{"id": "22713", "revid": "50933742", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22713", "title": "Opium", "text": "Dried latex of the opium poppy containing narcotic compounds\nOpium (also known as poppy tears, or Lachryma papaveris) is the dried latex obtained from the seed capsules of the opium poppy \"Papaver somniferum\". Approximately 12 percent of opium is made up of the analgesic alkaloid morphine, which is processed chemically to produce heroin and other synthetic opioids for medicinal use and for the illegal drug trade. Opium's main psychoactive alkaloids, primarily morphine, act on \u03bc-opioid receptors, causing analgesia and addiction with long-term use leading to tolerance, dependence, and increased cancer risk. The latex also contains the closely related opiates codeine and thebaine, and non-analgesic alkaloids such as papaverine and noscapine. The traditional, labor-intensive method of obtaining the latex is to scratch (\"score\") the immature seed pods (fruits) by hand; the latex leaks out and dries to a sticky yellowish residue that is later scraped off and dehydrated.\nThe English word for opium is borrowed from Latin, which in turn comes from (\"\u00f3pion\"), a diminutive of \u1f40\u03c0\u03cc\u03c2 (\"op\u00f3s\", \"juice of a plant\"). The word \"meconium\" (derived from the Greek for \"opium-like\", but now used to refer to newborn stools) historically referred to related, weaker preparations made from other parts of the opium poppy or different species of poppies. The Mediterranean region holds the earliest archaeological evidence of human use of opium poppies dating back to before 5000 BCE, with cultivation beginning around 3400 BCE in Mesopotamia. Opium was widely used for food, medicine, ritual, and as a painkiller throughout ancient civilizations including Greece, Egypt, and Islamic societies up to medieval times.\nThe production methods have not significantly changed since ancient times. Through selective breeding of the \"Papaver somniferum\" plant, the content of the phenanthrene alkaloids morphine, codeine, and to a lesser extent thebaine has been greatly increased. In modern times, much of the thebaine, which often serves as the raw material for the synthesis for oxycodone, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, and other semisynthetic opiates, originates from extracting \"Papaver orientale\" or \"Papaver bracteatum\". In preparation for the Second World War, the U.S. Army contracted farmers in the State of Sinaloa, Mexico, to grow opium crops. This was to provide morphine (the gold standard of analgesia) for injured soldiers. Modern opium production, once widely prohibited, still involves large-scale cultivation\u2014especially in Afghanistan\u2014where it is harvested by scoring poppy pods to collect latex used for both illicit drugs and legal medicines, with recent Taliban-led reductions cutting cultivation in Afghanistan by over 95%.\nFor the illegal drug trade, the morphine is extracted from the opium latex, reducing the bulk weight by 88%. It is then converted to heroin which is almost twice as potent, and increases the value by a similar factor. The reduced weight and bulk make it easier to smuggle.\nHistory.\nThe Mediterranean region contains the earliest archeological evidence of human use; the oldest known seeds date back to more than 5000BCE in the Neolithic age with purposes such as food, anaesthetics, and ritual. Evidence from ancient Greece indicates that opium was consumed in several ways, including inhalation of vapors, suppositories, medical poultices, and as a combination with hemlock for suicide. Opium is mentioned in the most important medical texts of the ancient and medieval world, including the Ebers Papyrus and the writings of Dioscorides, Galen, and Avicenna. Widespread medical use of unprocessed opium continued through the American Civil War before giving way to morphine and its successors, which could be injected at a precisely controlled dosage.\nAncient use (pre-500 CE).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA little of it, taken as much as a grain of ervum is a pain-easer, and a sleep-causer, and a digester...but being drank too much it hurts, making men lethargical, and it kills.\n Dioscorides\n , Introduction to \"The Herbal of Dioscorides the Greek\"\nOpium has been actively collected since approximately 3400BC.\nAt least 17 finds of \"Papaver somniferum\" from Neolithic settlements have been reported throughout Switzerland, Germany, and Spain, including the placement of large numbers of poppy seed capsules at a burial site (the \"Cueva de los Murci\u00e9lagos\", or \"Bat Cave\", in Spain), which has been carbon-14 dated to 4200BCE. Numerous finds of \"P. somniferum\" or \"P. setigerum\" from Bronze Age and Iron Age settlements have also been reported. The first known cultivation of opium poppies was in Mesopotamia, approximately 3400BCE, by Sumerians, who called the plant \"hul gil\", the \"joy plant\". Tablets found at Nippur, a Sumerian spiritual center south of Baghdad, described the collection of poppy juice in the morning and its use in production of opium. Cultivation continued in the Middle East by the Assyrians, who also collected poppy juice in the morning after scoring the pods with an iron scoop; they called the juice \"aratpa-pal\", possibly the root of \"Papaver\". Opium production continued under the Babylonians and Egyptians.\nOpium was used with poison hemlock to put people quickly and painlessly to death. It was also used in medicine. \"Spongia somnifera\", sponges soaked in opium, were used during surgery. The Egyptians cultivated \"opium thebaicum\" in famous poppy fields around 1300BCE. Opium was traded from Egypt by the Phoenicians and Minoans to destinations around the Mediterranean Sea, including Greece, Carthage, and Europe. By 1100BCE, opium was cultivated on Cyprus, where surgical-quality knives were used to score the poppy pods, and opium was cultivated, traded, and smoked. Opium was also mentioned after the Persian conquest of Assyria and Babylonian lands in the 6th century BC.\nFrom the earliest finds, opium has appeared to have ritual significance, and anthropologists have speculated ancient priests may have used the drug as a proof of healing power. In Egypt, the use of opium was generally restricted to priests, magicians, and warriors. Its invention is credited to Thoth, and it was said to have been given by Isis to Ra as treatment for a headache. A figurine of a goddess dated to around 1300 BC from the Minoan period contains three hairpins shaped as poppy capsules, all of which contain slits that suggest the Cretans knew the method of extracting opium. Additionally, her smile and parting lips suggests that she may be in a state induced by the opium. This has influenced some scholars to call her the \"goddess of ecstasy\". \nFurther evidence confirms the use of opium in the Mediterranean since the Late Bronze Age due to a number of small lekythi from various places in Crete. These lekythi are supposed to have contained pharmaceutical opium due to the shape of the jars being analogous to those of the poppy head. Additionally, each jar is decorated with vertical stripes that are very similar to the process of cutting into the poppy to extract the sap. There is further evidence for the use of opium during this era due to painted pyxis. These would be decorated with painted poppy capsules and birds holding both poppy capsules and poppy stalks.\nOpium's use in the ancient Mediterranean world is well written about, with many authors discussing its uses. In ancient Greece, it was regarded as a magic and poisonous plant that was used in religious ceremonies. Initiates of the cult of Demeter would most likely have taken opium. This is due to the fact that it is said that Demeter ate the opium plant when her daughter, Persephone, was abducted so that she could fall asleep and forget her grief. For the citizens of Mycenea, the opium poppy was an object of worship that was depicted on royal tombs.\nEventually, the Greco-Roman world began to accept opium for its medicinal qualities too. Helen of Sparta is said to have used the \"nepenthes drug\" which some authors believe to be a concoction containing opium. Within archaeological sites of ancient Sparta, there have been findings of pendants adorned with opium poppy capsules, affirming this belief. In the third century BCE, Theophrastus refers to it and discusses the process of obtaining the sap through crushing it, as the process of incising the poppy was lost until 40 CE. The process was relearned by Scribonius Largus, physician to the Emperor Claudius, who writes about the process of obtaining opium. Both of these authors note that opium induced sleep and numbed pain, disregarding its effects on the brain. However, other writings regard it effects on the mind to be important, such as those from Diagoras of Melos and Erasistratus, who believed that addiction to opium would harm the brain and body, urging others to not use it at all. Hippocrates believed that opium was a natural remedy that could cure certain ailments, but also advocated for its use sparingly. Additionally, certain ancient writers also believed poppy to be an important spice. Both Cato and Plauto wrote about its use as a spice, with archaeological evidence from seed cakes being found in ancient Roman farmhouses supporting these claims. \nThe Greek gods Hypnos (Sleep), Nyx (Night), and Thanatos (Death) were depicted wreathed in poppies or holding them. Poppies also frequently adorned statues of Apollo, Asclepius, Pluto, Demeter, Aphrodite, Kybele and Isis, symbolizing nocturnal oblivion.\nIslamic societies (500\u20131500 CE).\nAs the power of the Roman Empire declined, the lands to the south and east of the Mediterranean Sea became incorporated into the Islamic Empires. Some Muslims believe \"hadiths\", such as in \"Sahih Bukhari\", prohibit every intoxicating substance, though the use of intoxicants in medicine has been widely permitted by scholars. Dioscorides' five-volume \"De Materia Medica\", the precursor of pharmacopoeias, remained in use (which was edited and improved in the Arabic versions) from the 1st to 16th centuries, and described opium and the wide range of its uses prevalent in the ancient world.\nBetween 400 and 1200 AD, Arab traders introduced opium to China, and to India by 700 AD. The physician Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi of Persian origin (\"Rhazes\", 845\u2013930 CE) maintained a laboratory and school in Baghdad, and was a student and critic of Galen; he made use of opium in anesthesia and recommended its use for the treatment of melancholy in \"Fi ma-la-yahdara al-tabib\", \"In the Absence of a Physician\", a home medical manual directed toward ordinary citizens for self-treatment if a doctor was not available.\nThe renowned Andalusian ophthalmologic surgeon Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi (\"Abulcasis\", 936\u20131013 CE) relied on opium and mandrake as surgical anesthetics and wrote a treatise, \"al-Tasrif\", that influenced medical thought well into the 16th century.\nThe Persian physician Ab\u016b 'Al\u012b al-Husayn ibn Sina (\"Avicenna\") described opium as the most powerful of the stupefacients, in comparison to mandrake and other highly effective herbs, in \"The Canon of Medicine\". The text lists medicinal effects of opium, such as analgesia, hypnosis, antitussive effects, gastrointestinal effects, cognitive effects, respiratory depression, neuromuscular disturbances, and sexual dysfunction. It also refers to opium's potential as a poison. Avicenna describes several methods of delivery and recommendations for doses of the drug. This classic text was translated into Latin in 1175 and later into many other languages and remained authoritative until the 19th century. \u015eerafeddin Sabuncuo\u011flu used opium in the 14th-century Ottoman Empire to treat migraine headaches, sciatica, and other painful ailments.\nReintroduction to Western medicine.\nManuscripts of Pseudo-Apuleius's 5th-century work from the 10th and 11th centuries refer to the use of wild poppy \"Papaver agreste\" or \"Papaver rhoeas\" (identified as \"P. silvaticum\") instead of \"P. somniferum\" for inducing sleep and relieving pain.\nThe use of Paracelsus' laudanum was introduced to Western medicine in 1527, when Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim, better known by the name Paracelsus, claimed (dubiously) to have returned from wanderings in Arabia with a famous sword, within the pommel of which he kept \"Stones of Immortality\" compounded from opium thebaicum, citrus juice, and \"quintessence of gold\". The name \"Paracelsus\" was a pseudonym signifying him the equal or better of Aulus Cornelius Celsus, whose text, which described the use of opium or a similar preparation, had recently been translated and reintroduced to medieval Europe. \"The Canon of Medicine\", the standard medical textbook that Paracelsus burned in a public bonfire three weeks after being appointed professor at the University of Basel, also described the use of opium, though many Latin translations were of poor quality. \"Laudanum\" was originally the 16th-century term for a medicine associated with a particular physician that was widely well-regarded, but became standardized as \"tincture of opium\", a solution of opium in ethanol, which Paracelsus has been credited with developing. During his lifetime, Paracelsus was viewed as an adventurer who challenged the theories and mercenary motives of contemporary medicine with dangerous chemical therapies, but his therapies marked a turning point in Western medicine. In the 1660s, laudanum was recommended for pain, sleeplessness, and diarrhea by Thomas Sydenham, the renowned \"father of English medicine\" or \"English Hippocrates\", to whom is attributed the quote, \"Among the remedies which it has pleased Almighty God to give to man to relieve his sufferings, none is so universal and so efficacious as opium.\" Use of opium as a cure-all was reflected in the formulation of mithridatium described in the 1728 \"Chambers Cyclopedia\", which included true opium in the mixture.\nEventually, laudanum became readily available and extensively used by the 18th century in Europe, especially England. Compared to other chemicals available to 18th century regular physicians, opium was a benign alternative to arsenic, mercury, or emetics, and it was remarkably successful in alleviating a wide range of ailments. Due to the constipation often produced by the consumption of opium, it was one of the most effective treatments for cholera, dysentery, and diarrhea. As a cough suppressant, opium was used to treat bronchitis, tuberculosis, and other respiratory illnesses. Opium was additionally prescribed for rheumatism and insomnia. Medical textbooks even recommended its use by people in good health, to \"optimize the internal equilibrium of the human body\".\nDuring the 18th century, opium was found to be a good remedy for nervous disorders. Due to its sedative and tranquilizing properties, it was used to quiet the minds of those with psychosis, help with people who were considered insane, and also to help treat patients with insomnia. However, despite its medicinal values in these cases, it was noted that in cases of psychosis, it could cause anger or depression, and due to the drug's euphoric effects, it could cause depressed patients to become more depressed after the effects wore off because they would get used to being high.\nThe standard medical use of opium persisted well into the 19th century. US president William Henry Harrison was treated with opium in 1841, and in the American Civil War, the Union Army used 175,000\u00a0lb (80,000\u00a0kg) of opium tincture and powder and about 500,000 opium pills. During this time of popularity, users called opium \"God's Own Medicine\".\nOne reason for the increase in opiate consumption in the United States during the 19th century was the prescribing and dispensing of legal opiates by physicians and pharmacists to women with \"female complaints\" (mostly to relieve menstrual pain and hysteria). Because opiates were viewed as more humane than punishment or restraint, they were often used to treat the mentally ill. Between 150,000 and 200,000 opiate addicts lived in the United States in the late 19th century and between two-thirds and three-quarters of these addicts were women.\nOpium addiction in the later 19th century received a hereditary definition. Dr. George Beard in 1869 proposed his theory of neurasthenia, a hereditary nervous system deficiency that could predispose an individual to addiction. Neurasthenia was increasingly tied in medical rhetoric to the \"nervous exhaustion\" suffered by many a white-collar worker in the increasingly hectic and industrialized U.S. life\u2014the most likely potential clients of physicians.\nRecreational use in Europe, the Middle East and the US (11th to 19th centuries).\nSoldiers returning home from the Crusades in the 11th to 13th century brought opium with them. Opium is said to have been used for recreational purposes from the 14th century onwards in Muslim societies. Ottoman and European testimonies confirm that from the 16th to the 19th centuries Anatolian opium was eaten in Constantinople as much as it was exported to Europe. In 1573, for instance, a Venetian visitor to the Ottoman Empire observed many of the Turkish natives of Constantinople regularly drank a \"certain black water made with opium\" that makes them feel good, but to which they become so addicted, if they try to go without, they will \"quickly die\". From drinking it, dervishes claimed the drugs bestowed them with visionary glimpses of future happiness. Indeed, the Ottoman Empire supplied the West with opium long before China and India.\nExtensive textual and pictorial sources also show that poppy cultivation and opium consumption were widespread in Safavid Iran and Mughal India.\nEngland.\nIn England, opium fulfilled a \"critical\" role, as it did other societies, in addressing multifactorial pain, cough, dysentery, diarrhea, as argued by Virginia Berridge. A medical panacea of the 19th century, \"any respectable person\" could purchase a range of hashish pastes and (later) morphine with complementary injection kit.\nThomas De Quincey's \"Confessions of an English Opium-Eater\" (1822), one of the first and most famous literary accounts of opium addiction written from the point of view of an addict, details the pleasures and dangers of the drug. In the book, it is not Ottoman, nor Chinese, addicts about whom he writes, but English opium users: \"I question whether any Turk, of all that ever entered the paradise of opium-eaters, can have had half the pleasure I had.\" De Quincey writes about the great English Romantic poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772\u20131834), whose \"Kubla Khan\" is also widely considered to be a poem of the opium experience. Coleridge began using opium in 1791 after developing jaundice and rheumatic fever, and became a full addict after a severe attack of the disease in 1801, requiring 80\u2013100 drops of laudanum daily.\nChina.\nRecreational use in China.\nThe earliest clear description of the use of opium as a recreational drug in China came from Xu Boling, who wrote in 1483 that opium was \"mainly used to aid masculinity, strengthen sperm and regain vigor\", and that it \"enhances the art of alchemists, sex and court ladies\". He also described an expedition sent by the Ming dynasty Chenghua Emperor in 1483 to procure opium for a price \"equal to that of gold\" in Hainan, Fujian, Zhejiang, Sichuan and Shaanxi, where it is close to the western lands of Xiyu. A century later, Li Shizhen listed standard medical uses of opium in his renowned \"Compendium of Materia Medica\" (1578), but also wrote that \"lay people use it for the art of sex,\" in particular the ability to \"arrest seminal emission\". This association of opium with sex continued in China until the end of the 19th century.\nOpium smoking began as a privilege of the elite and remained a great luxury into the early 19th century. However, by 1861, Wang Tao wrote that opium was used even by rich peasants, and even a small village without a rice store would have a shop where opium was sold.\nRecreational use of opium was part of a civilized and mannered ritual, akin to an East Asian tea ceremony, prior to the extensive prohibitions that came later. In places of gathering, often tea shops, or a person's home servings of opium were offered as a form of greeting and politeness. Often served with tea (in China) and with specific and fine utensils and beautifully carved wooden pipes. The wealthier the smoker, the finer and more expensive material used in ceremony. The image of seedy underground, destitute smokers were often generated by anti-opium narratives and became a more accurate image of opium use following the effects of large scale opium prohibition in the 1880s.\nProhibitions in China.\nOpium prohibition in China began in 1729, yet was followed by nearly two centuries of increasing opium use. A massive destruction of opium by an emissary of the Chinese Daoguang Emperor in an attempt to stop opium smuggling by the British led to the First Opium War (1839\u20131842), in which Britain defeated China. After 1860, opium use continued to increase with widespread domestic production in China. By 1905, an estimated 25 percent of the male population were regular consumers of the drug. Recreational use of opium elsewhere in the world remained rare into late in the 19th century, as indicated by ambivalent reports of opium usage. In 1906, 41,000 tons were produced, but because 39,000 tons of that year's opium were consumed in China, overall usage in the rest of the world was much lower. These figures from 1906 have been criticized as overestimates.\nSmoking of opium came on the heels of tobacco smoking and may have been encouraged by a brief ban on the smoking of tobacco by the Ming emperor. The prohibition ended in 1644 with the coming of the Qing dynasty, which encouraged smokers to mix in increasing amounts of opium. In 1705, Wang Shizhen wrote, \"nowadays, from nobility and gentlemen down to slaves and women, all are addicted to tobacco.\" Tobacco in that time was frequently mixed with other herbs (this continues with clove cigarettes to the modern day), and opium was one component in the mixture. Tobacco mixed with opium was called \"madak\" (or \"madat\") and became popular throughout China and its seafaring trade partners (such as Taiwan, Java, and the Philippines) in the 17th century. In 1712, Engelbert Kaempfer described addiction to \"madak\": \"No commodity throughout the Indies is retailed with greater profit by the Batavians than opium, which [its] users cannot do without, nor can they come by it except it be brought by the ships of the Batavians from Bengal and Coromandel.\"\nFueled in part by the 1729 ban on \"madak\", which at first effectively exempted pure opium as a potentially medicinal product, the smoking of pure opium became more popular in the 18th century. In 1736, the smoking of pure opium was described by Huang Shujing, involving a pipe made from bamboo rimmed with silver, stuffed with palm slices and hair, fed by a clay bowl in which a globule of molten opium was held over the flame of an oil lamp. This elaborate procedure, requiring the maintenance of pots of opium at just the right temperature for a globule to be scooped up with a needle-like skewer for smoking, formed the basis of a craft of \"paste-scooping\" by which servant girls could become prostitutes as the opportunity arose.\nChinese diaspora in the West.\nThe Chinese Diaspora in the West (1800s to 1949) first began to flourish during the 19th century due to famine and political upheaval, as well as rumors of wealth to be had outside of Southeast Asia. Chinese emigrants to cities such as San Francisco, London, and New York City brought with them the Chinese manner of opium smoking, and the social traditions of the opium den. The Indian Diaspora distributed opium-eaters in the same way, and both social groups survived as \"lascars\" (seamen) and \"coolies\" (manual laborers). French sailors provided another major group of opium smokers, having gotten the habit while in French Indochina, where the drug was promoted and monopolized by the colonial government as a source of revenue. Among white Europeans, opium was more frequently consumed as laudanum or in patent medicines. Britain's All-India Opium Act of 1878 formalized ethnic restrictions on the use of opium, limiting recreational opium sales to registered Indian opium-eaters and Chinese opium-smokers only and prohibiting its sale to workers from Burma. Likewise, in San Francisco, Chinese immigrants were permitted to smoke opium, so long as they refrained from doing so in the presence of whites.\nBecause of the low social status of immigrant workers, contemporary writers and media had little trouble portraying opium dens as seats of vice, white slavery, gambling, knife- and revolver-fights, and a source for drugs causing deadly overdoses, with the potential to addict and corrupt the white population. By 1919, anti-Chinese riots attacked Limehouse, the Chinatown of London. Chinese men were deported for playing keno and sentenced to hard labor for opium possession. Due to this, both the immigrant population and the social use of opium fell into decline.\nProhibition and conflict in China.\nA large scale opium prohibition attempt began in 1729, when the Qing Yongzheng Emperor, disturbed by \"madak\" smoking at court and carrying out the government's role of upholding Confucian virtues, officially prohibited the sale of opium, except for a small amount for medicinal purposes. The ban punished sellers and opium den keepers, but not users of the drug. Opium was banned completely in 1799, and this prohibition continued until 1860.\nDuring the Qing dynasty, China opened itself to foreign trade under the Canton System through the port of Guangzhou (Canton), with traders from the East India Company visiting the port by the 1690s. Due to the growing British demand for Chinese tea and the Chinese Emperor's lack of interest in British commodities other than silver, British traders resorted to trade in opium as a high-value commodity for which China was not self-sufficient. The English traders had been purchasing small amounts of opium from India for trade since Ralph Fitch first visited in the mid-16th century. Trade in opium was standardized, with production of balls of raw opium, , 30% water content, wrapped in poppy leaves and petals, and shipped in chests of (one picul). Chests of opium were sold in auctions in Calcutta with the understanding that the independent purchasers would then smuggle it into China.\nChina had a positive balance sheet in trading with the British, which led to a decrease of the British silver stocks. Therefore, the British tried to encourage Chinese opium use to enhance their balance, and they delivered it from Indian provinces under British control. In India, its cultivation, as well as the manufacture and traffic to China, were subject to the British East India Company (BEIC), as a strict monopoly of the British government. There was an extensive and complicated system of BEIC agencies involved in the supervision and management of opium production and distribution in India. Bengal opium was highly prized, commanding twice the price of the domestic Chinese product, which was regarded as inferior in quality.\nSome competition came from the newly independent United States, which began to compete in Guangzhou, selling Turkish opium in the 1820s. Portuguese traders also brought opium from the independent Malwa states of western India, although by 1820, the British were able to restrict this trade by charging \"pass duty\" on the opium when it was forced to pass through Bombay to reach an \"entrepot\".\nDespite drastic penalties and continued prohibition of opium until 1860, opium smuggling rose steadily from 200 chests per year under the Yongzheng Emperor to 1,000 under the Qianlong Emperor, 4,000 under the Jiaqing Emperor, and 30,000 under the Daoguang Emperor. This illegal sale of opium, which has been called \"the most long continued and systematic international crime of modern times\", became one of the world's most valuable single commodity trades, and between 1814 and 1850, sucked out 11 percent of China's money supply.\nIn response to the ever-growing number of Chinese people becoming addicted to opium, the Qing Daoguang Emperor took strong action to halt the smuggling of opium, including the seizure of cargo. In 1838, the Chinese Commissioner Lin Zexu destroyed 20,000 chests of opium (approximately 2,660,000 pounds) in Guangzhou in a river. Given that \nThe opium trade incurred intense enmity from the later British Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone. As a member of Parliament, Gladstone called it \"most infamous and atrocious\" referring to the opium trade between China and British India in particular. Gladstone was fiercely against both of the Opium Wars Britain waged in China in the First Opium War initiated in 1840 and the Second Opium War initiated in 1857, denounced British violence against Chinese, and was ardently opposed to the British trade in opium to China. Gladstone lambasted it as \"Palmerston's Opium War\" and said that he felt \"in dread of the judgments of God upon England for our national iniquity towards China\" in May 1840. A famous speech was made by Gladstone in Parliament against the First Opium War. Gladstone criticized it as \"a war more unjust in its origin, a war more calculated in its progress to cover this country with permanent disgrace\". His hostility to opium stemmed from the effects of opium brought upon his sister Helen. Due to the First Opium war brought on by Palmerston, there was initial reluctance to join the government of Peel on part of Gladstone before 1841.\nFollowing China's defeat in the Second Opium War in 1858, China was forced to legalize opium and began massive domestic production. Importation of opium peaked in 1879 at 6,700 tons, and by 1906, China was producing 85 percent of the world's opium, some 35,000 tons, and 27 percent of its adult male population regularly used opium\u200d\u2014\u200c13.5million people consuming 39,000 tons of opium yearly. From 1880 to the beginning of the Communist era, the British attempted to discourage the use of opium in China, but this effectively promoted the use of morphine, heroin, and cocaine, further exacerbating the problem of addiction.\nScientific evidence of the pernicious nature of opium use was largely undocumented in the 1890s, when Protestant missionaries in China decided to strengthen their opposition to the trade by compiling data which would demonstrate the harm the drug did. Faced with the problem that many Chinese associated Christianity with opium, partly due to the arrival of early Protestant missionaries on opium clippers, at the 1890 Shanghai Missionary Conference, they agreed to establish the Permanent Committee for the Promotion of Anti-Opium Societies in an attempt to overcome this problem and to arouse public opinion against the opium trade. The members of the committee were John Glasgow Kerr, MD, American Presbyterian Mission in Guangzhou (Canton); B.C. Atterbury, MD, American Presbyterian Mission in Beijing (Peking); Archdeacon Arthur E. Moule, Church Missionary Society in Shanghai; Henry Whitney, MD, American Board of Commissioners for foreign Missions in Fuzhou; the Rev. Samuel Clarke, China Inland Mission in Guiyang; the Rev. Arthur Gostick Shorrock, English Baptist Mission in Taiyuan; and the Rev. Griffith John, London Mission Society in Hankou. These missionaries were generally outraged over the British government's Royal Commission on Opium visiting India but not China. Accordingly, the missionaries first organized the Anti-Opium League in China among their colleagues in every mission station in China. American missionary Hampden Coit DuBose acted as first president. This organization, which had elected national officers and held an annual national meeting, was instrumental in gathering data from every Western-trained medical doctor in China, which was then published as William Hector Park compiled \"Opinions of Over 100 Physicians on the Use of Opium in China\" (Shanghai: American Presbyterian Mission Press, 1899). The vast majority of these medical doctors were missionaries; the survey also included doctors who were in private practices, particularly in Shanghai and Hong Kong, as well as Chinese who had been trained in medical schools in Western countries. In England, the home director of the China Inland Mission, Benjamin Broomhall, was an active opponent of the opium trade, writing two books to promote the banning of opium smoking: \"The Truth about Opium Smoking\" and \"The Chinese Opium Smoker\". In 1888, Broomhall formed and became secretary of the Christian Union for the Severance of the British Empire with the Opium Traffic and editor of its periodical, \"National Righteousness\". He lobbied the British Parliament to stop the opium trade. He and James Laidlaw Maxwell appealed to the London Missionary Conference of 1888 and the Edinburgh Missionary Conference of 1910 to condemn the continuation of the trade. When Broomhall was dying, his son Marshall read to him from \"The Times\" the welcome news that an agreement had been signed ensuring the end of the opium trade within two years.\nOfficial Chinese resistance to opium was renewed on September 20, 1906, with an antiopium initiative intended to eliminate the drug problem within 10 years. The program relied on the turning of public sentiment against opium, with mass meetings at which opium paraphernalia were publicly burned, as well as coercive legal action and the granting of police powers to organizations such as the Fujian Anti-Opium Society. Smokers were required to register for licenses for gradually reducing rations of the drug. Action against opium farmers centered upon a highly repressive incarnation of law enforcement in which rural populations had their property destroyed, their land confiscated and/or were publicly tortured, humiliated and executed. Addicts sometimes turned to missionaries for treatment for their addiction, though many associated these foreigners with the drug trade. The program was counted as a substantial success, with a cessation of direct British opium exports to China (but not Hong Kong) and most provinces declared free of opium production. Nonetheless, the success of the program was only temporary, with opium use rapidly increasing during the disorder following the death of Yuan Shikai in 1916. Opium farming also increased, peaking in 1930 when the League of Nations singled China out as the primary source of illicit opium in East and Southeast Asia. Many local powerholders facilitated the trade during this period to finance conflicts over territory and political campaigns. In some areas food crops were eradicated to make way for opium, contributing to famines in Guizhou and Shaanxi Provinces between 1921 and 1923, and food deficits in other provinces.\nBeginning in 1915, Chinese nationalist groups came to describe the period of military losses and Unequal Treaties as the \"Century of National Humiliation\", later defined to end with the conclusion of the Chinese Civil War in 1949.\nIn the northern provinces of Ningxia and Suiyuan in China, Chinese Muslim General Ma Fuxiang both prohibited and engaged in the opium trade. It was hoped that Ma Fuxiang would have improved the situation, since Chinese Muslims were well known for opposition to smoking opium. Ma Fuxiang officially prohibited opium and made it illegal in Ningxia, but the Guominjun reversed his policy; by 1933, people from every level of society were abusing the drug, and Ningxia was left in destitution. In 1923, an officer of the Bank of China from Baotou found out that Ma Fuxiang was assisting the drug trade in opium which helped finance his military expenses. He earned US$ from taxing those sales in 1923. General Ma had been using the bank, a branch of the Government of China's exchequer, to arrange for silver currency to be transported to Baotou to use it to sponsor the trade.\nThe opium trade under the Chinese Communist Party was important to its finances in the 1940s. Peter Vladimirov's diary provided a first hand account. Chen Yung-fa provided a detailed historical account of how the opium trade was essential to the economy of Yan'an during this period. Mitsubishi and Mitsui were involved in the opium trade during the Japanese occupation of China.\nMao Zedong government is generally credited with eradicating both consumption and production of opium during the 1950s using unrestrained repression and social reform. Ten million addicts were forced into compulsory treatment, dealers were executed, and opium-producing regions were planted with new crops. Remaining opium production shifted south of the Chinese border into the Golden Triangle region. The remnant opium trade primarily served Southeast Asia, but spread to American soldiers during the Vietnam War; based on a study of opiate use in soldiers returning to the United States in 1971, 20 percent of participants were dependent enough to experience withdrawal symptoms.\nProhibition outside China.\nThere were no legal restrictions on the importation or use of opium in the United States until the San Francisco Opium Den Ordinance, which banned dens for public smoking of opium in 1875, a measure fueled by anti-Chinese sentiment and the perception that whites were starting to frequent the dens. This was followed by an 1891 California law requiring that narcotics carry warning labels and that their sales be recorded in a registry; amendments to the California Pharmacy and Poison Act in 1907 made it a crime to sell opiates without a prescription, and bans on possession of opium or opium pipes in 1909 were enacted.\nAt the US federal level, the legal actions taken reflected constitutional restrictions under the enumerated powers doctrine prior to reinterpretation of the commerce clause, which did not allow the federal government to enact arbitrary prohibitions, but did permit arbitrary taxation. Beginning in 1883, opium importation was taxed at US$ to US$ per pound, until the Opium Exclusion Act of 1909 prohibited the importation of opium altogether. In a similar manner, the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act of 1914, passed in fulfillment of the First International Opium Convention of 1912, nominally placed a tax on the distribution of opiates, but served as a \"de facto\" prohibition of the drugs. Today, opium is regulated by the Drug Enforcement Administration under the Controlled Substances Act.\nThe colonies of Queensland and South Australia along with the Northern Territory, where three of the four states of colonial Australia which still had large, yet unknown numbers of Aboriginal people living on Country in regional, remote and very remote locations. From time to time, this made in necessary for laws to be created so Australian\u2019s living within the colony understood their responsibilities to society, and the law was working to ensure protection from potential exploitation, perceived or otherwise. By 1897 the passage of law in all three of the above locations had restricted the sale, exchange or trade of opium with any Aboriginal person without exception, this broad application was required to ensure the law was enforceable.\nHardening of Canadian attitudes toward Chinese opium users and fear of a spread of the drug into the white population led to the effective criminalization of opium for nonmedical use in Canada between 1908 and the mid-1920s.\nIn 1909, the International Opium Commission was founded, and by 1914, 34 nations had agreed that the production and importation of opium should be diminished. In 1924, 62 nations participated in a meeting of the commission. Subsequently, this role passed to the League of Nations, and all signatory nations agreed to prohibit the import, sale, distribution, export, and use of all narcotic drugs, except for medical and scientific purposes. This role was later taken up by the International Narcotics Control Board of the United Nations under of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, and subsequently under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances. Opium-producing nations are required to designate a government agency to take physical possession of licit opium crops as soon as possible after harvest and conduct all wholesaling and exporting through that agency.\nIndochina tax.\nFrom 1897 to 1902, Paul Doumer (later President of France) was Governor-General of French Indochina. Upon his arrival the colonies were losing millions of francs each year. Determined to put them on a paying basis he levied taxes on various products, opium among them. The Vietnamese, Cambodians and Laotians who could or would not pay these taxes, lost their houses and land, and often became day laborers. Evidently, resorting to this means of gaining income gave France a vested interest in the continuation of opium use among the population of Indochina.\nRegulation in Britain and the United States.\nBefore the 1920s, regulation in Britain was controlled by pharmacists. Pharmacists who were found to have prescribed opium for illegitimate uses and anyone found to have sold opium without proper qualifications would be prosecuted. With the passing of the Rolleston Act in Britain in 1926, doctors were allowed to prescribe opiates such as morphine and heroin if they believed their patients demonstrated a medical need. Because addiction was viewed as a medical problem rather than an indulgence, doctors were permitted to allow patients to wean themselves off opiates rather than cutting off any opiate use altogether. The passing of the Rolleston Act put the control of opium use in the hands of medical doctors instead of pharmacists. Later in the 20th century, addiction to opiates, especially heroin in young people, continued to rise and so the sale and prescription of opiates was limited to doctors in treatment centres. If these doctors were found to be prescribing opiates without just cause, then they could lose their licence to practice or prescribe drugs.\nAbuse of opium in the United States began in the late 19th century and was largely associated with Chinese immigrants. During this time the use of opium had little stigma; the drug was used freely until 1882 when a law was passed to confine opium smoking to specific dens. Until the full ban on opium-based products came into effect just after the beginning of the twentieth century, physicians in the US considered opium a miracle drug that could help with many ailments. Therefore, the ban on said products was more a result of negative connotations towards its use and distribution by Chinese immigrants who were heavily persecuted during this particular period in history. As the 19th century progressed however, doctor Hamilton Wright worked to decrease the use of opium in the US by submitting the Harrison Act to congress. This act put taxes and restrictions on the sale and prescription of opium, as well as trying to stigmatize the opium poppy and its derivatives as \"demon drugs\", to try to scare people away from them. This act and the stigma of a demon drug on opium, led to the criminalization of people that used opium-based products. It made the use and possession of opium and any of its derivatives illegal. The restrictions were recently redefined by the Federal Controlled Substances Act of 1970.\n20th-century use.\nOpium production in China and the rest of East Asia was nearly wiped out after WWII; however, sustained covert support by the United States Central Intelligence Agency for the Thai Northern Army and the Chinese Nationalist Kuomintang army invading Burma facilitated production and trafficking of the drug from Southeast Asia for decades, with the region becoming a major source of world supplies.\nDuring the Communist era in Eastern Europe, poppy stalks sold in bundles by farmers were processed by users with household chemicals to make \"kompot\" (\"Polish heroin\"), and poppy seeds were used to produce \"koknar\", an opiate.\nObsolescence.\nGlobally, opium has gradually been superseded by a variety of purified, semi-synthetic, and synthetic opioids with progressively stronger effects, and by other general anesthetics. This process began in 1804, when Friedrich Wilhelm Adam Sert\u00fcrner first isolated morphine from the opium poppy.\nThe process continued until 1817, when Sert\u00fcrner published his results after thirteen years of research and a nearly disastrous trial on himself and three boys. The great advantage of purified morphine was that a patient could be treated with a known dose\u2014whereas with raw plant material, as Gabriel Fallopius once lamented, \"if soporifics are weak they do not help; if they are strong they are exceedingly dangerous.\"\nMorphine was the first pharmaceutical isolated from a natural product, and this success encouraged the isolation of other alkaloids: by 1820, isolations of noscapine, strychnine, veratrine, colchicine, caffeine, and quinine were reported. Morphine sales began in 1827, by Heinrich Emanuel Merck of Darmstadt, and helped him expand his family pharmacy into the Merck KGaA pharmaceutical company. Codeine was isolated in 1832 by Pierre Jean Robiquet.\nThe use of diethyl ether and chloroform for general anesthesia began in 1846\u20131847, and rapidly displaced the use of opiates and tropane alkaloids from Solanaceae due to their relative safety.\nHeroin, the first semi-synthetic opioid, was first synthesized in 1874, but was not pursued until its rediscovery in 1897 by Felix Hoffmann at the Bayer pharmaceutical company in Elberfeld, Germany. From 1898 to 1910 heroin was marketed as a non-addictive morphine substitute and cough medicine for children. Because the lethal dose of heroin was viewed as a hundred times greater than its effective dose, heroin was advertised as a safer alternative to other opioids. By 1902, sales made up 5 percent of the company's profits, and \"heroinism\" had attracted media attention. Oxycodone, a thebaine derivative similar to codeine, was introduced by Bayer in 1916 and promoted as a less-addictive analgesic. Preparations of the drug such as oxycodone with paracetamol and extended release oxycodone remain popular to this day.\nA range of synthetic opioids such as methadone (1937), pethidine (1939), fentanyl (late 1950s), and derivatives thereof have been introduced, and each is preferred for certain specialized applications. Nonetheless, morphine remains the drug of choice for American combat medics, who carry packs of syrettes containing 16 milligrams each for use on severely wounded soldiers. No drug has been found that can match the painkilling effect of opioids without also duplicating much of their addictive potential.\nModern production and use.\nOpium was prohibited in many countries during the early 20th century, leading to the modern pattern of opium production as a precursor for illegal recreational drugs or tightly regulated, highly taxed, legal prescription drugs. In 1980, 2,000 tons of opium supplied all legal and illegal uses. Worldwide production in 2006 was 6610 tonnes\u2014about one-fifth the level of production in 1906; since then, opium production has fallen.\nIn 2002, the price for one kilogram of opium was US$ for the farmer, US$ for purchasers in Afghanistan, and US$ on the streets of Europe before conversion into heroin.\nOpium production increased considerably, surpassing 5,000 tons in 2002 and reaching 8,600 tons in Afghanistan and 840 tons in the Golden Triangle in 2014. The World Health Organization has estimated that current production of opium would need to increase fivefold to account for total global medical need. Solar energy panels in use in Afghanistan have allowed farmers to dig their wells deeper, leading to a bumper crop of opium year after year. In a 2023 report, poppy cultivation in southern Afghanistan was reduced by over 80% as a result of Taliban campaigns to stop its use toward opium. This included a 99% reduction of opium growth in the Helmand Province. In November 2023, a U.N report showed that in the entirety of Afghanistan, poppy cultivation dropped by over 95%, removing it from its place as being the world's largest opium producer.\n\"Papaver somniferum\".\nOpium poppies are popular and attractive garden plants, whose flowers vary greatly in color, size and form. A modest amount of domestic cultivation in private gardens is not usually subject to legal controls. In part, this tolerance reflects variation in addictive potency. A cultivar for opium production, \"Papaver somniferum L. elite\", contains 91.2 percent morphine, codeine, and thebaine in its latex alkaloids, whereas in the latex of the condiment cultivar \"Marianne\", these three alkaloids total only 14.0 percent. The remaining alkaloids in the latter cultivar are primarily narcotoline and noscapine.\nSeed capsules can be dried and used for decorations, but they also contain morphine, codeine, and other alkaloids. These pods can be boiled in water to produce a bitter tea that induces a long-lasting intoxication. If allowed to mature, poppy pods (poppy straw) can be crushed and used to produce lower quantities of morphinans. In poppies subjected to mutagenesis and selection on a mass scale, researchers have been able to use poppy straw to obtain large quantities of oripavine, a precursor to opioids and antagonists such as naltrexone. Although millennia older, the production of poppy head decoctions can be seen as a quick-and-dirty variant of the K\u00e1b\u00e1y poppy straw process, which since its publication in 1930 has become the major method of obtaining licit opium alkaloids worldwide, as discussed in Morphine.\nPoppy seeds are a common and flavorsome topping for breads and cakes. One gram of poppy seeds contains up to 33 micrograms of morphine and 14 micrograms of codeine, and the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration in the United States formerly mandated that all drug screening laboratories use a standard cutoff of 300 nanograms per milliliter in urine samples. A single poppy seed roll (0.76\u00a0grams of seeds) usually did not produce a positive drug test, but a positive result was observed from eating two rolls. A slice of poppy seed cake containing nearly five grams of seeds per slice produced positive results for 24 hours. Such results are viewed as false positive indications of drug use and were the basis of a legal defense. On November 30, 1998, the standard cutoff was increased to 2000 nanograms (two micrograms) per milliliter. Confirmation by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry will distinguish amongst opium and variants including poppy seeds, heroin, and morphine and codeine pharmaceuticals by measuring the morphine:codeine ratio and looking for the presence of noscapine and acetylcodeine, the latter of which is only found in illicitly produced heroin, and heroin metabolites such as 6-monoacetylmorphine.\nHarvesting and processing.\nWhen grown for opium production, the skin of the ripening pods of these poppies is scored by a sharp blade at a time carefully chosen so that rain, wind, and dew cannot spoil the exudation of white, milky latex, usually in the afternoon. Incisions are made while the pods are still raw, with no more than a slight yellow tint, and must be shallow to avoid penetrating hollow inner chambers or \"loculi\" while cutting into the lactiferous vessels. In the Indian Subcontinent, Afghanistan, Central Asia and Iran, the special tool used to make the incisions is called a \"nushtar\" or \"nishtar\" (from Persian, meaning a lancet) and carries three or four blades three millimeters apart, which are scored upward along the pod. Incisions are made three or four times at intervals of two to three days, and each time the \"poppy tears\", which dry to a sticky brown resin, are collected the following morning. One acre harvested in this way can produce three to five kilograms of raw opium. In the Soviet Union, pods were typically scored horizontally, and opium was collected three times, or else one or two collections were followed by isolation of opiates from the ripe capsules. Oil poppies, an alternative strain of \"P. somniferum\", were also used for production of opiates from their capsules and stems. A traditional Chinese method of harvesting opium latex involved cutting off the heads and piercing them with a coarse needle then collecting the dried opium 24 to 48 hours later.\nRaw opium may be sold to a merchant or broker on the black market, but it usually does not travel far from the field before it is refined into morphine base, because the pungent, jelly-like form of raw opium is bulkier and harder to smuggle. Crude laboratories in the field are capable of refining opium into morphine base by a simple acid-base extraction. A sticky, brown paste, morphine base is pressed into bricks and sun-dried, and can either be smoked, prepared into other forms or processed into heroin.\nOther methods of preparation (besides smoking), include processing into regular opium tincture (\"tinctura opii\"), laudanum, paregoric (\"tinctura opii camphorata\"), herbal wine (e.g., \"vinum opii\"), opium powder (\"pulvis opii\"), opium sirup (\"sirupus opii\") and opium extract (\"extractum opii\"). Vinum opii is made by combining sugar, white wine, cinnamon, and cloves. Opium syrup is made by combining 97.5 part sugar syrup with 2.5 parts opium extract. Opium extract (\"extractum opii\") finally can be made by macerating raw opium with water. To make opium extract, 20 parts water are combined with 1 part raw opium which has been boiled for 5 minutes (the latter to ease mixing).\nHeroin is widely preferred because of increased potency. One study in postaddicts found heroin to be approximately 2.2 times more potent than morphine by weight with a similar duration; at these relative quantities, they could distinguish the drugs subjectively but had no preference. Heroin was also found to be twice as potent as morphine in surgical anesthesia. Morphine is converted into heroin by a simple chemical reaction with acetic anhydride, followed by purification. Especially in Mexican production, opium may be converted directly to \"black tar heroin\" in a simplified procedure. This form predominates in the U.S. west of the Mississippi. Relative to other preparations of heroin, it has been associated with a dramatically decreased rate of HIV transmission among intravenous drug users (4 percent in Los Angeles vs. 40 percent in New York) due to technical requirements of injection, although it is also associated with greater risk of venous sclerosis and necrotizing fasciitis.\nIllegal production.\nAfghanistan was formerly the primary producer of the drug. Having regularly producing 70 percent of the world's opium, Afghanistan decreased production to 74 tons per year under a ban by the Taliban in 2000, a move which cut production by 94 percent. A year later, after American and British troops invaded Afghanistan, removed the Taliban and installed the interim government, the land under cultivation leapt back to , with Afghanistan supplanting Burma to become the world's largest opium producer once more. Opium production increased rapidly in Afghanistan from that point, reaching an all-time high in 2006. According to DEA statistics, Afghanistan's production of oven-dried opium increased to 1,278 tons in 2002, more than doubled by 2003, and nearly doubled again during 2004. In late 2004, the U.S. government estimated that 206,000 hectares were under poppy cultivation, 4.5 percent of the country's total cropland, and produced 4,200 metric tons of opium, 76 percent of the world's supply, yielding 60 percent of Afghanistan's gross domestic product. In 2006, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime estimated production to have risen 59 percent to in cultivation, yielding 6,100 tons of opium, 82 percent of the world's supply. The value of the resulting heroin was estimated at US$, of which Afghan farmers were estimated to have received US$ in revenue. For farmers, the crop can be up to ten times more profitable than wheat. The price of opium is around US$ per kilo. Opium production has led to rising tensions in Afghan villages. Though direct conflict has yet to occur, the opinions of the new class of young rich men involved in the opium trade are at odds with those of the traditional village leaders.\nAn increasingly large fraction of opium is processed into morphine base and heroin in drug labs in Afghanistan. Despite an international set of chemical controls designed to restrict availability of acetic anhydride, it enters the country, perhaps through its Central Asian neighbors which do not participate. A counternarcotics law passed in December 2005 requires Afghanistan to develop registries or regulations for tracking, storing, and owning acetic anhydride. In November 2023, a U.N report showed that in the entirety of Afghanistan, poppy cultivation dropped by over 95%, removing it from its place as being the world's largest opium producer.\nBesides Afghanistan, smaller quantities of opium are produced in Pakistan, the Golden Triangle region of Southeast Asia (particularly Burma), Colombia, Guatemala, and Mexico.\nChinese production mainly trades with and profits from North America. In 2002, they were seeking to expand through eastern United States. In the post 9/11 era, trading between borders became difficult and because new international laws were set into place, the opium trade became more diffused. Power shifted from remote to high-end smugglers and opium traders. Outsourcing became a huge factor for survival for many smugglers and opium farmers.\nIn 2023 Burma overtook Afghanistan and became the world's largest producer of opium, producing 1080 metric tones according the UN Southeast Asia Opium Survey report.\nLegal production.\nLegal opium production is allowed under the United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and other international drug treaties, subject to strict supervision by the law enforcement agencies of individual countries. The leading legal production method is the Robertson-Gregory process, whereby the entire poppy, excluding roots and leaves, is mashed and stewed in dilute acid solutions. The alkaloids are then recovered via acid-base extraction and purified. The exact date of its discovery is unknown, but it was described by Wurtz in his \"Dictionnaire de chimie pure et appliqu\u00e9e\" published in 1868.\nLegal opium production in India is much more traditional. As of 2008, opium was collected by farmers who were licensed to grow of opium poppies, who to maintain their licences needed to sell 56 kilograms of unadulterated raw opium paste. The price of opium paste is fixed by the government according to the quality and quantity tendered. The average is around 1500 rupees (US$) per kilogram. Some additional money is made by drying the poppy heads and collecting poppy seeds, and a small fraction of opium beyond the quota may be consumed locally or diverted to the black market. The opium paste is dried and processed into government opium and alkaloid factories before it is packed into cases of 60 kilograms for export. Purification of chemical constituents is done in India for domestic production, but typically done abroad by foreign importers.\nLegal opium importation from India and Turkey is conducted by Mallinckrodt, Noramco, Abbott Laboratories, Purdue Pharma, and Cody Laboratories Inc. in the United States, and legal opium production is conducted by GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson &amp; Johnson, Johnson Matthey, and Mayne in Tasmania, Australia; Sanofi Aventis in France; Shionogi Pharmaceutical in Japan; and MacFarlan Smith in the United Kingdom. The UN treaty requires that every country submit annual reports to the International Narcotics Control Board, stating that year's actual consumption of many classes of controlled drugs as well as opioids and projecting required quantities for the next year. This is to allow trends in consumption to be monitored and production quotas allotted.\nIn 2005, the European Senlis Council began developing a programme which hopes to solve the problems caused by the large quantity of opium produced illegally in Afghanistan, most of which is converted to heroin and smuggled for sale in Europe and the United States. This proposal is to license Afghan farmers to produce opium for the world pharmaceutical market, and thereby solve another problem, that of chronic underuse of potent analgesics where required within developing nations. Part of the proposal is to overcome the \"80\u201320 rule\" that requires the U.S. to purchase 80 percent of its legal opium from India and Turkey to include Afghanistan, by establishing a second-tier system of supply control that complements the current INCB regulated supply and demand system by providing poppy-based medicines to countries who cannot meet their demand under the current regulations. Senlis arranged a conference in Kabul that brought drug policy experts from around the world to meet with Afghan government officials to discuss internal security, corruption issues, and legal issues within Afghanistan.\nIn June 2007, the council launched a \"Poppy for Medicines\" project that provides a technical blueprint for the implementation of an integrated control system within Afghan village-based poppy for medicine projects: the idea promotes the economic diversification by redirecting proceeds from the legal cultivation of poppy and production of poppy-based medicines. There has been criticism of the Senlis report findings by Macfarlan Smith, who argue that though they produce morphine in Europe, they were never asked to contribute to the report.\nCultivation in the UK.\nIn late 2006, the British government permitted the pharmaceutical company MacFarlan Smith (a Johnson Matthey company) to cultivate opium poppies in England for medicinal reasons, after Macfarlan Smith's primary source, India, decided to increase the price of export opium latex. This move is well received by British farmers, with a major opium poppy field located in Didcot, England. The British government has contradicted the Home Office's suggestion that opium cultivation can be legalized in Afghanistan for exports to the United Kingdom, helping lower poverty and internal fighting while helping the NHS to meet the high demand for morphine and heroin. Opium poppy cultivation in the United Kingdom does not need a licence, but a licence is required for those wishing to extract opium for medicinal products.\nConsumption.\nIn the industrialized world, the United States is the world's biggest consumer of prescription opioids, with Italy being one of the lowest, because of tighter regulations on prescribing narcotics for pain relief. Most opium imported into the United States is broken down into its alkaloid constituents, and whether legal or illegal, most current drug use occurs with processed derivatives such as heroin rather than with unrefined opium.\nIntravenous injection of opiates is most used: by comparison with injection, \"dragon chasing\" (heating of heroin on a piece of foil), and madak and \"ack ack\" (smoking of cigarettes containing tobacco mixed with heroin powder) are only 40 percent and 20 percent efficient, respectively. One study of British heroin addicts found a 12-fold excess mortality ratio (1.8 percent of the group dying per year). Most heroin deaths result not from overdose \"per se\", but combination with other depressant drugs such as alcohol or benzodiazepines.\nThe smoking of opium does not involve the burning of the material as might be imagined. Rather, the prepared opium is indirectly heated to temperatures at which the active alkaloids, chiefly morphine, are vaporized. In the past, smokers would use a specially designed opium pipe which had a removable knob-like pipe-bowl of fired earthenware attached by a metal fitting to a long, cylindrical stem. A small \"pill\" of opium about the size of a pea would be placed on the pipe-bowl, which was then heated by holding it over an opium lamp, a special oil lamp with a distinct funnel-like chimney to channel heat into a small area. The smoker would lie on his or her side in order to guide the pipe-bowl and the tiny pill of opium over the stream of heat rising from the chimney of the oil lamp and inhale the vaporized opium fumes as needed. Several pills of opium were smoked at a single session depending on the smoker's tolerance to the drug. The effects could last up to twelve hours.\nIn Eastern culture, opium is more commonly used in the form of paregoric to treat diarrhea. This is a weaker solution than laudanum, an alcoholic tincture which was prevalently used as a pain medication and sleeping aid. Tincture of opium has been prescribed for, among other things, severe diarrhea. Taken thirty minutes prior to meals, it significantly slows intestinal motility, giving the intestines greater time to absorb fluid in the stool.\nDespite the historically negative view of opium as a cause of addiction, the use of morphine and other derivatives isolated from opium in the treatment of chronic pain has been reestablished. If given in controlled doses, modern opiates can be an effective treatment for neuropathic pain and other forms of chronic pain.\nChemical and physiological properties.\nOpium contains two main groups of alkaloids. Phenanthrenes such as morphine, codeine, and thebaine are the main psychoactive constituents. Isoquinolines such as papaverine and noscapine have no significant central nervous system effects. Morphine is the most prevalent and important alkaloid in opium, consisting of 10\u201316 percent of the total, and is responsible for most of its harmful effects such as lung edema, respiratory difficulties, coma, or cardiac or respiratory collapse. Morphine binds to and activates mu opioid receptors in the brain, spinal cord, stomach and intestine. Regular use can lead to drug tolerance or physical dependence. Chronic opium addicts in 1906 China consumed an average of eight grams of opium daily; opium addicts in modern Iran are thought to consume about the same.\nBoth analgesia and drug addiction are functions of the mu opioid receptor, the class of opioid receptor first identified as responsive to morphine. Tolerance is associated with the superactivation of the receptor, which may be affected by the degree of endocytosis caused by the opioid administered, and leads to a superactivation of cyclic AMP signaling. Long-term use of morphine in palliative care and the management of chronic pain always entails a risk that the patient develops tolerance or physical dependence. There are many kinds of rehabilitation treatment, including pharmacologically based treatments with naltrexone, methadone, or ibogaine.\nIn 2021, the International Agency for Research on Cancer concluded that opium is a Group 1 (sufficient evidence) human carcinogen, causing cancers of the larynx, lung, and urinary bladder.\nSlang terms.\nSome slang terms for opium include: \"Big O\", \"Shanghai Sally\", \"dope\", \"hop\", \"midnight oil\", \"O.P.\", and \"tar\". \"Dope\" and \"tar\" can also refer to heroin. The traditional opium pipe is known as a \"dream stick.\" The term \"dope\" entered the English language in the early nineteenth century, originally referring to viscous liquids, particularly sauces or gravy.\u00a0 It has been used to refer to opiates since at least 1888, and this usage arose because opium, when prepared for smoking, is viscous.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22716", "revid": "5701339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22716", "title": "Online algorithm", "text": "Algorithm that begins on possibly incomplete inputs\nIn computer science, an online algorithm is one that can process its input piece-by-piece in a serial fashion, i.e., in the order that the input is fed to the algorithm, without having the entire input available from the start. In contrast, an offline algorithm is given the whole problem data from the beginning and is required to output an answer which solves the problem at hand. \nIn operations research, the area in which online algorithms are developed is called online optimization.\nAs an example, consider the sorting algorithms selection sort and insertion sort: selection sort repeatedly selects the minimum element from the unsorted remainder and places it at the front, which requires access to the entire input; it is thus an offline algorithm. On the other hand, insertion sort considers one input element per iteration and produces a partial solution without considering future elements. Thus insertion sort is an online algorithm.\nNote that the final result of an insertion sort is optimum, i.e., a correctly sorted list. For many problems, online algorithms cannot match the performance of offline algorithms. If the ratio between the performance of an online algorithm and an optimal offline algorithm is bounded, the online algorithm is called competitive.\nNot every \"offline algorithm\" has an efficient \"online\" counterpart.\nIn grammar theory they are associated with Straight-line grammars.\nDefinition.\nBecause it does not know the whole input, an online algorithm is forced to make decisions that may later turn out not to be optimal, and the study of online algorithms has focused on the quality of decision-making that is possible in this setting. Competitive analysis formalizes this idea by comparing the relative performance of an online and offline algorithm for the same problem instance. Specifically, the competitive ratio of an algorithm, is defined as the worst-case ratio of its cost divided by the optimal cost, over all possible inputs. The competitive ratio of an online problem is the best competitive ratio achieved by an online algorithm. Intuitively, the competitive ratio of an algorithm gives a measure on the quality of solutions produced by this algorithm, while the competitive ratio of a problem shows the importance of knowing the future for this problem.\nOther interpretations.\nFor other points of view on \"online inputs to algorithms\", see \nExamples.\nSome \"online algorithms\":\nOnline problems.\nA problem exemplifying the concepts of online algorithms is the Canadian traveller problem. The goal of this problem is to minimize the cost of reaching a target in a weighted graph where some of the edges are unreliable and may have been removed from the graph. However, that an edge has been removed (\"failed\") is only revealed to \"the traveller\" when she/he reaches one of the edge's endpoints. The worst case for this problem is simply that all of the unreliable edges fail and the problem reduces to the usual shortest path problem. An alternative analysis of the problem can be made with the help of competitive analysis. For this method of analysis, the offline algorithm knows in advance which edges will fail and the goal is to minimize the ratio between the online and offline algorithms' performance. This problem is PSPACE-complete.\nThere are many formal problems that offer more than one \"online algorithm\" as solution:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22717", "revid": "49618226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22717", "title": "Origin", "text": "Origin(s) or The Origin may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "22718", "revid": "12782318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22718", "title": "Ozone", "text": "Triatomic oxygen molecule\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nOzone (), also called trioxygen, is an inorganic molecule with the chemical formula O3. It is a pale-blue gas with a distinctively pungent odour. It is an allotrope of oxygen that is much less stable than the diatomic allotrope O2, breaking down in the lower atmosphere to O2 (dioxygen). Ozone is formed from dioxygen by the action of ultraviolet (UV) light and electrical discharges within the Earth's atmosphere. It is present in very low concentrations throughout the atmosphere, with its highest concentration high in the ozone layer of the stratosphere, which absorbs most of the Sun's ultraviolet (UV) radiation.\nOzone's odour is reminiscent of chlorine, and detectable by many people at concentrations of as little as in air. Ozone's O3 structure was determined in 1865. The molecule was later proven to have a bent structure and to be weakly diamagnetic. At standard temperature and pressure, ozone is a pale blue gas that condenses at cryogenic temperatures to a dark blue liquid and finally a violet-black solid. Ozone's instability with regard to more common dioxygen is such that both concentrated gas and liquid ozone may decompose explosively at elevated temperatures, physical shock, or fast warming to the boiling point. It is therefore used commercially only in low concentrations.\nOzone is a powerful oxidising agent (far more so than dioxygen) and has many industrial and consumer applications related to oxidation. This same high oxidising potential, however, causes ozone to damage mucous and respiratory tissues in animals, and also tissues in plants, above concentrations of about . While this makes ozone a potent respiratory hazard and pollutant near ground level, a higher concentration in the ozone layer (from two to eight ppm) is beneficial, preventing damaging UV light from reaching the Earth's surface.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNomenclature.\nThe trivial name \"ozone\" is the most commonly used and preferred IUPAC name. The systematic names \"2\u03bb4-trioxidiene\" and \"catena-trioxygen\", valid IUPAC names, are constructed according to the substitutive and additive nomenclatures, respectively. The name \"ozone\" derives from \"ozon\" (\u1f44\u03b6\u03bf\u03bd), the Greek neuter present participle of \"ozein\" (\u1f44\u03b6\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd) \"to smell\", referring to ozone's distinctive smell.\nIn appropriate contexts, ozone can be viewed as trioxidane with two hydrogen atoms removed, and as such, \"trioxidanylidene\" may be used as a systematic name, according to substitutive nomenclature. By default, these names pay no regard to the radicality of the ozone molecule. In an even more specific context, this can also name the non-radical singlet ground state, whereas the diradical state is named \"trioxidanediyl\".\n\"Trioxidanediyl\" (or \"ozonide\") is used, non-systematically, to refer to the substituent group (-OOO-). Care should be taken to avoid confusing the name of the group for the context-specific name for the ozone given above.\nHistory.\nIn 1785, Dutch chemist Martinus van Marum was conducting experiments involving electrical sparking above water when he noticed an unusual smell, which he attributed to the electrical reactions, failing to realize that he had in fact produced ozone.\nA half century later, Christian Friedrich Sch\u00f6nbein noticed the same pungent odour and recognized it as the smell often following a bolt of lightning. In 1839, he succeeded in isolating the gaseous chemical and named it \"ozone\", from the Greek word \"\" () meaning \"to smell\".\nFor this reason, Sch\u00f6nbein is generally credited with the discovery of ozone. He also noted the similarity of ozone smell to the smell of phosphorus, and in 1844 proved that the product of reaction of white phosphorus with air is identical. A subsequent effort to call ozone \"electrified oxygen\" he ridiculed by proposing to call the ozone from white phosphorus \"phosphorized oxygen\". The chemical formula for ozone, O3, was not determined until 1865 by Jacques-Louis Soret and confirmed by Sch\u00f6nbein in 1867.\nFor much of the second half of the 19th century and well into the 20th, ozone was considered a healthy component of the environment by naturalists and health-seekers. Beaumont, California, had as its official slogan \"Beaumont: Zone of Ozone\", as evidenced on postcards and Chamber of Commerce letterhead. Naturalists working outdoors often considered the higher elevations beneficial because of their ozone content which was readily monitored. \"There is quite a different atmosphere [at higher elevation] with enough ozone to sustain the necessary energy [to work]\", wrote naturalist Henry Henshaw, working in Hawaii. Seaside air was considered to be healthy because of its believed ozone content. The smell giving rise to this belief is in fact that of halogenated seaweed metabolites and dimethyl sulfide.\nMuch of ozone's appeal seems to have resulted from its \"fresh\" smell, which evoked associations with purifying properties. Scientists noted its harmful effects. In 1873 James Dewar and John Gray McKendrick documented that frogs grew sluggish, birds gasped for breath, and rabbits' blood showed decreased levels of oxygen after exposure to \"ozonized air\", which \"exercised a destructive action\". Sch\u00f6nbein himself reported that chest pains, irritation of the mucous membranes, and difficulty breathing occurred as a result of inhaling ozone, and small mammals died. In 1911, Leonard Hill and Martin Flack stated in the \"Proceedings of the Royal Society B\" that ozone's healthful effects \"have, by mere iteration, become part and parcel of common belief; and yet exact physiological evidence in favour of its good effects has been hitherto almost entirely wanting ... The only thoroughly well-ascertained knowledge concerning the physiological effect of ozone, so far attained, is that it causes irritation and \u0153dema of the lungs, and death if inhaled in relatively strong concentration for any time.\"\nDuring World War I, ozone was tested at Queen Alexandra Military Hospital in London as a possible disinfectant for wounds. The gas was applied directly to wounds for as long as 15 minutes. This resulted in damage to both bacterial cells and human tissue. Other sanitizing techniques, such as irrigation with antiseptics, were found preferable.\nUntil the 1920s, it was not certain whether small amounts of oxozone, O4, were also present in ozone samples due to the difficulty of applying analytical chemistry techniques to the explosive concentrated chemical. In 1923, Georg-Maria Schwab (working for his doctoral thesis under Ernst Hermann Riesenfeld) was the first to successfully solidify ozone and perform accurate analysis which conclusively refuted the oxozone hypothesis. Further hitherto unmeasured physical properties of pure concentrated ozone were determined by the Riesenfeld group in the 1920s.\nPhysical properties.\nOzone is a colourless or pale blue gas, slightly soluble in water, and much more soluble in inert non-polar solvents such as carbon tetrachloride or fluorocarbons, in which it forms a blue solution. At , it condenses to form a dark blue liquid. It is dangerous to allow this liquid to warm to its boiling point, because both concentrated gaseous ozone and liquid ozone can detonate. At temperatures below , it forms a violet-black solid.\nOzone has a very specific sharp odour somewhat resembling chlorine bleach. Most people can detect it at the 0.01\u00a0\u03bcmol/mol level in air. Exposure of 0.1 to 1\u00a0\u03bcmol/mol produces headaches and burning eyes and irritates the respiratory passages.\nEven low concentrations of ozone in air are very destructive to organic materials such as latex, plastics, and animal lung tissue.\nThe ozone molecule is weakly diamagnetic.\nStructure.\nAccording to experimental evidence from microwave spectroscopy, ozone is a bent molecule, with C2v symmetry (similar to the water molecule). The O\u2013O distances are . The O\u2013O\u2013O angle is 116.78\u00b0. The central atom is \"sp\"\u00b2 hybridized with one lone pair. Ozone is a polar molecule with a dipole moment of 0.53\u00a0D. The molecule can be represented as a resonance hybrid with two contributing structures, each with a single bond on one side and double bond on the other. The arrangement possesses an overall bond order of 1.5 for both sides. It is isoelectronic with the nitrite anion. Naturally occurring ozone can be composed of substituted isotopes (16O, 17O, 18O). A cyclic form has been predicted but not observed.\nReactions.\nOzone is among the most powerful oxidising agents known, far stronger than . It is also unstable at high concentrations, decaying into ordinary diatomic oxygen. Its half-life varies with atmospheric conditions such as temperature, humidity, and air movement. Under laboratory conditions, the half-life will average ~1500 minutes (25 hours) in still air at room temperature (24\u00a0\u00b0C), zero humidity with zero air changes per hour.\n&lt;chem&gt;2 O3 -&gt; 3 O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nThis reaction proceeds more rapidly with increasing temperature. Deflagration of ozone can be triggered by a spark and can occur in ozone concentrations of 10 wt% or higher.\nOzone can also be produced from oxygen at the anode of an electrochemical cell. This reaction can create smaller quantities of ozone for research purposes.\nformula_1\nThis can be observed as an unwanted reaction in a Hoffman apparatus during the electrolysis of water when the voltage is set above the necessary voltage.\nWith metals.\nOzone oxidises most metals (except gold, platinum, and iridium) into oxides of the metals in their highest oxidation state. For example:\nformula_2\nWith nitrogen and carbon compounds.\nOzone oxidises nitric oxide to nitrogen dioxide:\n &lt;chem&gt;NO + O3 -&gt; NO2 + O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nThis reaction is accompanied by chemiluminescence.\nThe can be further oxidised to nitrate radical:\n &lt;chem&gt;NO2 + O3 -&gt; NO3 + O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe formed can react with to form dinitrogen pentoxide ().\nSolid nitronium perchlorate can be made from , and gases:\n &lt;chem&gt;NO2 + ClO2 + 2 O3 -&gt; NO2ClO4 + 2 O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nOzone does not react with ammonium salts, but it oxidises ammonia to ammonium nitrate:\n &lt;chem&gt;2 NH3 + 4 O3 -&gt; NH4NO3 + 4 O2 + H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nOzone reacts with carbon to form carbon dioxide, even at room temperature:\n &lt;chem&gt;C + 2 O3 -&gt; CO2 + 2 O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nWith sulphur compounds.\nOzone oxidizes sulphides to sulphates. For example, lead(II) sulphide is oxidized to lead(II) sulphate:\n &lt;chem&gt;PbS + 4 O3 -&gt; PbSO4 + 4 O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nSulphuric acid can be produced from ozone, water and either elemental sulphur or sulphur dioxide:\nformula_3\nIn the gas phase, ozone reacts with hydrogen sulphide to form sulphur dioxide:\n &lt;chem&gt;H2S + O3 -&gt; SO2 + H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nIn an aqueous solution, however, two competing simultaneous reactions occur, one to produce elemental sulphur, and one to produce sulphuric acid:\nformula_4\nWith alkenes and alkynes.\nAlkenes can be oxidatively cleaved by ozone, in a process called ozonolysis, giving alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, and carboxylic acids, depending on the second step of the workup.\nOzone can also cleave alkynes to form an acid anhydride or diketone product. If the reaction is performed in the presence of water, the anhydride hydrolyzes to give two carboxylic acids.\nUsually ozonolysis is carried out in a solution of dichloromethane, at a temperature of \u221278\u00a0\u00b0C. After a sequence of cleavage and rearrangement, an organic ozonide is formed. With reductive workup (e.g. zinc in acetic acid or dimethyl sulphide), ketones and aldehydes will be formed, with oxidative workup (e.g. aqueous or alcoholic hydrogen peroxide), carboxylic acids will be formed.\nOther substrates.\nAll three atoms of ozone may also react, as in the reaction of tin(II) chloride with hydrochloric acid and ozone:\n &lt;chem&gt;3 SnCl2 + 6 HCl + O3 -&gt; 3 SnCl4 + 3 H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nIodine perchlorate can be made by treating iodine dissolved in cold anhydrous perchloric acid with ozone:\n &lt;chem&gt;I2 + 6 HClO4 + O3 -&gt; 2 I(ClO4)3 + 3 H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nOzone can also react with potassium iodide to give oxygen and iodine gas that can be titrated for quantitative determination:\n &lt;chem&gt;2KI + O3 + H2O -&gt; 2KOH + O2 + I2&lt;/chem&gt;\nCombustion.\nOzone can be used for combustion reactions and combustible gases; ozone provides higher temperatures than burning in dioxygen (). The following is a reaction for the combustion of carbon subnitride which can also cause higher temperatures:\n &lt;chem&gt;3 C4N2 + 4 O3 -&gt; 12 CO + 3 N2&lt;/chem&gt;\nOzone can react at cryogenic temperatures. At , atomic hydrogen reacts with liquid ozone to form a hydrogen superoxide radical, which dimerizes:\nformula_5\nOzone decomposition.\nTypes of ozone decomposition.\nOzone is a toxic substance, commonly found or generated in human environments (aircraft cabins, offices with photocopiers, laser printers, sterilisers, ...).\nThe catalytic decomposition of ozone is very important to reduce pollution. This type of decomposition is the most widely used, especially with solid catalysts, and it has many advantages such as a higher conversion with a lower temperature. Furthermore, the product and the catalyst can be instantaneously separated, and this way the catalyst can be easily recovered without using any separation operation. The most-used materials in the catalytic decomposition of ozone in the gas phase are manganese dioxide, transition metals such as Mn, Co, Cu, Fe, Ni, or Ag, and noble metals such as Pt, Rh, or Pd.\nFree radicals of chlorine (Cl\u00b7), formed by the action of ultraviolet radiation on chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and sea salt, are known to catalyse the breakdown of ozone in the atmosphere.\nThere are two other possibilities for decomposing ozone in the gas phase:\nKinetics of ozone decomposition into molecular oxygen.\nThe uncatalysed process of ozone decomposition in the gas phase is a complex reaction involving two elementary reactions that finally lead to molecular oxygen, and this means that the reaction order and the rate law cannot be determined by the stoichiometry of the overall reaction.\nOverall reaction: &lt;chem&gt;2 O3 -&gt; 3 O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nRate law (observed): formula_6\nwhere formula_7 is the observed rate constant and formula_8 is the reaction rate. From the rate law above it can be determined that the partial order respect to molecular oxygen is \u22121 and respect to ozone is 2; therefore, the global reaction order is 1.\nThe first step is a unimolecular reaction wherein one molecule of ozone decomposes into two products (molecular oxygen and oxygen). The oxygen atom from the first step is a reactive intermediate because it participates as a reactant in the second step, which is a bimolecular reaction because there are two different reactants (ozone and oxygen) that give rise to molecular oxygen.\nStep 1: Unimolecular reaction \u00a0 \u00a0&lt;chem&gt;O3 -&gt; O2 + O&lt;/chem&gt;\nStep 2: Bimolecular reaction \u00a0 \u00a0 &lt;chem&gt;O3 + O -&gt; 2 O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nThese two steps have different reaction rates and rate constants. The reaction rate laws for each of these steps are shown below:\nformula_9\nThe following mechanism allows to explain the rate law of the ozone decomposition observed experimentally, and also it allows to determine the reaction orders with respect to ozone and oxygen, with which the overall reaction order will be determined. \nThe first step is assumed reversible and faster than the second reaction, which means that the slower rate determining step is the second reaction. This step determines the rate of product formation, and so formula_10. However, this equation depends on the concentration of oxygen (intermediate), which does not appear in the observed rate law. Since the first step is a rapid equilibrium, the concentration of the intermediate can be determined as follows:\nformula_11\nformula_12\nThen using these equations, the formation rate of molecular oxygen is as shown below:\nformula_13\nThe mechanism is consistent with the rate law observed experimentally if the rate constant (\"K\"obs) is given in terms of the individual mechanistic steps' rate constants as follows:\nformula_14\nwhere formula_15\nReduction to ozonides.\nReduction of ozone gives the ozonide anion, . Derivatives of this anion are explosive and must be stored at cryogenic temperatures. Ozonides for all the alkali metals are known. , and can be prepared from their respective superoxides:\n &lt;chem&gt;KO2 + O3 -&gt; KO3 + O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nAlthough can be formed as above, it can also be formed from potassium hydroxide and ozone:\n &lt;chem&gt;2 KOH + 5 O3 -&gt; 2 KO3 + 5 O2 + H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\n and must be prepared by action of in liquid on an ion-exchange resin containing or ions:\n &lt;chem&gt;CsO3 + Na+ -&gt; Cs+ + NaO3&lt;/chem&gt;\nA solution of calcium in ammonia reacts with ozone to give ammonium ozonide and not calcium ozonide:\n formula_16\nApplications.\nOzone can be used to remove iron and manganese from water, forming a precipitate which can be filtered:\nformula_17\nOzone oxidizes dissolved hydrogen sulphide in water to sulphurous acid:\n &lt;chem&gt;3 O3 + H2S -&gt; H2SO3 + 3 O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nThese three reactions are central in the use of ozone-based well-water treatment.\nOzone detoxifies cyanides by converting them to cyanates.\n &lt;chem&gt;CN- + O3 -&gt; CNO- + O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nOzone completely decomposes urea:\n&lt;chem&gt;(NH2)2CO + O3 -&gt; N2 + CO2 + 2 H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nSpectroscopic properties.\nOzone is a bent triatomic molecule with three vibrational modes: the symmetric stretch (1103.157\u00a0cm\u22121), bend (701.42\u00a0cm\u22121) and antisymmetric stretch (1042.096\u00a0cm\u22121). The symmetric stretch and bend are weak absorbers, but the antisymmetric stretch is strong and responsible for ozone being an important minor greenhouse gas. This IR band is also used to detect ambient and atmospheric ozone although UV-based measurements are more common.\nThe electromagnetic spectrum of ozone is quite complex. An overview can be seen at the MPI Mainz UV/VIS Spectral Atlas of Gaseous Molecules of Atmospheric Interest.\nAll of the bands are dissociative, meaning that the molecule falls apart to O + O2 after absorbing a photon. The most important absorption is the Hartley band, extending from slightly above 300\u00a0nm down to slightly above 200\u00a0nm. It is this band that is responsible for absorbing UV\u00a0C in the stratosphere.\nOn the high wavelength side, the Hartley band transitions to the so-called Huggins band, which falls off rapidly until disappearing by ~360\u00a0nm. Above 400\u00a0nm, extending well out into the NIR, are the Chappius and Wulf bands. There, unstructured absorption bands are useful for detecting high ambient concentrations of ozone, but are so weak that they do not have much practical effect.\nThere are additional absorption bands in the far UV, which increase slowly from 200\u00a0nm down to reaching a maximum at ~120\u00a0nm.\nOzone in Earth's atmosphere.\nThe standard way to express total ozone levels (the amount of ozone in a given vertical column) in the atmosphere is by using Dobson units. Point measurements are reported as mole fractions in nmol/mol (parts per billion, ppb) or as concentrations in \u03bcg/m3. The study of ozone concentration in the atmosphere started in the 1920s.\nOzone layer.\nLocation and production.\nThe highest levels of ozone in the atmosphere are in the stratosphere, in a region also known as the ozone layer between about 10 and 50\u00a0km above the surface (or between about 6 and 31 miles). However, even in this \"layer\", the ozone concentrations are only two to eight parts per million, so most of the oxygen there is dioxygen, O2, at about 210,000 parts per million by volume.\nOzone in the stratosphere is mostly produced from short-wave ultraviolet rays between 240 and 160\u00a0nm. Oxygen starts to absorb weakly at 240\u00a0nm in the Herzberg bands, but most of the oxygen is dissociated by absorption in the strong Schumann\u2013Runge bands between 200 and 160\u00a0nm where ozone does not absorb. While shorter wavelength light, extending to even the X-Ray limit, is energetic enough to dissociate molecular oxygen, there is relatively little of it, and, the strong solar emission at Lyman-alpha, 121\u00a0nm, falls at a point where molecular oxygen absorption is a minimum.\nThe process of ozone creation and destruction is called the Chapman cycle and starts with the photolysis of molecular oxygen\n &lt;chem&gt;O2 -&gt; [\\ce{photon}] [(\\ce{radiation}\\ \\lambda\\ &lt;\\ 240\\ \\ce{nm})] 2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nfollowed by reaction of the oxygen atom with another molecule of oxygen to form ozone.\n&lt;chem&gt;O + O2 + M -&gt; O3 + M&lt;/chem&gt;\nwhere \"M\" denotes the third body that carries off the excess energy of the reaction. The ozone molecule can then absorb a UV-C photon and dissociate\nformula_18\nThe excess kinetic energy heats the stratosphere when the O atoms and the molecular oxygen fly apart and collide with other molecules. This conversion of UV light into kinetic energy warms the stratosphere. The oxygen atoms produced in the photolysis of ozone then react back with other oxygen molecule as in the previous step to form more ozone. In the clear atmosphere, with only nitrogen and oxygen, ozone can react with the atomic oxygen to form two molecules of :\n&lt;chem&gt;O3 + O -&gt; 2 O2&lt;/chem&gt;\nAn estimate of the rate of this termination step to the cycling of atomic oxygen back to ozone can be found simply by taking the ratios of the concentration of O2 to O3. The termination reaction is catalysed by the presence of certain free radicals, of which the most important are hydroxyl (OH), nitric oxide (NO) and atomic chlorine (Cl) and bromine (Br). In the second half of the 20th century, the amount of ozone in the stratosphere was discovered to be declining, mostly because of increasing concentrations of chlorofluorocarbons (CFC) and similar chlorinated and brominated organic molecules. The concern over the health effects of the decline led to the 1987 Montreal Protocol, the ban on the production of many ozone-depleting chemicals and in the first and second decade of the 21st century the beginning of the recovery of stratospheric ozone concentrations.\nImportance to surface-dwelling life on Earth.\nOzone in the ozone layer filters out sunlight wavelengths from about 200\u00a0nm UV rays to 315\u00a0nm, with ozone peak absorption at about 250\u00a0nm. This ozone UV absorption is important to life, since it extends the absorption of UV by ordinary oxygen and nitrogen in air (which absorb all wavelengths &lt; 200\u00a0nm) through the lower UV-C (200\u2013280\u00a0nm) and the entire UV-B band (280\u2013315\u00a0nm). The small unabsorbed part that remains of UV-B after passage through ozone causes sunburn in humans, and direct DNA damage in living tissues in both plants and animals. Ozone's effect on mid-range UV-B rays is illustrated by its effect on UV-B at 290\u00a0nm, which has a radiation intensity 350 million times as powerful at the top of the atmosphere as at the surface. Nevertheless, enough of UV-B radiation at similar frequency reaches the ground to cause some sunburn, and these same wavelengths are also among those responsible for the production of vitamin D in humans.\nThe ozone layer has little effect on the longer UV wavelengths called UV-A (315\u2013400\u00a0nm), but this radiation does not cause sunburn or direct DNA damage. While UV-A probably does cause long-term skin damage in certain humans, it is not as dangerous to plants and to the health of surface-dwelling organisms on Earth in general (see ultraviolet for more information on near ultraviolet).\nGround-level ozone.\nGround-level ozone (or tropospheric ozone) is an atmospheric pollutant. It is not emitted directly by car engines or by industrial operations, but formed by the reaction of sunlight on air containing hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides that react to form ozone directly at the source of the pollution or many kilometres downwind.\nOzone reacts directly with some hydrocarbons such as aldehydes and thus begins their removal from the air, but the products are themselves key components of smog. Ozone photolysis by UV light leads to production of the hydroxyl radical HO\u2022 and this plays a part in the removal of hydrocarbons from the air, but is also the first step in the creation of components of smog such as peroxyacyl nitrates, which can be powerful eye irritants. The atmospheric lifetime of tropospheric ozone is about 22 days; its main removal mechanisms are being deposited to the ground, the above-mentioned reaction giving HO\u2022, and by reactions with OH and the peroxy radical HO2\u2022.\nThere is evidence of significant reduction in agricultural yields because of increased ground-level ozone and pollution which interferes with photosynthesis and stunts overall growth of some plant species. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has proposed a secondary regulation to reduce crop damage, in addition to the primary regulation designed for the protection of human health.\nGround-level ozone in urban areas.\nCertain examples of cities with elevated ozone readings are Denver, Colorado; Houston, Texas; and Mexico City, Mexico. Houston has a reading of around 41\u00a0nmol/mol, while Mexico City is far more hazardous, with a reading of about 125\u00a0nmol/mol.\nGround-level ozone, or tropospheric ozone, is the most concerning type of ozone pollution in urban areas and is increasing in general. Ozone pollution in urban areas affects denser populations, and is worsened by high populations of vehicles, which emit NO2 and volatile organic compounds (VOCs), the main pollutants contributing to problematic ozone levels. Ozone pollution in urban areas is especially concerning with increasing temperatures, raising heat-related mortality during heat waves. During heat waves in urban areas, ground level ozone pollution can be 20% higher than usual. Ozone pollution in urban areas reaches higher levels of exceedance in the summer and autumn, which may be explained by patterns of weather and traffic. People experiencing poverty are more affected by pollution in general, even though these populations are less likely to be contributing to pollution levels.\nAs mentioned above, Denver, Colorado, is one of the many cities in the U.S. that have high amounts of ozone. According to the American Lung Association, the Denver\u2013Aurora area is the 14th most ozone-polluted area in the U.S. The problem of high ozone levels is not new to this area. In 2004, the EPA allotted the Denver Metro/North Front Range as non-attainment areas per 1997's 8-hour ozone standard, but later deferred this status until 2007. The non-attainment standard indicates that an area does not meet the EPA's air quality standards. The Colorado Ozone Action Plan was created in response, and numerous changes were implemented from this plan. The first major change was that car emission testing was expanded across the state to more counties that did not previously mandate emissions testing, like areas of Larimer and Weld County. There have also been changes made to decrease emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) and VOCs, which should help lower ozone levels.\nOne large contributor to high ozone levels in the area is the oil and natural gas industry situated in the Denver-Julesburg Basin (DJB) which overlaps with a majority of Colorado's metropolitan areas. Ozone is produced naturally in the Earth's stratosphere, but is also produced in the troposphere from human efforts. Briefly mentioned above, NOx and VOCs react with sunlight to create ozone through a process called photochemistry. One hour elevated ozone events (&lt;75\u00a0ppb) \"occur during June\u2013August indicating that elevated ozone levels are driven by regional photochemistry\". According to an article from the University of Colorado-Boulder, \"Oil and natural gas VOC emission have a major role in ozone production and bear the potential to contribute to elevated O3 levels in the Northern Colorado Front Range (NCFR)\". Using complex analyses to research wind patterns and emissions from large oil and natural gas operations, the authors concluded that \"elevated O3 levels in the NCFR are predominantly correlated with air transport from N\u2013 ESE, which are the upwind sectors where the O&amp;NG operations in the Wattenberg Field area of the DJB are located\".\nContained in the Colorado Ozone Action Plan, created in 2008, plans exist to evaluate \"emission controls for large industrial sources of NOx\" and \"statewide control requirements for new oil and gas condensate tanks and pneumatic valves\". In 2011, the Regional Haze Plan was released that included a more specific plan to help decrease NOx emissions. These efforts are increasingly difficult to implement and take many years to come to pass. Of course there are also other reasons that ozone levels remain high. These include: a growing population meaning more car emissions, and the mountains along the NCFR that can trap emissions. If interested, daily air quality readings can be found at the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment's website. As noted earlier, Denver continues to experience high levels of ozone to this day. It will take many years and a systems-thinking approach to combat this issue of high ozone levels in the Front Range of Colorado.\nOzone cracking.\nOzone gas attacks any polymer possessing olefinic or double bonds within its chain structure, such as natural rubber, nitrile rubber, and styrene-butadiene rubber. Products made using these polymers are especially susceptible to attack, which causes cracks to grow longer and deeper with time, the rate of crack growth depending on the load carried by the rubber component and the concentration of ozone in the atmosphere. Such materials can be protected by adding antiozonants, such as waxes, which bond to the surface to create a protective film or blend with the material and provide long term protection. Ozone cracking used to be a serious problem in car tyres, for example, but it is not an issue with modern tyres. On the other hand, many critical products, like gaskets and O-rings, may be attacked by ozone produced within compressed-air systems. Fuel lines made of reinforced rubber are also susceptible to attack, especially within the engine compartment, where some ozone is produced by electrical components. Storing rubber products in close proximity to a DC electric motor can accelerate ozone cracking. The commutator of the motor generates sparks which in turn produce ozone.\nOzone as a greenhouse gas.\nAlthough ozone was present at ground level before the Industrial Revolution, peak concentrations are now far higher than the pre-industrial levels, and even background concentrations well away from sources of pollution are substantially higher. Ozone acts as a greenhouse gas, absorbing some of the infrared energy emitted by the earth. Quantifying the greenhouse gas potency of ozone is difficult because it is not present in uniform concentrations across the globe. However, the most widely accepted scientific assessments relating to climate change (e.g. the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Third Assessment Report) suggest that the radiative forcing of tropospheric ozone is about 25% that of carbon dioxide.\nThe annual global warming potential of tropospheric ozone is between 918 and 1022 tons carbon dioxide equivalent/tons tropospheric ozone. This means on a per-molecule basis, ozone in the troposphere has a radiative forcing effect roughly 1,000 times as strong as carbon dioxide. However, tropospheric ozone is a short-lived greenhouse gas, which decays in the atmosphere much more quickly than carbon dioxide. This means that over a 20-year span, the global warming potential of tropospheric ozone is much less, roughly 62 to 69 tons carbon dioxide equivalent / ton tropospheric ozone.\nBecause of its short-lived nature, tropospheric ozone does not have strong global effects, but has very strong radiative forcing effects on regional scales. In fact, there are regions of the world where tropospheric ozone has a radiative forcing up to 150% of carbon dioxide. For example, ozone increase in the troposphere is shown to be responsible for ~30% of upper Southern Ocean interior warming between 1955 and 2000.\nCarbon filtering.\nFilters containing an adsorbent or catalyst such as charcoal (carbon) may be used to remove odours and gaseous pollutants such as volatile organic compounds or ozone.\nHealth effects.\nOzone is an acutely toxic gas.\nFor the last few decades, scientists studied the effects of acute and chronic ozone exposure on human health. Hundreds of studies suggest that ozone is harmful to people at levels currently found in urban areas. Ozone has been shown to affect the respiratory, cardiovascular and central nervous system. Early death and problems in reproductive health and development are also shown to be associated with ozone exposure.\nVulnerable populations.\nThe American Lung Association has identified five populations who are especially vulnerable to the effects of breathing ozone:\nAdditional evidence suggests that women, those with obesity and low-income populations may also face higher risk from ozone, although more research is needed.\nAcute ozone exposure.\nAcute ozone exposure ranges from hours to a few days. Because ozone is a gas, it directly affects the lungs and the entire respiratory system. Inhaled ozone causes inflammation and acute\u2014but reversible\u2014changes in lung function, as well as airway hyperresponsiveness. These changes lead to shortness of breath, wheezing, and coughing which may exacerbate lung diseases, like asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) resulting in the need to receive medical treatment. Acute and chronic exposure to ozone has been shown to cause an increased risk of respiratory infections, due to the following mechanism.\nMultiple studies have been conducted to determine the mechanism behind ozone's harmful effects, particularly in the lungs. These studies have shown that exposure to ozone causes changes in the immune response within the lung tissue, resulting in disruption of both the innate and adaptive immune response, as well as altering the protective function of lung epithelial cells. It is thought that these changes in immune response and the related inflammatory response are factors that likely contribute to the increased risk of lung infections, and worsening or triggering of asthma and reactive airways after exposure to ground-level ozone pollution.\nThe innate (cellular) immune system consists of various chemical signals and cell types that work broadly and against multiple pathogen types, typically bacteria or foreign bodies/substances in the host. The cells of the innate system include phagocytes, neutrophils, both thought to contribute to the mechanism of ozone pathology in the lungs, as the functioning of these cell types have been shown to change after exposure to ozone. Macrophages, cells that serve the purpose of eliminating pathogens or foreign material through the process of \"phagocytosis\", have been shown to change the level of inflammatory signals they release in response to ozone, either up-regulating and resulting in an inflammatory response in the lung, or down-regulating and reducing immune protection. Neutrophils, another important cell type of the innate immune system that primarily targets bacterial pathogens, are found to be present in the airways within 6 hours of exposure to high ozone levels. Despite high levels in the lung tissues, however, their ability to clear bacteria appears impaired by exposure to ozone.\nThe adaptive immune system is the branch of immunity that provides long-term protection via the development of antibodies targeting specific pathogens and is also impacted by high ozone exposure. Lymphocytes, a cellular component of the adaptive immune response, produce an increased amount of inflammatory chemicals called \"cytokines\" after exposure to ozone, which may contribute to airway hyperreactivity and worsening asthma symptoms.\nThe airway epithelial cells also play an important role in protecting individuals from pathogens. In normal tissue, the epithelial layer forms a protective barrier, and also contains specialized ciliary structures that work to clear foreign bodies, mucus and pathogens from the lungs. When exposed to ozone, the cilia become damaged and mucociliary clearance of pathogens is reduced. Furthermore, the epithelial barrier becomes weakened, allowing pathogens to cross the barrier, proliferate and spread into deeper tissues. Together, these changes in the epithelial barrier help make individuals more susceptible to pulmonary infections.\nInhaling ozone not only affects the immune system and lungs, but it may also affect the heart as well. Ozone causes short-term autonomic imbalance leading to changes in heart rate and reduction in heart rate variability; and high levels exposure for as little as one-hour results in a supraventricular arrhythmia in the elderly, both increase the risk of premature death and stroke. Ozone may also lead to vasoconstriction resulting in increased systemic arterial pressure contributing to increased risk of cardiac morbidity and mortality in patients with pre-existing cardiac diseases.\nChronic ozone exposure.\nBreathing ozone for periods longer than eight hours at a time for weeks, months or years defines chronic exposure. Numerous studies suggest a serious impact on the health of various populations from this exposure.\nOne study finds significant positive associations between chronic ozone and all-cause, circulatory, and respiratory mortality with 2%, 3%, and 12% increases in risk per 10\u00a0ppb and report an association (95% CI) of annual ozone and all-cause mortality with a hazard ratio of 1.02 (1.01\u20131.04), and with cardiovascular mortality of 1.03 (1.01\u20131.05). A similar study finds similar associations with all-cause mortality and even larger effects for cardiovascular mortality. An increased risk of mortality from respiratory causes is associated with long-term chronic exposure to ozone.\nChronic ozone has detrimental effects on children, especially those with asthma. The risk for hospitalization in children with asthma increases with chronic exposure to ozone; younger children and those with low-income status are even at greater risk.\nAdults suffering from respiratory diseases (asthma, COPD, lung cancer) are at a higher risk of mortality and morbidity and critically ill patients have an increased risk of developing acute respiratory distress syndrome with chronic ozone exposure as well.\nOzone produced by air cleaners.\nOzone generators sold as air cleaners intentionally produce the gas ozone. These are often marketed to control indoor air pollution, and use misleading terms to describe ozone. Some examples are describing it as \"energized oxygen\" or \"pure air\", suggesting that ozone is a healthy or \"better\" kind of oxygen. However, according to the EPA, \"There is evidence to show that at concentrations that do not exceed public health standards, ozone is not effective at removing many odor-causing chemicals\", and \"If used at concentrations that do not exceed public health standards, ozone applied to indoor air does not effectively remove viruses, bacteria, mold, or other biological pollutants.\". Furthermore, another report states that \"results of some controlled studies show that concentrations of ozone considerably higher than these [human safety] standards are possible even when a user follows the manufacturer's operating instructions\".\nThe California Air Resources Board has a page listing air cleaners (many with ionizers) meeting their indoor ozone limit of 0.050 parts per million. From that article:\nAll portable indoor air cleaning devices sold in California must be certified by the California Air Resources Board (CARB). To be certified, air cleaners must be tested for electrical safety and ozone emissions, and meet an ozone emission concentration limit of 0.050 parts per million. For more information about the regulation, visit the https://.\nOzone air pollution.\nOzone precursors are a group of pollutants, predominantly those emitted during the combustion of fossil fuels. Ground-level ozone pollution (tropospheric ozone) is produced near the Earth's surface by the action of daylight UV rays on these precursors. The ozone at ground level is primarily from fossil fuel precursors, but methane is a natural precursor, and the very low natural background level of ozone at ground level is considered safe. This section examines the health impacts of fossil fuel burning, which raises ground level ozone far above background levels.\nThere is a great deal of evidence to show that ground-level ozone can harm lung function and irritate the respiratory system. Exposure to ozone (and the pollutants that produce it) is linked to premature death, asthma, bronchitis, heart attack, and other cardiopulmonary problems.\nLong-term exposure to ozone has been shown to increase risk of death from respiratory illness. A study of 450,000 people living in U.S. cities saw a significant correlation between ozone levels and respiratory illness over the 18-year follow-up period. The study revealed that people living in cities with high ozone levels, such as Houston or Los Angeles, had an over 30% increased risk of dying from lung disease.\nAir quality guidelines such as those from the World Health Organization, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the European Union are based on detailed studies designed to identify the levels that can cause measurable ill health effects.\nAccording to scientists with the EPA, susceptible people can be adversely affected by ozone levels as low as 40\u00a0nmol/mol. In the EU, the current target value for ozone concentrations is 120\u00a0\u03bcg/m3 which is about 60\u00a0nmol/mol. This target applies to all member states in accordance with Directive 2008/50/EC. Ozone concentration is measured as a maximum daily mean of 8 hour averages and the target should not be exceeded on more than 25 calendar days per year, starting from January 2010. While the directive requires in the future a strict compliance with 120\u00a0\u03bcg/m3 limit (i.e. mean ozone concentration not to be exceeded on any day of the year), there is no date set for this requirement and this is treated as a long-term objective.\nIn the US, the Clean Air Act directs the EPA to set National Ambient Air Quality Standards for several pollutants, including ground-level ozone, and counties out of compliance with these standards are required to take steps to reduce their levels. In May 2008, under a court order, the EPA lowered its ozone standard from 80\u00a0nmol/mol to 75\u00a0nmol/mol. The move proved controversial, since the Agency's own scientists and advisory board had recommended lowering the standard to 60\u00a0nmol/mol. Many public health and environmental groups also supported the 60\u00a0nmol/mol standard, and the World Health Organization recommends 100\u00a0\u03bcg/m3 (51\u00a0nmol/mol).\nOn January 7, 2010, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced proposed revisions to the National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) for the pollutant ozone, the principal component of smog:\n... EPA proposes that the level of the 8-hour primary standard, which was set at 0.075\u00a0\u03bcmol/mol in the 2008 final rule, should instead be set at a lower level within the range of 0.060 to 0.070\u00a0\u03bcmol/mol, to provide increased protection for children and other \"at risk\" populations against an array of O3 \u2013 related adverse health effects that range from decreased lung function and increased respiratory symptoms to serious indicators of respiratory morbidity including emergency department visits and hospital admissions for respiratory causes, and possibly cardiovascular-related morbidity as well as total non- accidental and cardiopulmonary mortality\u00a0...\nOn October 26, 2015, the EPA published a final rule with an effective date of December 28, 2015, that revised the 8-hour primary NAAQS from 0.075\u00a0ppm to 0.070\u00a0ppm.\nThe EPA has developed an air quality index (AQI) to help explain air pollution levels to the general public. Under the current standards, eight-hour average ozone mole fractions of 85 to 104\u00a0nmol/mol are described as \"unhealthy for sensitive groups\", 105\u00a0nmol/mol to 124\u00a0nmol/mol as \"unhealthy\", and 125\u00a0nmol/mol to 404\u00a0nmol/mol as \"very unhealthy\".\nOzone can also be present in indoor air pollution, partly as a result of electronic equipment such as photocopiers. A connection has also been known to exist between the increased pollen, fungal spores, and ozone caused by thunderstorms and hospital admissions of asthma sufferers.\nIn the Victorian era, one British folk myth held that the smell of the sea was caused by ozone. In fact, the characteristic \"smell of the sea\" is caused by dimethyl sulphide, a chemical generated by phytoplankton. Victorian Britons considered the resulting smell \"bracing\".\nHeat waves.\nAn investigation to assess the joint mortality effects of ozone and heat during the European heat waves in 2003, concluded that these appear to be additive.\nPhysiology.\nOzone, along with reactive forms of oxygen such as superoxide, singlet oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, and hypochlorite ions, is produced by white blood cells and other biological systems (such as the roots of marigolds) as a means of destroying foreign bodies. Ozone reacts directly with organic double bonds. Also, when ozone breaks down to dioxygen it gives rise to oxygen free radicals, which are highly reactive and capable of damaging many organic molecules. Moreover, it is believed that the powerful oxidizing properties of ozone may be a contributing factor of inflammation. The cause-and-effect relationship of how the ozone is created in the body and what it does is still under consideration and still subject to various interpretations, since other body chemical processes can trigger some of the same reactions. There is evidence linking the antibody-catalyzed water-oxidation pathway of the human immune response to the production of ozone. In this system, ozone is produced by antibody-catalyzed production of trioxidane from water and neutrophil-produced singlet oxygen.\nWhen inhaled, ozone reacts with compounds lining the lungs to form specific, cholesterol-derived metabolites that are thought to facilitate the build-up and pathogenesis of atherosclerotic plaques (a form of heart disease). These metabolites have been confirmed as naturally occurring in human atherosclerotic arteries and are categorized into a class of secosterols termed \"atheronals\", generated by ozonolysis of cholesterol's double bond to form a 5,6 secosterol as well as a secondary condensation product via aldolization.\nImpact on plant growth and crop yields.\nOzone has been implicated to have an adverse effect on plant growth: \"... ozone reduced total chlorophylls, carotenoid and carbohydrate concentration, and increased 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) content and ethylene production. In treated plants, the ascorbate leaf pool was decreased, while lipid peroxidation and solute leakage were significantly higher than in ozone-free controls. The data indicated that ozone triggered protective mechanisms against oxidative stress in citrus.\" Studies that have used pepper plants as a model have shown that ozone decreased fruit yield and changed fruit quality. Furthermore, it was also observed a decrease in chlorophylls levels and antioxidant defences on the leaves, as well as increased the reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and lipid and protein damages.\nA 2022 study concludes that East Asia loses 63\u00a0billion dollars in crops per year due to ozone pollution, a byproduct of fossil fuel combustion. China loses about one-third of its potential wheat production and one-fourth of its rice production.\nSafety regulations.\nBecause of the strongly oxidizing properties of ozone, ozone is a primary irritant, affecting especially the eyes and respiratory systems and can be hazardous at even low concentrations. The Canadian Centre for Occupation Safety and Health reports that:\nEven very low concentrations of ozone can be harmful to the upper respiratory tract and the lungs. The severity of injury depends on both the concentration of ozone and the duration of exposure. Severe and permanent lung injury or death could result from even a very short-term exposure to relatively low concentrations.\"\nTo protect workers potentially exposed to ozone, U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration has established a permissible exposure limit (PEL) of 0.1\u00a0\u03bcmol/mol (29 CFR 1910.1000 table Z-1), calculated as an 8-hour time weighted average. Higher concentrations are especially hazardous and NIOSH has established an Immediately dangerous to life or health limit (IDLH) of 5\u00a0\u03bcmol/mol. Work environments where ozone is used or where it is likely to be produced should have adequate ventilation and it is prudent to have a monitor for ozone that will alarm if the concentration exceeds the OSHA PEL. Continuous monitors for ozone are available from several suppliers.\nElevated ozone exposure can occur on passenger aircraft, with levels depending on altitude and atmospheric turbulence. U.S. Federal Aviation Administration regulations set a limit of 250\u00a0nmol/mol with a maximum four-hour average of 100\u00a0nmol/mol. Some planes are equipped with ozone converters in the ventilation system to reduce passenger exposure.\nProduction.\nOzone generators, or ozonators, are used to produce ozone for cleaning air or removing smoke odours in unoccupied rooms. These ozone generators can produce over 3\u00a0g of ozone per hour. Ozone often forms in nature under conditions where O2 will not react. Ozone used in industry is measured in \u03bcmol/mol (ppm, parts per million), nmol/mol (ppb, parts per billion), \u03bcg/m3, mg/h (milligrams per hour) or weight percent. The regime of applied concentrations ranges from 1% to 5% (in air) and from 6% to 14% (in oxygen) for older generation methods. New electrolytic methods can achieve up 20% to 30% dissolved ozone concentrations in output water.\nTemperature and humidity play a large role in how much ozone is being produced using traditional generation methods (such as corona discharge and ultraviolet light). Old generation methods will produce less than 50% of nominal capacity if operated with humid ambient air, as opposed to very dry air. New generators, using electrolytic methods, can achieve higher purity and dissolution through using water molecules as the source of ozone production.\nCoronal discharge method.\nThis is the most common type of ozone generator for most industrial and personal uses. While variations of the \"hot spark\" coronal discharge method of ozone production exist, including medical grade and industrial grade ozone generators, these units usually work by means of a corona discharge tube or ozone plate. They are typically cost-effective and do not require an oxygen source other than the ambient air to produce ozone concentrations of 3\u20136%. Fluctuations in ambient air, due to weather or other environmental conditions, cause variability in ozone production. However, they also produce nitrogen oxides as a by-product. Use of an air dryer can reduce or eliminate nitric acid formation by removing water vapour and increase ozone production. At room temperature, nitric acid will form into a vapour that is hazardous if inhaled. Symptoms can include chest pain, shortness of breath, headaches and a dry nose and throat causing a burning sensation. Use of an oxygen concentrator can further increase the ozone production and further reduce the risk of nitric acid formation by removing not only the water vapour, but also the bulk of the nitrogen.\nUltraviolet light.\nUV ozone generators, or vacuum-ultraviolet (VUV) ozone generators, employ a light source that generates a narrow-band ultraviolet light, a subset of that produced by the Sun. The Sun's UV sustains the ozone layer in the stratosphere of Earth.\nUV ozone generators use ambient air for ozone production, no air prep systems are used (air dryer or oxygen concentrator), therefore these generators tend to be less expensive. However, UV ozone generators usually produce ozone with a concentration of about 0.5% or lower which limits the potential ozone production rate. Another disadvantage of this method is that it requires the ambient air (oxygen) to be exposed to the UV source for a longer amount of time, and any gas that is not exposed to the UV source will not be treated. This makes UV generators impractical for use in situations that deal with rapidly moving air or water streams (in-duct air sterilisation, for example). Production of ozone is one of the potential dangers of ultraviolet germicidal irradiation. VUV ozone generators are used in swimming pools and spa applications ranging to millions of gallons of water. VUV ozone generators, unlike corona discharge generators, do not produce harmful nitrogen by-products and work extremely well in humid air environments. There is also not normally a need for expensive off-gas mechanisms, and no need for air driers or oxygen concentrators which require extra costs and maintenance.\nCold plasma.\nIn the cold plasma method, pure oxygen gas is exposed to a plasma created by dielectric barrier discharge. The diatomic oxygen is split into single atoms, which then recombine in triplets to form ozone.\nIt is common in the industry to mislabel some DBD ozone generators as CD Corona Discharge generators. Typically all solid flat metal electrode ozone generators produce ozone using the dielectric barrier discharge method. Cold plasma machines use pure oxygen as the input source and produce a maximum concentration of about 24% ozone. They produce far greater quantities of ozone in a given time compared to ultraviolet production that has about 2% efficiency. The discharges manifest as filamentary transfer of electrons (micro discharges) in a gap between two electrodes. In order to evenly distribute the micro discharges, a dielectric insulator must be used to separate the metallic electrodes and to prevent arcing.\nElectrolytic.\nElectrolytic ozone generation (EOG) splits water molecules into H2, O2, and O3.\nIn most EOG methods, the hydrogen gas will be removed to leave oxygen and ozone as the only reaction products. Therefore, EOG can achieve higher dissolution in water without other competing gases found in corona discharge method, such as nitrogen gases present in ambient air. This method of generation can achieve concentrations of 20\u201330% and is independent of air quality because water is used as the source material. Production of ozone electrolytically is typically unfavourable because of the high overpotential required to produce ozone as compared to oxygen. This is why ozone is not produced during typical water electrolysis. However, it is possible to increase the overpotential of oxygen by careful catalyst selection such that ozone is preferentially produced under electrolysis. Catalysts typically chosen for this approach are lead dioxide or boron-doped diamond.\nThe ozone-to-oxygen ratio is improved by increasing current density at the anode, cooling the electrolyte around the anode close to 0\u00a0\u00b0C, using an acidic electrolyte (such as dilute sulphuric acid) instead of a basic solution, and by applying pulsed current instead of DC.\nSpecial considerations.\nOzone cannot be stored and transported like other industrial gases (because it quickly decays into diatomic oxygen) and must therefore be produced on site. Available ozone generators vary in the arrangement and design of the high-voltage electrodes. At production capacities higher than 20\u00a0kg per hour, a gas/water tube heat-exchanger may be utilised as ground electrode and assembled with tubular high-voltage electrodes on the gas-side. The regime of typical gas pressures is around absolute in oxygen and absolute in air. Several megawatts of electrical power may be installed in large facilities, applied as single phase AC current at 50 to 8000\u00a0Hz and peak voltages between 3,000 and 20,000 volts. Applied voltage is usually inversely related to the applied frequency.\nThe dominating parameter influencing ozone generation efficiency is the gas temperature, which is controlled by cooling water temperature and/or gas velocity. The cooler the water, the better the ozone synthesis. The lower the gas velocity, the higher the concentration (but the lower the net ozone produced). At typical industrial conditions, almost 90% of the effective power is dissipated as heat and needs to be removed by a sufficient cooling water flow.\nBecause of the high reactivity of ozone, only a few materials may be used like stainless steel (quality 316L), titanium, aluminium (as long as no moisture is present), glass, polytetrafluorethylene, or polyvinylidene fluoride. Viton may be used with the restriction of constant mechanical forces and absence of humidity (humidity limitations apply depending on the formulation). Hypalon may be used with the restriction that no water comes in contact with it, except for normal atmospheric levels. Embrittlement or shrinkage is the common mode of failure of elastomers with exposure to ozone. Ozone cracking is the common mode of failure of elastomer seals like O-rings.\nSilicone rubbers are usually adequate for use as gaskets in ozone concentrations below 1 wt%, such as in equipment for accelerated aging of rubber samples.\nIncidental production.\nOzone may be formed from O2 by electrical discharges and by action of high energy electromagnetic radiation. Unsuppressed arcing in electrical contacts, motor brushes, or mechanical switches breaks down the chemical bonds of the atmospheric oxygen surrounding the contacts [O2 -&gt; 2O]. Free radicals of oxygen in and around the arc recombine to create ozone [O3]. Certain electrical equipment generate significant levels of ozone. This is especially true of devices using high voltages, such as ionic air purifiers, laser printers, photocopiers, tasers, and arc welders. Electric motors using brushes can generate ozone from repeated sparking inside the unit. Large motors that use brushes, such as those used by elevators or hydraulic pumps, will generate more ozone than smaller motors.\nOzone is similarly formed in the Catatumbo lightning storms phenomenon on the Catatumbo River in Venezuela, though ozone's instability makes it dubious that it has any effect on the ozonosphere.\nIt is the world's largest single natural generator of ozone, lending calls for it to be designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nLaboratory production.\nIn the laboratory, ozone can be produced by electrolysis using a 9 volt battery, a pencil graphite rod cathode, a platinum wire anode, and a 3 molar sulphuric acid electrolyte. The half cell reactions taking place are:\nformula_19\nwhere E\u00b0 represents the standard electrode potential.\nIn the net reaction, three equivalents of water are converted into one equivalent of ozone and three equivalents of hydrogen. Oxygen formation is a competing reaction.\nIt can also be generated by a high voltage arc. In its simplest form, high voltage AC, such as the output of a neon-sign transformer is connected to two metal rods with the ends placed sufficiently close to each other to allow an arc. The resulting arc will convert atmospheric oxygen to ozone.\nIt is often desirable to contain the ozone. This can be done with an apparatus consisting of two concentric glass tubes sealed together at the top with gas ports at the top and bottom of the outer tube. The inner core should have a length of metal foil inserted into it connected to one side of the power source. The other side of the power source should be connected to another piece of foil wrapped around the outer tube. A source of dry O2 is applied to the bottom port. When high voltage is applied to the foil leads, electricity will discharge between the dry dioxygen in the middle and form O3 and O2 which will flow out the top port. This is called a Siemen's ozoniser. The reaction can be summarized as follows:\n &lt;chem&gt;3O2 -&gt;[\\text{electricity}] 2O3&lt;/chem&gt;\nApplications.\nIndustry.\nThe largest use of ozone is in the preparation of pharmaceuticals, synthetic lubricants, and many other commercially useful organic compounds, where it is used to sever carbon-carbon bonds. It can also be used for bleaching substances and for killing microorganisms in air and water sources. Many municipal drinking water systems kill bacteria with ozone instead of the more common chlorine. Ozone has a very high oxidation potential. Ozone does not form organochlorine compounds, nor does it remain in the water after treatment. Ozone can form the suspected carcinogen bromate in source water with high bromide concentrations. The U.S. Safe Drinking Water Act mandates that these systems introduce an amount of chlorine to maintain a minimum of 0.2\u00a0\u03bcmol/mol residual free chlorine in the pipes, based on results of regular testing. Where electrical power is abundant, ozone is a cost-effective method of treating water, since it is produced on demand and does not require transportation and storage of hazardous chemicals. Once it has decayed, it leaves no taste or odour in drinking water.\nAlthough low levels of ozone have been advertised to be of some disinfectant use in residential homes, the concentration of ozone in dry air required to have a rapid, substantial effect on airborne pathogens exceeds safe levels recommended by the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration and Environmental Protection Agency. Humidity control can vastly improve both the killing power of the ozone and the rate at which it decays back to oxygen (more humidity allows more effectiveness). Spore forms of most pathogens are very tolerant of atmospheric ozone in concentrations at which asthma patients start to have issues.\nIn 1908 artificial ozonisation of the Central Line of the London Underground was introduced for aerial disinfection. The process was found to be worthwhile, but was phased out by 1956. However the beneficial effect was maintained by the ozone created incidentally from the electrical discharges of the train motors (see above: Incidental production).\nOzone generators were made available to schools and universities in Wales for the Autumn term 2021, to disinfect classrooms after COVID-19 outbreaks.\nIndustrially, ozone is used to:\nOzone is a reagent in many organic reactions in the laboratory and in industry. Ozonolysis is the cleavage of an alkene to carbonyl compounds.\nMany hospitals around the world use large ozone generators to decontaminate operating rooms between surgeries. The rooms are cleaned and then sealed airtight before being filled with ozone which effectively kills or neutralizes all remaining bacteria.\nOzone is used as an alternative to chlorine or chlorine dioxide in the bleaching of wood pulp. It is often used in conjunction with oxygen and hydrogen peroxide to eliminate the need for chlorine-containing compounds in the manufacture of high-quality, white paper.\nOzone can be used to detoxify cyanide wastes (for example from gold and silver mining) by oxidising cyanide to cyanate and eventually to carbon dioxide.\nWater disinfection.\nSince the invention of dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) plasma reactors, it has been employed for water treatment with ozone. However, with cheaper alternative disinfectants like chlorine, such applications of DBD ozone water decontamination have been limited by high power consumption and bulky equipment. Despite this, with research revealing the negative impacts of common disinfectants like chlorine with respect to toxic residuals and ineffectiveness in killing certain micro-organisms, DBD plasma-based ozone decontamination is of interest in current available technologies. Although ozonation of water with a high concentration of bromide does lead to the formation of undesirable brominated disinfection byproducts, unless drinking water is produced by desalination, ozonation can generally be applied without concern for these byproducts. Advantages of ozone include high thermodynamic oxidation potential, less sensitivity to organic material and better tolerance for pH variations while retaining the ability to kill bacteria, fungi, viruses, as well as spores and cysts. Although, ozone has been widely accepted in Europe for decades, it is sparingly used for decontamination in the U.S. due to limitations of high-power consumption, bulky installation and stigma attached with ozone toxicity. Considering this, recent research efforts have been directed toward the study of effective ozone water treatment systems. Researchers have looked into lightweight and compact low power surface DBD reactors, energy efficient volume DBD reactors and low power micro-scale DBD reactors. Such studies can help pave the path to re-acceptance of DBD plasma-based ozone decontamination of water, especially in the U.S.\nConsumers.\nOzone levels which are safe for people are ineffective at killing fungi and bacteria. Some consumer disinfection and cosmetic products emit ozone at levels harmful to human health.\nDevices generating high levels of ozone, some of which use ionisation, are used to sanitise and deodorise uninhabited buildings, rooms, ductwork, woodsheds, boats, and other vehicles.\nOzonated water is used to launder clothes and to sanitise food, drinking water, and surfaces in the home. According to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), it is \"amending the food additive regulations to provide for the safe use of ozone in gaseous and aqueous phases as an antimicrobial agent on food, including meat and poultry.\" Studies at California Polytechnic University demonstrated that 0.3\u00a0\u03bcmol/mol levels of ozone dissolved in filtered tapwater can produce a reduction of more than 99.99% in such food-borne microorganisms as salmonella, \"E. coli\" 0157:H7 and \"Campylobacter\". This quantity is 20,000 times the WHO-recommended limits stated above.\nOzone can be used to remove pesticide residues from fruits and vegetables.\nOzone is used in homes and hot tubs to kill bacteria in the water and to reduce the amount of chlorine or bromine required by reactivating them to their free state. Since ozone does not remain in the water long enough, ozone by itself is ineffective at preventing cross-contamination among bathers and must be used in conjunction with halogens. Gaseous ozone created by ultraviolet light or by corona discharge is injected into the water.\nOzone is also widely used in the treatment of water in aquariums and fishponds. Its use can minimise bacterial growth, control parasites, eliminate transmission of some diseases, and reduce or eliminate \"yellowing\" of the water. Ozone must not come in contact with fishes' gill structures. Natural saltwater (with life forms) provides enough \"instantaneous demand\" that controlled amounts of ozone activate bromide ions to hypobromous acid, and the ozone entirely decays in a few seconds to minutes. If oxygen-fed ozone is used, the water will be higher in dissolved oxygen and fishes' gill structures will atrophy, making them dependent on oxygen-enriched water.\nAquaculture.\nOzonation \u2013 a process of infusing water with ozone\u00a0\u2013 can be used in aquaculture to facilitate organic breakdown. Ozone is also added to recirculating systems to reduce nitrite levels through conversion into nitrate. If nitrite levels in the water are high, nitrites will also accumulate in the blood and tissues of fish, where it interferes with oxygen transport (it causes oxidation of the heme-group of haemoglobin from ferrous (Fe2+) to ferric (Fe3+), making haemoglobin unable to bind O2). Despite these apparent positive effects, ozone use in recirculation systems has been linked to reducing the level of bioavailable iodine in salt water systems, resulting in iodine deficiency symptoms such as goitre and decreased growth in Senegalese sole (\"Solea senegalensis\") larvae.\nOzonate seawater is used for surface disinfection of haddock and Atlantic halibut eggs against nodavirus. Nodavirus is a lethal and vertically transmitted virus which causes severe mortality in fish. Haddock eggs should not be treated with high ozone level as eggs so treated did not hatch and died after 3\u20134 days.\nAgriculture.\nOzone application on freshly cut pineapple and banana shows increase in flavonoids and total phenol contents when exposure is up to 20 minutes. Decrease in ascorbic acid (one form of vitamin C) content is observed but the positive effect on total phenol content and flavonoids can overcome the negative effect. Tomatoes upon treatment with ozone show an increase in \u03b2-carotene, lutein and lycopene. However, ozone application on strawberries in pre-harvest period shows decrease in ascorbic acid content.\nOzone facilitates the extraction of some heavy metals from soil using EDTA. EDTA forms strong, water-soluble coordination compounds with some heavy metals (Pb and Zn) thereby making it possible to dissolve them out from contaminated soil. If contaminated soil is pre-treated with ozone, the extraction efficacy of Pb, Am, and Pu increases by 11.0\u201328.9%, 43.5% and 50.7% respectively.\nEffect on pollinators.\nCrop pollination is an essential part of an ecosystem. Ozone can have detrimental effects on plant-pollinator interactions. Pollinators carry pollen from one plant to another. This is an essential cycle inside of an ecosystem. Causing changes in certain atmospheric conditions around pollination sites or with xenobiotics could cause unknown changes to the natural cycles of pollinators and flowering plants. In a study conducted in North-Western Europe, crop pollinators were negatively affected more when ozone levels were higher.\nAlternative medicine.\nThe use of ozone for the treatment of medical conditions is not supported by high quality evidence, and is generally considered alternative medicine.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nclass=\"center\""}
{"id": "22719", "revid": "49649547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22719", "title": "Orchid", "text": "Family of flowering plants in the order Asparagales\nOrchids are plants that belong to the family Orchidaceae (), a diverse and widespread group of flowering plants with blooms that are often colourful and fragrant. Orchids are cosmopolitan plants, living in diverse habitats on every continent except Antarctica. The world's richest diversity of orchid genera and species is in the tropics. Many species are epiphytes, living on trees. The flowers and their pollination mechanisms are highly specialized, attracting insect pollinators by colour, pattern, scent, pheromones, and sometimes by mimicking female insects. Orchids have very small seeds, relying on fungal partners for germination. Some orchids have no leaves, either photosynthesizing with their roots or relying entirely on fungal partners for food.\nOrchidaceae is one of the two largest families of flowering plants. It contains about 28,000 currently accepted species in around 700 genera. That represents some 6\u201311% of all species of seed plants. Horticulturists run many orchid societies around the world; they have produced many hybrids and cultivars.\nEtymology.\nThe type genus (i.e. the genus after which the family is named) is \"Orchis\". The genus name comes from the Ancient Greek (\"\"), literally meaning \"testicle\", because of the shape of the twin tubers in some species of \"Orchis\". The term \"orchid\" was introduced in 1845 by John Lindley in \"School Botany\", as a shortened form of \"Orchidaceae\". In Middle English, the name \"bollockwort\" was used for some orchids, based on \"bollock\" meaning testicle and \"wort\" meaning plant.\nDescription.\nOrchids are easily distinguished from other plants, as most of them share some very evident derived characteristics or synapomorphies. Among these are: bilateral symmetry of the flower (zygomorphism), many resupinate flowers, a nearly always highly modified middle petal (labellum), stamens and carpels fused into a column, and extremely small seeds.\nStem and roots.\nAll orchids are perennial herbs that lack any permanent woody structure. They can grow according to two patterns:\nTerrestrial (ground-living) orchids may have rhizomes or tubers. Epiphytic orchids, those that grow upon a support, have aerial roots. The older parts of the roots are covered with a velamen, a layer of dead cells.\nLeaves.\nLike most monocots, orchids usually have simple (untoothed) leaves with parallel veins. Some orchids such as \"Vanda\" are distichous, with their leaves arranged in two ranks on opposite sides of the stem. This is the arrangement at the base of all orchid shoots, though in many species the leaves higher up the shoot switch to a spiral phyllotaxis. \nOrchids are perennial; most species add new leaves at the apex while the oldest leaves gradually die off, but some such as \"Catasetum\" shed their leaves annually in the dry season, developing new leaves and new pseudobulbs each year.\nSome epiphytic orchids, such as \"Taeniophyllum aphyllum\", are leafless, depending on their green roots for photosynthesis. Other epiphytes like \"Phalaenopsis\" have leaves, but rely on photosynthesis in their green roots to prevent hypoxia (lack of oxygen) of the roots. Orchids of the genus \"Corallorhiza\" (coralroot orchids) have no leaves; instead they have symbiotic or parasitic associations with fungal mycelium, through which they absorb sugars.\nFlowers.\nOrchid flowers are very varied in form. They have three sepals, three petals and a three-chambered ovary. The three sepals and two of the petals are often similar to each other but one petal is usually highly modified, forming a \"lip\" or labellum. In most orchid genera, as the flower develops, it undergoes a twisting through 180\u00b0, called resupination, so that the labellum lies below the column. The labellum functions to attract insects, and in resupinate flowers, also acts as a landing stage, or sometimes a trap.\nReproduction.\nPollination.\nCharles Darwin investigated the complex and varied mechanisms that orchids have evolved to achieve cross-pollination, and described these in his 1862 book \"Fertilisation of Orchids\".\nThe reproductive parts of an orchid flower are unique in that the stamens and style are joined to form a single structure, the column.\nMost orchids deliver pollen in a single mass, a pollinium (plural: pollinia), able to fertilise thousands of ovules.\nThe pollinia are attached to a sticky disc near the top of the column. Just below the pollinia is a second, larger sticky plate, the stigma.\nIn orchids that produce pollinia, pollination happens as some variant of the following sequence: when the pollinator enters into the flower, it touches a viscidium, which promptly sticks to its body, generally on the head or abdomen. While leaving the flower, it pulls the pollinium out of the anther, as it is connected to the viscidium by the caudicle or stipe. The caudicle then bends and the pollinium is moved forwards and downwards. When the pollinator enters another flower of the same species, the pollinium is so placed that it sticks to the stigma of the second flower, pollinating it. In horticulture, artificial orchid pollination is achieved by removing the pollinia with a small instrument such as a toothpick from the pollen parent and transferring them to the seed parent.\nSpecial cases.\nPollinators are often visually attracted by the shape and colours of the labellum. However, some \"Bulbophyllum\" species attract male fruit flies (\"Bactrocera\" and \"Zeugodacus\" spp.) solely via a floral chemical which simultaneously acts as a floral reward (e.g. methyl eugenol, raspberry ketone, or zingerone) to perform pollination.\nThe slipper orchid \"Paphiopedilum parishii\" reproduces by self-fertilization. This occurs when the anther changes from a solid to a liquid state and directly contacts the stigma surface without the aid of any pollinating agent or floral assembly.\nIn some extremely specialized orchids, such as the Eurasian genus \"Ophrys\", the labellum is adapted to have a colour, shape, and odour which attracts male insects via mimicry of a receptive female. Pollination happens as a male insect attempts to mate with the flowers.\nMany neotropical orchids are pollinated by male orchid bees, which visit the flowers to gather volatile chemicals they require to synthesize pheromonal attractants. Males of species such as \"Euglossa imperialis\" or \"Eulaema meriana\" leave their territories periodically to forage for aromatic compounds, such as cineole, to synthesize pheromone for attracting females.\n\"Catasetum saccatum\", discussed by Darwin, launches its viscid pollinia with explosive force when an insect touches a seta, knocking the pollinator off the flower.\nAsexual reproduction.\nSome species, such as in the genera \"Phalaenopsis\", \"Dendrobium\", and \"Vanda\", produce offshoots or plantlets formed from one of the nodes along the stem, through the accumulation of growth hormones at that point. These shoots are known to horticulturalists as keiki.\n\"Epipogium aphyllum\" exhibits a dual reproductive strategy, engaging in both sexual and asexual seed production. The likelihood of apomixis playing a substantial role in successful reproduction appears minimal. Within certain petite orchid species groups, there is a noteworthy preparation of female gametes for fertilization preceding the act of pollination.\nFruits and seeds.\nThe ovary develops into a capsule that is dehiscent by three or six longitudinal slits in its sides.\nThe seeds of orchids are almost microscopic and very numerous, in some species over a million per capsule. After ripening, they blow off like dust particles or spores. Most orchid species lack endosperm in their seed and must enter symbiotic relationships with various mycorrhizal basidiomyceteous fungi that provide them the necessary nutrients to germinate, so almost all orchid species are mycoheterotrophic during germination and reliant upon fungi to complete their lifecycles. Only a handful of orchid species have seed that can germinate without mycorrhiza, namely the species within the genus \"Disa\" with hydrochorous seeds.\nEvolution.\nFossil and reconstructed history.\nFew orchid fossils are recorded. An extinct species of stingless bee, \"Proplebeia dominicana\", was found trapped in Miocene amber from about 15\u201320 million years ago. The bee was carrying pollen of a previously unknown orchid taxon, \"Meliorchis caribea\", on its wings. This 2007 find provided the first fossil evidence of orchids. It shows insects were active pollinators of orchids in the Miocene. \"M. caribea\" has been placed within the extant tribe Cranichideae, subtribe Goodyerinae (subfamily Orchidoideae). An even older orchid species, \"Succinanthera baltica\", was described in 2017 from Baltic amber of Eocene age, some 40\u201355 million years ago.\nGenetic sequencing indicates orchids may have arisen earlier, 76 to 84 million years ago during the Late Cretaceous. According to Mark W. Chase \"et al.\" (2001), the overall biogeography and phylogenetic patterns of Orchidaceae show they are even older and may go back roughly 100 million years.\nThe molecular clock method has provided ages for the major branches of the orchid family. The subfamily Vanilloideae is a branch at the base of the monandrous orchids, and must have evolved very early in the evolution of the family, some 60 to 70 million years ago. Since this subfamily occurs worldwide in tropical and subtropical regions, from tropical America to tropical Asia, New Guinea and West Africa, and the continents began to split about 100 million years ago, significant biotic exchange must have occurred after this split. Biogeographic studies indicate that the most recent common ancestor of all extant orchids probably originated 83 million years ago somewhere in the supercontinent Laurasia. Despite their long evolutionary history on Earth, the extant orchid diversity is also inferred to have originated during the last 5 million years, with the American and Asian tropics as the geographic areas exhibiting the highest speciation rates (i.e., number of speciation events per million years) on Earth.\nGenome duplication occurred prior to the divergence of this taxon.\nPhylogeny.\nThe cladogram below was made according to the APG system of 1998. It represents the view that most botanists had held up to that time. It was supported by morphological studies.\nIn 2015, a phylogenetic study showed strong statistical support for the following topology of the orchid tree, using 9 kb of plastid and nuclear DNA from 7 genes, a topology that was confirmed by a phylogenomic study in the same year.\nTaxonomy.\nThe orchids are among the largest and most diverse taxonomic groups of vascular plants, with at least 700 genera and 28,000 species; they are rivalled only by the Asteraceae (Compositae) which has some 1,600 genera and around 24,700 species, and new species are continually being discovered and described. In 1753, Carl Linnaeus recognized eight genera of orchids in his \"Species Plantarum\". Antoine Laurent de Jussieu recognized the Orchidaceae as a separate family in his \"Genera Plantarum\" in 1789. Olof Swartz recognized 25 genera in 1800. In 1830\u20131840, John Lindley recognized four subfamilies.\nThe family was placed in the order Asparagales by the APG III system of taxonomy of 2009, mainly using molecular phylogenetics, where five subfamilies are recognised. The diversity of orchids led taxonomists to create hundreds of genera. Some taxonomists felt that the number had become excessive, and published classifications with fewer genera. Dressler had some 850 genera in 2013; \"Genera Orchidacearum\" reduced this to 765 in 2014; and Chase continued the process of merging genera, with 736 in 2015.\nHybrids.\nOrchid species hybridize readily in cultivation, leading to a large number of hybrids with complex naming. Hybridization is possible across genera, and therefore many cultivated orchids are placed into nothogenera. For instance, the nothogenus \u00d7 \"Brassocattleya\" is used for all hybrids of species from the genera \"Brassavola\" and \"Cattleya\". Nothogenera based on at least three genera may have names based on a person's name with the suffix \"-ara\", for instance \u00d7 \"Colmanara\"=\"Miltonia\" \u00d7 \"Odontoglossum\" \u00d7 \"Oncidium\". The suffix is obligatory starting at four genera.\nCultivated hybrids in the orchid family are also special in that they are named by using grex nomenclature, rather than nothospecies. For instance, hybrids between \"Brassavola nodosa\" and \"Brassavola acaulis\" are placed in the grex \"Brassavola\" Guiseppi. The name of the grex (\"Guiseppi\" in this example) is written in a non-italic font without quotes.\nDistribution and ecology.\nOrchidaceae are cosmopolitan in distribution, occurring in every continent except for Antarctica. A majority are epiphytic, living high on trees in the tropics and subtropics; some such as \"Angraecum sororium\" are lithophytes, on rocks; others are terrestrial, growing on the ground.\nSpecies interactions.\nSome orchids, such as \"Neottia\" and \"Corallorhiza\", lack chlorophyll, so are unable to photosynthesise. Instead, these species obtain energy and nutrients by parasitising soil fungi through the formation of orchid mycorrhizae. The fungi involved include those that form ectomycorrhizas with trees and other woody plants, parasites such as \"Armillaria\", and saprotrophs. These orchids are known as myco-heterotrophs, but were formerly (incorrectly) described as saprophytes as it was believed they gained their nutrition by breaking down organic matter. While only a few species are achlorophyllous holoparasites, all orchids are myco-heterotrophic during germination and seedling growth, and even photosynthetic adult plants may continue to obtain carbon from their mycorrhizal fungi. The symbiosis is typically maintained throughout the lifetime of the orchid because they depend on the fungus for nutrients, sugars and minerals.\nOrchids employ multiple forms of deception to attract pollinators. Some produce the aroma of nectar without providing the actual food reward. Others attract nematoceran gnats which feed on decaying fungi with the aroma of mushrooms. Others again produce the aroma of female insects, attracting male insects to attempt to copulate. In each case the orchid is pollinated by an insect that is deceived and that does not receive the expected reward.\nUses.\nHorticulture.\nMany orchid species and hybrids are cultivated for their flowers. Most of these are tropical or subtropical, needing to be grown indoors in temperate zones, but some such as species of \"Cypripedium\" and \"Dactylorhiza\" can be grown outdoors in temperate climates. Several thousand new cultivated orchid hybrids are registered each year.\nA large number of societies and clubs for orchid growers are run in countries in all continents except Antarctica. National societies include the Orchid Society of Great Britain and the American Orchid Society. New orchids are registered with the International Orchid Register, maintained by the Royal Horticultural Society. An annual festival of orchids is held in February every year at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.\nFlavours and aromas.\nThe dried seed pods of one orchid genus, \"Vanilla\" (especially \"Vanilla planifolia\"), are commercially important as a flavouring in baking, for perfume manufacture and aromatherapy.\nThe scent of orchids is frequently analysed by perfumers using headspace technology, gas-liquid chromatography, and mass spectrometry to identify potential fragrance chemicals.\nFood.\nThe tubers of terrestrial orchids (mainly early purple orchid, \"Orchis mascula\") are ground to a powder and used for cooking, such as in the hot beverage \"salep\" and ice cream, leading to local extinctions in parts of Greece, Turkey, and Iran. \nSome saprophytic orchid species of the group \"Gastrodia\" produce potato-like tubers and were eaten by native peoples in Australia and can be cultivated, notably \"Gastrodia sesamoides\". Wild stands of these plants still grow near early Aboriginal settlements, such as Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park. Aboriginal peoples found the plants by observing where bandicoots had scratched in search of the tubers after detecting the plants by scent.\nCultural symbolism.\nOrchids have symbolic values in some cultures; several countries have chosen orchids as their national flowers. Because of the etymology of the word \"orchid\", and the use of orchiectomy, a surgery on intersex infants, the orchid has become a symbol of being intersex and of opposition to non-consensual genital surgery.\nOrchids native to the Mediterranean are depicted on the \"Ara Pacis\" in Rome, until now the only known instance of orchids in ancient art, and the earliest in European art. A French writer and agronomist, Louis Liger, invented a classical myth in his book \"Le Jardinier Fleuriste et Historiographe\" published in 1704, attributing it to the ancient Greeks and Romans, in which Orchis the son of a nymph and a satyr rapes a priestess of Bacchus during one of his festivals the Bacchanalia and is then killed and transformed into an orchid flower as punishment by the gods, paralleling the various myths of youths dying and becoming flowers, like Adonis and Narcissus; this myth however does not appear any earlier than Liger, and is not part of traditional Greek and Roman mythologies.\nConservation.\nAlmost all orchids are included in Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), meaning that international trade is regulated by the CITES permit system. A smaller number of orchids, such as \"Paphiopedilum\" species, are listed in CITES Appendix I, meaning that commercial international trade in wild-sourced specimens is prohibited and other trade is strictly controlled.\nAssisted migration may be a viable conservation tool for orchids endangered by climate change. In 2006 the Longtan Dam was built near the Yachang Orchid Nature Reserve. In response to the threat of inundation at lower altitudes (350\u2013400 m), 1000 endangered orchid plants of 16 genera and 29 species were translocated to higher elevation (around 1000 m), where they survived well.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22720", "revid": "2153309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22720", "title": "Orchidaceae", "text": ""}
{"id": "22721", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22721", "title": "Obsidian", "text": "Naturally occurring volcanic glass\nObsidian ( ) is a naturally occurring volcanic glass formed when lava extruded from a volcano cools rapidly with minimal crystal growth. It is an igneous rock. Produced from felsic lava, obsidian is rich in the lighter elements such as silicon, oxygen, aluminium, sodium, and potassium. It is commonly found within the margins of rhyolitic lava flows known as obsidian flows. These flows have a high content of silica, giving them a high viscosity. The high viscosity inhibits the diffusion of atoms through the lava, which inhibits the first step (nucleation) in the formation of mineral crystals. Together with rapid cooling, this results in a natural glass forming from the lava.\nObsidian is hard, brittle, and amorphous; it therefore fractures with sharp edges. In the past, it was used to manufacture cutting and piercing tools, and it has been used experimentally as surgical scalpel blades.\nOrigin and properties.\nThe \"Natural History\" by the Roman writer Pliny the Elder includes a few sentences about a volcanic glass called obsidian (\"lapis obsidianus\"), discovered in Ethiopia by Obsidius, a Roman explorer.\nObsidian is formed from quickly cooled lava. Extrusive formation of obsidian may occur when felsic lava cools rapidly at the edges of a felsic lava flow or volcanic dome, or when lava cools during sudden contact with water or air. Intrusive formation of obsidian may occur when felsic lava cools along the edges of a dike.\nTektites were once thought by many to be obsidian produced by lunar volcanic eruptions, though few scientists now adhere to this hypothesis.\nObsidian is mineral-like, but not a true mineral because, as a glass, it is not crystalline; in addition, its composition is too variable to be classified as a mineral. It is sometimes classified as a mineraloid. Though obsidian is usually dark in color, similar to mafic rocks such as basalt, the composition of obsidian is extremely felsic. Obsidian consists mainly of SiO2 (silicon dioxide), usually 70% by weight or more; the remainder consists of variable amounts of other oxides, mostly oxides of aluminium, iron, potassium, sodium and calcium. Crystalline rocks with a similar composition include granite and rhyolite. Because obsidian is metastable at the Earth's surface (over time the glass devitrifies, becoming fine-grained mineral crystals), obsidian older than Miocene in age is rare. Exceptionally old obsidians include a Cretaceous welded tuff and a partially devitrified Ordovician perlite. This transformation of obsidian is accelerated by the presence of water. Although newly formed obsidian has a low water content, typically less than 1% water by weight, it becomes progressively hydrated when exposed to groundwater, forming perlite.\nPure obsidian is usually dark in appearance, though the color varies depending on the impurities present. Iron and other transition elements may give the obsidian a dark brown to black color. Most black obsidians contain nanoinclusions of magnetite, an iron oxide. Very few samples of obsidian are nearly colorless. In some stones, the inclusion of small, white, radially clustered crystals (spherulites) of the mineral cristobalite in the black glass produce a blotchy or snowflake pattern (\"snowflake obsidian\"). Obsidian may contain patterns of gas bubbles remaining from the lava flow, aligned along layers created as the molten rock was flowing before being cooled. These bubbles can produce interesting effects such as a golden sheen (\"sheen obsidian\"). An iridescent, rainbow-like sheen (\"fire obsidian\") is caused by inclusions of magnetite nanoparticles creating thin-film interference. Colorful, striped obsidian (\"rainbow obsidian\") from Mexico contains oriented nanorods of hedenbergite, which cause the rainbow striping effects by thin-film interference.\nOccurrence.\nObsidian is found near volcanoes in locations which have undergone rhyolitic eruptions. It can be found in Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Australia, Canada, Chile, Georgia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Russia, Scotland, the Canary Islands, Turkey and the United States. Obsidian flows which are so large that they can be hiked on are found within the calderas of Newberry Volcano (Big Obsidian Flow, 700 acres) and Medicine Lake Volcano in the Cascade Range of western North America, and at Inyo Craters east of the Sierra Nevada in California. Yellowstone National Park has a mountainside containing obsidian located between Mammoth Hot Springs and the Norris Geyser Basin, and deposits can be found in many other western U.S. states including Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, Texas, Utah, and Washington, Oregon and Idaho.\nThere are only four major deposit areas in the central Mediterranean: Lipari, Pantelleria, Palmarola and Monte Arci (Sardinia).\nAncient sources in the Aegean were Milos and Gyali.\nAc\u0131g\u00f6l town and the G\u00f6ll\u00fc Da\u011f volcano were the most important sources in central Anatolia, one of the more important source areas in the prehistoric Near East.\nPrehistoric and historical use.\nThe first known archaeological evidence of usage was in Kariandusi (Kenya) and other sites of the Acheulian age (beginning 1.5 million years BP) dated 700,000 BC, although only very few objects have been found at these sites relative to the Neolithic. Manufacture of obsidian bladelets at Lipari had reached a high level of sophistication by the late Neolithic, and was traded as far as Sicily, the southern Po river valley, and Croatia. Obsidian bladelets were used in ritual circumcisions and cutting of umbilical cords of newborns. Anatolian sources of obsidian are known to have been the material used in the Levant and modern-day Iraqi Kurdistan from a time beginning sometime about 12,500 BC. Obsidian artifacts are common at Tell Brak, one of the earliest Mesopotamian urban centers, dating to the late fifth millennium BC. Obsidian was valued in Stone Age cultures because, like flint, it could be fractured to produce sharp blades or arrowheads in a process called knapping. Like all glass and some other naturally occurring rocks, obsidian breaks with a characteristic conchoidal fracture. It was also polished to create early mirrors. Modern archaeologists have developed a relative dating system, obsidian hydration dating, to calculate the age of obsidian artifacts.\nEurope.\nObsidian artifacts first appeared in the European continent in Central Europe in the Middle Paleolithic and had become common by the Upper Paleolithic, although there are exceptions to this. Obsidian played an important role in the transmission of Neolithic knowledge and experiences. The material was mainly used for production of chipped tools which were very sharp due to its nature. Artifacts made of obsidian can be found in many Neolithic cultures across Europe. The source of obsidian for cultures inhabiting the territory of and around Greece was the island of Milos; the Star\u010devo\u2013K\u00f6r\u00f6s\u2013Cri\u0219 culture obtained obsidian from sources in Hungary and Slovakia, while the Cardium-Impresso cultural complex acquired obsidian from the island outcrops of the central Mediterranean. Through trade, these artifacts ended up in lands thousands of kilometers away from the original source; this indicates that they were a highly valued commodity. X-ray fluorescence techniques have also allowed obsidian in Greece to be identified as coming from Milos, Nisyros or Gyali, islands in the Aegean Sea. John Dee had a mirror, made of obsidian, which was brought from Mexico to Europe between 1527 and 1530 after Hernando Cort\u00e9s's conquest of the region.\nMiddle East and Asia.\nIn the Ubaid in the 5th millennium BC, blades were manufactured from obsidian extracted from outcrops located in modern-day Turkey. Ancient Egyptians used obsidian imported from the eastern Mediterranean and southern Red Sea regions. Obsidian scalpels older than 2100 BC have been found in a Bronze Age settlement in Turkey. In the eastern Mediterranean area the material was used to make tools, mirrors and decorative objects.\nThe use of obsidian tools was present in Japan near areas of volcanic activity. Obsidian was mined during the J\u014dmon period.\nObsidian has also been found in Gilat, a site in the western Negev in Israel. Eight obsidian artifacts dating to the Chalcolithic Age found at this site were traced to obsidian sources in Anatolia. Neutron activation analysis (NAA) on the obsidian found at this site helped to reveal trade routes and exchange networks previously unknown.\nAmericas.\nIndigenous people traded obsidian throughout the Americas. Each volcano and in some cases each volcanic eruption produces a distinguishable type of obsidian allowing archaeologists to use methods such as non-destructive energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence to select minor element compositions from both the artifact and geological sample to trace the origins of a particular artifact. Obsidian cores and blades were traded far inland from the coast. A particularly distant examples of traded obsidian are pieces from the Yellowstone Region found at Hopewell sites, such as Hopewell Culture National Historical Park, Ohio, over 1500 miles away.\nObsidian tools found in Mission Santa Clara has shown the existence of exchange networks between various tribes in California.\nLithic analysis helps to understand pre-Hispanic groups in Mesoamerica. A careful analysis of obsidian in a culture or place can be of considerable use to reconstruct commerce, production, and distribution, and thereby understand economic, social and political aspects of a civilization. For example, the coastal Chumash sites in California indicate considerable trade with the distant site of Casa Diablo Hot Springs in the Sierra Nevada. Obsidian in California comes from 5 major locations all around the state, and when Mission Santa Clara was built, the tribes took their obsidian tools with them and from the analysis of the obsidian tools it showed that all 5 major location of obsidian were present.. While in Mesoamerica, at the Maya city of Yaxchil\u00e1n, even warfare implications have been studied linked with obsidian use and its debris. Green Pachuca obsidian was highly prized: it has been argued Teotihuacan monopolized the Pachuca deposit to control and influence Obsidian trade in Central Mexico during the Classic Period, and the Mexica of Tenochtitlan (the capital of the Aztec Empire), favored Pachuca obsidian for ritual deposits after rising to power. A scraper made from Pachuca obsidian has even been found at Spiro Mounds in Oklahoma.\nPre-Columbian Mesoamericans' use of obsidian was extensive and sophisticated; including carved and worked obsidian for tools and decorative objects. Mesoamericans made use of a variety of weapons using obsidian, such as \"macuahuitl\", a type of sword with obsidian blades lining a wooden shaft, or the \"tepoztopilli\", a polearm with a leaf or spade shaped wooden head lined with blades in a similar manner. Spanish sources describe these weapons as being able kill and inflicting terrible injuries.\nObsidian mirrors were used by some Aztec priests to conjure visions and make prophecies. They were connected with Tezcatlipoca, god of obsidian and sorcery, whose name can be translated from the Nahuatl language as 'Smoking Mirror'.\nIn Chile obsidian tools from Chait\u00e9n Volcano have been found as far away as in Chan-Chan north of the volcano, and also in sites 400\u00a0km south of it.\nOceania.\nThe Lapita culture, active across a large area of the Pacific Ocean around 1000 BC, made widespread use of obsidian tools and engaged in long distance obsidian trading. The complexity of the production technique for these tools, and the care taken in their storage, may indicate that beyond their practical use they were associated with prestige or high status.\nObsidian was also used on Rapa Nui (Easter Island) for edged tools such as \"Mataia\" and the pupils of the eyes of their Moai (statues), which were encircled by rings of bird bone. Obsidian was used to inscribe the Rongorongo glyphs.\nCurrent use.\nObsidian can be used to make extremely sharp knives, and obsidian blades are a type of glass knife made using naturally occurring obsidian instead of manufactured glass. Obsidian is used by some surgeons for scalpel blades, although this is not approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use on humans. Well-crafted obsidian blades, like any glass knife, can have a cutting edge many times sharper than high-quality steel surgical scalpels: the cutting edge of the blade is only about three nanometers thick. All metal knives have a jagged, irregular blade when viewed under a strong enough microscope; however, obsidian blades are still smooth, even when examined under an electron microscope. One study found that obsidian incisions produced fewer inflammatory cells and less granulation tissue in a group of rats after seven days but the differences disappeared after twenty-one days. Don Crabtree has produced surgical obsidian blades and written articles on the subject. Obsidian scalpels may be purchased for surgical use on research animals.\nThe major disadvantage of obsidian blades is their brittleness compared to those made of metal, thus limiting the surgical applications for obsidian blades to a variety of specialized uses where this is not a concern.\nObsidian is also used for ornamental purposes and as a gemstone. It presents a different appearance depending on how it is cut: in one direction it is jet black, while in another it is glistening gray. \"Apache tears\" are small rounded obsidian nuggets often embedded within a grayish-white perlite matrix.\nPlinths for audio turntables have been made of obsidian since the 1970s, such as the grayish-black SH-10B3 plinth by Technics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22722", "revid": "24061565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22722", "title": "Otaku", "text": "Someone highly interested in anime and manga\n is a type of Japanese subculture of people with consuming interests, such as anime, manga, video games, computers, or any other enthusiastically pursued hobby. Its contemporary use originated with a 1983 essay by Akio Nakamori in \"Manga Burikko\".\n\"Otaku\" subculture is a central theme of various anime, manga, documentaries, and academic research. The subculture began in the 1980s as changing social mentalities and the nurturing of \"otaku\" traits by Japanese schools combined with the resignation of such individuals to what was then seen as inevitably becoming social outcasts. The subculture's birth coincided with the anime boom after the release of works such as \"Mobile Suit Gundam\", before it branched into Comic Market. The rise of the internet and media further expanded the otaku subculture, as more anime, video games, and other media catering to otaku interests were created. The definition of subsequently became more complex, and numerous classifications of \"otaku\" emerged.\n may be used as a pejorative, with its negativity stemming from a stereotypical view of \"otaku\" as social outcasts and the media's reporting on Tsutomu Miyazaki, \"The Otaku Murderer\", in 1989. \"Otaku\" discrimination was particularly intense between 1989 (when a serial murder suspect was arrested) and the mid-1990s. According to studies published in 2013, the term has become less negative, and an increasing number of people now identify themselves as \"otaku\", both in Japan and elsewhere. Out of 137,734 teens surveyed in Japan in 2013, 42.2% self-identified as a type of \"otaku\". In 2005, the Nomura Research Institute divided \"otaku\" into twelve groups and estimated the size and market impact of each of these groups. Other institutions have split it further or focused on a single \"otaku\" interest. These publications classify distinct groups including anime, manga, camera, automobile, J-idol, and electronics otaku. In 2005, the economic impact of \"otaku\" was estimated to be as high as \u00a52\u00a0trillion (US$\u00a0billion).\nEtymology.\n is derived from a Japanese term for another person's house or family (\u304a\u5b85, ). The word can be used metaphorically as a part of honorific speech in Japanese, as a second-person pronoun. In this usage, its literal translation is \"you\". It is associated with some dialects of Western Japanese and with housewives, and is less direct and more distant than intimate pronouns, such as \"anata\", and masculine pronouns, such as \"kimi\" and \"omae\".\nThe origin of the pronoun's use among 1980s manga and anime fans is unclear. Science fiction fans were using \"otaku\" to address owners of books by the late 1960s (in a sense of \"Do[es] [your home] own this book?\"). Social critic Eiji \u014ctsuka posits that \"otaku\" was used because it allowed people meeting for the first time, such as at a convention, to interact from a comfortable distance. One theory posits that \"otaku\" was popularized as a pronoun by science fiction author Motoko Arai in a 1981 essay in \"Variety\" magazine, and another posits that it was popularized by fans of anime studio Gainax, some of whose founders came from Tottori Prefecture in western Japan (where \"otaku\" is commonly used). The pronoun was also used in the popular anime \"Macross\", first aired in 1982, by the characters Hikaru Ichijyo and Lynn Minmay, who address each other as \"otaku\" until they get to know each other better.\nThe modern slang form, which is distinguished from the older usage by being written in hiragana (\u304a\u305f\u304f), katakana (\u30aa\u30bf\u30af or, less frequently, \u30f2\u30bf\u30af) or rarely in r\u014dmaji, first appeared in public discourse in the 1980s, through the work of humorist and essayist Akio Nakamori. His 1983 series , printed in the \"lolicon\" magazine \"Manga Burikko\", applied the term as pejorative for \"unpleasant\" fans, attacking their supposed poor fashion sense and physical appearance in particular. Nakamori was particularly critical of \"manga maniacs\" drawn to cute girl characters, and explained his label \"otaku\" as the term of address used between junior high school kids at manga and anime conventions.\nIn 1989, the case of Tsutomu Miyazaki, \"The Otaku Murderer\", brought the fandom, very negatively, to national attention. Miyazaki, who randomly chose and murdered four girls, had a collection of 5,763 video tapes, some containing anime and slasher films that were found interspersed with videos and pictures of his victims. Later that year, the contemporary knowledge magazine \"Bessatsu Takarajima\" dedicated its 104th issue to the topic of otaku. It was called and delved into the subculture of otaku with 19 articles by otaku insiders, among them Akio Nakamori. This publication has been claimed by scholar Rudyard Pesimo to have popularized the term.\nUsage.\nIn modern Japanese slang, the term is mostly equivalent to \"geek\" or \"nerd\" (both in the broad sense); a technological geek would be a and an academic nerd would be a or ), but in a more derogatory manner than used in the West. It is also applied to any fan of any particular theme, topic, hobby or form of entertainment. According to journalist Colette Bennett, \"[w]hen these people are referred to as , they are judged for their behaviors \u2014 and people suddenly see an 'otaku' as a person unable to relate to reality.\" The term thus has more of a negative association in Japanese society.\nThe word entered English as a loanword from the Japanese language. It is typically used to refer to a fan of anime and manga, but can also refer to Japanese video games or even Japanese culture in general. Platforms like https:// and the American magazine \"Otaku USA\" popularize and cover these aspects. The usage of the word is a source of contention among some fans, owing to its negative connotations and stereotyping of the fandom. Widespread English exposure to the term came in 1988 with the release of \"Gunbuster\", which refers to anime fans as . \"Gunbuster\" was released officially in English in March 1990. The term's usage spread throughout the Usenet group rec.arts.anime with discussions about \"Otaku no Video\"'s portrayal of otaku before its 1994 English release. Positive and negative aspects, including the pejorative usage, were intermixed. The term was also popularized by William Gibson's 1996 novel \"Idoru\", which references \"otaku\".\nSubculture.\nKaichir\u014d Morikawa identifies the subculture as distinctly Japanese, a product of the school system and society. Japanese schools have a class structure which functions as a caste system, but clubs are an exception to the social hierarchy. In these clubs, a student's interests will be recognized and nurtured, catering to the interests of \"otaku\". Secondly, the vertical structure of Japanese society identifies the value of individuals by their success. Until the late 1980s, unathletic and unattractive males focused on academics, hoping to secure a good job and marry to raise their social standing. Those unable to succeed socially focused instead on their interests, often into adulthood, with their lifestyle centering on those interests, furthering the creation of the otaku subculture.\nEven prior to the coinage of the term, the stereotypical traits of the subculture were identified in a 1981 issue of \"Fan R\u014ddo\" (Fan road) about \"culture clubs\". These individuals were drawn to anime, a counter-culture, with the release of hard science fiction works such as \"Mobile Suit Gundam\". These works allowed a congregation and development of obsessive interests that turned anime into a medium for unpopular students, catering to obsessed fans. After these fans discovered Comic Market, the term was used as a self-confirming and self-mocking collective identity.\nThe 1989 \"Otaku Murderer\" case gave the fandom a negative connotation from which it has not fully recovered. The perception of \"otaku\" was again damaged in late 2004 when Kaoru Kobayashi kidnapped, sexually assaulted, and murdered a seven-year-old first-grade student. Japanese journalist Akihiro \u014ctani suspected that Kobayashi's crime was committed by a member of the \"figure moe zoku\" even before his arrest. Although Kobayashi was not an \"otaku\", the degree of social hostility against \"otaku\" increased. \"Otaku\" were seen by law enforcement as possible suspects for sex crimes, and local governments called for stricter laws controlling the depiction of eroticism in \"otaku\" materials.\nNot all attention has been negative. In his book \"Otaku\", Hiroki Azuma observed: \"Between 2001 and 2007, the \"otaku\" forms and markets quite rapidly won social recognition in Japan\", citing the fact that \"[i]n 2003, Hayao Miyazaki won the Academy Award for his \"Spirited Away\"; around the same time Takashi Murakami achieved recognition for otaku-like designs; in 2004, the Japanese pavilion in the 2004 International Architecture exhibition of the Venice Biennale (Biennale Architecture) featured 'otaku'. In 2005, the word \u2014 one of the keywords of the present volume \u2014 was chosen as one of the top ten 'buzzwords of the year'.\" In 2013, a Japanese study of 137,734 people found that 42.2% self-identify as a type of otaku. This study suggests that the stigma of the word has vanished, and the term has been embraced by many. Marie Kondo told ForbesWomen in 2020: \"I credit being an otaku with helping me to focus deeply, which definitely contributed to my success.\"\nIn the early 1990s, the otaku subculture started to gain traction in the Western world. According to Lawrence Eng, the first anime that could have caused this to happen was \"Gunbuster\", and the protagonist, Noriko Takaya, is teased about her otaku behavior.88 Through \"Gunbuster\", Western audiences would learn about the word \"otaku\". In the late 1990s, otaku was a popular subculture among Generation Xers in the United States. In the early 2000s, the otaku community in the United States often consisted of suburban young people and niche online groups.\nPlaces.\nThe district of Akihabara in Tokyo, where there are maid caf\u00e9s featuring waitresses who dress up and act like maids or anime characters, is a notable attraction center for otaku. Akihabara also has dozens of stores specializing in anime, manga, retro video games, figurines, card games, and other collectibles. Another popular location is Otome Road in Ikebukuro, Tokyo. Students from Nagoya City University started a project to help promote hidden tourist attractions and attract more otaku to Nagoya.\nSubtypes.\nThere are specific terms for different types of otaku, including , a self-mockingly pejorative Japanese term for female fans of , which focuses on homosexual male relationships. are female otaku who are interested in Japanese history. Some terms refer to a location, such as (\"Akihabara-style\"), which applies to those familiar with Akihabara's culture.\nMiyadai describes two big subtypes of the otaku type, a world type and a battle royale type. There is a chronological development from the world type of the late 1990s to the battle royale type of the 2000s but they also coexisted. The antagonism between the world type and the battle royale type emerged in the age in which reality and fiction are regarded as equivalent tools for self-defense. He further describes the internet society as a rhizomic structure which invalidates the distinction between \"reality\" and \"fiction\". The world type treats fiction as an equivalent of reality (real-ization of fiction), while the battle royale type treats reality as an equivalent of fiction (fictionalization of reality).\nMedia.\nOtaku often participate in self-mocking through the production or interest in humor directed at their subculture. Anime and manga otaku are the subject of numerous self-critical works, such as \"Otaku no Video\", which contains a live-interview mockumentary that pokes fun at the otaku subculture and includes Gainax's own staff as the interviewees. Other works depict otaku subculture less critically, such as \"Genshiken\" and \"Comic Party\". A well-known light novel, which later received a manga and anime adaptation, is \"Welcome to the N.H.K.\", which focuses on otaku subcultures and highlights other social outcasts, such as and NEETs. Works that focus on otaku characters include \"WataMote\", the story of an unattractive and unsociable otome gamer otaku who exhibits delusions about her social status; and \"No More Heroes\", a video game about an otaku assassin named Travis Touchdown and his surrealistic adventures inspired by anime and manga. Media about otaku also exist outside of Japan, such as the American documentary \"Otaku Unite!\" which focuses on the American side of the otaku culture, and the Filipino novel \"Otaku Girl\", which tells the story of a virtual reality world where otaku can role-play and use the powers of their favorite anime characters.\nHabits.\nA term used in the otaku fandom is , a type of cheering performed as a group. Another term is , which describes vehicles decorated with fictional characters, especially bish\u014djo game or eroge characters.\nClassification.\nThe Nomura Research Institute (NRI) has made two major studies into otaku, the first in 2004 and a revised study with a more specific definition in 2005. The 2005 study defines twelve major fields of otaku interests. Of these groups:\nThe remaining five categories include mobile device otaku, with 70,000 individuals and \u00a58\u00a0billion; audio-visual equipment otaku, with 60,000 individuals and \u00a512\u00a0billion; camera otaku, with 50,000 individuals and \u00a518\u00a0billion; fashion otaku, with 40,000 individuals and \u00a513\u00a0billion; and railway otaku, with 20,000 individuals and \u00a54\u00a0billion. These values were partially released with a much higher estimation in 2004, but this definition focused on consumerism and not the \"unique psychological characteristics\" of otaku used in the 2005 study.\nThe NRI's 2005 study also put forth five archetypes of otaku:\nThe Hamagin Research Institute found that -related content was worth \u00a588.8\u00a0billion ($807\u00a0million) in 2005, and one analyst estimated the market could be as much as \u00a52\u00a0trillion ($18\u00a0billion). Japan-based \"Tokyo Otaku Mode\", a place for news related to otaku, has been liked on Facebook almost 10\u00a0million times.\nOther classifications of otaku interests include Vocaloid, cosplay, figures, and professional wrestling, as categorized by the Yano Research Institute, which reports and tracks market growth and trends in sectors heavily influenced by otaku consumerism. In 2012, it noted around 30% of growth in dating sim and online gaming otaku, while Vocaloid, cosplay, idols and maid services grew by 10%, confirming its 2011 predictions.\n\u014ckina otomodachi.\n is a Japanese phrase that literally translates to \"big friend\" or \"adult friend\". Japanese otaku use it to describe themselves as adult fans of an anime, a manga, or a TV show that is originally aimed at children. A parent who watches such a show with their children is not considered an \"\u014dkina otomodachi\", nor is a parent who buys anime DVDs or manga volumes for their children; \"\u014dkina otomodachi\" are those who consume such content by themselves.\nOtaku outside Japan.\nBased on a survey with 1,800 responses conducted by Dentsu in July 2022, an extrapolated 34% of American Gen-Zs (around 15 million people) identify themselves as anime \"otaku\".\nKim Morrissy of the media company Crunchyroll wrote that, in the anime fandom, some Westerners believe that identifying as an otaku constitutes cultural appropriation, and that it can only refer to a Japanese person.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22723", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22723", "title": "Object-modeling language", "text": ""}
{"id": "22725", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22725", "title": "On Fairy-Stories", "text": "Essay by J. R. R. Tolkien\n\"On Fairy-Stories\" is a 1947 essay by J. R. R. Tolkien which discusses the fairy story as a literary form. It was written as a lecture entitled \"Fairy Stories\" for the Andrew Lang lecture at the University of St Andrews, Scotland, on 8 March 1939.\nThe essay is significant because it contains Tolkien's explanation of his philosophy on fantasy, and his thoughts on mythopoeia and sub-creation or worldbuilding. Alongside his 1936 essay \"\", it is his most influential scholarly work.\nSeveral scholars have used \"On Fairy-Stories\" as a route to understanding Tolkien's own fantasy, \"The Lord of the Rings\", complete with its sub-created world of Middle-earth. Clyde Northrup contends that in the essay, Tolkien argues that \"fairy-story\" must contain four qualities, namely fantasy, recovery, escape, and consolation. Derek Shank argues that while Tolkien objects to structuralism in the essay, Tolkien also proposes that a secondary world must have a structure with coherently related parts; but since it works by its effect on the reader, humans are inside the structure and cannot analyse it objectively.\nContext.\nJ. R. R. Tolkien was a professional philologist and an author of fantasy fiction, starting with the children's book \"The Hobbit\" in 1937. The Andrew Lang Lecture was important as it brought him to clarify his view of fairy stories as a legitimate literary genre, rather than something intended exclusively for children. By the time of the lecture, \"The Hobbit\" had become extremely popular, and Tolkien had started work on a sequel, which became \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nHistory.\nTolkien created the material as a lecture entitled \"Fairy Stories\"; he delivered it as the Andrew Lang lecture at the University of St Andrews, Scotland, on 8 March 1939.\n\"On Fairy-Stories\" first appeared in print, with some enhancement, in 1947, in a \"festschrift\" volume, \"Essays Presented to Charles Williams\", compiled by C. S. Lewis. Charles Williams, a friend of Lewis's, had been relocated with the Oxford University Press staff from London to Oxford during the London blitz in World War II. This allowed him to participate in gatherings of the Inklings with Lewis and Tolkien. The volume of essays was intended to be presented to Williams upon the return of the Oxford University Press staff to London with the ending of the war. However, Williams died suddenly on 15 May 1945, and the book was published as a memorial volume. \"Essays Presented to Charles Williams\" received little attention and was out of print by 1955.\n\"On Fairy-Stories\" began to receive much more attention in 1964, when it was published in \"Tree and Leaf\". Since then, \"Tree and Leaf\" has been reprinted several times, and \"On Fairy-Stories\" has been reprinted in other compilations of Tolkien's works, such as \"The Tolkien Reader\" in 1966, though that edition was impaired by poor proofreading. It appeared again in the 1980 \"Poems and Stories\", and in the 1983 \"The Monsters and the Critics, and Other Essays\". \"On Fairy Stories\" was published on its own in an expanded edition in 2008.\nSynopsis.\nThe essay \"On Fairy-Stories\" is an attempt to explain and defend the genre of fairy tales, under the following headings.\nFairy-story.\nTolkien distinguishes fairy tales from \"traveller's tales\" (such as \"Gulliver's Travels\"), science fiction (such as H. G. Wells's \"The Time Machine\"), beast fables (such as Aesop's Fables and \"The Tale of Peter Rabbit\"), and dream stories (such as \"Alice in Wonderland\").\nTolkien claims that one touchstone of the authentic fairy tale is that it is presented as wholly credible: \"It is at any rate essential to a genuine fairy-story, as distinct from the employment of this form for lesser or debased purposes, that it should be presented as 'true'. ... But since the fairy-story deals with 'marvels', it cannot tolerate any frame or machinery suggesting that the whole framework in which they occur is a figment or illusion.\"\nOrigins.\nTolkien comments that fairy stories are ancient, and that it was once thought that they had derived from powerful, elemental \"nature-myths\", with gods personifying the sun, night, and other elements of nature. These myths were humanised to legends by telling them with human heroes as protagonists. Finally, the legends dwindled to folktales and fairy stories. But in Tolkien's view, this is \"almost upside down\". A tale of the Norse god Thor in the Elder Edda, the \"Thrymskvitha\", is \"certainly just a fairy-story\"; it is just as old as the Norse myths. The historical King Arthur, perhaps a minor figure, went into the \"Cauldron of Story\", and \"was boiled for a long time\", eventually becoming a \"King of Fa\u00ebrie\". Tolkien notes that these old stories produce an effect of \"distance and a great abyss of time\", and suggests that they were selected precisely because they created this literary effect.\nChildren.\nTolkien argues that there is no essential connection between fairy stories and children, but that this \"is an accident of our domestic history\", meaning that they have been relegated \"to the nursery\" because adults no longer wanted them. Only some children, he writes, \"have any special taste for them\", and he suggests that the taste \"increases with age, if it is innate\". He criticises Andrew Lang's suggestion that children have an \"unblunted edge of belief\" as trading on their credulity and inexperience. As an infant, when the \"Green Fairy Book\" was published, Tolkien says he had \"no special 'wish to believe'. I wanted to know.\" On the other hand, fairy stories did awaken desire, such as for dragons. He had no time for Lang's talking down to children, or for \"covertly sniggering\". He notes that G. K. Chesterton remarked that children are not uncritically tender: \"For children are innocent and love justice; while most of us are wicked and naturally prefer mercy.\"\nFantasy.\nTolkien emphasises that through the use of fantasy, which he equates with imagination, the author can bring the reader to experience a world that is consistent and rational, under rules other than those of the normal world. He calls this \"a rare achievement of Art\", and notes that it was important to him as a reader: \"It was in fairy-stories that I first divined the potency of the words, and the wonder of things, such as stone, and wood, and iron; tree and grass; house and fire; bread and wine.\"\nRecovery, Escape, Consolation.\nTolkien suggests that fairy stories allow the reader to review his own world from the \"perspective\" of a different world. Tolkien calls this \"recovery\", in the sense that one's unquestioned assumptions might be recovered and changed by an outside perspective. Second, he defends fairy stories as offering escapist pleasure to the reader, justifying this analogy: a prisoner is not obliged to think of nothing but cells and wardens. And third, Tolkien suggests that fairy stories can provide moral or emotional consolation, through their happy ending, which he terms a \"eucatastrophe\".\nEpilogue.\nIn conclusion, Tolkien asserts that a truly good fairy story is marked by joy: \"Far more powerful and poignant is the effect [of joy] in a serious tale of Fa\u00ebrie. In such stories, when the sudden 'turn' comes we get a piercing glimpse of joy, and heart's desire, that for a moment passes outside the frame, rends indeed the very web of story, and lets a gleam come through.\" Tolkien sees Christianity as partaking in and fulfilling the overarching mythological nature of the cosmos:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would venture to say that approaching the Christian Story from this direction, it has long been my feeling (a joyous feeling) that God redeemed the corrupt making-creatures, men, in a way fitting to this aspect, as to others, of their strange nature. The Gospels contain a fairy-story, or a story of a larger kind which embraces all the essence of fairy-stories. They contain many marvels ... and among the marvels is the greatest and most complete conceivable eucatastrophe. The Birth of Christ is the eucatastrophe of Man's history. The Resurrection is the eucatastrophe of the story of the Incarnation.\nAnalysis.\nThe Tolkien scholar Verlyn Flieger states that \"On Fairy-Stories\" would be at the centre of Tolkien research simply because it is Tolkien's own explanation of his art, of the \"sub-creation\" (in his terminology) of a secondary world. She at once adds that it is much more than that, since it is \"a deeply perceptive commentary on the interdependence of language and human consciousness\", a useful summary of the study of folklore at that time, and a \"cogent\" analysis of myth, fairy-story, and \"the poet's craft\". It is also, Flieger writes, an essential text for study of \"the multivalent myth, epic and fairy tale romance that is \"The Lord of the Rings\".\" In her view, alongside his 1936 essay \"\", the essay is his most influential scholarly work. In the lecture, Tolkien focused on Andrew Lang's work on fairy tales. He disagreed with Lang's broad inclusion of traveller's tales, beast fables, and other types of stories in his 1889\u20131910 \"Fairy Books\" collection. Tolkien viewed fairy stories more narrowly as those that took place in the enchanted realm of \"Faerie\", with or without fairies as characters. He disagreed with both Lang and Max M\u00fcller in their theories of the development of the fairy story, which he viewed as a natural result of the way that imagination and language interact in the human mind.\nThe folklorist Juliette Wood, writing in \"A Companion to J. R. R. Tolkien\", comments that the image of Galadriel's creating her magic mirror by pouring water illustrated how central the \"imaginative reworking of reality\" was to the theory of fantasy that Tolkien set out in the essay. Carl Phelpstead, also writing in the \"Companion\", notes that the essay attempts to answer three questions, namely what fairy-tales are, their origins, and their value, the last of these related to Tolkien's concept of mythopoeia.\nClyde Northrup argues that through the essay Tolkien creates a framework of four necessary qualities for interpreting \"Tolkienian fantasy\", or as he called it \"fairy-story\". These are fantasy (the contrast of enchantment and ordinariness), recovery (as the reader sees the \"magic\" of simple things in daily life), escape (from the primary world), and consolation (the \"happy ending\"). He suggests that these can be applied both to Tolkien's own Middle-earth fantasies, \"The Hobbit\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\", and to the works of later fantasy authors including David Eddings, Roger Zelazny, Stephen R. Donaldson, and J. K. Rowling.\nDerek Shank, in \"Tolkien Studies\", argues that while \"On Fairy-Stories\" criticises the application of structuralism to folklore, since \"being bound up in the transcendental, it cannot account for the transcendent\", Tolkien actually uses a similar analysis to relate \"human beings, language, stories, and the external world.\" Shank notes that in the essay, Tolkien states that fantastic language alone, in his words \"the green sun\", is not enough to create fantasy. Instead, the green sun will only become believable, Shank writes, when the author, the sub-creator or worldbuilder, \"construct[s] the Secondary World to form a coherent and organic whole in which all the parts are harmoniously interrelated\u2014in other words, a structure.\"\nShank concludes, however, that Tolkien moves away from structuralism in the essay's epilogue, by likening fairy stories to the Gospel, which (he writes) has a profound effect on the people who hear it, whether they accept or reject it. Thus, Shank writes, Tolkien goes from structure to a story's effects, \"the realm of phenomenology and psychoanalysis.\" These too may have structure, but since humans are now inside that structure, people cannot analyse it, or fairy stories, objectively.\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22727", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22727", "title": "Otaku no Video", "text": "1991 original video animation\n is a 1991 Japanese original video animation (OVA) produced by Gainax. The anime spoofs the life and culture of otaku, individuals with obsessive interests in media, particularly anime and manga, as well as the history of Gainax and its creators. It is noted for its mix of conventional documentary film styles with a more traditional anime storytelling fashion. It is licensed in the United States by AnimEigo. The \"DAICON III and IV Opening Animations\" from the early 1980s are also featured in this OVA.\nPlot.\nThe story begins in \"Otaku no Video 1982\", where the main character is an everyman character, Ken Kubo, living with his girlfriend Yoshiko and as a member of his college's tennis team, until introduced by his former friend Tanaka to a club of enthusiasts: a female illustrator, an information geek, a martial artist, and a weapons collector. Kubo soon joins them; and when Yoshiko, who hates otaku, abandons him, makes the wish to become the supreme enthusiast, under the name of \"Otaking\".\nKubo's quest continues in \"More Otaku no Video 1985\", set three years later, in which he creates his model kits, opens shops, and builds a factory in China. Later, he loses his fortune when one of his rivals (now married to Yoshiko) takes control of his enterprise; but Kubo and Tanaka, with hard-working artist Misuzu, gradually take over the anime industry with a 'magical girl' show, \"Misty May\". At the peak of their ambitions, Ken and Tanaka create Otakuland in 1999: the equivalent of Disneyland for otaku (the story suggests Otakuland to be located in the same city of Urayasu, Chiba Prefecture, as the original Tokyo Disneyland.)\nMany years later, Ken and Tanaka return to Otakuland in a post-apocalyptic submerged Japan and find its central structure, a giant robot, converted into a functional spaceship piloted by their old friends. Miraculously rejuvenated, they fly into space in search of \"The Planet of Otaku\".\nPart of \"Otaku no Video\" was the inclusion of live-action documentary excerpts, titled \"A Portrait of an Otaku\". In these segments, the documentary crew would interview an anonymous otaku, typically ashamed at being a fan and whose face are censored with a mosaic and have their voices digitally masked. The mock documentary segments serve as a counterpoint to the anime: while the anime emphasizes the camaraderie, creativity, and dreams of mainstream acceptance of otaku, the mock interviews exaggerate its negative qualities. The subjects run the gamut of the otaku subculture: the interviews cover a cosplayer who now works as a computer programmer and evasively denies his cosplay days until presented with photographic evidence, but keeps his Char Aznable helmet in his desk drawer, an airsoft otaku, a garage kit otaku, and a shut-in who video-records television programs for trade, but has not actually watched anything that he recorded. The interviews also contain fans who engage in a range of illicit or unsavory activities, such as cel thieves, a pornography fan attempting to manufacture glasses to defeat the mosaic censorship common in Japanese porn videos and who is shown masturbating during the interview, and a computer gamer obsessed with a character in a hentai computer game (Kimiko from \"Gunbuster\" who makes a cameo in Gainax's own hentai game, \"Cybernetic High School\").\nProduction.\n\"Otaku no Video\" is based on the experiences of Gainax employees which started as a sci-fi and anime fanclub. Staff involved in the OVA include Shinji Higuchi, Takeshi Mori, Kohei Tanaka, Yu Honda, Hidenori Matsubara, and Toshio Okada.\nSince \"Otaku no Video\" was partially based in the personal life of the original creators of Gainax, who started their careers as otaku during the late seventies and the beginning of the eighties, many anime titles from that period are shown as footage or referenced in the OVA (in costumes, cosplay or other related material). Among them are \"Gatchaman\", \"Uchuu Senkan Yamato\", \"Urusei Yatsura\", \"Captain Harlock\", \"Mobile Suit Gundam\", \"Dirty Pair\", \"Space Adventure Cobra\", \"Lupin the Third\", \"Phoenix 2772\", \"Silent M\u00f6bius\", \"Magical Princess Minky Momo\", \"The Super Dimension Fortress Macross\", ', \"Genesis Climber Mospeada\", ', \"Gunbuster\", and the \"Daicon III and IV Opening Animations\".\nIt is believed that all the subjects in the Portrait of an Otaku segments were Gainax employees or connected to Gainax at the time of filming. The first otaku interviewed bore a remarkable resemblance to Toshio Okada, a principal founder in Gainax, in both background and physical appearance. The gaijin otaku, Shon Hernandez, has been confirmed to have been Craig York, who with Shon Howell and Lea Hernandez, whose names were borrowed for the character, were the main staff of General Products USA, an early western branch of Gainax's merchandising enterprise in the early 1990s. The interview with \"Shon Hernandez\" has been a point of contention with Lea Hernandez, who, in an interview with \"PULP\" magazine, noted that the interview was unscripted and that Craig York had been fairly sincere in his thoughts and had felt that Gainax insulted their American members. In the interview, the words spoken by Shon Hernandez in the background are noticeably different from what is shown on screen via subtitle (which is based on the Japanese voice-over \"translation\").\nAt FanimeCon 2003, Hiroki Sato, an animator and another Gainax member, mentioned that he had been in one of the interviews in \"Otaku no Video\". In \"Otaku no Video\", the garage kit otaku was given the pseudonym \"Sato Hiroshi\" for the interview.\nCharacters.\nAnimated version.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe main character. Voiced by: K\u014dji Tsujitani\nVoiced by: Toshiharu Sakurai\nVoiced by: Shigeru Nakahara\nVoiced by: Y\u016bko Kobayashi\nVoiced by: Kikuko Inoue\nVoiced by: Yuri Amano\nVoiced by: Masami Kikuchi\nVoiced by: Toshiyuki Morikawa\nVoiced by: Nobuo Tobita\nVoiced by: Wataru Takagi\nVoiced by: Hideyuki Umezu\nVoiced by: Jun'ichi Kanemaru\nVoiced by: Kiyoyuki Yanada\nVoiced by: Rena Kurihara\nVoiced by: Hideyuki Umezu\nVoiced by: Akio \u014ctsuka\nVoiced by: Akio \u014ctsuka\nLive-action version (\"A Portrait of an Otaku\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPortrayed by: Jun Tamaya\nPortrayed by: Himself\nPortrayed by: Kazuya Shioiri\nPortrayed by: Sh\u016bichi Miyagawa\nPortrayed by: Takayuki Masuda\nPortrayed by: Hiroki Sato\nPortrayed by: Craig York\nPortrayed by: Osamu Akahagi\nPortrayed by: Sh\u014dji Murahama\nPortrayed by: Hidehiko Kuroda\nRelease.\nThe OVA consists of two episodes: \"1982 Otaku no video\" and \"1985 More Otaku no Video\". The first episode of \"Otaku no Video\" had its world premiere at AnimeCon \u201891 on September 1, 1991, where it was shown on 16mm with an audience of 9 people. The OVA was a commercial failure, which has in part been attributed to the bubble economy at the time as well as the content of the anime.\nIn Japan the OVA was released on Blu-ray Disc in 2014 by TC Entertainment with a new audio commentary track by staff, as well as the creation of a new master.\nIt was later released with English subtitles on VHS in North America on March 17, 1993, on DVD on April 2, 2002, and on Blu-ray Disc on June 24, 2016, and a future release on October 8, 2024, all by AnimEigo.\nReception.\nThe OVA was largely praised by critics. Carl Gustav Horn of \"J-pop.com\" praised the anime saying \"\"ONV\"'s been known to offend fans in America as much as those in Japan. And you know that may be a mark of quality.\" David Smith at \"IGN\" recommended it for fans of the anime \"Genshiken\" and said \"If you look closely, you can also see some of the secret history of Gainax in there, but you may be laughing too hard to pick up on those subtle details.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22728", "revid": "113336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22728", "title": "Old Thumper", "text": ""}
{"id": "22729", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22729", "title": "Optical activity", "text": ""}
{"id": "22730", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22730", "title": "Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries", "text": ""}
{"id": "22731", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22731", "title": "Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development", "text": ""}
{"id": "22734", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22734", "title": "Omphalos theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "22735", "revid": "346060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22735", "title": "Original sin", "text": "Christian doctrine about human nature\nIn Christian theology, original sin () is the condition of sinfulness that all humans share, which is inherited from Adam and Eve due to the Fall, involving the loss of original righteousness and the distortion of the Image of God. The biblical basis for the belief is generally found in Genesis 3 (the story of the expulsion of Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden), and in texts such as (\"I was brought forth in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me\") and (\"Therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, and in this way death came to all people, because all sinned\").\nThe specific doctrine of original sin was developed in the 2nd century struggle against Gnosticism by Irenaeus of Lyons, and was shaped significantly by Augustine of Hippo (354\u2013430 AD), who was the first author to use the phrase \"original sin\". Influenced by Augustine, the Councils of Carthage (411\u2013418 AD) and Orange (529 AD) brought theological speculation about original sin into the official lexicon of the Church.\nProtestant Reformers such as Martin Luther and John Calvin equated original sin with concupiscence (or 'hurtful desire'), affirming that it persisted even after baptism and completely destroyed freedom to do good, proposing that original sin involved a loss of free will except to sin. The Jansenist movement, which the Catholic Church declared heretical, also maintained that original sin destroyed freedom of will. Instead, the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" declares that \"Baptism, by imparting the life of Christ's grace, erases original sin and turns a man back towards God, but the consequences for nature, weakened and inclined to evil, persist in man and summon him to spiritual battle\", and the Council of Trent states that \"whereas all men had lost their innocence in the prevarication of Adam [...] although free will, attenuated as it was in its powers, and bent down, was by no means extinguished in them.\"\nHistory.\nScriptural background and early development.\nFor the Apostle Paul, Adam's act released a power into the world by which sin and death became the natural lot of mankind, a view which is evident in 2 Esdras, 2 Baruch and the \"Apocalypse of Moses\". Paul uses much of the same language observed in 4 Ezra and 2 Baruch, such as Adam-death associations. He also emphasizes the individual human responsibility for their sins when he described the predominance of death over all \"because all have sinned\" (). Early Christianity had no specific doctrine of original sin prior to the 4th century. The idea developed incrementally in the writings of the Early Church Fathers in the centuries after the New Testament was composed. The late 1st- or early 2nd-century \"Didache\"'s seemingly exclusive preference for adult baptism offers evidence that its author may have believed that children were born sinless. The authors of the Shepherd of Hermas and the Epistle of Barnabas, also from the late 1st or early 2nd centuries, assumed that children were born without sin. However Clement of Rome and Ignatius of Antioch, from the same period, took universal sin for granted but did not explain its origin from anywhere; and while Clement of Alexandria in the late 2nd century did propose that sin was inherited from Adam, he did not say how.\nThe biblical bases for original sin are generally found in the following passages, the first and last of which explain why the sin is described as \"original\":\nGenesis 3, the story of the Garden of Eden, makes no association between sex and the disobedience of Adam and Eve, nor is the serpent associated with Satan, nor are the words \"sin,\" \"transgression,\" \"rebellion,\" or \"guilt\" mentioned. The words of Psalm 51:5 read: \"Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity, and in sin my mother conceived me\", but while the speaker traces their sinfulness to the moment of their conception, there is little to support the idea that it was meant to be applicable to all humanity. In the 4th century, Augustine would use texts such as to justify his theory of original sin as originating in \"propagation\" since Adam rather than being merely \"imitation\" of Adam as Pelagius claimed (\"And the free gift is not like the effect of the one man\u2019s sin. For the judgment following one trespass brought condemnation, but the free gift following many trespasses brings justification. If, because of the one man\u2019s trespass, death exercised dominion through that one, much more surely will those who receive the abundance of grace and the free gift of righteousness exercise dominion in life through the one man, Jesus Christ. Therefore just as one man\u2019s trespass led to condemnation for all, so one man\u2019s act of righteousness leads to justification and life for all.\"). However, Pelagians and modern interpreters such as M. Eugene Boring argue that Paul's meaning is not that God punishes later generations for the deeds of Adam, but that Adam's story is representative for all humanity.\nSecond Temple Judaism.\nThe first writings to discuss the first sin at the hands of Adam and Eve were early Jewish texts in the Second Temple Period, such as the Book of Sirach and the Wisdom of Solomon. In these writings, there is no notion that sin is inherent to an individual or that it is transmitted upon conception. Instead, Adam is more largely seen as a heroic figure and the first patriarch. Rather, the beginnings of sin were seen in the stories of Cain or the sons of God mentioned in Genesis 6.\nDespite the lack of a notion of original sin, by the 1st century, a number of texts did discuss the roles of Adam and Eve as the first to have committed sin. While states that \"God created man for incorruption[...] but death entered the world by the envy of the devil\" (2:23\u201324), states that \"Sin began with a woman, and we must all die because of her\" (25:24). The notion of the hereditary transmission of sin from Adam was rejected by both 4 Ezra and 2 Baruch in favor of individual responsibility for sin. Despite describing death as having come to all men through Adam, these texts also held to the notion that it is still the individual that is ultimately responsible for committing his own sin and that it is the individual's sin, rather than the sin of Adam and Eve, that God condemns in a person. Ian McFarland argues that it is the context of this Judaism through which Paul's discussions on the fall of Adam are to be better understood.\nGreek Fathers before Augustine.\nJustin Martyr, a 2nd-century Christian apologist and philosopher, was the first Christian author to discuss the story of Adam's fall after Paul. In Justin's writings, there is no conception of original sin and the fault of sin lies at the hands of the individual who committed it. In his Dialogue with Trypho, Justin wrote \"The Christ has suffered to be crucified for the race of men who, since Adam, were fallen to the power of death and were in the error of the serpent, each man committing evil by his own fault\" (chapter 86) and \"Men[...] were created like God, free from pain and death, provided they obeyed His precepts and were deemed worthy by Him to be called His sons, and yet, like Adam and Eve, brought death upon themselves\" (chapter 124). Irenaeus was an early father appealed to by Augustine on the doctrine of original sin, although he did not believe that Adam's sin was as severe as later tradition would hold and he was not wholly clear about its consequences. One recurring theme in Irenaeus is his view that Adam, in his transgression, is essentially a child who merely partook of the tree ahead of his time.\nOrigen of Alexandria had a notion similar to, but not the same as original sin, since Genesis was largely allegorical for him. On the other hand, he also believed in the pre-existence of the soul, and theorized that individuals are inherently predisposed to committing sin on account of the transgressions committed in their pre-worldly existence. Origen is the first to quote Romans 5:12\u201321, but rejected the existence of a sinful state inherited from Adam. To Origen, Adam's sin sets an example that all humanity partakes in, but is not inherently born into. Responding to and rejecting Origen's theories, Methodius of Olympus rejected the pre-existence of the soul and the allegorical interpretation of Genesis, and in the process, was the first to describe the events of Adam's life as the \"Fall\".\nGreek Fathers would come to emphasize the cosmic dimension of the Fall, namely that since Adam, human beings are born into a fallen world, but held fast to belief that man, though fallen, is free. They thus did not teach that human beings are deprived of free will and involved in total depravity, which is one understanding of original sin among the leaders of the Reformation. During this period the doctrines of human depravity and the inherently sinful nature of human flesh were taught by Gnostics, and orthodox Christian writers took great pains to counter them. Thus Christian apologists such as Justin insisted that God's future judgment of humanity implied humanity must have the ability to live righteously.\nLatin Fathers before Augustine.\nTertullian, perhaps the first to believe in hereditary transmission of sin, did so on the basis of the theory of traducianism, the theory that each individual's soul was derived from the soul of their two parents, and therefore, because everyone is ultimately a descendant of Adam through sexual reproduction, the souls of humanity are partly derived from Adam's own soul\u2014the only one directly created by God, and as a sinful soul, the derived souls of humanity, too, are sinful. Cyprian, on the other hand, believed that individuals were born already guilty of sin, and he was the first to link his notion of original guilt with infant baptism. Cyprian writes that the infant is \"born has not sinned at all, except that carnally born according to Adam, he has contracted the contagion of the first death from the first nativity.\" Another text to assert the connection between original sin and infant baptism was the Manichaen \"Letter to Menoch\", although it is of disputed authenticity.\nAmbrose accepted the idea of hereditary sin, also linking it, like Cyprian, to infant baptism, but as a shift from earlier proponents of a transmitted sin, he argued that Adam's sin was solely his own fault, in his attempt to attain equality with God, rather than the fault of the devil. One contemporary of Ambrose was Ambrosiaster, the first to introduce a translation of Romans 5:12 that substituted the language of all being in death \"because all sinned\" to \"in him all sinned\". Augustine's primary formulation of original sin was based on this mistranslation of Romans 5:12. This mistranslation would act as the basis for Augustine's complete development of the doctrine of original sin, and Augustine would quote Ambrosiaster as the source. Some exegetes still justify the doctrine of original sin based on the wider context of Romans 5:12\u201321.\nHilary of Poitiers did not clearly articulate a concept of original sin, though anticipates the views of Augustine, as he declared that all humanity is implicated in Adam's downfall.\nAugustine of Hippo.\nOn the precise nature of Adam's sin, Augustine taught that it was both an act of foolishness (\"insipientia\") and of pride and disobedience to God of Adam and Eve. He thought it was a most subtle work to discern what came first: self-centeredness or failure in seeing truth, as he wrote to the Pelagian bishop Julian of Eclanum. The sin of Adam and Eve would not have taken place if Satan had not sown into their senses \"the root of evil\" (\"radix mali\").\nThe sin of Adam is transmitted by concupiscence, or \"hurtful desire\", resulting in humanity becoming a (mass of perdition, condemned crowd), with much enfeebled, though not destroyed, freedom of will. When Adam sinned, human nature was thenceforth transformed. He believed that prior to the Fall, Adam had both the freedom to sin and not to sin (\"posse peccare, posse non peccare\"), but humans have no freedom to choose not to sin (\"non posse non peccare\") after Adam's Fall. Augustine found the original sin inexplicable given the understanding that Adam and Eve were \"created with perfect natures\" which would fail to explain how the evil desire arose in them in the first place. Augustine also identified male semen as the means by which original sin was made heritable, leaving only Jesus Christ, conceived without semen, free of the sin passed down from Adam through the sexual act. This sentiment was echoed as late as 1930 by Pope Pius XI in his : \"The natural generation of life has become the path of death by which original sin is communicated to the children.\"\nConcupiscence.\nAdam and Eve, via sexual reproduction, recreated human nature. Their descendants now live in sin, in the form of concupiscence, a term Augustine used in a metaphysical, not a psychological sense. Thomas Aquinas explained this by pointing out that the \"libido\" (\"concupiscence\"), which makes the original sin pass from parents to children, is not a \"libido actualis\", i.e. sexual lust, but a \"libido habitualis\", i.e. a wound of the whole of human nature. Augustine insisted that concupiscence was not \"a being\" but a \"bad quality\", the privation of good or a wound. He admitted that sexual concupiscence (\"libido\") might have been present in the perfect human nature in paradise, and that only later it became disobedient to human will as a result of the first couple's disobedience to God's will in the original sin. In Augustine's view (termed \"realism\"), all of humanity was really present in Adam when he sinned, and therefore all have sinned. Original sin, according to Augustine, consists of the guilt of Adam that all humans inherit. Although earlier Christian authors taught the elements of physical death, moral weakness, and a sin propensity within original sin, Augustine was the first to add the concept of inherited guilt (\"reatus\") from Adam whereby an infant was eternally damned at birth. Augustine held the traditional view that free will was weakened but not destroyed by original sin until he converted in 412 AD to the Stoic view that humanity had no free will except to sin as a result of his anti-Pelagian view of infant baptism.\nAnti-Pelagianism.\nAugustine articulated his explanation in reaction to his understanding of Pelagianism that would insist that humans have of themselves, without the necessary help of God's grace, the ability to lead a morally good life, thus denying both the importance of baptism and the teaching that God is the giver of all that is good. According to this understanding, the influence of Adam on other humans was merely that of bad example, thus, original sin consists in \"imitation\" of Adam. Augustine held that the effects of Adam's sin are transmitted to his descendants not by example but by the very fact of generation from that ancestor (\"propagation\"). A wounded nature comes to the soul and body of the new person from their parents, who experience \"libido\" (or \"concupiscence\"). Augustine frequently cited Romans 5 to refute the Pelagian theory of imitation.But observe more attentively what he says, that \u201cthrough the offence of one, many are dead.\u201d For why should it be on account of the sin of one, and not rather on account of their own sins, if this passage is to be understood of \"imitation\", and not of \"propagation?\" But mark what follows: \u201cAnd not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift; for the judgment was by one to condemnation, but the grace is of many offences unto justification.\u201d [Romans 5:16] Now let them tell us, where there is room in these words for \"imitation\". \u201cBy one,\u201d says he, \u201cto condemnation.\u201d By one what except one sin? [...] That person, therefore, greatly deceives both himself and others, who teaches that they will not be involved in condemnation; whereas the apostle says: \u201cJudgment from one offence to condemnation,\u201d [Romans 5:16] and again a little after: \u201cBy the offence of one upon all persons to condemnation.\u201d [Romans 5:18]Augustine's view was that human procreation was the way the transmission was being effected. He did not blame, however, the sexual passion itself, but the spiritual concupiscence present in human nature, soul and body, even after baptismal regeneration. This was because, according to Augustine, sexual desire is only one\u2014though the strongest\u2014of many physical realizations of that spiritual libido. Christian parents transmit their wounded nature to children, because they give them birth, not the \"re-birth\". Augustine used the Ciceronian Stoic concept of passions to interpret Paul's doctrine of universal sin and redemption. In that view, sexual desire itself as well as other bodily passions were consequences of the original sin, in which pure affections were wounded by vice and became disobedient to human reason and will. As long as they carry a threat to the dominion of reason over the soul, they constitute moral evil, but since they do not presuppose consent, one cannot call them sins. Humanity will be liberated from passions, and pure affections will be restored only when all sin has been washed away and ended, that is in the resurrection of the dead.\nPelagius' response.\nThe theologian Pelagius reacted thoroughly negatively to Augustine's theory of original sin. Pelagius considered it an insult to God that humans could be born inherently sinful or biased towards sin, and Pelagius believed that the soul was created by God at conception, and therefore could not be imbued with sin as it was solely the product of God's creative agency. Adam did not bring about inherent sin, but he introduced death to the world. Furthermore, Pelagius argued, sin was spread through example rather than hereditary transmission. Pelagius advanced a further argument against the idea of the transmission of sin: since adults are baptized and cleansed of their sin, their children are not capable of inheriting a sin that the parents do not have to begin with.\nReaction of the Church to Augustine.\nOpposition to Augustine's ideas about original sin, which he had developed in reaction to Pelagianism, arose rapidly. After a long and bitter struggle several councils, especially the Second Council of Orange in 529, confirmed the general principles of Augustine's teaching within Western Christianity. However, while the Western Church condemned Pelagius, it did not endorse Augustine entirely and, while Augustine's authority was accepted, he was interpreted in the light of writers such as John Cassian, who rejected Pelagius but believed that fallen man could still choose to follow God of his own free will, although it is God who guides his progress. Some of the followers of Augustine identified original sin with concupiscence in the psychological sense, but Anselm of Canterbury challenged this identification in the 11th century, defining original sin as \"privation of the righteousness that every man ought to possess\", thus separating it from concupiscence. In the 12th century the identification of original sin with concupiscence was supported by Peter Lombard and others, but was rejected by the leading theologians in the next century, most notably by Thomas Aquinas. Aquinas distinguished the supernatural gifts of Adam before the fall from what was merely natural, and said that it was the former that were lost, privileges that enabled man to keep his inferior powers in submission to reason and directed to his supernatural end. Even after the fall, man thus kept his natural abilities of reason, will and passions. Rigorous Augustine-inspired views persisted among the Franciscans, though the most prominent Franciscan theologians, such as Duns Scotus and William of Ockham, eliminated the element of concupiscence and identified original sin with the loss of sanctifying grace. Eastern Christian theology has questioned some of the ideas of Western Christianity on original sin from the outset and does not promote the specific idea of inherited guilt.\nIn \"Cur Deus Homo\", Anselm of Canterbury explained that after the original sin of Adam and Eve, the sacrifice of Christ's passion and death on the cross was necessary for the human race to be restored to the possibility of entering Paradise for eternal life. Indeed, a life of infinite duration required infinite merits of salvation that only the infinitely valuable blood shed by the Lord could purchase. Thomas Aquinas maintains \"that Christ is the head of the Church, and that the grace that he possesses as head is passed on to all the members of the Church because of the organic conjunction that obtains within the Mystical Body.\" Quoting , Aquinas declares that the passion of Christ satisfied superabundantly for the sins of the whole world. The death of Christ was necessary only as a result of God's free decision to redeem humankind in a suitable manner, showing forth both the justice and the mercy of God.\nProtestant Reformation.\nBoth Martin Luther (1483\u20131546) and John Calvin (1509\u20131564) represent a radical Augustinian shift: equating concupiscence with original sin, maintaining that it destroyed free will and persisted after baptism. Arguments supporting original sin began to increase in the early modern era largely, Matthew Kadane argues, because of Luther's idea of \"sola fide\". The Latin phrase expresses the belief that believers are not saved through moral conduct, but solely through faith in God. Kadane maintains that the doctrine underpinning \"sola fide\" was original sin. Luther asserted that humans inherit Adamic guilt and are in a state of sin from the moment of conception. The second article in the orthodox statement of Lutheran doctrine, the Augsburg Confession presents its doctrine of original sin in summary form.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is also taught among us that since the fall of Adam all men who are born according to the course of nature are conceived and born in sin. That is, all men are full of evil lust and inclinations from their mothers' wombs and are unable by nature to have true fear of God and true faith in God. Moreover, this inborn sickness and hereditary sin is truly sin and condemns to the eternal wrath of God all those who are not born again through Baptism and the Holy Spirit. Rejected in this connection are the Pelagians and others who deny that original sin is sin, for they hold that natural man is made righteous by his own powers, thus disparaging the sufferings and merit of Christ.\nCalvin developed a systematic theology of Augustinian Protestantism with reference to Augustine of Hippo's notion of original sin. Calvin believed that humans inherit Adamic guilt and are in a state of sin from the moment of conception. This inherently sinful nature (the basis for the Reformed doctrine of \"total depravity\") results in a complete alienation from God and the total inability of humans to achieve reconciliation with God based on their own abilities. Not only do individuals inherit a sinful nature due to Adam's fall, but since he was the federal head and representative of the human race, all whom he represented inherit the guilt of his sin by imputation. Redemption by Jesus Christ is the only remedy. Calvin defined original sin in his \"Institutes of the Christian Religion\" as follows.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Original sin, then, may be defined a hereditary corruption and depravity of our nature, extending to all the parts of the soul, which first makes us obnoxious to the wrath of God, and then produces in us works which in Scripture are termed works of the flesh. This corruption is repeatedly designated by Paul by the term sin (Gal. 5:19); while the works which proceed from it, such as adultery, fornication, theft, hatred, murder, revellings, he terms, in the same way, the fruits of sin, though in various passages of Scripture, and even by Paul himself, they are also termed sins.\nCouncil of Trent.\nThe defining doctrinal statement of the Counter-Reformation, the Council of Trent (1545\u20131563), while not pronouncing on points disputed among Catholic theologians, opposes Protestantism in stating that \"whereas all men had lost their innocence in the prevarication of Adam [...] although free will, attenuated as it was in its powers, and bent down, was by no means extinguished in them.\" The Council also condemned the teaching that in baptism the whole of what belongs to the essence of sin is not taken away, but is only cancelled or not imputed, and declared the concupiscence that remains after baptism not truly and properly \"sin\" in the baptized, but only to be called sin in the sense that it is of sin and inclines to sin.\nIn 1567, soon after the close of the Council of Trent, Pope Pius V went beyond Trent by sanctioning Aquinas' distinction between nature and supernature in Adam's state before the Fall, condemned the equating of original sin with concupiscence, and approved the view that the unbaptized could have right use of will. The \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" states, \"Whilst original sin is effaced by baptism concupiscence still remains in the person baptized; therefore original sin and concupiscence cannot be one and the same thing, as was held by the early Protestants (see Council of Trent, Sess. V, can. v).\"\nModern theologians.\nS\u00f8ren Kierkegaard, Paul Tillich and Reinhold Niebuhr thought that the doctrine of original sin is not necessarily linked to some act of disobedience by the first human beings; rather, the Fall describes every human person's existential situation. Karl Barth rejected the concepts of original guilt and original corruption for being, as he thought, deterministic and undermining human responsibility; instead, he advanced, as noted by Loke, \"an alternative conception of Original Sin (\"Urs\u00fcnde\") which rests upon the idea that God sees, addresses, and treats humanity as a unity on account of the disobedience that is universal.\" For Barth, Adam did not pass on sin as corruption. In response to Augustine's problem of the inexplicability of original sin, Loke responds that God is not the first cause of evil, rather created libertarian agents who freely choose evil are the first causes of evil.\nDenominational views.\nRoman Catholicism.\nIn the theology of the Roman Catholic Church, original sin is the absence of original holiness and justice into which humans are born, distinct from the actual sins that a person commits. The absence of sanctifying grace or holiness in the new-born child is an effect of the first sin, for Adam, having received holiness and justice from God, lost it not only for himself but also for humanity. The \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" sets forth the Catholic doctrine of original sin in brief.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By his sin Adam, as the first man, lost the original holiness he had received from God, not only for himself but for all humans.\nAdam and Eve transmitted to their descendants human nature wounded by their own first sin and hence deprived of original holiness and justice; this deprivation is called \"original sin\".\nAs a result of original sin, human nature is weakened in its powers, subject to ignorance, suffering and the domination of death, and inclined to sin (this inclination is called \"concupiscence\").\nAnselm of Canterbury wrote that \"there is a difference between the sin of Adam on the one hand, and the sins of children on the other: one is the cause and one is the effect.\" Following this, Catholic doctrine sees the original sin of a child as distinct from the fault of Adam, but rather as one of its effects. The effects of Adam's sin according to the Catholic Encyclopedia are the following.\nThe Catholic Church teaches that every human person born on earth is made in the image of God. Within man \"is both the powerful surge toward the good because we are made in the image of God, and the darker impulses toward evil because of the effects of Original Sin\". Furthermore, it explicitly denies that guilt is inherited from anyone, maintaining that instead humanity inherits its own fallen nature. In this it differs from the Reformed position that each person actually inherits Adam's guilt, and teaches instead that \"original sin does not have the character of a personal fault in any of Adam's descendants [...] but the consequences for nature, weakened and inclined to evil, persist in man\". This view, that human beings do not bear guilt for the sin of Adam, is also held in Eastern Orthodoxy. The Catholic Church teaches, \"By our first parents' sin, the devil has acquired a certain domination over man, even though man remains free.\"\nThe Catholic Church has always held baptism to be for the remission of sins including the original sin, and, as mentioned in \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\", infants too have traditionally been baptized, though not held guilty of any actual personal sin. The sin that through baptism is remitted for them could only be original sin. Baptism confers original sanctifying grace that erases original sin and any actual personal sin. The first comprehensive theological explanation of this practice of baptizing infants, guilty of no actual personal sin, was given by Augustine of Hippo, not all of whose ideas on original sin have been adopted by the Catholic Church\u2014the church has condemned the Protestant interpretation of Augustine characteristic of Luther and Calvin which involves total depravity, or a complete loss of freedom to will rightly.\nThe \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" explains that \"by yielding to the tempter, Adam and Eve committed a personal sin, but this sin affected the human nature that they would then transmit in a fallen state. [... Original] sin is called \"sin\" only in an analogical sense: it is a sin \"contracted\" and not \"committed\" - a state and not an act.\" This \"state of deprivation of the original holiness and justice[...] transmitted to the descendants of Adam along with human nature\" involves no personal responsibility or personal guilt on their part (as stated in para. 405 of the \"Catechism\"). Personal responsibility and guilt were Adam's, who because of his sin, was unable to pass on to his descendants a human nature with the holiness with which it would otherwise have been endowed, in this way implicating them in his sin. The doctrine of original sin thus does not impute the sin of the father to his children, but merely states that they inherit from him a \"human nature deprived of original holiness and justice\", which is \"transmitted by propagation to all mankind\".\nIn Catholic theology, the meaning of the word \"concupiscence\" is the movement of the sensitive appetite contrary to the operation of the human reason. The apostle St Paul identifies it with the rebellion of the \"flesh\" against the \"spirit\". \"Concupiscence stems from the disobedience of the first sin. It unsettles man's moral faculties and, without being in itself an offence, inclines man to commit sins.\"\nSalvation of infants.\nAugustine believed that unbaptized infants go to hell as a consequence of original sin. The Latin Church Fathers who followed Augustine adopted his position, which became a point of reference for Latin theologians in the Middle Ages. In the later medieval period, some theologians continued to hold Augustine's view. Others held that unbaptized infants suffered no pain at all: unaware of being deprived of the beatific vision, they enjoyed a state of natural, not supernatural happiness. Starting around 1300, unbaptized infants were often said to inhabit the \"limbo of infants\". The \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\", declares: \"As regards children who have died without Baptism, the Church can only entrust them to the mercy of God, as she does in her funeral rites for them. Indeed, the great mercy of God who desires that all men should be saved, and Jesus' tenderness toward children which caused him to say: \"Let the children come to me, do not hinder them,\" allow us to hope that there is a way of salvation for children who have died without Baptism. All the more urgent is the Church's call not to prevent little children coming to Christ through the gift of holy Baptism.\" But the theory of Limbo, while it \"never entered into the dogmatic definitions of the Magisterium[...] remains[...] a possible theological hypothesis\".\nPost-conciliar developments.\nSoon after the Second Vatican Council, biblical theologian Herbert Haag raised the question; \"Is original sin in Scripture?\" According to his exegesis, would indicate that Adam and Eve were created from the beginning naked of the divine grace, an originary grace that, then, they would never have had, and much less would have lost due to the subsequent events narrated. On the other hand, while supporting a continuity in the Bible about the absence of preternatural gifts (), with regard to the ophitic event, Haag never makes any reference to the discontinuity of the loss of access to the tree of life. states that, if one ate the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, one would surely die, and the adverb indicates that, by avoiding this type of choice, one would have the possibility but not the certainty of accessing to the other tree. Therefore, in 1970 Latin American biblical scholar Carlos Mesters wondered if \"Eden [is] golden age or goad to action\", protology or eschatology, nostalgia for an idealized past or hope for something that has yet to happen as it is claimed by and .\nSome warn against taking Genesis 3 too literally. They take into account that \"God had the church in mind before the foundation of the world\" (as in as also in , \"...his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus \"before\" the world began.\" In his 1986 book \"'In the Beginning...'\", Pope Benedict XVI referred to the term \"original sin\" as \"misleading and unprecise\". Benedict does not require a literal interpretation of Genesis, or of the origin of evil, but writes, \"How was it possible, how did it happen? This remains obscure. Evil is not logical. Only God and good are logical, are light. Evil remains mysterious. It is presented as such in great images, as it is in chapter 3 of Genesis, with that scene of the two trees, of the serpent, of sinful man: a great image that makes us guess but cannot explain what is itself illogical.\"\nProtestantism.\nLutheranism.\nArticle 1 of the Formula of Concord, an authoritative statement of Lutheran doctrine, teaches that original sin \"is a root and fountain-head of all actual sins.\"\nReformed.\nThere are two elements of original sin in Reformed theology: \"original guilt\" and \"original pollution\". The term \"guilt\" refers to a \"relation to the penal sanction of the law\", or the obligation to satisfy God's justice due to a willful violation of his law. In covenant theology, Adam is regarded as the \"federal head\" of the human race, and so by his sin and Fall, the guilt of his sin is imputed to all his descendents, as Louis Berkhof states, drawing from , \"God adjudges all men to be guilty sinners in Adam, just as He adjudges all believers to be righteous in Jesus Christ. This is what Paul means, when he says: 'So then as through one trespass the judgment came unto all men to condemnation; even so through one act of righteousness the free gift came unto all men to justification of life. For as through the one man's disobedience the many were made sinners, even so through the obedience of the one shall the many be made righteous,' Rom. 5:18, 19.\" The Fall also resulted in an \"original pollution\", which involves the absence of original righteousness and the presence of an active disposition towards sin. The pervasive nature of this pollution in the human race is emphasized with the term \"total depravity\", that is, the notion that the corruption of original sin extends to every part of man's nature, and that there is nothing in man which can vindicate him before God. The effect of total depravity is \"total inability\", which means that, although fallen man may perform natural, civil and externally religious goods or virtues, yet he cannot do any act which pleases God and he cannot even begin to love God rather than himself.\nThe Reformed conception of free will is that fallen man does indeed retain the faculties of the soul such as reason, conscience and freedom of choice, yet, he has by nature an irresistible desire to commit sin, and cannot will the highest good, which was part of his original moral constitution. In his fallen state, man commits many actual sins () which \"does not merely denote those external actions which are accomplished by means of the body, but all those conscious thoughts and volitions which spring from original sin.\" This reflects the Reformed conflation of concupiscence with sin proper.\nMethodism.\nThe Methodist Church upholds Article VII in the Articles of Religion in the \"Book of Discipline of the United Methodist Church\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Original sin standeth not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly talk), but it is the corruption of the nature of every man, that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from original righteousness, and of his own nature inclined to evil, and that continually.\nMethodist theology teaches that a believer is made free from original sin when they are entirely sanctified.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We believe that entire sanctification is that act of God, subsequent to regeneration, by which believers are made free from original sin, or depravity, and brought into a state of entire devotement to God, and the holy obedience of love made perfect. It is wrought by the baptism with or infilling of the Holy Spirit, and comprehends in one experience the cleansing of the heart from sin and the abiding, indwelling presence of the Holy Spirit, empowering the believer for life and service. Entire sanctification is provided by the blood of Jesus, is wrought instantaneously by grace through faith, preceded by entire consecration; and to this work and state of grace the Holy Spirit bears witness.\nQuakers.\nMost Quakers (also known as the \"Religious Society of Friends\"), including the founder of Quakerism, George Fox, believe in the doctrine of inward light, a doctrine that states that there is \"that of God in everyone\". This has led to a common belief among many liberal and universalist Quakers affiliated with the Friends General Conference and Britain Yearly Meeting, based on the ideas of Quaker Rufus Jones among others, that rather than being burdened by original sin, human beings are inherently good, and the doctrine of universal reconciliation, that is, that all people will eventually be saved and reconciled with God.\nHowever, this rejection of the doctrine of original sin or the necessity of salvation is not something that most conservative or evangelical Quakers affiliated with Friends United Meeting or Evangelical Friends Church International tend to agree with. Although the more conservative and evangelical Quakers also believe in the doctrine of inward light, they interpret it in a manner consistent with the doctrine of original sin, namely, that people may or may not listen to the voice of God within them and be saved, and people who do not listen will not be saved.\nSeventh-day Adventism.\nSeventh-day Adventists believe that humans are inherently sinful due to the fall of Adam, but they do not totally accept the Augustinian/Reformed understanding of original sin, taught in terms of original guilt, but hold more to what could be termed the \"total depravity\" tradition. Seventh-day Adventists have historically preached a doctrine of inherited weakness, but not a doctrine of inherited guilt. According to Augustine and Calvin, humanity inherits not only Adam's depraved nature but also the actual guilt of his transgression, while Adventists look more toward the Wesleyan model. In part, the Adventist position on original sin reads thus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The nature of the penalty for original sin, i.e., Adam's sin, is to be seen as literal, physical, temporal, or actual death \u2013 the opposite of life, i.e., the cessation of being. By no stretch of the scriptural facts can death be spiritualised as depravity. God did not punish Adam by making him a sinner. That was Adam's own doing. All die the first death because of Adam's sin regardless of their moral character \u2013 children included.\nEarly Adventist pioneers (such as George Storrs and Uriah Smith) tended to de-emphasise the morally corrupt nature inherited from Adam, while stressing the importance of actual, personal sins committed by the individual. They thought of the \"sinful nature\" in terms of physical mortality rather than moral depravity. Traditionally, Adventists look at sin in terms of willful transgressions, and believe that Christ triumphed over sin. Though believing in the concept of inherited sin from Adam, there is no dogmatic Adventist position on original sin.\nAnglicanism.\nThe original formularies of the Church of England also continue in the Western and Reformation understanding of original sin, which is evident in Article 9 (\"Of Original or Birth-sin\") of the Thirty-nine Articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Original Sin standeth not in the following of \"Adam,\" (as the \"Pelagians\" do vainly talk;) but it is the fault and corruption of the Nature of every man, that naturally is engendered of the offspring of \"Adam;\" whereby man is very far gone from original righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil, so that the flesh lusteth always contrary to the spirit; and therefore in every person born into this world, it deserveth God's wrath and damnation. And this infection of nature doth remain, yea in them that are regenerated; whereby the lust of the flesh, called in the Greek, \"phronema sarkos\", (which some do expound the wisdom, some sensuality, some the affection, some the desire, of the flesh,) is not subject to the Law of God. And although there is no condemnation for them that believe and are baptized, yet the Apostle doth confess, that concupiscence and lust hath of itself the nature of sin.\nHowever, more recent doctrinal statements permit a greater variety of understandings of this doctrine, such as the 1938 report \"Doctrine in the Church of England\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Man is by nature capable of communion with God, and only through such communion can he become what he was created to be. \"Original sin\" stands for the fact that from a time apparently prior to any responsible act of choice man is lacking in this communion, and if left to his own resources and to the influence of his natural environment cannot attain to his destiny as a child of God.\nEastern Christianity.\nThe Eastern Orthodox and Byzantine Rite Eastern Catholic Churches' version of original sin is the view that sin originates with the Devil, \"for the devil sins from the beginning (1 John iii. 8)\". The Eastern Church never subscribed to Augustine of Hippo's notions of original sin and hereditary guilt. The church does not interpret \"original sin\" as having anything to do with transmitted guilt but with transmitted mortality. Because Adam sinned, all humanity shares not in his guilt but in the same punishment.\nThe Eastern Churches accept the teachings of Church Father John Cassian, as does the Catholic Church, in rejecting the doctrine of total depravity, by teaching that human nature is \"fallen\", that is, depraved, but not totally. Augustine Casiday states that Cassian \"baldly asserts that God's grace, not human free will, is responsible for 'everything [that] pertains to salvation' \u2013 even faith\". Cassian points out that people still have moral freedom and one has the option to choose to follow God. Colm Luibh\u00e9id says that according to Cassian, there are cases where the soul makes the first little turn, while Augustine Casiday says that, in Cassian's view, any sparks of goodwill that may exist, not directly caused by God, are totally inadequate and only direct divine intervention ensures spiritual progress. Lauren Pristas says that \"for Cassian, salvation is, from beginning to end, the effect of God's grace\".\nEastern Christianity accepts the doctrine of ancestral sin: \"Original sin is hereditary. It did not remain only Adam and Eve's. As life passes from them to all of their descendants, so does original sin.\" \"As from an infected source there naturally flows an infected stream, so from a father infected with sin, and consequently mortal, there naturally proceeds a posterity infected like him with sin, and like him mortal.\"\nThe Orthodox Church in America makes clear the distinction between \"fallen nature\" and \"fallen man\" and this is affirmed in the early teaching of the church whose role it is to act as the catalyst that leads to true or inner redemption. Every human person born on this earth bears the image of God undistorted within themselves. In the Eastern Christian understanding, it is explicitly denied that humanity inherited guilt or a fallen nature from anyone; rather, humanity inherits sin's consequences and a fallen environment: \"while humanity does bear the consequences of the original, or first, sin, humanity does not bear the personal guilt associated with this sin. Adam and Eve are guilty of their willful action; we bear the consequences, chief of which is death.\"\nRestorationist denominations.\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nAccording to the theology of Jehovah's Witnesses, all humans are born sinners, because of inheriting sin, corruption, and death from Adam. They teach that Adam was originally created perfect and sinless, but with free will; that the Devil, who was originally a perfect angel, but later developed feelings of pride and self-importance, seduced Eve and then, through her, persuaded Adam to disobey God, and to obey the Devil instead, rebelling against God's sovereignty, thereby making themselves sinners, and because of that, transmitting a sinful nature to all of their future offspring. Instead of destroying the Devil right away, as well as destroying the disobedient couple, God decided to test the loyalty of the rest of humankind, and to prove that they cannot be independent of God successfully, but are lost without God's laws and standards, and can never bring peace to the earth, and that Satan was a deceiver, murderer, and liar.\nJehovah's Witnesses believe that all humans possess \"inherited sin\" from the \"one man\" Adam, and teach that verses such as Romans 5:12\u201322, Psalm 51:5, Job 14:4, and 1 Corinthians 15:22 show that humanity is born corrupt and dies because of inherited sin and imperfection, and that inherited sin is the reason and cause for sickness and suffering, made worse by the Devil's wicked influence. They believe Jesus is the \"second Adam\", being the sinless Son of God and the Messiah, and that he came to undo Adamic sin; and that salvation and everlasting life can only be obtained through faith and obedience to the second Adam. They believe that \"sin\" is \"missing the mark\" of God's standard of perfection, and that everyone is born a sinner, due to being the offspring of sinner Adam.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) rejects the doctrine of original sin. The church's second Articles of Faith reads, \"We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression.\" The church's founder Joseph Smith taught that humans had an essentially godlike nature, and were not only holy in a premortal state, but had the potential to progress eternally to become like God. Latter-day Saints take this creed-like statement as a rejection of the doctrine of original sin and any notion of inherited sinfulness. Thus, while modern members of the LDS Church will agree that the fall of Adam brought consequences to the world, including the possibility of sin, they generally reject the idea that any culpability is automatically transmitted to Adam and Eve's offspring. Children under the age of eight are regarded as free of all sin and therefore do not require baptism. https:// states that children who die prior to age eight are believed to be saved in the highest degree of heaven. The LDS Church's Book of Moses states that the Lord told Adam that \"thy children are conceived in sin\" (https://). Apostle Bruce R. McConkie stated that this means that the children were \"born into a world of sin\".\nSwedenborgianism.\nIn Swedenborgianism, exegesis of the first 11 chapters of Genesis from \"The First Church\" involves the view that Adam is not an individual person. Rather, he is a symbolic representation of the \"Most Ancient Church\", having a more direct contact with heaven than all other successive churches. Swedenborg's view of original sin is referred to as \"hereditary evil\", which passes from generation to generation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But as to hereditary evil, the case is this. Everyone who commits actual sin thereby induces on himself a nature, and the evil from it is implanted in his children, and becomes hereditary. It thus descends from every parent, from the father, grandfather, great-grandfather, and their ancestors in succession, and is thus multiplied and augmented in each descending posterity, remaining with each person, and being increased in each by his actual sins, and never being dissipated so as to become harmless except in those who are being regenerated by the Lord. Every attentive observer may see evidence of this truth in the fact that the evil inclinations of parents remain visibly in their children, so that one family, and even an entire race, may be thereby distinguished from every other.\nIt cannot be completely abolished by an individual man, but can be tempered when someone reforms their own life, and are thus held accountable only for their own sins.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are evils in man [that] must be dispersed while he is being regenerated, that is, which must be loosened and attempered by goods; for no actual and hereditary evil in man can be so dispersed as to be abolished. It still remains implanted; and can only be so far loosened and attempered by goods from the Lord that it does not injure, and does not appear, which is an arcanum hitherto unknown. Actual evils are those that are loosened and attempered, and not hereditary evils; which also is a thing unknown. [...] It is to be observed that in the other life no one undergoes any punishment and torture on account of his hereditary evil, but only on account of the actual evils [that] he himself has committed.\nImmaculate Conception of Mary.\nAlthough primarily associated with Catholicism, the Immaculate Conception (the doctrine that Mary was conceived without original sin) is confessed in some form in several major Christian denominations.\nCatholicism.\nThe Catholic doctrine of the Immaculate Conception of Mary is that Mary was conceived free from original sin: \"the most Blessed Virgin Mary was, from the first moment of her conception, by a singular grace and privilege of almighty God and by virtue of the merits of Jesus Christ, Savior of the human race, preserved immune from all stain of original sin\". The doctrine sees her as an exception to the general rule that human beings are not immune from the reality of original sin. As Mary was conceived without original sin, this statement opens to the fourth Marian dogma of the Assumption of Mary to Heaven in body and soul, according to the unchangeable dogmatic definition publicly proclaimed by Pope Pius XII. The Assumption to Heaven, with no corruption of the body, was made possible by Mary's being born without the original sin, while, according to Aquinas, other persons need to wait for the final resurrection of the flesh in order to get the sanctification of the whole human being.\nEastern Orthodoxy.\nThe view of Eastern Christianity varies on whether Mary is free of all actual sin or concupiscence. Some Patristic sources imply that she was cleansed from sin at the Annunciation, while the liturgical references are unanimous that she is all-holy from the time of her conception.\nLutheranism.\nMartin Luther agreed with the Catholic doctrine of the Immaculate Conception, as is evident in the following quote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Mary] is full of grace, proclaimed to be entirely without sin. God's grace fills her with everything good and makes her devoid of all evil. God is with her, meaning that all she did or left undone is divine and the action of God in her. Moreover, God guarded and protected her from all that might be hurtful to her.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nCatholic Church"}
{"id": "22736", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22736", "title": "Origin of Species", "text": ""}
{"id": "22738", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22738", "title": "Operation Enduring Freedom", "text": " \nOfficial name for the US's war on terror\nOperation Enduring Freedom (OEF) was the official name used by the U.S. government for both the first stage (2001\u20132014) of the war in Afghanistan (2001\u20132021) and related military operations during broader-scale global war on terrorism. On 7 October 2001, in response to the September 11 attacks, President George W. Bush announced that airstrikes against al-Qaeda and the Taliban had begun in Afghanistan. Beyond the military actions in Afghanistan, U.S military command structures operating under the Operation Enduring Freedom banner were also affiliated with several counterterrorism missions in other countries, such as OEF-Philippines and OEF-Trans Sahara.\nAfter 13 years, on 28 December 2014, President Barack Obama announced the end of Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. Subsequent operations in Afghanistan by the United States' military forces, both non-combat and combat, occurred under the name Operation Freedom's Sentinel.\nSubordinate operations.\nOperation Enduring Freedom referred to the U.S.-led combat mission in Afghanistan. The codename was also used for counter-terrorism operations in other countries targeting Al Qaeda and remnants of the Taliban, such as OEF-Philippines, OEF-Trans Sahara, and possibly in Georgia's Pankisi Gorge, primarily through government funding vehicles.\nEtymology.\nThe U.S. government used the term \"Operation Enduring Freedom\" to officially describe the War in Afghanistan, from the period between 7 October 2001 and 31 December 2014. Subsequent operations in Afghanistan by the United States' military forces, both non-combat and combat, occurred under the name Operation Freedom's Sentinel.\nThe operation was originally called \"Operation Infinite Justice\", but as similar phrases have been used by adherents of several religions as an exclusive description of God, it is believed to have been changed to avoid offense to Muslims who are the majority religion in Afghanistan. In September 2001, U.S. President George W. Bush's remark that \"this crusade, this war on terrorism, is going to take a while,\" which prompted widespread criticism from the Islamic world, may also have contributed to the renaming of the operation.\nThe term \"OEF\" typically refers to the phase of the War in Afghanistan from 2001 to 2014. Other operations, such as the Georgia Train and Equip Program, are only loosely or nominally connected, such as through government funding vehicles. All the operations, however, have a focus on counterterrorism activities.\nOperation Enduring Freedom, which was a joint U.S., U.K., and Afghan operation, was separate from the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), which was an operation of North Atlantic Treaty Organization nations including the U.S. and the U.K. The two operations ran in parallel, although it had been suggested that they merge.\nOverview.\nOn September 11th, 2001, Al Qaeda carried out terrorist attacks in New York City and Washington D.C. Shortly after President George W. Bush declared a war on terror. In response to the September 11 attacks, the early combat operations that took place on 7 October 2001 to include a mix of strikes from land-based B-1 Lancer, B-2 Spirit and B-52 Stratofortress bombers, carrier-based F-14 Tomcat and F/A-18 Hornet fighters, and Tomahawk cruise missiles launched from both U.S. and British ships and submarines signaled the start of Operation Enduring Freedom.\nThe initial military objectives of OEF, as articulated by President George W. Bush in his 20 September address to a Joint Session of Congress and his 7 October address to the country, included the destruction of terrorist training camps and infrastructure within Afghanistan, the capture of al-Qaeda leaders, and the cessation of terrorist activities in Afghanistan.\nIn January 2002, over 1,200 soldiers from the United States Special Operations Command Pacific (SOCPAC) deployed to the Philippines to support the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) in their push to uproot terrorist forces on the island of Basilan. Of those groups included are Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG), al-Qaeda and Jemaah Islamiyah. The operation consisted of training the AFP in counter-terrorist operations as well as supporting the local people with humanitarian aid in Operation Smiles.\nIn October 2002, the Combined Task Force 150 and United States military Special Forces established themselves in Djibouti at Camp Lemonnier. The stated goals of the operation were to provide humanitarian aid and patrol the Horn of Africa to reduce the abilities of terrorist organizations in the region. Similar to OEF-P, the goal of humanitarian aid was emphasized, ostensibly to prevent militant organizations from being able to take hold amongst the population as well as reemerge after being removed.\nThe military aspect involves coalition forces searching and boarding ships entering the region for illegal cargo as well as providing training and equipment to the armed forces in the region. The humanitarian aspect involves building schools, clinics and water wells to enforce the confidence of the local people.\nSince 2001, the cumulative expenditure by the U.S. government on Operation Enduring Freedom has exceeded $150\u00a0billion.\nOperation Enduring Freedom (OEF) in Afghanistan.\nTaliban.\nSeizing upon a power vacuum after the Soviets withdrew from Afghanistan after their invasion, the Taliban governed Afghanistan from 1996 to 2001. Their extreme interpretation of Islamic law prompted them to ban music, television, sports, and dancing, and enforce harsh judicial penalties (See Human rights in Afghanistan). Amputation was an accepted form of punishment for stealing, and public executions could often be seen at the Kabul football stadium. Women's rights groups around the world were frequently critical as the Taliban banned women from appearing in public or holding many jobs outside the home. They drew further criticism when they destroyed the Buddhas of Bamyan, historical statues nearly 1,500 years old, because the Buddhas were considered idols.\nIn 1996, Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden moved to Afghanistan. When the Taliban came to power, bin Laden was able to forge an alliance between the Taliban and his al-Qaeda organization. It is understood that al-Qaeda-trained fighters known as the 055 Brigade were integrated with the Taliban army between 1997 and 2001. It has been suggested that the Taliban and bin Laden had very close connections.\nU.S.-led coalition action.\nOn 20 September 2001, the U.S. stated that Osama bin Laden was behind the 11 September attacks in 2001. The U.S. made a five-point ultimatum to the Taliban:\n* Deliver to the U.S. all of the leaders of al-Qaeda\n* Release all imprisoned foreign nationals\n* Close immediately every terrorist training camp\n* Hand over every terrorist and their supporters to appropriate authorities\n* Give the United States full access to terrorist training camps for inspection\nOn 21 September 2001, the Taliban rejected this ultimatum, stating there was no evidence in their possession linking bin Laden to the 11 September attacks.\nOn 22 September 2001, the United Arab Emirates and later Saudi Arabia withdrew their recognition of the Taliban as the legal government of Afghanistan, leaving neighboring Pakistan as the only remaining country with diplomatic ties.\nOn 4 October 2001, it was reported that the Taliban covertly offered to turn bin Laden over to Pakistan for trial in an international tribunal that operated according to Islamic shar'ia law. On 7 October 2001, the Taliban proposed to try bin Laden in Afghanistan in an Islamic court. This proposition was immediately rejected by the US.\nOn 14 October 2001, the Taliban proposed to hand bin Laden over to a third country for trial, but only if they were given evidence of bin Laden's involvement in the events of 11 September 2001.\nThe UN Security Council, on 16 January 2002, unanimously established an arms embargo and the freezing of identifiable assets belonging to bin Laden, al-Qaeda, and the remaining Taliban.\nCombat operations start.\nOn Sunday 7 October 2001, American and British warplanes began fighting Taliban forces and al-Qaeda. Cruise missiles were fired from warships.\nThe Northern Alliance, aided by Joint Special Operations teams consisting of Green Berets from the 5th Special Forces Group, aircrew members from the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (SOAR), and Air Force Combat Controllers, fought against the Taliban. Aided by U.S. bombing and massive defections, they captured Mazar-i-Sharif on 9 November. They then rapidly gained control of most of northern Afghanistan, and took control of Kabul on 13 November after the Taliban unexpectedly fled the city. The Taliban were restricted to a smaller and smaller region, with Kunduz, the last Taliban-held city in the north, captured on 26 November. Most of the Taliban fled to Pakistan.\nThe war continued in the south of the country, where the Taliban retreated to Kandahar. Whilst in Kandahar the Taliban agreed to surrender but the deal was rejected by Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld as it would have provided amnesty to Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar. After Kandahar fell in December, remnants of the Taliban and al-Qaeda continued to mount resistance. Meanwhile, in November 2001 the U.S. military and its allied forces established their first ground base in Afghanistan to the south west of Kandahar, known as FOB Rhino.\nThe Battle of Tora Bora, involving U.S., German, British and Northern Alliance forces took place in December 2001 to further destroy the Taliban and suspected al-Qaeda in Afghanistan. In early March 2002 the United States military, along with allied Afghan military forces, conducted a large operation to destroy al-Qaeda in an operation code-named Operation Anaconda.\nThe operation was carried out by elements of the United States 10th Mountain Division, 101st Airborne Division, the U.S. special forces groups TF 11, TF Bowie, TF Dagger, TF K-Bar, British Royal Marines, the Norwegian \"Forsvarets Spesialkommando\", \"H\u00e6rens Jegerkommando\" and \"Marinejegerkommandoen\", Canada's 3rd Battalion Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry, Canada's Joint Task Force 2, the German KSK, and elements of the Australian Special Air Service Regiment and of the New Zealand Special Air Service and the Afghan National Army.\nAfter managing to evade U.S. forces throughout the summer of 2002, the remnants of the Taliban gradually began to regain their confidence. A U.S. and Canadian led operation (supported by British and Dutch forces), Operation Mountain Thrust was launched in May 2006 to counter renewed Taliban insurgency.\nSince January 2006, the NATO International Security Assistance Force undertook combat duties from Operation Enduring Freedom in southern Afghanistan, the NATO force chiefly made up of British, Canadian and Dutch forces (and some smaller contributions from Denmark, Romania and Estonia and air support from Norway as well as air and artillery support from the U.S.) (\"see the article Coalition combat operations in Afghanistan in 2006\"). The United States military also conducts military operations separate from NATO as part of Operation Enduring Freedom in other parts of Afghanistan, in areas such as Kandahar, Bagram, and Kabul (including Camp Eggers and Camp Phoenix.)\nInternational support.\nThe United States was supported by during Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) in Afghanistan in 2001\u20132003 and in subsequent coalition operations directly or indirectly in support of OEF. See the article Afghanistan War order of battle for the disposition of coalition forces in Afghanistan as of 2012.\nResult.\nThe U.S.-led coalition initially removed the Taliban from power and seriously crippled al-Qaeda and associated militants in Afghanistan. However, success in quelling the Taliban insurgency since the 2001 invasion has faltered. As the war dragged on, the Taliban demonstrated they could not be defeated also thanks to sanctuary in neighboring Pakistan.\nOn 9 October 2004, Afghanistan elected Hamid Karzai president in its first direct elections. The following year, Afghans conducted the 2005 Afghan parliamentary election on 18 September. Since the invasion, hundreds of schools and mosques have been constructed, millions of dollars in aid have been distributed, and the occurrence of violence has been reduced.\nWhile military forces interdicted insurgents and assured some form of security, Provincial reconstruction teams were tasked with infrastructure building, such as constructing roads and bridges, assisting during floods, and providing food and water to refugees. Many warlords have participated in an allegiance program, formally recognizing the legitimacy of the government of Afghanistan, and formally surrendering their soldiers and weapons. Subsequent actions have led to questions about their true loyalties.\nThe Afghan National Army, Afghan National Police, and Afghan Border Police were being trained to assume the task of securing their nation.\nOn 31 December 2014, Operation Enduring Freedom concluded, and was succeeded by Operation Freedom's Sentinel on 1 January 2015.\nIn 2020, the US left Afghanistan to the Taliban under an agreement ensuring a safe passage for American forces out of the country by mid 2021.\nOn 15 August 2021, all of Afghanistan, besides Kabul, was back in the hands of Taliban. By August 31, all US and allied forces departed the Hamid Karzai International Airport, thus ending any official operations within Afghanistan.\nCriticism.\nHardliner newspapers in Iran and religious scholars in Lebanon suggested \"Infinite Imperialism\", \"Infinite Arrogance\", or \"Infinite Injustice\" might have been more appropriate name for the operation.\nAFP, reporting on a news story in the Sunday, 3 April 2004, issue of \"The New Yorker\", wrote that retired Army Colonel Hy Rothstein, \"who served in the Army Special Forces for more than 20 years [and was] commissioned by the Pentagon to examine the war in Afghanistan, concluded the conflict created conditions that have given 'warlordism, banditry and opium production a new lease on life.' \"\nThe conduct of U.S. forces was criticised in a report entitled \"Enduring Freedom \u2013 Abuses by U.S. Forces in Afghanistan\" by U.S.-based human rights group Human Rights Watch in 2004. Some Pakistani scholars, such as Masood Ashraf Raja, editor of , have also provided a more specific form of criticism that relates to the consequences of the Global War on Terrorism on the region.\nOperation Enduring Freedom \u2013 Philippines (OEF-P).\nAbu Sayyaf Group.\nThe Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) Al Harakat Al Islamiyya, is deemed a \"foreign terrorist organization\" by the United States government. Specifically, it is an Islamist separatist group based in and around the southern islands of the Republic of the Philippines, primarily Jolo, Basilan, and Mindanao.\nSince inception in the early 1990s, the group has carried out bombings, assassinations, kidnappings, and extortion in their fight for an independent Islamic state in western Mindanao and the Sulu Archipelago. Its claimed overarching goal is to create a Pan-Islamic superstate across the \"Malay\" portions of Southeast Asia, spanning, from east to west, the large island of Mindanao, the Sulu Archipelago (Basilan and Jolo islands), the large island of Borneo (Malaysia and Indonesia), the South China Sea, and the Malay Peninsula (Peninsular Malaysia, Thailand and Myanmar).\nJemaah Islamiyah.\nJemaah Islamiyah is a militant Islamic terrorist organization dedicated to the establishment of a fundamentalist Islamic theocracy in Southeast Asia, in particular Indonesia, Singapore, Brunei, Malaysia, the south of Thailand and the Philippines. Jemaah Islamiyah originally used peaceful means to achieve its goals, but later resorted to terrorism because of its connections with al-Qaeda.\nFinancial links between Jemaah Islamiyah and other terrorist groups, such as Abu Sayyaf and al-Qaeda, have been found to exist. Jemaah Islamiyah means \"Islamic Group\" or \"Islamic Community\" and is often abbreviated JI.\nJemaah Islamiyah is thought to have killed hundreds of civilians. Also, it is suspected of carrying out the Bali car bombing on 12 October 2002, in which suicide bombers attacked a nightclub killing 202 people and wounding many more. Most of the casualties were Australian tourists. After this attack, the U.S. State Department designated Jemaah Islamiyah as a Foreign Terrorist Organization. Jemaah Islamiyah is also suspected of carrying out the Zamboanga bombings, the Metro Manila bombings, the 2004 Australian embassy bombing and the 2005 Bali terrorist bombing.\nU.S. actions.\nIn January 2002, 1,200 Members of United States Special Operations Command, Pacific (SOCPAC) were deployed to the Philippines to assist the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) in uprooting al-Qaeda, Jemaah Islamiyah and Abu Sayyaf. The members of SOCPAC were assigned to assist in military operations against the terrorist forces as well as humanitarian operations for the island of Basilan, where most of the conflict was expected to take place.\nThe United States Special Forces (SF) Unit trained and equipped special forces and scout rangers of the AFP, creating the Light Reaction Company (LRC). The LRC and elements of SOCPAC deployed to Basilan on completion of their training. The stated goals of the deployment were denying the ASG sanctuary, surveiling, controlling, and denying ASG routes, surveiling supporting villages and key personnel, conducting local training to overcome AFP weaknesses and sustain AFP strengths, supporting operations by the AFP \"strike force\" (LRC) in the area of responsibility (AOR), conducting and supporting civil affairs operations in the AOR.\nResult.\nThe desired result was for the AFP to gain sufficient capability to locate and destroy the ASG, to recover hostages and to enhance the legitimacy of the Philippine government. Much of the operation was a success: the ASG was driven from Basilan and one U.S. hostage was recovered. The Abu Sayyaf Group's ranks, which once counted more than 800 members, was reduced to less than 100. The humanitarian portion of the operation, Operation Smiles, created 14 schools, 7 clinics, 3 hospitals and provided medical care to over 18,000 residents of Basilan. Humanitarian groups were able to continue their work without fear of further kidnappings and terrorists attacks by the Abu Sayyaf Group.\nOperation Enduring Freedom \u2013 Horn of Africa (OEF-HOA).\nUnlike other operations contained in Operation Enduring Freedom, OEF-HOA does not have a specific terrorist organization as a target. OEF-HOA instead focuses its efforts to disrupt and detect terrorist activities in the region and to work with host nations to deny the reemergence of terrorist cells and activities. Operations began in mid-2002 at Camp Lemonnier by a Combined Joint Special Operations Task Force (CJSOTF) augmented by support forces from Fort Stewart, Fort Hood, and Fort Story. In October 2002, the Combined Joint Task Force, Horn of Africa (CJTF-HOA) was established at Djibouti at Camp Lemonnier, taking over responsibilities from the CJSOTF. CJTF-HOA comprised approximately 2,000 personnel including U.S. military and Special Operations Forces (SOF), and coalition force members, Combined Task Force 150 (CTF-150). The coalition force consists of ships from Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Netherlands, India, Italy, Pakistan, New Zealand, Spain, Turkey and the United Kingdom. The primary goal of the coalition forces is to monitor, inspect, board and stop suspected shipments from entering the Horn of Africa region. Since 2003, the U.S. Military also conducts operations targeting Al-Qaeda-linked fighters in Somalia, these operations had reportedly killed between 113 and 136 militants by early 2016. On 7 March 2016, a further 150 were killed in U.S. airstrikes on an al Shabaab training camp north of Mogadishu.\nCJTF-HOA has devoted the majority of its efforts to train selected armed forces units of the countries of Djibouti, Kenya and Ethiopia in counterterrorism and counterinsurgency tactics. Humanitarian efforts conducted by CJTF-HOA include the rebuilding of schools and medical clinics, as well as providing medical services to those countries whose forces are being trained. The program expands as part of the Trans-Saharan Counter Terrorism Initiative as CJTF personnel also assist in training the forces of Chad, Niger, Mauritania and Mali.\nU.S. action.\n\"Operation Enduring Freedom\"\nAnti-piracy operations were undertaken by the coalition throughout 2006 with a battle fought in March when US vessels were attacked by pirates. In January 2007, during the war in Somalia, an AC-130 airstrike was conducted against al-Qaeda members embedded with forces of the Islamic Courts Union (ICU) operating in southern Somalia near Ras Kamboni. US naval forces, including the aircraft carrier USS \"Dwight D. Eisenhower\", were positioned off the coast of Somalia to provide support and to prevent any al-Qaeda forces escaping by sea. Actions against pirates also occurred in June and October 2007 with varying amounts of success.\n\"Operation Resolute Support/Freedom's Sentinel\"\nEffective 1 January 2015, Secretary of Defense Hagel announced that the new U.S. mission in Afghanistan will focus on training, advising, and assisting Afghan security forces and designated as Operation Freedom's Sentinel.\n19 About 13,500 U.S. troops are expected in Afghanistan through\n2015 and will be assisted by troops from NATO allies.\nMilitary decorations.\nSince 2002, the United States military has created military awards and decorations related to Operation Enduring Freedom\nNATO also created a military decoration related to Operation Enduring Freedom:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22739", "revid": "50860042", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22739", "title": "Obfuscation (software)", "text": "Deliberate creation of difficult-to-understand code\nIn software development, obfuscation is the practice of creating source or machine code that is intentionally difficult for humans or computers to understand. Similar to obfuscation in natural language, code obfuscation may involve using unnecessarily roundabout ways to write statements. Programmers may obfuscate code to conceal its purpose, logic, or embedded values. The primary reasons for doing so are to prevent tampering, deter reverse engineering, or to create a puzzle or recreational challenge to deobfuscate the code, a challenge often included in crackmes. While obfuscation can be done manually, it is more commonly performed using obfuscators.\nOverview.\nThe architecture and characteristics of some languages may make them easier to obfuscate than others. C, C++, and the Perl programming language are some examples of languages easy to obfuscate. Haskell is also quite obfuscatable despite being quite different in structure.\nThe properties that make a language obfuscatable are not immediately obvious.\nTechniques.\nTypes of obfuscations include simple keyword substitution, use or non-use of whitespace to create artistic effects, and self-generating or heavily compressed programs.\nAccording to Nick Montfort, techniques may include:\nPayload encoding for malware evasion.\nXOR encryption and Base64 encoding are two common methods used to hide malware from antivirus detection. Both work by changing how malicious code appears in its file form, which prevents security software from recognizing dangerous patterns.\nIn XOR obfuscation, an attacker chooses a secret key and applies the XOR bitwise operation to the malware binary. This transforms the executable into what looks like random data. Function names in the import table vanish, PE headers become corrupted, and the entire file loses its structure. The obfuscated payload then gets embedded into a dropper, which is a normal-looking executable that contains the hidden malware as a resource or data section. When a user runs the dropper, it performs the XOR operation again with the same key to reconstruct the original malware, then either executes it directly from memory or writes it to disk before running it.\nThis process removes several indicators that antivirus software relies on. The MZ header, which marks the beginning of every Windows executable, gets completely obscured by the XOR operation. Security programs frequently scan for this two-byte signature when searching for embedded executables. Base64 encoding achieves similar results through a different method. It converts binary data into ASCII text, so an executable file ends up looking like plain text rather than a program.\nResearch from the 2020 Machine Learning Security Evasion Competition showed that these methods can bypass modern detection systems. Participants used combinations of XOR encoding, Base64 encoding, and dead code insertion to evade all three competition models with fewer than five attempts per sample. Entropy-based detection also failed, and in some cases Base64 encoding actually lowered the entropy compared to the original malware files.\nThe simplicity of these techniques is what makes them particularly dangerous. XOR and Base64 encoding require only basic programming skills to implement, yet they proved effective against advanced machine learning classifiers. This has pushed security researchers toward new defenses, including automated XOR key recovery tools and deeper analysis of embedded resources in executable files.\nAutomated tools.\nA variety of tools exist to perform or assist with code obfuscation. These include experimental research tools developed by academics, hobbyist tools, commercial products written by professionals, and open-source software. Additionally, deobfuscation tools exist, aiming to reverse the obfuscation process.\nWhile most commercial obfuscation solutions transform either program source code or platform-independent bytecode, i.e. portable code (as used by Java and .NET), some also work directly on compiled binaries.\nRecreational.\nWriting and reading obfuscated source code can be a brain teaser. A number of programming contests reward the most creatively obfuscated code, such as the International Obfuscated C Code Contest and the Obfuscated Perl Contest.\nShort obfuscated Perl programs may be used in signatures of Perl programmers. These are JAPHs (\"Just another Perl hacker\").\nCryptographic.\nCryptographers have explored the idea of obfuscating code so that reverse-engineering the code is \"cryptographically\" hard. This is formalized in the many proposals for indistinguishability obfuscation, a cryptographic primitive that, if possible to build securely, would allow one to construct many other kinds of cryptography, including completely novel types that no one knows how to make. (A stronger notion, black-box obfuscation, is known to be impossible in general.)\nDisadvantages of obfuscation.\nNotifying users of obfuscated code.\nSome anti-virus softwares, such as AVG AntiVirus, will also alert their users when they land on a website with code that is manually obfuscated, as one of the purposes of obfuscation can be to hide malicious code. However, some developers may employ code obfuscation for the purpose of reducing file size or increasing security. The average user may not expect their antivirus software to provide alerts about an otherwise harmless piece of code, especially from trusted corporations, so such a feature may actually deter users from using legitimate software.\nMozilla and Google disallow browser extensions containing obfuscated code in their add-ons store.\nObfuscation and copyleft licenses.\nThere has been debate on whether it is illegal to skirt copyleft software licenses by releasing source code in obfuscated form, such as in cases in which the author is less willing to make the source code available. The issue is addressed in the GNU General Public License by requiring the \"preferred form for making modifications\" to be made available. The GNU website states \"Obfuscated 'source code' is not real source code and does not count as source code.\"\nDecompilers.\nA decompiler is a tool that can reverse-engineer source code from an executable or library. This process is sometimes referred to as a man-in-the-end (mite) attack, inspired by the traditional \"man-in-the-middle attack\" in cryptography. The decompiled source code is often hard to read, containing random function and variable names, incorrect variable types, and logic that differs from the original source code due to compiler optimizations.\nModel obfuscation.\nModel obfuscation is a technique to hide the internal structure of a machine learning model. Obfuscation turns a model into a black box. It is contrary to explainable AI. Obfuscation models can also be applied to training data before feeding it into the model to add random noise. This hides sensitive information about the properties of individual and groups of samples.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22740", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22740", "title": "Odyssey1", "text": ""}
{"id": "22742", "revid": "28422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22742", "title": "\u00d6tzi", "text": "Natural mummy of a man who lived c. 3300 BC\n\u00d6tzi, also called The Iceman, is the natural mummy of a man who lived between 3350 and 3105\u00a0BC. \u00d6tzi's remains were discovered on 19 September 1991, in the \u00d6tztal Alps (hence the nickname \"\u00d6tzi\", ) at the Austria\u2013Italy border. He is Europe's oldest known natural human mummy, offering an unprecedented view of Chalcolithic (Copper Age) Europeans.\nBecause of the presence of an arrowhead embedded in his left shoulder and various other wounds, researchers believe that \u00d6tzi was killed by another person. The nature of his life and the circumstances of his death are the subject of much investigation and speculation. His remains and personal belongings are on exhibit at the South Tyrol Museum of Archaeology in Bolzano, South Tyrol, Italy.\nDiscovery.\n\u00d6tzi was found on 19 September 1991 by two German tourists, at an elevation of on the east ridge of the Fineilspitze in the \u00d6tztal Alps on the Austrian\u2013Italian border, near Similaun mountain and the Tisenjoch pass. When the tourists, Helmut and Erika Simon, first saw the body, they both believed that they had happened upon a recently deceased mountaineer. The next day, a mountain gendarme and the keeper of the nearby Similaunh\u00fctte first attempted to remove the body, which was frozen in ice below the torso, using a pneumatic drill and ice axes, but bad weather forced them to give up. Within a short time, eight groups visited the site, among whom were mountaineers Hans Kammerlander and Reinhold Messner.\nThe body was extracted on 22 September and salvaged the following day. It was transported to the office of the medical examiner in Innsbruck, together with other objects found nearby. On 24 September, the find was examined there by archaeologist Konrad Spindler of the University of Innsbruck. He dated the find to be \"at least four thousand years old\" on the basis of the typology of an axe among the retrieved objects. Tissue samples from the corpse and other accompanying materials were later analyzed at several scientific institutions and their results unequivocally concluded that the remains belonged to someone who had lived between 3359 and 3105 BC, or some 5,000 years ago. More specific estimates find that there was a 66% chance he died between 3239 and 3105 BC, a 33% chance he died between 3359 and 3294 BC, and a 1% chance he died between 3277 and 3268 BC.\nIn the course of recovery attempts and subsequent handling, multiple mishaps occurred. The mummy and its belongings were prodded with ski poles and ice picks, and the hip area of the body was damaged with a pneumatic drill. \u00d6tzi's longbow was snapped, with its bottom part recovered from the ice a year later. Careless handling of the body resulted in the destruction of many elements of the clothing \u00d6tzi was wearing at the time of his death. The mummy's left arm was broken while the body was being forced into a coffin for transportation from Vent to Innsbruck. Fungus began growing on the Iceman's skin while the body was on the mortuary slab in Innsbruck. It was only after five days that scientists initiated a rigorous effort to stabilize the mummy's condition.\nBorder dispute.\nAt the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye of 1919, the border between North and South Tyrol was defined as the watershed of the rivers Inn and Etsch. Near Tisenjoch, the glacier (which has since retreated) complicated establishing the watershed and the border was drawn too far north. Although \u00d6tzi's find site drains to the Austrian side, land surveys in October 1991 ultimately proved that the body had been located inside Italian territory, which was in consonance with Italy's original 1919 ownership claim.\nThe province of South Tyrol claimed property rights but agreed to let Innsbruck University finish its scientific examinations. Since 1998, he has been on display at the South Tyrol Museum of Archaeology in Bolzano, the capital of South Tyrol.\nScientific analyses.\nThe corpse has been extensively examined, measured, X-rayed, and dated. Tissues and intestinal contents have been examined microscopically, as have the items found with the body. In August 2004, the frozen bodies of three Austro-Hungarian soldiers killed during the Battle of San Matteo (1918) were found on the mountain Punta San Matteo in Trentino. One body was sent to a museum in the hope that research on how the environment had affected its preservation would help unravel \u00d6tzi's past.\nBody.\nBy the most recent estimates, at the time of his death, \u00d6tzi was tall, weighed about , and was about 45 years of age. When his body was found, it weighed . Because the body was covered in ice shortly after his death, it had only partially deteriorated. Initial reports claimed that his penis and most of his scrotum were missing, but this was later shown to be unfounded. Analysis of pollen, dust grains and the isotopic composition of his tooth enamel indicates that he spent his childhood near what is now the South Tyrol village of Feldthurns, north of Bolzano, but later went to live in valleys about farther north.\nIn 2009, a CAT scan revealed that the stomach had shifted upward to where his lower lung area would normally be. Analysis of the contents revealed the partly digested remains of ibex meat, confirmed by DNA analysis, suggesting he had had a meal less than two hours before his death. Wheat grains were also found. It is believed that he most likely had a few slices of a dried, fatty meat, which came from a wild goat in South Tyrol, Italy. Analysis of his intestinal contents showed two meals (the last one consumed about eight hours before his death), one of chamois meat, the other of red deer and herb bread; both were eaten with roots and fruits. The grain also eaten with both meals was a highly processed einkorn wheat bran, possibly bread. In the proximity of the body, and thus possibly originating from the Iceman's provisions, chaff and grains of einkorn and barley, and seeds of flax and poppy were discovered, as well as kernels of sloes (small plum-like fruits of the blackthorn tree) and various wild berry seeds.\nHair analysis was used to examine his diet in the months preceding his death. Pollen in the first meal showed that it had been consumed in a mid-altitude conifer forest. Other pollens indicated the presence of wheat and legumes, which may have been domesticated crops. Pollen grains of hop-hornbeam were also discovered. The pollen was very well preserved, with the cells inside remaining intact, indicating that it had been fresh (estimated about two hours old) at the time of \u00d6tzi's death, which places the event in the spring or early summer. Einkorn wheat is harvested in the late summer, and sloes in the autumn; these must have been stored from the previous year.\nHigh levels of copper and arsenic were found in his hair. This, along with his copper axe blade, which is 99.7% copper, has led scientists to speculate that he was involved in copper smelting.\nBy examining the proportions of his tibia, femur and pelvis, it was postulated that his lifestyle included long walks over hilly terrain. This degree of mobility is not characteristic of other Copper Age Europeans. This may indicate that he was a high-altitude shepherd.\nUsing modern 3D scanning technology, a facial reconstruction has been created for the South Tyrol Museum of Archaeology. It shows the Iceman looking old for his 45 years, with deep-set brown eyes, a beard, a furrowed face, and sunken cheeks. He is depicted as tired and ungroomed.\nHealth.\n\u00d6tzi had \"Trichuris trichiura\" (whipworm), an intestinal parasite. During CT scans, it was observed that three or four of his right ribs had been cracked when he had been lying face down after death, or where the ice had crushed his body. One of his fingernails (of the two found) shows three Beau's lines, indicating he was sick three times in the six months before he died. The last incident, two months before he died, lasted about two weeks. It was also found that his epidermis, the outer skin layer, was missing, a natural process from his mummification in ice. \u00d6tzi's teeth showed considerable internal deterioration from cavities. These oral pathologies may have been brought about by his grain-heavy, high-carbohydrate diet. DNA analysis in February 2012 revealed that \u00d6tzi was lactose intolerant, supporting the theory that lactose intolerance was still common at that time, despite the increasing spread of agriculture and dairying. \u00d6tzi's lungs were examined endoscopically and were found to be blackened by soot, probably due to his frequent proximity to open fires for warmth and cooking.\nSkeletal details and tattooing.\n\u00d6tzi had a total of 61 tattoos. They consisted of 19 groups of black lines ranging from in width and in length. These include groups of parallel lines along the longitudinal axis of his body and to both sides of the lumbar spine, as well as a cruciform mark behind the right knee and on the right ankle, and parallel lines around the left wrist. The greatest concentration of markings is found on his legs, which together exhibit 12 groups of lines. A microscopic examination of samples collected from these tattoos revealed that they were created from pigment manufactured out of fireplace ash or soot. This pigment was rubbed into small linear incisions or punctures. It has been suggested that he was repeatedly tattooed in the same locations, since the majority of them are quite dark.\nRadiological examination of his bones showed \"age-conditioned or strain-induced degeneration\" corresponding to many tattooed areas, including osteochondrosis and slight spondylosis in the lumbar spine and wear-and-tear degeneration in the knee and especially in the ankle joints. These tattoos may have been part of pain relief treatments similar to acupressure or acupuncture, though \u00d6tzi lived at least 2,000 years before their earliest use in China (c. 1000 BC). Of the 19 groups of tattoos present, nine are located next to, or directly on, acupunctural areas used today, and most of the others are on meridians and other acupunctural regions and over arthritic joints. \u00d6tzi's abdominal tattoos may have assuaged the intestinal pain caused by his whipworm infection.\nAt one point, it was thought that \u00d6tzi was the oldest tattooed human mummy yet discovered. In 2018, however, tattoos were discovered on nearly contemporaneous Egyptian mummies.\nMany of \u00d6tzi's tattoos originally went unnoticed, since they are difficult to see with the naked eye. In 2015, researchers photographed the body using noninvasive multispectral techniques to capture images on light wavelengths imperceptible to humans, revealing the remainder of his tattoos.\nClothes and shoes.\n\u00d6tzi wore a cloak made of woven grass and a coat, a belt, a pair of leggings, a loincloth, and shoes, all made of leather of different skins. He also wore a bearskin cap with a leather chin strap. The shoes were waterproof and wide, seemingly designed for walking across the snow. They were constructed using bearskin for the soles, deer hide for the top panels, and a netting made of tree bark. Soft grass went around the foot and in the shoe, functioning like modern socks. The coat, belt, leggings and loincloth were constructed of vertical strips of leather sewn together with sinew. His belt had a pouch sewn to it that contained a cache of useful items: a scraper, a drill, a flint flake, a bone awl and a dried fungus (see #Tools and equipment below).\nThe shoes have since been reproduced by a Czech academic, who said that \"because the shoes are actually quite complex, I'm convinced that even 5,300 years ago, people had the equivalent of a cobbler who made shoes for other people\". The reproductions were found to constitute such excellent footwear that a Czech company reportedly offered to purchase the rights to sell them. However, a more recent hypothesis by British archaeologist Jacqui Wood posits that \u00d6tzi's shoes were actually the upper part of snowshoes. According to this theory, the item currently interpreted as part of a backpack is actually the wood frame and netting of one snowshoe and animal hide to cover the face.\nThe leather loincloth and hide coat were made from sheepskin. Genetic analysis showed that the sheep species was nearer to modern domestic European sheep than to wild sheep; the items were made from the skins of at least four animals. Part of the coat was made from a domesticated goat belonging to a mitochondrial haplogroup (a common female ancestor) that inhabits central Europe today. The coat was made from several animals from two different species and was stitched together using hides. The leggings were made from domesticated goat leather. A similar set of 5,000-year-old leggings discovered in Schnidejoch, Switzerland, were made from goat leather as well.\nIrish and Italian researchers were able to undertake an analysis of the mitochondrial DNA from six different items of the body's clothing and published their findings in the journal \"Scientific Reports\". These showed that the shoelaces were made from the European genetic population of cattle. The quiver was made from wild roe deer, and the fur hat was made from a genetic lineage of brown bear which lives in the region today.\nTools and equipment.\nOther items found with the Iceman were a copper axe with a yew handle, a chert-bladed knife with an ash handle and a quiver of 14 arrows with viburnum and dogwood shafts. Two of the arrows, which were broken, were tipped with flint and had fletching (stabilizing fins), while the other 12 were unfinished and untipped. The arrows were found in a quiver with what is presumed to be a bow string, an unidentified tool, and an antler tool which might have been used for sharpening arrow points. There was also an unfinished yew longbow that was long.\nAmong \u00d6tzi's possessions were berries, two birch bark baskets, and two species of polypore mushrooms with leather strings through them. One of these, the birch fungus, is known to have anthelmintic properties, and was probably used for medicinal purposes. The other was a type of tinder fungus, included with part of what appeared to be a complex firelighting kit. The kit featured pieces of over a dozen different plants, in addition to flint and pyrite for creating sparks.\n\u00d6tzi's copper axe was of particular interest. His axe's haft is long and made from carefully worked yew with a right-angled crook at the shoulder, leading to the blade. The axe head is almost pure copper. It was produced through casting and did not undergo mechanical hardening. Though copper ore sources in the Alpines are known to have been exploited in \u00d6tzi's time, a 2017 study indicated that the copper in the axe came from southern Tuscany. It was let into the forked end of the crook and fixed there using birch-tar and tight leather lashing. The blade part of the head extends out of the lashing and shows clear signs of having been used to chop and cut. Such an axe would have been a valuable possession, important both as a tool and as a status symbol.\nGenetic analysis.\n\u00d6tzi's full genome was first sequenced in 2012. A new, high-coverage genome with much less modern human contamination was published in 2023.\nAccording to the 2012 study, the Y chromosome DNA of \u00d6tzi belongs to a subclade of G defined by the SNPs M201, P287, P15, L223 and L91 (G-L91, ISOGG G2a2b, former \"G2a4\"). He was not typed for any of the subclades downstreaming from G-L91; however, an analysis of his Binary Alignment Map file revealed that he belongs to the L166 and FGC5672 subclades below L91. G-L91 is now mostly found in South Corsica. Analysis of his mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) showed that \u00d6tzi belongs to the K1 subclade, but cannot be categorized into any of the three modern branches of that subclade (K1a, K1b, or K1c). The new subclade has provisionally been named \"K1\u00f6\" for \"\u00d6tzi\". A multiplex assay study was able to confirm that the Iceman's mtDNA belongs to a previously unknown European mtDNA clade with a very limited distribution among modern data sets. By autosomal DNA, \u00d6tzi is most closely related to Southern Europeans, especially geographically isolated populations like Corsicans and Sardinians. \u00d6tzi traced the majority of his ancestry to the Neolithic early European farmers who migrated from Anatolia to Europe beginning during the 7th millennium BC, replacing earlier European hunter-gatherers as dominant population. DNA analysis also showed him at high risk of atherosclerosis and lactose intolerance, with the presence of the DNA sequence of \"Borrelia burgdorferi\", possibly making him the earliest known human with Lyme disease. A later analysis suggested the sequence may have been a different \"Borrelia\" species.\nThe 2023 study on \u00d6tzi's genome found a very high proportion (90%) of Anatolian farmer-related ancestry \u2013 in fact, the highest among European populations of the same time\u2014with a lesser contribution from European hunter-gatherer-related ancestry, but (in contrast to the 2012 research) no evidence of Steppe-related ancestry, the disagreement with previous results being attributed to modern human contamination. \nWhile the absence in \u00d6tzi's genome of genetic components from Western Steppe Herders (WSH) is not surprising because these \"Proto-Indo-European\" populations did not arrive in Europe until about 2900 BC, the unusually low contribution from the Western Hunter Gatherers was explained by positing that the genetic mixing between neolithic farmers originating from Anatolia and WHG was still an ongoing process. Examining the genetic sites involved in phenotypical traits, the authors concluded that the Iceman likely had darker skin than present-day Europeans (though not as dark as the Mesolithic Western Hunter-Gatherers), was likely affected by baldness, and may have suffered from obesity-related metabolic disorders. The article also leaves room for environmental factors as indicative of their darker skin complexion, so more studies will be necessary in the future.\nIn October 2013, it was reported that 19 modern Tyrolean men belong to the same paternal lineage (Y-DNA haplogroup G-L91) as \u00d6tzi, and may share a common ancestor with, and/or descend from close relatives of \u00d6tzi. Scientists from the Institute of Legal Medicine at Innsbruck Medical University had analysed the DNA of over 3,700 Tyrolean male blood donors and found 19 (c. 0.5%) who shared the same paternal haplogroup with the 5,300-year-old man.\nBlood.\nIn May 2012, scientists announced the discovery that \u00d6tzi still had intact blood cells. These are the oldest complete human blood cells ever identified. In most bodies this old, the blood cells are either shrunken or mere remnants, but \u00d6tzi's have the same dimensions as living red blood cells and resemble a modern-day sample.\n\"H. pylori\" analysis.\nIn 2016, researchers reported on a study from the extraction of twelve samples from the gastrointestinal tract of \u00d6tzi to analyze the origins of the \"Helicobacter pylori\" in his gut. The \"H. pylori\" strain found in his gastrointestinal tract was, surprisingly, the hpAsia2 strain, a strain today found primarily in South Asian and Central Asian populations, with extremely rare occurrences in modern European populations. The strain found in \u00d6tzi's gut is most similar to three modern individuals from Northern India; the strain itself is, of course, older than the modern Northern Indian strain.\nStomach.\n\u00d6tzi's stomach was completely full and its contents were mostly undigested. In 2018, researchers thoroughly analysed his stomach and intestines to gain insights on Chalcolithic meal composition and dietary habits. Biopsies were performed on the stomach to obtain dietary information in the time leading up to his death, and the contents themselves were also analyzed. Previously, \u00d6tzi was believed to be vegetarian, but during this study, it was revealed that his diet was omnivorous. The presence of certain compounds suggests what kinds of food he generally ate, such as gamma-terpinene, implying the intake of herbs, and several nutritious minerals indicating red meat or dairy consumption. Through analysis of DNA and protein traces, the researchers were able to identify the contents of \u00d6tzi's last meal, composed of fat and meat from ibex and red deer as well as einkorn wheat. The results of atomic force microscopy and Raman spectroscopy analysis reveal that he consumed fresh or dried wild meat. A previous study detected charcoal particles in his lower intestine, which indicate that fire was present during some part of the food preparation process, but it was likely used in drying out the meat or smoking it.\nAfter death.\nAnalysis shows that the tissues had converted to adipocere, a mixture of fatty acids, before desiccation.\nRather than ice, the body had been in water for months over several seasons.\nCause of death.\nThe cause of death remained uncertain until 10 years after the discovery of the body. It was initially believed that \u00d6tzi died from exposure during a winter storm. Later it was speculated that he may have been a victim of a ritual sacrifice, perhaps for being a chieftain. This explanation was inspired by theories previously advanced for bodies recovered from peat bogs such as Tollund Man and Lindow Man.\nArrowhead and blood analyses.\nIn 2001, X-rays and a CT scan revealed that \u00d6tzi had an arrowhead lodged in his left shoulder when he died and a small, matching tear in his coat. Researchers theorized that \u00d6tzi died of blood loss from the wound, which likely would have been fatal even if modern medical techniques had been available. Further research found that the arrow's shaft had been removed before death, and close examination of the body found bruises and cuts to the hands, wrists and chest and cerebral trauma indicative of a blow to the head. One of the cuts, to the base of his thumb, reached down to the bone but had no time to heal before his death. Currently, it is believed that \u00d6tzi bled to death after the arrow shattered the scapula and damaged nerves and blood vessels before lodging near his lung.\nDNA analyses taken in 2003 are claimed to have revealed traces of blood from at least four other people on his gear: one from his knife, two from a single arrowhead in his quiver, and a fourth from his coat. Interpretations of these findings are that \u00d6tzi killed two people with the same arrow and was able to retrieve it on both occasions, and the blood on his coat was from a wounded comrade he may have carried over his back. \u00d6tzi's posture (frozen body, face down, left arm bent across the chest) could support a hypothesis that, before death occurred and rigor mortis set in, the Iceman was turned onto his belly in the effort to remove the arrow shaft. \"The Cambridge World History of Violence\" (2020) cited \u00d6tzi as evidence of prehistoric warfare.\nAlternative theory of death location.\nMost research has assumed that \u00d6tzi died at roughly the spot where he was found. In 2010, it was proposed that \u00d6tzi died at a much lower altitude and was buried higher in the mountains, as posited by archaeologist Alessandro Vanzetti of the Sapienza University of Rome and his colleagues. According to their study of the items found near \u00d6tzi and their locations, the Iceman may have been placed above what has been interpreted as a stone burial mound, but his body subsequently moved with each thaw cycle that created a flowing watery mixture driven by gravity before being re-frozen. While archaeobotanist Klaus Oeggl of the University of Innsbruck agrees that the natural process described probably caused the body to move from the ridge that includes the stone formation, he pointed out that the paper provided no compelling evidence to demonstrate that the scattered stones constituted a burial platform. Moreover, biological anthropologist Albert Zink argues that the Iceman's bones display no dislocations that would have resulted from a downhill slide and that the intact blood clots in his arrow wound would show damage if the body had been moved up the mountain.\nLegal dispute.\nItalian law entitled the Simons to a finders' fee from the South Tyrolean provincial government of 25% of the value of \u00d6tzi. In 1994 the authorities offered a \"symbolic\" reward of 10 million lire (\u20ac5,200), which the Simons declined. In 2003, the Simons filed a lawsuit which asked a court in Bolzano to recognize their role in \u00d6tzi's discovery and declare them his \"official discoverers\". The court decided in the Simons' favour in November 2003, and at the end of December that year the Simons announced that they were seeking US$300,000 as their fee. The provincial government decided to appeal.\nIn addition, two people came forward, each with a claim of being part of the same mountaineering party that had come across \u00d6tzi and of discovering the body first:\nIn 2005, the rival claims were heard by a Bolzano court. The legal case angered Mrs. Simon, who alleged that neither woman was present on the mountain that day. In 2005, Mrs. Simon's lawyer said: \"Mrs. Simon is very upset by all this and by the fact that these two new claimants have decided to appear 14 years after \u00d6tzi was found.\" In 2008, however, Jarc stated for a Slovene newspaper that she had written twice to the Bolzano court in regard to her claim but received no reply whatsoever.\nIn 2004, Helmut Simon died. Two years later, in June 2006, an appeals court affirmed that the Simons had indeed discovered the Iceman and were therefore entitled to a finder's fee. It also ruled that the provincial government had to pay the Simons' legal costs. After this ruling, Mrs. Erika Simon reduced her claim to \u20ac150,000. The provincial government's response was that the expenses it had incurred to establish a museum and the costs of preserving the Iceman should be considered in determining the finder's fee. It insisted it would pay no more than \u20ac50,000. In September 2006, the authorities appealed the case to Italy's highest court, the Court of Cassation.\nOn 29 September 2008, it was announced that the provincial government and Mrs. Simon had reached a settlement of the dispute, under which she would receive \u20ac150,000 in recognition of \u00d6tzi's discovery by her and her late husband and the tourist income that it attracts.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22743", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22743", "title": "Operation Deadlight", "text": "1946 UK operation to scuttle German U-boats\nOperation Deadlight was the code name for the Royal Navy operation of November 1945 \u2013 February 1946 to scuttle German U-boats surrendered to the Allies after the defeat of Germany near the end of World War II. After the surrender, political discussions continued between the Allies concerning the final disposal of the surviving German naval vessels, the result of which was an agreement to retain 30 U-boats in total, to be divided equally between the United Kingdom, the United States and the Soviet Union. The remainder would be scuttled.\nOperation.\nOf the 156 U-boats that surrendered to the Allies by Germany at the end of World War II, 116 were scuttled as part of Operation Deadlight. The Royal Navy carried out the operation, and planned to tow the submarines to three areas about northwest of Ireland and sink them. The areas were codenamed XX, YY, and ZZ. They intended to use XX as the main scuttling area, while towing 36 boats to ZZ to use as practice targets for aerial attack. YY was to be a reserve position where, if the weather was good enough, they could divert submarines from XX to sink with naval forces. Submarines that were not used for target practice were to be sunk with explosive charges, with naval gunfire as a fallback option if that failed.\nWhen Operation Deadlight began, the navy found that many of the U-boats were in poor condition from being moored in exposed harbours while awaiting disposal. These issues, combined with poor weather, sank 56 of the boats before they reached the scuttling areas, and those that did reach the area were generally sunk by gunfire rather than explosive charges. The first sinking took place on 17 November 1945 and the last on 11 February 1946.\nU-boats excluded from Operation Deadlight.\nSeveral U-boats escaped Operation Deadlight. Some were claimed as prizes by the United Kingdom, France, Norway, and the Soviet Union. Four were in East Asia when Germany surrendered and were commandeered by Japan. was renamed \"I-501\", \u2013 \"I-506\", \u2013 \"I-505\", \u2013 \"I-502\", and two other boats, and , had been sold to Japan in 1943 and renamed \"RO-500\" and \"RO-501\". Two U-boats that survived Operation Deadlight became museum ships. was earmarked for scuttling, but American Rear Admiral Daniel V. Gallery argued successfully that she did not fall under Operation Deadlight. United States Navy Task Group 22.3, under then-Captain Gallery, had captured \"U-505\" in battle on 4 June 1944. Having been captured, not surrendered at the end of the war, she survived to become a war memorial at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago. was transferred to Norway by the United Kingdom in October 1948 and became the Norwegian \"Kaura\". She was returned to Germany in 1965, to become a museum ship at Laboe in October 1971.\nSalvage proposals.\nIn the late-1990s, a firm applied to the British Ministry of Defence for salvage rights to the Operation Deadlight U-boats, planning to raise up to a hundred of them. Because the U-boats were constructed in the pre-atomic age, the wrecks contain metals that are not radioactively tainted, and are therefore valuable for certain research purposes. The ministry awarded no salvage rights, due to objections from Russia and the United States, and potentially from the United Kingdom. \nBetween 2001 and 2003, nautical archaeologist Innes McCartney discovered and surveyed fourteen of the U-boat wrecks; including the rare Type XXI U-boat , once under the command of Horst von Schroeter; the successful Type IXC U-boat, commanded by Adolf Piening and , which was the most promising salvage.\nIn 2007, Derry City Council announced plans to raise \"U-778\" to be the main exhibit of a new maritime museum. On 3 October 2007, an Irish diver died whilst filming the wreck as part of the salvage project. In November 2009, a spokesman from the council's heritage museum service announced the salvage project had been cancelled for cost reasons.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22745", "revid": "1169106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22745", "title": "Oetzi", "text": ""}
{"id": "22746", "revid": "55983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22746", "title": "Order of the Eastern Star", "text": "Freemasonry-related fraternal organization\nThe Order of the Eastern Star (OES) is a Masonic appendant body open to both men and women. It was established in 1850 by lawyer and educator Rob Morris, a noted Freemason, and adopted and approved as an appendant body of the Masonic Fraternity in 1873. The order is based on teachings from the Bible and is open to people of all religious beliefs. It has approximately 10,000 chapters in 18 countries and approximately 500,000 members under its General Grand Chapter.\nMembers of the Order of the Eastern Star are aged 18 and older; men must be Master Masons and women must be sponsored. Originally, a woman would have to be the daughter, widow, wife, sister, or mother of a Master Mason. The Order now allows other relatives as well as allowing Job's Daughters, Rainbow Girls and Members of the Organization of Triangles (in New York) to become members when of age.\nHistory.\nThe Order was created by Rob Morris in 1850 when he was teaching at the Eureka Masonic College in Richland, Mississippi. While confined by illness, he set down the principles of the order in his \"Rosary of the Eastern Star\". By 1855, he had organized a \"Supreme Constellation\" in New York, which chartered chapters throughout the United States.\nIn 1866, Dr. Morris started working with Robert Macoy, and handed the Order over to him while Morris was traveling in the Holy Land. Macoy organized the current system of Chapters, and modified Dr. Morris' \"Rosary\" into a \"Ritual\".\nSimilarly to Freemasonry, the Order of Eastern Star was not open to African Americans. Prince Hall Freemasonry was formed in 1784 and the first Prince Hall Order of the Eastern Star chapter was founded on December 1, 1874, titled, Queen Esther Chapter, No. 1, and established in Washington, D.C. by Thornton Andrew Jackson.\nThe \"General Grand Chapter\" was formed in Indianapolis, Indiana on November 6, 1876. Committees formed at that time created the \"Ritual of the Order of the Eastern Star\" in more or less its current form.\nEmblem and heroines.\nThe emblem of the Order is a five-pointed star with the white ray of the star pointing downwards towards the manger. The meaning of the letters FATAL surrounding the center pentagon in the emblem is only revealed to members of the Order. In the Chapter room, the downward-pointing white ray points to the West. The character-building lessons taught in the Order are stories inspired by Biblical figures:\nOfficers.\nThere are 18 main officers in a full chapter:\nTraditionally, a woman who is elected Associate Conductress will be elected to Conductress the following year, then the next year Associate Matron, and the next year Worthy Matron. A man elected Associate Patron will usually be elected Worthy Patron the following year. Usually, the woman who is elected to become Associate Matron will let it be known who she wishes to be her Associate Patron, so the next year they will both go to the East together as Worthy Matron and Worthy Patron. There is no male counterpart to the Conductress and Associate Conductress. Only women are allowed to be Matrons, Conductresses, and the Star Points (Adah, Ruth, etc.) and only men can be Patrons.\nOnce a member has served a term as Worthy Matron or Worthy Patron, they may use the post-nominal letters, PM or PP respectively.\nHeadquarters.\nThe General Grand Chapter headquarters, the International Temple, is located in the Dupont Circle neighborhood of Washington, D.C., in the Perry Belmont Mansion. The mansion was built in 1909 for the purpose of entertaining the guests of Perry Belmont. They included Britain's Prince of Wales in 1919. General Grand Chapter purchased the building in 1935. The secretary of the General Grand Chapter lives there while serving his or her term of office. The mansion features works of art from around the world, most of which were given as gifts from various international Eastern Star chapters.\nCharities.\nThe Order has a charitable foundation and from 1986 to 2001 contributed $513,147 to Alzheimer's disease research, juvenile diabetes research, and juvenile asthma research. It also provides bursaries to students of theology and religious music, as well as other scholarships that differ by jurisdiction. In 2000 over $83,000 was donated. Many jurisdictions support a Masonic and/or Eastern Star retirement center or nursing home for older members; some homes are also open to the public. The Elizabeth Bentley OES Scholarship Fund was started in 1947.\nNotable members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrince Hall OES.\nThe Prince Hall Order of the Eastern Star is a predominantly African-American version of OES, associated with Prince Hall Freemasonry.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22747", "revid": "50324240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22747", "title": "OSI model", "text": "Model of communication of seven abstraction layers\nThe Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model is a reference model developed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) that \"provides a common basis for the coordination of standards development for the purpose of systems interconnection.\"\nIn the OSI reference model, the components of a communication system are distinguished in seven abstraction layers: Physical, Data Link, Network, Transport, Session, Presentation, and Application.\nThe model describes communications from the physical implementation of transmitting bits across a transmission medium to the highest-level representation of data of a distributed application. Each layer has well-defined functions and semantics and serves a class of functionality to the layer above it and is served by the layer below it. Established, well-known communication protocols are decomposed in software development into the model's hierarchy of function calls.\nThe Internet protocol suite as defined in and is a model of networking developed contemporarily to the OSI model, and was funded primarily by the U.S. Department of Defense. It was the foundation for the development of the Internet. It assumed the presence of generic physical links and focused primarily on the software layers of communication, with a similar but much less rigorous structure than the OSI model.\nIn comparison, several networking models have sought to create an intellectual framework for clarifying networking concepts and activities, but none have been as successful as the OSI reference model in becoming the standard model for discussing and teaching networking in the field of information technology. The model allows transparent communication through equivalent exchange of protocol data units (PDUs) between two parties, through what is known as peer-to-peer networking (also known as peer-to-peer communication). As a result, the OSI reference model has not only become an important piece among professionals and non-professionals alike, but also in all networking between one or many parties, due in large part to its commonly accepted user-friendly framework.\nHistory.\nThe development of the OSI model started in the late 1970s to support the emergence of the diverse computer networking methods that were competing for application in the large national networking efforts in the world (see OSI protocols and Protocol Wars). In the 1980s, the model became a working product of the Open Systems Interconnection group at the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). While attempting to provide a comprehensive description of networking, the model failed to garner reliance during the design of the Internet, which is reflected in the less prescriptive Internet Protocol Suite, principally sponsored under the auspices of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).\nIn the early- and mid-1970s, networking was largely either government-sponsored (NPL network in the UK, ARPANET in the US, CYCLADES in France) or vendor-developed with proprietary standards, such as IBM's Systems Network Architecture and Digital Equipment Corporation's DECnet. Public data networks were only just beginning to emerge, and these began to use the X.25 standard in the late 1970s.\nThe Experimental Packet Switched System in the UK c.\u20091973\u20131975 identified the need for defining higher-level protocols. The UK National Computing Centre publication, \"Why Distributed Computing\", which came from considerable research into future configurations for computer systems, resulted in the UK presenting the case for an international standards committee to cover this area at the ISO meeting in Sydney in March 1977.\nBeginning in 1977, the ISO initiated a program to develop general standards and methods of networking. A similar process evolved at the International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (CCITT, from French: \"Comit\u00e9 Consultatif International T\u00e9l\u00e9phonique et T\u00e9l\u00e9graphique\"). Both bodies developed documents that defined similar networking models. The British Department of Trade and Industry acted as the secretariat, and universities in the United Kingdom developed prototypes of the standards.\nThe OSI model was first defined in raw form in Washington, D.C., in February 1978 by French software engineer Hubert Zimmermann, and the refined but still draft standard was published by the ISO in 1980.\nThe drafters of the reference model had to contend with many competing priorities and interests. The rate of technological change made it necessary to define standards that new systems could converge to rather than standardizing procedures after the fact; the reverse of the traditional approach to developing standards. Although not a standard itself, it was a framework in which future standards could be defined.\nIn May 1983, the CCITT and ISO documents were merged to form \"The Basic Reference Model for Open Systems Interconnection\", usually referred to as the \"Open Systems Interconnection Reference Model\", \"OSI Reference Model\", or simply \"OSI model\". It was published in 1984 by both the ISO, as standard ISO 7498, and the renamed CCITT (now called the Telecommunications Standardization Sector of the International Telecommunication Union or ITU-T) as standard X.200.\nOSI had two major components: an abstract model of networking, called the Basic Reference Model or seven-layer model, and a set of specific protocols. The OSI reference model was a major advance in the standardisation of network concepts. It promoted the idea of a consistent model of protocol layers, defining interoperability between network devices and software.\nThe concept of a seven-layer model was provided by the work of Charles Bachman at Honeywell Information Systems. Various aspects of OSI design evolved from experiences with the NPL network, ARPANET, CYCLADES, EIN, and the International Network Working Group (IFIP WG6.1). In this model, a networking system was divided into layers. Within each layer, one or more entities implement its functionality. Each entity interacted directly only with the layer immediately beneath it and provided facilities for use by the layer above it.\nThe OSI standards documents are available from the ITU-T as the X.200 series of recommendations. Some of the protocol specifications were also available as part of the ITU-T X series. The equivalent ISO/IEC standards for the OSI model were available from ISO. Not all are free of charge.\nOSI was an industry effort, attempting to get industry participants to agree on common network standards to provide multi-vendor interoperability. It was common for large networks to support multiple network protocol suites, with many devices unable to interoperate with other devices because of a lack of common protocols. For a period in the late 1980s and early 1990s, engineers, organizations and nations became polarized over the issue of which standard, the OSI model or the Internet protocol suite, would result in the best and most robust computer networks. However, while OSI developed its networking standards in the late 1980s, TCP/IP came into widespread use on multi-vendor networks for internetworking.\nThe OSI model is still used as a reference for teaching and documentation; however, the OSI protocols originally conceived for the model did not gain popularity. Some engineers argue the OSI reference model is still relevant to cloud computing. Others say the original OSI model does not fit today's networking protocols and have suggested instead a simplified approach.\nDefinitions.\nCommunication protocols enable an entity in one host to interact with a corresponding entity at the same layer in another host. Service definitions, like the OSI model, abstractly describe the functionality provided to a layer \"N\" by a layer \"N\u22121\", where \"N\" is one of the seven layers of protocols operating in the local host (with N=1 being the most basic layer, often represented at the bottom of a list).\nAt each level \"N\", two entities at the communicating devices (layer N \"peers\") exchange protocol data units (PDUs) by means of a layer N \"protocol\". Each PDU contains a payload, called the service data unit (SDU), along with protocol-related headers or footers.\nData processing by two communicating OSI-compatible devices proceeds as follows:\nStandards documents.\nThe OSI model was defined in ISO/IEC 7498 which consists of the following parts:\nISO/IEC 7498-1 is also published as ITU-T Recommendation X.200.\nLayer architecture.\nThe recommendation X.200 describes seven layers, labelled 1 to 7. Layer 1 is the lowest layer in this model.\nLayer 1: Physical layer.\nThe physical layer is responsible for the transmission and reception of unstructured raw data between a device, such as a network interface controller, Ethernet hub, or network switch, and a physical transmission medium. It converts the digital bits into electrical, radio, or optical signals (analogue signals). Layer specifications define characteristics such as voltage levels, the timing of voltage changes, physical data rates, maximum transmission distances, modulation scheme, channel access method and physical connectors. This includes the layout of pins, voltages, line impedance, cable specifications, signal timing and frequency for wireless devices. Bit rate control is done at the physical layer and may define transmission mode as simplex, half duplex, and full duplex. The components of a physical layer can be described in terms of the network topology. Physical layer specifications are included in the specifications for the ubiquitous Bluetooth, Ethernet, and USB standards. An example of a less well-known physical layer specification would be for the CAN standard.\nThe physical layer also specifies how encoding occurs over a physical signal, such as electrical voltage or a light pulse. For example, a 1 bit might be represented on a copper wire by the transition from a 0-volt to a 5-volt signal, whereas a 0 bit might be represented by the transition from a 5-volt to a 0-volt signal. As a result, common problems occurring at the physical layer are often related to the incorrect media termination, EMI or noise scrambling, and NICs and hubs that are misconfigured or do not work correctly.\nLayer 2: Data link layer.\nThe data link layer provides node-to-node data transfer\u2014a link between two directly connected nodes. It detects and possibly corrects errors that may occur in the physical layer. It defines the protocol to establish and terminate a connection between two physically connected devices. It also defines the protocol for flow control between them.\nIEEE 802 divides the data link layer into two sublayers:\nThe MAC and LLC layers of IEEE 802 networks such as 802.3 Ethernet, 802.11 Wi-Fi, and 802.15.4 Zigbee operate at the data link layer.\nThe Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) is a data link layer protocol that can operate over several different physical layers, such as synchronous and asynchronous serial lines.\nThe ITU-T G.hn standard, which provides high-speed local area networking over existing wires (power lines, phone lines and coaxial cables), includes a complete data link layer that provides both error correction and flow control by means of a selective-repeat sliding-window protocol.\nSecurity, specifically (authenticated) encryption, at this layer can be applied with MACsec.\nLayer 3: Network layer.\nThe network layer provides the functional and procedural means of transferring packets from one node to another connected in \"different networks\". A network is a medium to which many nodes can be connected, on which every node has an \"address\" and which permits nodes connected to it to transfer messages to other nodes connected to it by merely providing the content of a message and the address of the destination node and letting the network find the way to deliver the message to the destination node, possibly routing it through intermediate nodes. If the message is too large to be transmitted from one node to another on the data link layer between those nodes, the network may implement message delivery by splitting the message into several fragments at one node, sending the fragments independently, and reassembling the fragments at another node. It may, but does not need to, report delivery errors.\nMessage delivery at the network layer is not necessarily guaranteed to be reliable; a network layer protocol may provide reliable message delivery, but it does not need to do so.\nA number of layer-management protocols, a function defined in the \"management annex\", ISO 7498/4, belong to the network layer. These include routing protocols, multicast group management, network-layer information and error, and network-layer address assignment. It is the function of the payload that makes these belong to the network layer, not the protocol that carries them.\nSecurity, specifically (authenticated) encryption, at this layer can be applied with IPsec.\nLayer 4: Transport layer.\nThe transport layer provides the functional and procedural means of transferring variable-length data sequences from a source host to a destination host from one application to another across a network while maintaining the quality-of-service functions. Transport protocols may be connection-oriented or connectionless.\nThis may require breaking large protocol data units or long data streams into smaller chunks called \"segments\", since the network layer imposes a maximum packet size called the maximum transmission unit (MTU), which depends on the maximum packet size imposed by all data link layers on the network path between the two hosts. The amount of data in a data segment must be small enough to allow for a network-layer header and a transport-layer header. For example, for data being transferred across Ethernet, the MTU is 1500 bytes, the minimum size of a TCP header is 20 bytes, and the minimum size of an IPv4 header is 20 bytes, so the maximum segment size is 1500\u2212(20+20) bytes, or 1460 bytes. The process of dividing data into segments is called segmentation; it is an optional function of the transport layer. Some connection-oriented transport protocols, such as TCP and the OSI connection-oriented transport protocol (COTP), perform segmentation and reassembly of segments on the receiving side; connectionless transport protocols, such as UDP and the OSI connectionless transport protocol (CLTP), usually do not.\nThe transport layer also controls the reliability of a given link between a source and destination host through flow control, error control, and acknowledgments of sequence and existence. Some protocols are state- and connection-oriented. This means that the transport layer can keep track of the segments and retransmit those that fail delivery through the acknowledgment hand-shake system. The transport layer will also provide the acknowledgement of the successful data transmission and sends the next data if no errors occurred.\nReliability, however, is not a strict requirement within the transport layer. Protocols like UDP, for example, are used in applications that are willing to accept some packet loss, reordering, errors or duplication. Streaming media, real-time multiplayer games and voice over IP (VoIP) are examples of applications in which loss of packets is not usually a fatal problem.\nThe OSI connection-oriented transport protocol defines five classes of connection-mode transport protocols, ranging from class 0 (which is also known as TP0 and provides the fewest features) to class 4 (TP4, designed for less reliable networks, similar to the Internet). Class 0 contains no error recovery and was designed for use on network layers that provide error-free connections. Class 4 is closest to TCP, although TCP contains functions, such as the graceful close, which OSI assigns to the session layer. Also, all OSI TP connection-mode protocol classes provide expedited data and preservation of record boundaries. Detailed characteristics of TP0\u20134 classes are shown in the following table:\nAn easy way to visualize the transport layer is to compare it with a post office, which deals with the dispatch and classification of mail and parcels sent. A post office inspects only the outer envelope of mail to determine its delivery. Higher layers may have the equivalent of double envelopes, such as cryptographic presentation services that can be read by the addressee only. Roughly speaking, tunnelling protocols operate at the transport layer, such as carrying non-IP protocols such as IBM's SNA or Novell's IPX over an IP network, or end-to-end encryption with IPsec. While Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) might seem to be a network-layer protocol, if the encapsulation of the payload takes place only at the endpoint, GRE becomes closer to a transport protocol that uses IP headers but contains complete Layer 2 frames or Layer 3 packets to deliver to the endpoint. L2TP carries PPP frames inside transport segments.\nAlthough not developed under the OSI Reference Model and not strictly conforming to the OSI definition of the transport layer, the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) of the Internet Protocol Suite are commonly categorized as layer 4 protocols within OSI.\nTransport Layer Security (TLS) does not strictly fit inside the model either. It contains characteristics of the transport and presentation layers.\nLayer 5: Session layer.\nThe session layer creates the setup, controls the connections, and ends the teardown, between two or more computers, which is called a \"session\". Common functions of the session layer include user logon (establishment) and user logoff (termination) functions. Including this matter, authentication methods are also built into most client software, such as FTP Client and NFS Client for Microsoft Networks. Therefore, the session layer establishes, manages and terminates the connections between the local and remote applications. The session layer also provides for full-duplex, half-duplex, or simplex operation, and establishes procedures for checkpointing, suspending, restarting, and terminating a session between two related streams of data, such as an audio and a video stream in a web-conferencing application. Therefore, the session layer is commonly implemented explicitly in application environments that use remote procedure calls.\nLayer 6: Presentation layer.\nThe presentation layer establishes data formatting and data translation into a format specified by the application layer during the encapsulation of outgoing messages while being passed down the protocol stack, and possibly reversed during the deencapsulation of incoming messages when being passed up the protocol stack. For this very reason, outgoing messages during encapsulation are converted into a format specified by the application layer, while the conversion for incoming messages during deencapsulation are reversed.\nThe presentation layer handles protocol conversion, data encryption, data decryption, data compression, data decompression, incompatibility of data representation between operating systems, and graphic commands. The presentation layer transforms data into the form that the application layer accepts, to be sent across a network. Since the presentation layer converts data and graphics into a display format for the application layer, the presentation layer is sometimes called the syntax layer. For this reason, the presentation layer negotiates the transfer of syntax structure through the Basic Encoding Rules of Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1), with capabilities such as converting an EBCDIC-coded text file to an ASCII-coded file, or serialization of objects and other data structures from and to XML.\nLayer 7: Application layer.\nThe application layer is the layer of the OSI model that is closest to the end user, which means both the OSI application layer and the user interact directly with a software application that implements a component of communication between the client and server, such as File Explorer and Microsoft Word. Such application programs fall outside the scope of the OSI model unless they are directly integrated into the application layer through the functions of communication, as is the case with applications such as web browsers and email programs. Other examples of software are Microsoft Network Software for File and Printer Sharing and Unix/Linux Network File System Client for access to shared file resources.\nApplication-layer functions typically include file sharing, message handling, and database access, through the most common protocols at the application layer, known as HTTP, FTP, SMB/CIFS, TFTP, and SMTP. When identifying communication partners, the application layer determines the identity and availability of communication partners for an application with data to transmit. The most important distinction in the application layer is the distinction between the application entity and the application. For example, a reservation website might have two application entities: one using HTTP to communicate with its users, and one for a remote database protocol to record reservations. Neither of these protocols have anything to do with reservations. That logic is in the application itself. The application layer has no means to determine the availability of resources in the network.\nCross-layer functions.\nCross-layer functions are services that are not tied to a given layer, but may affect more than one layer. Some orthogonal aspects, such as management and security, involve all of the layers (See ITU-T X.800 Recommendation). These services are aimed at improving the CIA triad\u2014confidentiality, integrity, and availability\u2014of the transmitted data.\nCross-layer functions are the norm, in practice, because the availability of a communication service is determined by the interaction between network design and network management protocols.\nSpecific examples of cross-layer functions include the following:\nProgramming interfaces.\nNeither the OSI Reference Model, nor any OSI protocol specifications, outline any programming interfaces, other than deliberately abstract service descriptions. Protocol specifications define a methodology for communication between peers, but the software interfaces are implementation-specific.\nFor example, the Network Driver Interface Specification (NDIS) and Open Data-Link Interface (ODI) are interfaces between the media (layer 2) and the network protocol (layer 3).\nComparison to other networking suites.\nThe table below presents a list of OSI layers, the original OSI protocols, and some \"approximate\" modern matches. This correspondence is rough: the OSI model contains idiosyncrasies not found in later systems such as the IP stack in modern Internet.\nComparison with TCP/IP model.\nThe design of protocols in the TCP/IP model of the Internet does not concern itself with strict hierarchical encapsulation and layering. contains a section entitled \"Layering considered harmful\". TCP/IP does recognize four broad layers of functionality which are derived from the operating scope of their contained protocols: the scope of the software application; the host-to-host transport path; the internetworking range; and the scope of the direct links to other nodes on the local network.\nDespite using a different concept for layering than the OSI model, these layers are often compared with the OSI layering scheme in the following manner:\nThese comparisons are based on the original seven-layer protocol model as defined in ISO 7498, rather than refinements in the internal organization of the network layer.\nThe OSI protocol suite that was specified as part of the OSI project was considered by many as too complicated and inefficient, and to a large extent unimplementable. Taking the \"forklift upgrade\" approach to networking, it specified eliminating all existing networking protocols and replacing them at all layers of the stack. This made implementation difficult and was resisted by many vendors and users with significant investments in other network technologies. In addition, the protocols included so many optional features that many vendors' implementations were not interoperable.\nAlthough the OSI model is often still referenced, the Internet protocol suite has become the standard for networking. TCP/IP's pragmatic approach to computer networking and to independent implementations of simplified protocols made it a practical methodology. Some protocols and specifications in the OSI stack remain in use, one example being IS-IS, which was specified for OSI as ISO/IEC 10589:2002 and adapted for Internet use with TCP/IP as RFC 1142.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22749", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22749", "title": "Otzi", "text": ""}
{"id": "22751", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22751", "title": "Original Sin (2001 film)", "text": "2001 romantic drama film by Michael Cristofer\nOriginal Sin is a 2001 American erotic romantic thriller film written and directed by Michael Cristofer and starring Antonio Banderas and Angelina Jolie. It is based on the 1947 novel \"Waltz into Darkness\" by Cornell Woolrich, which was previously made into the 1969 Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut film \"Mississippi Mermaid\". The film was produced by actress Michelle Pfeiffer's production company, Via Rosa Productions.\nPlot.\n\"Original Sin\" is set in late 19th century Cuba during the Spanish rule, and flashes back and forth from the scene of a woman awaiting her execution while telling her story to a priest to the actual events of that story.\nLuis Vargas, a Cuban man, sends for American Julia Russell from Delaware to be his mail-order bride. Julia comes off the ship, looking nothing like her photos. Julia explains she wants more than a man who is only interested in a pretty face, so she substitutes a plain-looking woman's photo. Luis also admits to deception; he has misled her into believing he is a poor clerk instead of a wealthy plantation owner. Julia says that they both have something in common: that both are not to be trusted. But they assure each other that they will try to understand and trust each other in life.\nLuis and Julia wed in the church within hours of her setting foot in Cuba. Luis falls desperately in love with her and they have passionate sex. Meanwhile, Julia's sister Emily is worried. She sends an emotional letter asking about her welfare. Luis forces Julia to write back, fearing that if Julia continues to ignore Emily's letters, Emily will assume something terrible has befallen her sister, and she might send the authorities. Holding off as long as possible, Julia finally pens a letter to her sister.\nLuis adds Julia to his business and personal bank accounts, giving her free rein to spend as she pleases. A detective, Walter Downs, arrives from Wilmington and tells Luis that he has been hired by Emily to find her sister Julia and would like to see her on the coming Sunday. Luis informs Julia about this, and she gets upset. Emily arrives in Cuba to meet Luis and shows the letter Julia wrote to her. She informs Luis that she believes Julia to be an impostor and that her sister may be dead. Luis discovers that Julia has taken nearly all of his fortune and teams up with Walter to look for her.\nLuis finds Julia and discovers she is actually in league with Walter. Luis believes she loves him and lies to Walter, but when confronted, a fight breaks out, and Luis shoots Walter. Julia sends Luis to go and buy them tickets home, but it is a trick, and Walter is not dead. Julia appears to love Luis but fears Walter, so she and Luis run off to live secretly, with the supposedly dead Walter in pursuit. Walter turns out to be Julia's (Bonny's) old lover and partner, Billy. Billy makes a cut on Bonny's back before having sex with her, as he did during their previous encounters.\nLuis throws away his promising future to be with Julia/Bonny. One night, Luis follows Julia/Bonny and discovers Walter/Billy is alive and that the two are still working together; she is apparently going to poison her husband that very night. He returns home to wait for her, and when she arrives, he reveals that he knows about the plan, confesses his love for her once more, and swallows the poisoned drink. Julia flees with the dying Luis, with Walter close behind. They run into him at a train station; Walter is furious that Julia has betrayed him. As Walter holds a knife to her throat, Luis shoots and wounds him, with Julia finishing him off.\nBack in the \"mise en scene\", Julia finishes her story and asks the priest to pray with her. The next morning the guards come to her cell to take her to her execution, only to find the priest kneeling in her clothing.\nIn Morocco, Julia is watching a card game. She walks around the table occupied by gamblers \u2013 including Luis \u2013 and thanks them for allowing her to watch. As Julia signals Luis about the other players' cards, he begins telling them the story of how they got there.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Antonio Banderas as Luis Antonio Vargas\nProduction.\nIt was rumored that the chemistry between Jolie and Banderas led to a relationship, which they denied. The film had to be cut to achieve a R-rating, which director Michael Cristofer called censorship.\nReception.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes the film has a 12% approval rating based on 90 reviews and an average rating of 3.40/10. The site's consensus states: \"Laughably melodramatic, \"Original Sin\" features bad acting, poor dialogue and even worse plotting.\" On Metacritic, it has a score of 33 based on reviews from 24 critics, indicating generally unfavorable reviews. \nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the movie a positive review, and said about Jolie's performance: \"Jolie continues to stalk through pictures entirely on her own terms. Her presence is like a dare-ya for a man. There's dialogue in this movie so overwrought, it's almost literally unspeakable, and she survives it by biting it off contemptuously and spitting it out.\"\nAngelina Jolie was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress for her work in both this film and \"\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22753", "revid": "49248264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22753", "title": "Oscar Hammerstein II", "text": "American librettist (1895\u20131960)\nOscar Greeley Clendenning Hammerstein\u00a0II (; July 12, 1895 \u2013 August 23, 1960) was an American lyricist, librettist, theatrical producer, and director in musical theater for nearly 40 years. He won eight Tony Awards and two Academy Awards for Best Original Song. Many of his songs are standard repertoire for vocalists and jazz musicians. He co-wrote 850 songs.\nHe is best known for his collaborations with composer Richard Rodgers, as the duo Rodgers and Hammerstein, whose musicals include \"Oklahoma!\", \"Carousel\", \"South Pacific\", \"The King and I\", \"Flower Drum Song\", and \"The Sound of Music\". Described by his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Stephen Sondheim as an \"experimental playwright\", Hammerstein helped bring the American musical to new maturity by popularizing musicals that focused on stories and character rather than the lighthearted entertainment that the musical had been known for beforehand.\nHe also collaborated with Jerome Kern (with whom he wrote the 1927 musical \"Show Boat\"), Vincent Youmans, Rudolf Friml, Richard A. Whiting, and Sigmund Romberg.\nEarly life.\nOscar Greeley Clendenning Hammerstein II was born on West 125th Street in Harlem, New York. The son of theatrical manager William Hammerstein and his wife Alice (n\u00e9e Nimmo). His grandfather was the German theater impresario Oscar Hammerstein I. His father was from a Jewish family, and his mother was the daughter of British parents. He attended the Church of the Divine Paternity, now the Fourth Universalist Society in the City of New York.\nAlthough Hammerstein's father managed the Victoria Theatre and was a producer of vaudeville shows, he was opposed to his son's desire to participate in the arts.\nHammerstein attended Columbia University (1912\u20131916) and studied at Columbia Law School until 1917. As a student, he maintained high grades and engaged in numerous extracurricular activities. These included playing first base on the baseball team, performing in the Varsity Show and becoming an active member of Pi Lambda Phi fraternity.\nAfter his father's death, in June 1914, when he was 19, he participated in his first play with the Varsity Show, entitled \"On Your Way\". Throughout the rest of his college career, Hammerstein wrote and performed in several Varsity Shows.&lt;ref name=\"PBS-broadway/stars\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Following his graduation, he sat on the judging committee for the show and continued to contribute to several musicals, including \"Fly With Me\", written by Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart.\nEarly career.\nAfter quitting law school to pursue theater, Hammerstein began his first professional collaboration, with Herbert Stothart, Otto Harbach and Frank Mandel. He began as an apprentice and went on to form a 20-year collaboration with Harbach. Out of this collaboration came his first musical, \"Always You\", for which he wrote the book and lyrics. It opened on Broadway in 1920. In 1921 Hammerstein joined The Lambs club.\nThroughout the next forty years, Hammerstein teamed up with many other composers, including Jerome Kern, with whom Hammerstein enjoyed a highly successful collaboration. In 1927, Kern and Hammerstein wrote their biggest hit based on Edna Ferber's bestselling eponymous novel, \"Show Boat\", which is often revived, as it is considered one of the masterpieces of American musical theater. \"Here we come to a completely new genre\u2014the musical play as distinguished from musical comedy. Now\u00a0... the play was the thing, and everything else was subservient to that play. Now\u00a0... came complete integration of song, humor and production numbers into a single and inextricable artistic entity.\" Many years later, Hammerstein's wife Dorothy bristled when she overheard someone remark that Jerome Kern had written \"Ol' Man River\". \"Indeed not\", she retorted. \"Jerome Kern wrote 'dum, dum, dum-dum'. My husband wrote 'Ol' Man River'.\"\nOther Kern\u2013Hammerstein musicals include \"Sunny\", \"Sweet Adeline\", \"Music in the Air\", \"Three Sisters\", and \"Very Warm for May\". Hammerstein also collaborated with Vincent Youmans (\"Wildflower\"), Rudolf Friml (\"Rose-Marie\"), and Sigmund Romberg (\"The Desert Song\" and \"The New Moon\").\nRodgers and Hammerstein.\nHammerstein's most successful and sustained collaboration began when he teamed up with Rodgers to write a musical adaptation of the play \"Green Grow the Lilacs\". Rodgers' first partner, Lorenz Hart, originally planned to collaborate with Rodgers on this piece, but his alcoholism had spiraled out of control, rendering him incapacitated. Hart was also not certain that the idea had much merit, and the two therefore separated. The adaptation became the first Rodgers and Hammerstein collaboration, titled \"Oklahoma!\", which opened on Broadway in 1943. It furthered the revolution begun by \"Show Boat\", by thoroughly integrating all the aspects of musical theater, with the songs and dances arising out of and further developing the plot and characters.\nWilliam A. Everett and Paul R. Laird wrote that this was a \"show, that, like \"Show Boat\", became a milestone, such that subsequent historians writing about important moments in twentieth-century theater began to identify eras according to their relationship to \"Oklahoma!\"\" After \"Oklahoma!\", Rodgers and Hammerstein were the most important contributors to the musical-play form\u2014with such masterworks as \"Carousel\", \"The King and I\" and \"South Pacific\". \"The examples they set in creating vital plays, often rich with social thought, provided the necessary encouragement for other gifted writers to create musical plays of their own\".\nThe partnership went on to produce not only the aforementioned, but also other Broadway musicals such as \"Allegro\", \"Me and Juliet\", \"Pipe Dream\", \"Flower Drum Song\", and \"The Sound of Music\", as well as the musical film \"State Fair\" (and its stage adaptation of the same name), and the television musical \"Cinderella\", all featured in the revue \"A Grand Night for Singing\". Hammerstein also wrote the book and lyrics for \"Carmen Jones\", an adaptation of Georges Bizet's opera \"Carmen\", with an all-black cast that became a 1943 Broadway musical and a 1954 film, starring Dorothy Dandridge.\nAdvocacy.\nAn active advocate for writers' rights within the theater industry, Hammerstein was a member of the Dramatists Guild of America. In 1956, he was elected as the eleventh president of the nonprofit organization. He continued his presidency at the Guild until 1960; he was succeeded by Alan Jay Lerner.\nPersonal life.\nHammerstein married his first wife, Myra Finn, in 1917; the couple divorced in 1929. He married his second wife, the Australian-born Dorothy (Blanchard) Jacobson (1899\u20131987), in 1929. He had three children: William Hammerstein (1918\u20132001) and Alice Hammerstein Mathias (1922\u20132015) by his first wife, and James Hammerstein (1931\u20131999) by his second wife, with whom he also had a stepson, Henry Jacobson, and a stepdaughter, Susan Blanchard. His son William married the screenwriter Jane-Howard Hammerstein.\nHammerstein was lifelong Unitarian Universalist.\nHammerstein died of stomach cancer on August 23, 1960, at his home Highland Farm in Doylestown, Pennsylvania, aged 65, nine months after the opening of \"The Sound of Music\" on Broadway. The final song he wrote was \"Edelweiss\", which was added near the end of the second act during rehearsal. The lights of Times Square were turned off for one minute, and London's West End lights were dimmed in recognition of his contribution to the musical. He was cremated, and his ashes were buried at the Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York. A memorial plaque was unveiled at Southwark Cathedral, England, on May 24, 1961.\nAfter Hammerstein's death, \"The Sound of Music\" was adapted as a 1965 film, which won the Academy Award for Best Picture.\nReputation.\nHammerstein was one of the most important \"book writers\" in Broadway history\u2014he made the story, not the songs or the stars, central to the musical and brought musical theater to full maturity as an art form. According to Stephen Sondheim, \"What few people understand is that Oscar's big contribution to the theater was as a theoretician, as a Peter Brook, as an innovator. People don't understand how experimental \"Show Boat\" and \"Oklahoma!\" felt at the time they were done. Oscar is not about the 'lark that is learning to pray'\u2014that's easy to make fun of. He's about \"Allegro\"\", Hammerstein's most experimental musical.\nHis reputation for being sentimental is based largely on the movie versions of the musicals, especially \"The Sound of Music\", in which a song sung by those in favor of reaching an accommodation with the Nazis, \"No Way to Stop It\", was cut. As recent revivals of \"Show Boat\", \"Oklahoma!\", \"Carousel\", and \"The King and I\" in London and New York show, Hammerstein was one of the more tough-minded and socially conscious American musical theater artists. According to Richard Kislan, \"The shows of Rodgers and Hammerstein were the product of sincerity. In the light of criticism directed against them and their universe of sweetness and light, it is important to understand that they believed sincerely in what they wrote.\" According to Marc Bauch, \"The Rodgers and Hammerstein musicals are romantic musical plays. Love is important.\"\nAccording to \"The Rodgers and Hammerstein Story\" by Stanley Green,\nFor three minutes, on the night of September first, the entire Times Square area in New York City was blacked out in honor of the man who had done so much to light up that particular part of the world. From 8:57 to 9:00 p.m., every neon sign and every light bulb was turned off and all traffic was halted between 42nd Street and 53rd Street, and between eighth Ave and the Avenue of the Americas. A crowd of 5,000 people, many with heads bowed, assembled at the base of the statue of Father Duffy on Times Square where two trumpeters blew taps. It was the most complete blackout on Broadway since World War II, and the greatest tribute of its kind ever paid to one man.\nMajor works.\nSongs.\nAccording to \"The Complete Lyrics of Oscar Hammerstein II\", edited by Amy Asch, Hammerstein contributed the lyrics to 850 songs, including \"Ol' Man River\", \"Can't Help Lovin' That Man\" and \"Make Believe\" from \"Show Boat\"; \"Indian Love Call\" from \"Rose-Marie\"; \"People Will Say We're in Love\" and \"Oklahoma\" (which has been the official state song of Oklahoma since 1953) from \"Oklahoma!\"; \"If I Loved You\" and \"You'll Never Walk Alone\" from \"Carousel\", \"Some Enchanted Evening\", from \"South Pacific\"; \"Getting to Know You\" and \"Shall We Dance\" from \"The King and I\"; and the title song as well as \"Climb Ev'ry Mountain\" from \"The Sound of Music\".\nSeveral albums of Hammerstein's musicals were named to the \"Songs of the Century\" list as compiled by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), the National Endowment for the Arts, and Scholastic Corporation:\nLegacy.\nHis advice and work influenced Stephen Sondheim, a friend of the Hammerstein family from childhood. Sondheim has attributed his success in theater, and especially as a lyricist, directly to Hammerstein's influence and guidance.\nThe Oscar Hammerstein Award for Lifetime Achievement in Musical Theater is presented annually. The York Theatre Company of New York City is the administrator of the award. Past awardees are composers such as Stephen Sondheim and performers such as Carol Channing.\nOscar Hammerstein was a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22754", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22754", "title": "O-code machine", "text": ""}
{"id": "22756", "revid": "32452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22756", "title": "Otto Jespersen", "text": "Danish linguist (1860\u20131943)\nJens Otto Harry Jespersen (; 16 July 1860 \u2013 30 April 1943) was a Danish linguist who worked in foreign-language pedagogy, historical phonetics, and other areas, but is best known for his description of the grammar of the English language. Steven Mithen describes him as \"one of the greatest language scholars of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.\"\nEarly life.\nOtto Jespersen was born in Randers in Jutland, to Jens Bloch Jespersen (1813\u20131870) and Sophie Caroline Bentzien (1833\u20131874). He was one of nine children. After his father died the family moved to Hiller\u00f8d, where his Jutland accent was ridiculed. \nAs a boy, Jespersen was inspired by works of the Danish philologist Rasmus Rask and the biography of Rask by Niels Matthias Petersen; and with the help of Rask's grammars taught himself some Icelandic, Italian, and Spanish.\nAcademic life and work.\nJespersen's father, grandfather and great-grandfather had been lawyers, and the same was expected of him. He entered the University of Copenhagen in 1877 when he was 17, initially studying law but not abandoning his language studies. In his first year at university, he attended a lecture course by Sophus Heegaard on the history of Evolutionism since the Greeks; this introduced him to the ideas of Herbert Spencer, and later in life he looked back on the course warmly. Teaching languages in a lower secondary school and working from 1880 to 1887 as a stenographer for the Rigsdag (Danish parliament) brought an income that in 1881 allowed Jespersen to shift his focus completely to languages. Following the introduction of a new degree, \"Skoleembedseksamen\", he switched to this, choosing French as the major subject and English as the second minor subject, the first compulsorily being Latin (a language that he hated from then on). He was one of a large number of students who appealed for Latin to be made voluntary, but the appeal was unsuccessful. Thanks to his need for an income, obtaining a Master's degree (in French) took Jespersen a decade, but the delays may well have determined his \"habits of wide and self-motivated study\". \nJespersen studied under the linguists Karl Verner, Hermann M\u00f6ller and particularly Vilhelm Thomsen; and beyond linguistics, under Harald H\u00f8ffding. It was thanks to H\u00f8ffding that Jespersen was further exposed to the writings and ideas of Darwin, Mill and Spencer, and to introspective psychology.\nIn 1887 Jespersen passed \"Skoleembedseksamen\". For French, he chose to be examined on Diderot, from a lasting enthusiasm for the ideals of the French Revolution and the Enlightenment. Throughout his life Jespersen remained faithful to the ideals and methods of his early teachers. Positivist and evolutionary attitudes, physiological and psychological methods in their classical form, and finally, liberal humanism were essential to his character.\nJespersen's views on language owed less to theoretical considerations than to a practical and thus largely functional conception of language; as a language theorist, Jespersen could remain tethered to reality thanks to the common sense fundamental to his character. Even when making such bold proposals as that of the \"progress\" of a language, he could avoid extremes.\nIn 1887, soon after passing the \"Skoleembedseksamen\", Jespersen went to London, where he met the phoneticians Wilhelm Vi\u00ebtor, Alexander Ellis and Henry Sweet. In October he went on to Oxford, where James Murray told him of progress towards \"A New English Dictionary\", and where he heard lectures by the Assyriologist Archibald Sayce and others.\nAround New Year 1888 he went to Germany, first visiting Leipzig, where he met the phonetician Friedrich Techmer and the historical linguists Karl Brugmann and August Leskien. He also visited the historical linguist Eduard Sievers, the phonetician Franz Beyer and the English teacher Hermann Klinghardt, at Halle, Wei\u00dfenfels and Reichenbach respectively. He then stayed with Paul Passy at Neuilly-sur-Seine for two months, each day going with him to Paris to see the sights, to hear lectures by the Romance scholar Gaston Paris, the Orientalist James Darmesteter or the dialectologist Jules Gilli\u00e9ron, or to audit Passy's English lessons.\nHe then went to Berlin to study Old and Middle English in Berlin under the philologist Julius Zupitza. Among his fellow students were the Anglicists Josef Schick and G.\u00a0C. Moore Smith, both of whom would long remain friends. \nFollowing a tip from his mentor Vilhelm Thomsen that after a few years there would be a vacancy for a specialist in English, he returned to Copenhagen in August 1888 and began work on his doctoral dissertation on the English case system, a dissertation that he successfully defended in 1891. His doctorate entitled Jespersen to teach in the university without pay as a \"Privatdocent\"; he took this opportunity to teach classes on Chaucer and Old English, thereby adding to his qualifications for the expected vacancy; he also wrote a book on Chaucer. \nOn the resignation of George Stephens as \"Docent\", the newly vacant position was upgraded to that of Professorship of English language and literature. Jespersen was one of four applicants; the others were Adolf Hansen and J\u00f3n Stef\u00e1nsson (both regarded as rather lacklustre), and William Craigie (then very young). This was \"a no-holds-barred contest\", during which J\u00f3n Stef\u00e1nsson even published a book charging Jespersen with plagiarizing Georg von der Gabelentz (a charge that Gabelentz himself denied). Up to date in English philology, familiar with English literature, and \"[speaking] English perfectly\", Jespersen was chosen. \nJespersen was a professor of English at the University of Copenhagen from 1893 to his retirement in 1925. This was not such a comfortable position: in 1911 he published an article in the newspaper \"Politiken\" describing poor conditions for academic work (serious underfunding, and the lack of a compulsory retirement age for professors), and also how he had got his wife to promise to shoot him if he failed to retire at 65. He remained something of a radical, in a magazine article published in 1914 he made further recommendations: that Denmark should have more than one university (its second would only arrive in 1928), that a Faculty of Divinity did not belong in a modern university, that there should be financial incentives for students to proceed to postgraduate work, and more. However, although Jespersen succeeded in having Latin removed as a compulsory minor, it can be inferred that he backed the compulsory inclusion of Chaucer, Spenser and Milton in the English course.\nJespersen was Dean of the Faculty of Arts from November 1904 to November 1906; and Rector (vice-chancellor, or president) of the university from November 1920 to November 1921. Among his engagements while Rector was an address at the inauguration in March 1921 of the Institute of Theoretical Physics (later renamed Niels Bohr Institute). Another was a speech welcoming new students in September 1921: \"he exhorts [them] to absorb the scholarly and scientific tradition (to the extent of being critical of their professors!), the only genuine hallmark of academics\". \nLanguage teaching.\nAt the end of the 19th century the teaching in Denmark of contemporaneous foreign languages was ossified, and very similar to that of long-dead classical languages. This was despite the belief of N.\u00a0M. Petersen, expressed decades earlier, that pupils should be encouraged to acquire a second language in the way that they had acquired their first, and indeed despite the writings of Jan Amos Comenius in the 17th century.\nIn 1886, Jespersen, August Western and Johan August Lundell cofounded a Scandinavian group for a revitalization of language teaching, naming the group \"Quousque Tandem\" after Wilhelm Vi\u00ebtor's pseudonym as author of the 1882 pamphlet \"Der Sprachunterricht muss umkehren!\". The group opposed the use of theoretical grammar and translation exercises, advocating in its place the teaching of a language in its spoken and living form by the \"direct\" method, informed by phonetics:\nThe pupils should begin by recognizing words and short sentences by ear, and repeating them, and only then should they learn to read them. A correct pronunciation should be secured with the help of phonetic transcription.\nAs a campaigner, Jespersen was an extremist: Hjelmslev writes that this was an area where his normal moderation and common sense were counterbalanced by a revolutionary fervour, and that he was a \"Jacobin\" among linguists.\nJespersen's first book (1884) was a Danish translation, \"Praktisk Tilegnelse af Fremmede Sprog\" (\"Practical acquisition of foreign languages\"), of \"Die praktische Spracherlernung\", by Felix Franke. Both Franke (also born in 1860) and Jespersen first assumed that the other was much older than himself, but from its start in 1884 their correspondence quickly became a lively discussion (about two hundred letters and postcards survive) of such matters as second language education and phonetic scripts; it was cut short in 1886 when Franke succumbed to tuberculosis.\nIn an article published in 1886 (and elaborated in his 1901 book \"Sprogundervisning\", translated as \"How to Teach a Foreign Language\", 1904), Jespersen argued for the following principles in language teaching:\nJespersen followed his 1884 translation of Franke with \"Kortfattet engelsk Grammatik for Tale- og Skriftsproget\" (1885), \"Fransk L\u00e6sebog efter Lydskriftsmetoden\" (1889), and (with Christian Sarauw) \"Engelsk Begynderbog\" (1895), whose use of phonetic script and nursery rhymes made it most unusual. After a heated contest, these books, together with books written by others that similarly used the \"direct method\", soon took over from the \"grammar\u2013translation\" material against which Jespersen and Quousque Tandem had rebelled, as recognized by the Secondary Schools Act of 1903.\nPhonetics.\n Jespersen's interest in phonetics was prompted by Henry Sweet's \"Handbook of Phonetics\" (1877), and the lectures of Vilhelm Thomsen. In the 1880s, inspired by Melville Bell and other British phoneticians, Jespersen developed what he first called an \"analphabetic\" system \u2013 which, in order \"to avoid ridicule\", he later termed an \"antalphabetic\" system \u2013 that used a series of three variables for any phone: lowercase Roman for the passive articulator, lowercase Greek for the active articulator, and numerals and more for \"the degree and shape of the aperture at a place of constriction\". J\u00f8rgen Rischel points out that a given \"anatomical feature\" can be labelled according to its use: thus rather than simply \"uvular\", the role of the uvula can be described as \"a passive articulator in uvular consonants but an active articulator in nasalized sounds\".\n In June 1886, he became a member of the Phonetic Teachers' Association, later renamed the International Phonetic Association (IPA). The idea of creating a phonetic alphabet that could be used by every language was first put forward by Jespersen in a letter he sent to Paul Passy. Jespersen's transcription system for English, used in John Brynildsen's \"A Dictionary of the English and Dano-Norwegian Languages\" (1902\u20131907), is very close to that of Daniel Jones, which it preceded by some years. Language-specific systems were not unusual at the time (Johan A. Lundell published a Swedish dialect alphabet in 1879, Johan Storm devised Norvegia for Norwegian in 1884); and Jespersen devised a system, Dania, for the phonetic transcription of Danish (1890), which has remained in use for philological, dialectological and lexicographic work in Danish. Jespersen was sceptical of a single phonetic transcription system for universal application, and did not use the IPA's International Phonetic Alphabet.\nWith continued encouragement by Thomsen and a new friendship with Paul Passy, whom he met in Paris, Jespersen was well informed on phonetics. His own major work on this was \"Fonetik\", published in 1897\u20131899. In it, Jespersen bases his descriptions on his observations of his own production of sounds in a variety of languages, where this production satisfies native speakers. Jespersen was keen to supplant metaphorical and impressionistic terms with those that described the vocal tract, and had considerable success. J\u00f8rgen Rischel calls \"Fonetik\" \"a landmark in Danish phonetics because of its terminology\", much of which has lasted. \nThe Danish-specific material within \"Fonetik\" was republished in 1906 within the booklet \"Modersm\u00e5lets Fonetik\" (\"Phonetics of the mother tongue\"). This treated not only the sounds of Danish but also its prosody, an area in which Jespersen was a pioneer. Repeatedly reprinted, the booklet was long used as a standard textbook.\nTwo books, \"Phonetische Grundfragen\" (\"Phonetics essentials\") and \"Lehrbuch der Phonetik\" (\"Textbook of phonetics\"), presented portions of \"Fonetik\" \u2013 stripped of content specific to Danish, but updated \u2013 to readers of German in 1904. Jespersen hoped for an English translation, and plans were made first for a translation by Hans J\u00f8rgen Uldall and later for a revision by him; however, no English translation ever appeared. \nRischel writes that: \"It is Jespersen's amazing breadth in [his studies of phonetics], paired with his never failing linguistic intuition as a safeguard against errors or downright nonsense, which impresses the reader today.\" In Eli Fischer-J\u00f8rgensen's estimate (1979), Jespersen was not a great innovator, but was unusually adept at pronunciation and the description of articulatory phonetics, and also aware of the importance of contrast.\n[Jespersen's] theory of the syllable is an original contribution for which he has not always been given sufficient recognition. Here he maintains that speech sounds have an inherent force called sonority, that sounds can be ranked according to sonority, and that syllables correlate with peaks of sonority.\u00a0.\u00a0.\u00a0. [H]e emphasized the ability of sounds to distinguish meanings. In this respect Jespersen can be considered a forerunner of phonemic theory.\nAlthough not a phonologist himself, Jespersen was the first to propose a conceptual distinction between \"phonetics\" and \"phonology\" that is commonly observed today.\nEarly dialectological and other fieldwork on East Slesvig and North Jutland dialects, Faroese, and West Greenlandic work was indebted to Jespersen's methodology (although for the last, the researcher William Thalbitzer \"did not live up to Jespersen's standards at all\").\n\"St\u00f8d\", \"a particular kind of laryngealisation (creaky voice) characterizing some Danish syllables\", had been studied since the mid-18th century (by Jens H\u00f8ysgaard), but Jespersen's synchronic study of \"st\u00f8d\" and of its morphology and also his study of the relationship between the Danish \"st\u00f8d\" and \"the Norwegian and Swedish tonal ('musical') accents\" were major advances from the work done by Rasmus Rask, Karl Verner, and Henry Sweet.\nHans Basb\u00f8ll evaluates Jespersen as \"a true pioneer in his analysis of stress\" saying that:\nhe developed a whole system of types of stress and described it in detail: both syntactic principles of stress reduction (unitary stress, or unit accentuation), of compound stress, of value stress (different types of emphatic stress), and so on.\nJespersen's early work focused primarily on language teaching reform and on phonetics, but he would soon branch out:\nThere was hardly any field of linguistics that Jespersen did not touch upon or develop. He was a diachronic linguist, an excellent phonetician, an equally good descriptive syntactician, both in theory and practice, and one of the founders of sociolinguistics, although he never referred to it as such.\nConcentration on English.\nWhile still regarding himself as less of a scholar of English than a scholar of French, Jespersen published \"Kortfattet engelsk Grammatik for Tale- og Skriftsproget\" (\"A concise English grammar for the spoken and written language\") in 1885. Most unusually for a grammar book, this employed phonetic script. Inge Kabell comments: \"All other grammars of English published in Denmark were for many, many years to come modelled on it and all middle-aged Danes have been taught English according to the principles found in it.\"\nHenry Sweet's views on phonetics, grammar, and historical linguistics, and his concentration on English, had a great influence on Jespersen, whose choice of the case system of English as the subject of his doctoral dissertation was probably also prompted by advice from Vilhelm Thomsen to prepare for a chair in English at the University of Copenhagen that would soon be vacant upon the retirement of George Stephens. He successfully defended his dissertation in 1891. Once installed as chair, Jespersen devoted most of his energy to the study and teaching of English, but he retained his broader interests. His prolific output was of great importance for the linguistic study of all aspects of English, for linguistics in general, and to a lesser degree for Nordic philology. Jespersen was the first great linguist to hold the chair of English at the Copenhagen, while his friend Kristoffer Nyrop had much the same role for the university's chair of French.\nJespersen continued as chair of English until he retired in 1925, following his resolve not to continue after reaching 65, in order to help make way for younger scholars.\nGeneral syntax.\nJespersen advanced the concepts of \"rank\" in two papers: \"Sprogets logik\" (1913) and \"De to hovedarter af grammatiske forbindelser\" (1921); and in the latter, \"nexus\" as well. In this theory of ranks, Jespersen removes the parts of speech from the syntax, and differentiates among what he names \"primaries\", \"secondaries\", and \"tertiaries\"; for example, in \"well honed phrase\", the primary is \"phrase\", this being defined by a secondary, \"honed\", which itself is defined by a tertiary, \"well\". \nThe term \"nexus\" is applied to sentences, structures similar to sentences, and sentences in formation (in which two concepts are expressed in one unit; e.g., \"it rained, he ran indoors\"). This term is qualified by a further concept called a \"junction\" which represents one idea, expressed by means of two or more elements, whereas a nexus combines two ideas. \"Junction\" and \"nexus\" have had a mixed reception. Hjelmslev finds the distinction between them confused, and Jespersen's theory of them in need of revision: a contrast to his refinement in \"Tid og tempus\" (1914) of Sweet's distinction between \"tense\" (Danish \"tempus\") and \"time\" (Danish \"tid\").\nJespersen's work helped point the way towards linguists' current understanding of a grammatical \"head\".\nIn Hjelmslev's opinion, \"Negation in English and Other Languages\" (1917) offers a great number of observations and considerable food for thought, but fails to constitute a general examination of negation, for which purpose it would have to be based on more solid materials, from a greater variety of languages (the overwhelming majority of the examples examined are from the Indo-European languages of west Europe). Jespersen coined the terms \"paratactic negation\" and \"resumptive negation\" (negation with an element added to the end of the sentence to strengthen the already negative meaning of the sentence); he also advanced understanding of \"negative concord\".\nIn \"The Philosophy of Grammar\" (1924) Jespersen challenges the accepted views of common concepts in grammar and proposes corrections to the basic definitions of case, pronoun, object, voice etc., and further develops his notions of \"Rank\" and \"Nexus\". In the 21st century this book is still used as one of the basic texts in modern structural linguistics.\nWith \"The Philosophy of Grammar\" particularly in mind, Noam Chomsky remarked in 1975: \"I think it is fair to say that the work of recent years tends generally to support the basic ideas that Jespersen outlined 50 years ago, and extends and advances the program that he outlined.\"\nLate in his life Jespersen published \"Analytic Syntax\" (1937), in which he presents his views on syntactic structure using an idiosyncratic shorthand notation.\nJespersen's main interest was not that of seeking patterns and explanations of the \"langue\" behind \"parole\", but rather its opposite, the major concern of the phonetics and semantics of his youth: \"the psychophysiological fact of \"parole\"\".\nEvolution and progress of languages.\nFrom the time of his doctoral thesis of 1891 (primarily about the disappearance over time of the case system of Old English), Jespersen maintained that language did not merely evolve over time but \"progressed\", a notion originally inspired by Spencer's ideas on the progress of language. For the publication of the thesis in English translation (1894), Jespersen moved its subtitle to its main title, for \"Progress in Language: With Special Reference to English\". Within it, he wrote \"That language ranks highest which goes farthest in the art of accomplishing much with little means, or, in other words, which is able to express the greatest amount of meaning with the simplest mechanism.\" Jespersen considered the efficiency of a language's phonology, lexicon and grammar, his view of efficiency in grammar being a reaction to contrasting estimates of \"synthetic\" and \"analytic\" inflectional languages held by the brothers August Wilhelm Schlegel and Friedrich Schlegel, and Wilhelm von Humboldt. \nAugust Schleicher was a conspicuous proponent of the idea that older languages such as Latin had attained a synthetic optimum, and languages that derived from these tended to degrade via the analytic towards an \"isolating\" extreme, the degree of degradation of a language increasing with \"the richness and eventfulness of its speakers' history\". Jespersen proposed the reverse, criticizing the needless complexities of synthetic grammar, ascribing Schleicher's evaluations to \"a grammar-school admiration, a Renaissance love of [Latin and Ancient Greek] and their literatures\", and commenting that \"The so-called full and rich forms of the ancient languages are not a beauty but a deformity\".\nWhereas Schleicher conceived language as a biological phenomenon, and thus subject to processes such as maturation, ageing and death, linguists of the mid 19th century such as Georg Curtius, Johan Nikolai Madvig and William Dwight Whitney emphasized language as a human-developed tool for communication. By the end of the century this became the received conception of language. \nJespersen thought of the uses of language as needing a balance between two factors: the \"ease\" of the speaker's expression of ideas, and the \"distinctness\" of that expression (and thus the ease of comprehension for the listener). The proximate sources of the pair were Georg von der Gabelentz's \"Bequemlichkeitstrieb\" ('drive to comfort') and \"Deutlichkeitstrieb\" ('drive to distinctness', although by \"Deutlichkeit\" Gabelentz meant something broader than Jespersen's early formulations of \"distinctness\"). Although Jespersen later recognized that distinctness should include playfulness, vividness and other factors, the ability to communicate remained foremost.\nAs for the mechanism of grammatical change, a major interest of Jespersen's was the diachronic loss from Old English of both case inflections and freedom of word order. He showed that fixed word order did not arrive to make up for the loss of case inflections: word order became fixed before rather than after this loss. Rather, the degree of syncretism in inflection had meant that inflection had lost much of its earlier helpfulness. A later change Jespersen discussed was the disappearance of the exclusively singular second-person (\"thou, thee, thy, thine\"), which, he wrote, had merely maintained a \"useless distinction\" between polite and familiar terms of address or reference.\nFollowing a description of Chinese largely deriving from Gabelentz, Jespersen's \"Progress in Language\" summarized its counter-argument to Schleicher in a pithy fashion:\nThe evolution of language shows a progressive tendency from inseparable irregular conglomerations to freely and regularly combinable short elements.\nSchleicher's system [i.e. Schleicher's hypothesis/opinion, the reverse of the above] is to be likened to an enormous pyramid; only it is a pity that he should make its base the small, square, strong Chinese root-word, and suspend above it the inconvenient flexion-encumbered Indo-Germanic sentence-word. Structures of this sort may with some adroitness be made to stand; but their equilibrium is unstable, and sooner or later they will inevitably tumble over.\nThe message was well received by Chinese intellectuals such as the writer Lin Yutang, the lexicographer T.\u00a0F. Chu, and the philologist Fu Ssu-nien (Fu Sinian). As for the book \"Progress in Language\", in 1909 Karl Brugmann listed it among six \"indispensable books for a first approach to [linguistics]\".\nUnlike Gabelentz, Jespersen was interested in extending the concepts of analyticity and efficiency to international auxiliary languages. Within negotiations among the Delegation for the Adoption of an International Auxiliary Language aimed at deciding which constructed language should receive the international backing of scholars, the greatest supporter of Jespersen's principles was the chemist Wilhelm Ostwald, who had his own theory of \"Energetik\" ('energetics'), and for whom \"Language was .\u00a0.\u00a0. a domain of culture calling out to be optimized through deliberate intervention\". Thus for Jespersen, progress towards communicative efficiency is anyway inevitable, but can also be assisted by language engineering.\nHjelmslev criticizes the ambiguity of \"efficiency\" and \"effort\"; and adds that even if these are understood only loosely, there have been counter-examples. He concludes that, as propounded by Jespersen, the thesis is far from convincing, but that it is put forward vividly and has aroused considerable interest.\nJespersen's conception of evolution soon came to differ from Spencer's. Whereas Spencer believed that increased heterogeneity \u2013 synonymy, and the generation of new word classes, dialects and even languages \u2013 indicated progress, Jespersen found progress in simplicity and uniformity and:\nJespersen praised the \"\u2009'noiseless' machinery\" of English, the modern European language furthest down the analytic path, and the language most despised by Schleicher precisely for what he regarded as this analytic degeneracy.\nIn a review of \"Efficiency in Linguistic Change\", Bernard Bloch was forthright in saying that while linguists, like anyone else, were entitled to their private opinions on the relative merits of languages, judging the utility or attractiveness of a language was not part of their job. But although Bloch was an American structuralist, largely following Leonard Bloomfield, his reaction was much more extreme than that of Bloomfield, who thought that tackling questions such as relative efficiency was not improper, but instead better postponed until the factors involved were better understood.\nA very different kind of opposition to Jespersen's conception came from Charles Bally, whose stylistics concerns led him to concentrate on the affective dimension of language, for which processes such as polysemy and clipping are important, and thus to reject efficiency as an ideal. Bally's objections to received opinions on language evolution extended beyond this: for example, he claimed that the change from \"synthetic\" to \"analytic\" was at times reversed (as Hermann M\u00f6ller had pointed out to Jespersen as early as 1891).\nHans Frede Nielsen has criticized Jespersen's lack of consistency in, for example, approving the development of new, periphrastic (and, thanks to \"\u2011ing\", inflectional) tenses for allowing new distinctions and nuances that enriched English, while also approving the loss in English of the subjunctive and thus the distinctions and nuances that it had enabled.\nFrom the 18th down to the mid 19th century, the origins of language had been an unusually contentious subject, based on little more than speculation \u2013 to the point where in 1866 the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 de Linguistique de Paris banned communications about the subject. The ban, which lasted a decade, had an influence far beyond the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 but seems to have done little to deter Jespersen.\nJespersen argued that none among the \"several types of glottogenetic hypotheses\" in the 1866 typology of Max M\u00fcller \u2013 the \"bow-wow\" theory (that protolanguage imitated sounds in nature), the \"pooh-pooh\" theory (derivation from interjections), and the \"yo-he-yo\" theory (from field hollers and similar) \u2013 should be dismissed because of its inability to explain the distant origin of this or that \"part\" of language. Rather, each of the three may explain certain parts, \"and not even the most important parts \u2013 the main body of language seems hardly to be touched by any of them\".\nJespersen's version of the bow-wow theory in particular may seem farfetched:\nHumboldt held the view .\u00a0.\u00a0. that the origin of language lies in the natural urge to produce art.\u00a0.\u00a0.\u00a0. [The idea, which] originated most probably with Vico .\u00a0.\u00a0. lived on till the beginning of the 20th century. Jespersen .\u00a0.\u00a0. emphatically denies, against all evidence, the romanticist background of this theory, [yet] still defends the thesis that language originated in song, in love play and otherwise.\u00a0.\u00a0.\u00a0. Nowadays [this view] is entirely forgotten.\nHowever, Salikoko Mufwene suggests that such speculations by Jespersen are less important than his belief that study of early, prelinguistic communication by infants \u2013 \"cooing, babbling, and gestures\" \u2013 may illuminate the origins of language.\nMufwene points out that Jespersen's conception of the long-term evolution of language is opposed to that published decades later by Derek Bickerton, for whom the protolanguage was very simple and \"had minimal syntax, if any\": \nWhile Bickerton sees in pidgins fossils of that protolanguage and in creoles the earliest forms of complex grammar that could putatively evolve from them, Jespersen would perhaps see in them the ultimate stage of the evolution of language to date. Many of us today find it difficult to side with one or the other position.\nJespersen's writing on these matters can be unpalatable: \nRather outrageous is Jespersen's claim that languages of \"savages\" in Africa and the Americas could inform us about the origins of language, not only because they have longer words (with complex morphology), but also because they use difficult sounds such as clicks and rely on tones, which, according to him, suggests that their speakers are \"passionate\". \"Primitive languages\" were accordingly sung, poetic, and figurative.\nRichard C. Smith considers \"Language: Its Nature, Development and Origin\" to be Jespersen's \"masterpiece\".\nJespersen advanced the study of the Great Vowel Shift, and was the first to present it in diagram form; he also coined its name.\nChild language.\nThe work of Jespersen's that addresses child language most extensively is \"Nutidssprog hos B\u00f8rn og Voxne\" (\"Today's language in children and adults\", 1916), and its second edition, \"B\u00f8rnesprog: En Bog for Foraldre\" (\"Children's language: A book for parents\", 1923). Their content, and that of \"Sproget: Barnet, Kvinden, Sl\u00e6gten\" (1941), is summarized within \"Language: Its Nature, Development, and Origin\" (1922). Jespersen distinguishes himself, as a linguist, from psychologists and educationalists such as Wilhelm Wundt, William Stern, and Vilhelm Rasmussen, criticizing them for faults such as the ambiguity of estimates of vocabulary when what are counted are ill-defined, and criticizing Wundt in particular for his belief that children participate only passively in what is largely an environmental generation of language.\nJespersen writes of three major stages in first language acquisition: screaming (perceived as language-like by the addressee, if not by the producer), babbling, and talking; and of talking as itself having two stages: own language and common language. He observes that production of speech comes later than understanding (although it can be hard to gauge understanding when not accompanied by production). He deals with issues of lexical semantics, and \"a child's acquisition of his mother tongue is, \"in general\", a complex process of guessing, supposing and inventing, not only in the field of language but also in the fields of reality and conception\". Children's inventiveness encompasses conversion and blending. Taking the use of prepositions to illustrate the acquisition of syntactic structure, Jespersen points out that what linguists now regard as preposition phrases first appear as formulas (thus \"to\" might first appear in \"go \"to bed\"\") and only later in novel combinations.\nJespersen emphasizes the role of young children's linguistic awareness: although they lack the ability to talk about language, awareness can be observed from their reactions to errors by others, from their hesitations, and from their playful alterations of language.\nJespersen also considers the relationship between meanings of words in child language and the concepts held by those children; he suggests that the influence can work in either direction.\nInternational auxiliary languages.\nJespersen applied both his theories on grammar and his ideas of efficiency of expression into the quest for an international auxiliary language. \nIt is true that towards the end of his life Jespersen expressed some qualms about the time and energy he had invested in &amp;lsqb;artificial languages; but his] interest in the matter covered practically his whole life, from his rejection of Volap\u00fck in his student days to suggested reforms in his own creation Novial a few years before his death.\nThe Delegation for the Adoption of an International Auxiliary Language, and Ido.\nIn 1907 Louis Couturat called a meeting of the Delegation for the Adoption of an International Auxiliary Language to decide on a single language for recommendation for international use. As an Anglicist, Jespersen might have been expected to back English for this role, but he rejected such a notion on the grounds that:\nAs for constructed languages, these were thought of has having either of two goals. There were languages primarily designed to encourage clarity of thought, and those primarily based on (but simplifying) existing, widely spoken languages\u2014although examples of the former type had a tendency to develop towards the latter type. Volap\u00fck, which had approached the former (and whose words were built on unrecognizable roots), had recently suffered a rapid decrease in speaker population, eclipsed by Esperanto. Thus the favourites for endorsement by the Delegation were Esperanto (which had regular morphology and was largely based on Romance languages), and Idiom Neutral (which had less stress on regularity and was based on what was already shared by the most prominent languages of Europe). Of the two, Idiom Neutral was more to Jespersen's liking.\nA complex and shady process involved the sudden nomination by somebody using the pseudonym \"Ido\" of a newly conceived revision of Esperanto. Despite learning of the deception made by or for the pseudonymous reviser, and despite his anger over this deception, Jespersen believed candidate languages should be judged purely on their merits, and that this revision (which itself came to be called Ido) was a significant improvement over Esperanto in its state at the time. However, L.\u00a0L. Zamenhof, Esperanto's creator, was opposed to it, as was the Esperantists' Lingva Komitato, and Ido became a rival of Esperanto. Jespersen collaborated with Louis Couturat and others on \"International Language and Science\" (1910), a book advocating its adoption; and became president of an Ido academy. But although a significant increase in its number of speakers would have required Ido to mobilize its speakers and evangelize, such a project did not attract Jespersen, who wanted \"a language for the brain, not for the heart\".\nThe International Auxiliary Language Association.\nIn 1925 Jespersen met Alice Morris, a wealthy cofounder (and lasting financial supporter) of the International Auxiliary Language Association (IALA). \"[U]nlike its counterparts in the international auxiliary language movement in Europe, there was in IALA little of the fanaticism, the eccentricity, and even the mysticism that accompanied the promotion of languages such as Esperanto.\" Through Morris and the IALA, Jespersen also met Edgar de Wahl, creator of the language Occidental and others with whom he could discuss the possibilities for constructed languages.\nJespersen's active participation in the IALA included chairing an IALA-funded conference, the Meeting of Linguistic Research, held in Geneva in spring 1930; but perhaps more important to IALA was the prestige he brought. Before the involvement in IALA, and later the formal association with it, of American scholars such as Edward Sapir, Earle Babcock, Henry A. Todd, and John L. Gerig, and the Europeans W.\u00a0E. Collinson and Jespersen, many in academia thought international auxiliary languages pointless and a waste of time; but now \"the organization and the movement could \u2013 and did \u2013 claim scholarly legitimacy for its linguistic research\".\nMorris viewed the issues involved in constructing a language to be mainly those of the lexicon. She and Jespersen (writing in a 1929 article, \"Nature and art in language\") were not unusual:\nThe proponents, the creators, and the analysts of artificial languages all concentrated on lexicon and derivational morphology. Syntax warranted no special attention. Being 'natural', it would take care of itself, or so it seemed to many of the enthusiasts most responsible for actually constructing auxiliary languages.\nNovial.\nJespersen believed that constructed languages, Ido included, were still more complex than needed, and still differed more than necessary from widely spoken national languages. He therefore set out to create an improved language, Novial (\"Nov\" 'new' + \"IAL\" 'International Auxiliary Language'). His significant publications here include \"An International Language\"; \"Novial Lexike\" (a dictionary); and \"A new science: Interlinguistics\" (all published 1928\u20131931). Novial had a mixed reception (the Esperantist Gaston Waringhien found it particularly unsatisfactory), and Jespersen was hobbled by the mutual incompatibility of regularity and perceived naturalness as goals. Oddly, Novial also lacked some of the features that Jespersen had praised in English, such as consonant-ending monosyllabic words, and conversion without a need for inflection.\nLarsen urges his readers:\nBut rather than judge [projects such as Novial] by their actual or potential contribution to international communication, we are better advised .\u00a0.\u00a0. to see [Jespersen's] life-long preoccupation with auxiliary languages and his creation of Novial not as a heroic failure but as a revealing application of his linguistic thought.\nEnglish.\nTerms related to English that were introduced by Jespersen and are still widely used today include \"cleft sentence\", \"content clause\", \"light verb\", \"mass noun\", \"quantifier\", and \"yes-or-no question\". Jespersen's writings have also influenced today's conceptions of \"existential sentence\".\nIn his own work \"The Syntactic Phenomena of English\" (1988), James D. McCawley attributes various of his analyses, or the insights pointing towards them, to Jespersen: raising; \"worthwhile criticism of traditional systems of parts of speech\" and classification of what are traditionally termed \"subordinating conjunctions\" (as in \"You must look at this \"before you leave\"\") as prepositions with sentential objects; and more specifically, classification of \"that\" in relative clauses (as in \"The necktie \"that he bought\" was polyester\") not as a relative pronoun but as a complementizer. Asked how the 20th-century Dutch grammarians of English Hendrik Poutsma, Etsko Kruisinga and R.\u00a0W. Zandvoort compared with Jespersen, McCawley replied: \"Of course, Jespersen is in a class by himself. He was a fantastically original, broad, and deep thinker.\"\nRobert I. Binnick calls Jespersen \"one of the greatest students of the English language .\u00a0.\u00a0.\u00a0, at once the last of the traditional grammarians and the first modern linguist\u2013grammarian\".\n\"A Modern English Grammar on Historical Principles\".\nJespersen's specialism for the longest period was the English language. His most celebrated work, and easily his most expansive, was \"A Modern English Grammar on Historical Principles\", published in six \"parts\" (volumes) during his lifetime, from 1909 to 1942, and a seventh, posthumous part in 1949. The first part is devoted to phonetics (much of it historical), the sixth to morphology (both derivational and inflectional). The other five are devoted to syntax, which Jespersen particularly enjoyed.\nWriting in Jespersen's obituary, Helmslev calls \"A Modern English Grammar\" a \"monumental work\", one that \"will maintain its immense value for an incalculable future thanks to the rich documentation of facts it provides\".\nOther works on English.\n\"Growth and Structure of the English Language\" (1905, and reprinted at numerous times thereafter) is a broad history of the English language. It won Jespersen the Prix Volney. In 1989, Hans Frede Nielsen wrote that:\n[It] can be read as the homage paid by an Anglophile to the English language which is praised for its business-like, virile qualities, its conciseness, logic and sobriety \u2014 to say nothing of its noble, rich, pliant and expressive character.\u00a0.\u00a0.\u00a0. No wonder that [the book] became so popular in the English-speaking world and among Anglophiles elsewhere.\nHe described it as \"probably the most widely read introduction to the history of the English language ever written\".\n\"Essentials of English Grammar\" (1933), primarily intended for university teaching, is for the most part synchronic. W. Nelson Francis described it as \"arguably [Jespersen's] most familiar and popular book\".\nWomen's language.\nJespersen has been cited as \"a pioneer in the study of women's language [and] often quoted for his views on what he believed to be the biologically determined nature of women's usage\" \u2013 although \"[a] product of his own day and age\".\nLinguists since Jespersen have been less patient with the content of \"The woman\", chapter 13 within his book \"Language: Its Nature, Development and Origin\" (1922): \"he manages to include every stereotype about women that was current at the time\"; \"[the chapter offers] a compendium \u2013 and a grim one for that matter, filled with prejudices and misogyny \u2013 of long-standing commonplaces on women's contribution to the development of language.\"\nMargaret Thomas writes: \nJespersen's Chapter 13 is now read as the prime early example of conventional stereotypes and preconceptions about women's language that consider it inherently defective relative to men's language. As such, Jespersen's text is introduced into accounts of the history of language and gender studies in tones that range from detached amusement to derision.\nThomas continues by summarizing how Deborah Cameron reprints what she calls \"Jespersen's notorious chapter\" \"in toto\", Kira Hall describes it as \"infamous\", Patrick Mahony demonstrates how it exhibits \"androcentric ideology\" and \"chauvinism\", and Jennifer Coates makes multiple references to \"Language, Its Nature, Development and Origin\" as a whole.\nChapter 13, \"The woman\", is one of five chapters making up \"Book III\" of \"Language: Its Nature, Development and Origin\", a Book in which \"Jespersen describes and speculates about the influence of what he considers three other major factors in language change\": multilingualism and language contact, pidgins and creoles, and women. While claiming that the differences between women's and men's language contribute to such change, his descriptions of these differences tend to make limited concessions to claims made by others, downplaying their scope or significance Thomas summarizes Jespersen's judgments as made in a tone \"not so much distasteful, much less scornful, toward women and women's language as it is indulgent and condescending\"; \"Jespersen's assessment of women's language overall cannot be represented as disparaging\"; he \"does not seem to present women's language as a deformed version of men's language\".\nOn its first publication (1922), numerous, mostly favourable reviews were published of \"Language: Its Nature, Development and Origin\". But its chapter 13 \"received scant attention from contemporary readers\". Thomas finds only one review that comments substantively on the chapter: that in \"The Modern Language Review\" by W.\u00a0E. Collinson. This did not criticize Jespersen's methodology (quite inadequate from today's perspective, normal in its time); nevertheless, \"Collinson alone took Jespersen's claims seriously, but downplayed them as inaccurate and overblown.\"\nThomas sees Jespersen's \"The woman\" (taken together with the Danish-language versions: the 1907 article and the 1941 book) as \"an essentially singular, isolated, text that had little precedent \"or\" following for another fifty years\". But the rediscovery of (societal) gender differences in language as a subject for study, led in the mid-1970s by Robin Lakoff and Cheris Kramer, brought considerable commentary in feminist linguistics, based on descriptions of the chapter ranging from accurate, to simplifying, to distorting. Thomas approvingly quotes Deborah Cameron: \"If you read the whole chapter in which Jespersen expounds on the subject of 'The Woman', it becomes clear that he is adopting a view of languages as ideally balanced between 'masculine' and 'feminine' elements\".\nScholarly influences and allegiances.\nNiels Haislund comments:\nThe three Danish scholars Vilhelm Thomsen, Karl Verner and Hermann M\u00f6ller, Johan Storm the Norwegian (\"Englische Philologie\"), and Sweet probably are those teachers to whom Otto Jespersen owes most, no doubt he was Sweet's dearest pupil.\nDuring the decades of his activity, Jespersen followed what other, younger linguists were doing but refrained from unreservedly welcoming any advance, let alone from aligning himself with any new approach. He remained individualistic, but \"there was a conservative streak in his radicalism\" as he seemed to take seriously only the standpoints that had influenced him in his youth and to interpret newer work as mere repetition of this or that older theory.\nHans Basb\u00f8ll sees many followers of Jespersen in Denmark. He has coined the term \"New Jespersen School\" (\"Ny-Jespersenianerne\") for \"the main editors of [\"Den store danske Udtaleordbog\" (a major pronunciation dictionary for Danish)], namely, Lars Brink, J\u00f8rn Lund and Steffen Heger, and their collaborators and pupils\"; their major achievement aside from \"SDU\" has been Brink and Lund's two-volume historical phonetics work \"Dansk Rigsm\u00e5l\" (1975).\nRather than naming Jespersen's adherents in each of the various other areas of linguistics of interest to Jespersen, Basb\u00f8ll chooses to describe only a single line of succession, in the study of Danish grammar. In the preface to his 1901 book \"Synspunkter for Dansk Sprogl\u00e6re\", H.\u00a0G. Wiwel expresses his gratitude to Jespersen, who in turn praised Wiwel's book, if guardedly. The book harshly criticized the work of Kristian Mikkelsen: unjustly so, in the opinion of Paul Diderichsen. According to Basb\u00f8ll, in a \"large scientific grammar of Danish\" of 2011 by Erik Hansen and Lars Heltoft, Wiwel is among the earlier grammarians who \"play a significant role\", and so Jespersen \"still has a heavy share of today's tradition of Danish grammar\".\nMore broadly, Olli O. Silvennoinen sees Jespersen's compatibility with, or encouragement for, late 20th-century functionalism, and \"communicative pressures on language structure\" (thanks to his \"Darwinist and teleological approach to language change\"); mainstream generative grammar (thanks to his \"emphasis on universal principles underlying superficial variation across languages\"); non-mainstream generative grammar (thanks to his \"empirical richness and theoretical depth\"); and corpus linguistics (thanks to copious provision of attested examples).\nTravels and honours.\nJespersen visited the United States twice: he lectured at the Congress of Arts and Sciences in St.\u00a0Louis in 1904, and in 1909\u20131910 at the University of California at Berkeley, Columbia University (New York), the University of Chicago, Harvard University, and Wellesley College (Wellesley, Massachusetts).\nAfter his retirement in 1925, Jespersen remained active in the international linguistic community. As well as continuing to write, he convened and chaired the first International Meeting on Linguistic Research in Geneva in 1930, co-chaired the first International Congress of Linguists in The Hague in 1928, and presided over the fourth in Copenhagen in 1936.\nJespersen received honorary degrees from Columbia University (1910), the University of St Andrews in Scotland (1925), and the Sorbonne in Paris (1927). He was one of the first six international scholars to be elected as honorary members of the Linguistic Society of America. He was elected a foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1931.\nBooks by Jespersen.\nEven Hovdhaugen et al. describe Jespersen's output:\n[Jespersen's] textbooks and numerous other books gave readers balanced, although not uncritical, information on what was going on in the field of linguistics. Jespersen had a broad theoretical orientation, was interested in all subsystems of language, and invoked examples from many different languages in a way that made him a precursor of language typology.\nPolitical and other views.\nJespersen was \"an idealist and a pacifist\"; and \"It is no surprise that Jespersen, with his communicative view of language, his work in foreign language teaching, \"and\" his pacifism, should have been attracted to the idea of an international language.\" \nHe was \"a rationalist and a radical\". And \"typical of his approach\" was Jespersen's application of:\nthe formula I put forward in 1908, and which since then has been very often quoted by Idists: \"That international language is best which in every point offers the greatest facility to the greatest number\" (modelled, of course, on Hutcheson's and Bentham's famous dictum: That action is best, which accomplishes the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers).\nPolitically, Jespersen leant to the left:\nBy temperament he belonged to no party for he could never endorse any party-political platform to the full, but he was closest to the Social Democrats in their ideas about social justice, equal opportunity and the like\nHe had a \"dislike of anything that is stilted and pretentious and aimed at making the writer appear more important than he is\".\nLack of respect for authority and tradition was an important part of Jespersen's personality.\u00a0.\u00a0.\u00a0. Intellectually Jespersen's inclination to go his own way expressed itself in scepticism and an urge to contradict.\nPersonal life.\nAs a student, Jespersen enjoyed chess and reading French and English literature.\nJespersen married Ane Marie Dj\u00f8rup on 13 April 1897; the couple, later together with their son (Frans), lived in Frederiksberg (administratively outside Copenhagen but geographically part of it), until their move in 1901 to Ermelundsly, a large house in J\u00e6gersborg, near Gentofte. In 1934 they again moved, to Lundehave, a large house in the outskirts of Helsing\u00f8r, provided by the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters for a distinguished academician.\nAne Marie died on 30 March 1937. Jespersen became ill in December 1942; he died on 30 April 1943, and his urn was interred in a cemetery at Helsing\u00f8r.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22758", "revid": "38516105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22758", "title": "List of object-oriented programming languages", "text": "This is a list of notable programming languages with features designed for object-oriented programming (OOP).\nThe listed languages are designed with varying degrees of OOP support. Some are highly focused in OOP while others support multiple paradigms including OOP. For example, C++ is a multi-paradigm language including OOP; however, it is less object-oriented than other languages such as Python and Ruby.\nLanguages with object-oriented features.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22759", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22759", "title": "OOP", "text": "OOP, Oop, or oop may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "22760", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22760", "title": "Occidental", "text": "Occidental may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "22761", "revid": "19475098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22761", "title": "Interlingue", "text": "International auxiliary language created 1922\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFrom the \"Lord's Prayer\" (in Interlingue)\nPatre nor, qui es in li cieles,\nmey tui n\u00f3mine esser sanctificat...\nInterlingue (; ISO 639 \"ie\", \"ile\"), originally Occidental (), is an international auxiliary language created in 1922 and renamed in 1949. Its creator, Edgar de Wahl, sought to achieve maximal grammatical regularity and natural character. The vocabulary is based on pre-existing words from various languages and a derivational system which uses recognized prefixes and suffixes.\nMany of Interlingue's derived word forms reflect those common to certain Western European languages, primarily the Romance languages, along with some Germanic vocabulary. Many of its words are formed using de Wahl's rule, a set of rules for regular conversion of all but six verb infinitives into derived words including from Latin double-stem verbs (e.g. \"vider\" to see and its derivative \"vision\"). The result is a naturalistic and regular language that is easy to understand at first sight for individuals acquainted with certain Western European languages. Readability and simplified grammar, along with the regular appearance of the magazine \"Cosmoglotta\", made Occidental popular in Europe during the years before World War II despite efforts by the Nazis to suppress international auxiliary languages.\nOccidental survived the war, but the community had been out of touch with the language's creator since 1939. A Baltic German naval officer and teacher from Estonia, de Wahl refused to leave his Tallinn home for Germany, even after his house was destroyed in the 1943 air raids on the city forcing him to take refuge in a psychiatric hospital. Since most of his mail had been intercepted, he died in 1948 largely unaware of developments in the language. The name change to \"Interlingue\" took place the following year for two reasons: (1) to demonstrate to the Soviet Union the language's neutrality, and (2) the expectation of a possible union or closer collaboration with the community around Interlingua, a competing naturalistic project under development. Many users were lost following the latter's appearance in 1951, beginning a period of decline until the advent of the Internet.\nHistory and activity.\nBeginnings.\nEdgar de Wahl announced the creation of Occidental in 1922 with the first issue of the magazine \"Cosmoglotta\", published in Tallinn, Estonia under the name \"Kosmoglott\". Occidental was a product of years of personal experimentation under the name Auli (auxiliary language), which he used from 1906 to 1921 and which later on gained the nickname proto-Occidental. De Wahl, originally a proponent of Volap\u00fck and then Esperanto, began creating Occidental after the failed vote to reform Esperanto in 1894.\nDe Wahl corresponded with other language creators, among them the Italian mathematician Giuseppe Peano (creator of Latino sine flexione), from whom he gained an appreciation for its selection of international vocabulary, and Waldemar Rosenberger, the creator of Idiom Neutral.\nUpon its announcement in 1922, Occidental was nearly complete. De Wahl had not intended to announce the language for a few years, but decided to accelerate its release after hearing that the League of Nations (LON) had begun an inquiry into the question of an international language. The first known publication in Occidental, a booklet entitled \"Transcendent Algebra\" by Jacob Linzbach, appeared shortly before \"Kosmoglott\" debuted.\nOccidental began gathering followers due to its readability, despite a complete lack of grammars and dictionaries. Two years later in 1924, de Wahl wrote that he was corresponding with about 30 people \"in good Occidental\" despite the lack of learning material, and users of other languages began to join Occidental. The first dictionary, the \"Radicarium Directiv,\" a collection of Occidental root words and their equivalents in eight languages, was published the following year.\n\"Kosmoglott\" was also a forum for various other planned languages, while still mainly written in Occidental. The name was changed to \"Cosmoglotta\" in 1927 as it began to officially promote Occidental in lieu of other languages, and that January the magazine's editorial and administrative office was moved to the Vienna neighborhood of Mauer, now part of Liesing. Much of the early success for Occidental in this period came from the office's new central location, along with the efforts of Engelbert Pigal, also from Austria, whose article \"Li Ovre de Edgar de Wahl\" (The Work of Edgar de Wahl) led to interest in Occidental from users of Ido. Use in France began in 1928, and by the beginning of the next decade the Occidental community was established in Germany, Austria, Sweden, Czechoslovakia and Switzerland.\nVienna period and World War II.\nThe Vienna period was also marked by financial stability. With the help of two major backers, Hanns H\u00f6rbiger, also from Vienna, and G.A. Moore from London, \"Cosmoglotta\" thrived despite the economic crisis. After the two died in 1931, \"Cosmoglotta\" was again forced to rely on revenue from subscriptions and republications.\nThe growing movement began campaigning more assertively for Occidental in the early 1930s, leveraging its at-sight readability by contacting organizations such as companies, embassies, printing houses and the LON with letters entirely in Occidental that were often understood and answered. Recordings of spoken Occidental on gramophone records for distribution were first made in this period.\nThe years from 1935 to 1939 were particularly active for \"Cosmoglotta\" and a second edition of the journal was published. Originally entitled \"Cosmoglotta-Informationes\", it was soon renamed \"Cosmoglotta B\", focusing on items of more internal interest such as linguistic issues, reports of Occidental in the news, and financial updates. In early 1936, not counting the 110 issues of \"Cosmoglotta\" and other journals and bulletins, a total of 80 publications existed in and about Occidental.\nBut the years before World War II posed difficulties for Occidental and other planned languages. They were banned in Germany, Austria and Czechoslovakia, forced to disband, and kept under surveillance by the Gestapo, which also destroyed instructional materials. The prohibition of auxiliary languages in Germany was particularly damaging as this was where most Occidentalists lived at the time. The inability to accept payment for subscriptions was a financial blow that continued after the war along with Germany's division into zones of influence, not all of which allowed payments.\nDe Wahl, in Tallinn, was unable to communicate with the Occidental Union in Switzerland from 1939 to October 1947, first due to the war and thereafter the interception of mail between Switzerland and the Soviet Union. Unaware of this, de Wahl was bewildered at the lack of response to his continued letters; even a large collection of poetry translated into Occidental was never delivered. The only letter of his received in Switzerland came in 1947, asking the Occidental Union why it had not answered any of his. Meanwhile, de Wahl's house and his entire library had been destroyed during the bombardment of Tallinn. De Wahl himself was incarcerated for a time after refusing to leave Estonia for Germany, and later took refuge in a psychiatric hospital where he lived out his life.\nThe outbreak of war in 1939 put a halt to publications of both \"Cosmoglotta\"s through 1940, but in 1941 \"Cosmoglotta B\" began publication once again and continued until 1950. An edition of either \"Cosmoglotta\" A or B was published every month between January 1937 and September 1939, and then (after the initial shock of the war) every month from September 1941 to June 1951. During the war, only those in neutral Switzerland and Sweden were able to fully devote themselves to the language, carrying on activities semi-officially.\nDuring the war, Occidentalists noticed that the language was often permitted to be sent by telegram within and outside of Switzerland (especially to and from Sweden) even without official recognition, surmising that censors were able to understand it and may have thought them to be written in Spanish or Romansch (a small yet official Romance language in Switzerland). This allowed some communication to take place between the Occidentalists in Switzerland and Sweden. The other centres of Occidental activity in Europe did not fare as well, with the stocks of study materials in Vienna and Tallinn having been destroyed in bombings and numerous Occidentalists sent to concentration camps in Germany and Czechoslovakia.\nContacts were reestablished shortly after the war by those who remained, with letters from countries such as France, Czechoslovakia, Finland and Great Britain reaching \"Cosmoglotta\". Writers said they were ready to begin activities anew for the language. \"Cosmoglotta\" had subscribers in 58 cities in Switzerland a few months before the end of World War II in Europe, and \"Cosmoglotta\" A began publication again in 1946.\nLanguage standardization.\nDuring the war many Occidentalists took to standardizing the language. De Wahl had created Occidental with a number of unchangeable features, but believed that its following of the \"laws of life\" gave it a firm enough base that it could follow a \"natural evolution\" with a flexibility that would \"allow time and practice to take care of modifications that would prove to be necessary\". As a result, some words had more than one permissible form, which could not be resolved by decree alone, thus leaving the ultimate decision to the community by including both possible forms in the first Occidental dictionaries. One example concerned the verb \"scrir\" (to write) and a possible other form \"scripter\", as both created internationally recognizable derivations: \"scritura\" and \"scritor\" from \"scrir\", or \"scriptura\" and \"scriptor\" from \"scripter.\" De Wahl expressed a preference for \"scrir\", finding \"scripter\" to be somewhat heavy, but commented that the latter was certainly permissible and that Occidental might take on a similar evolution to natural languages in which both forms come into common use, with the longer form having a heavier and formal character and the shorter form a lighter and more everyday tone (such as English \"story\" vs. \"history\").\nOrthography was another area in which several possibilities existed, namely etymologic orthography (adtractiv, obpression), historic orthography (attractiv, oppression), or simplified orthography (atractiv, opression). The simplified orthography eventually became the standard by 1939. With questions still remaining about the official form of some words and a lack of general material destined for the general public, much time during World War II was spent on language standardization and course creation, and due to the continuing war, in August 1943 the decision was made to create an interim academy to officialize this process.\nThis process had just about begun not long before the war, and the Swiss Occidentalists, finding themselves isolated from the rest of the continent, opted to concentrate on instructional materials to have ready by the end of the war.\nIALA, Interlingua, and name change to Interlingue.\nThe International Auxiliary Language Association (IALA), founded in 1924 to study and determine the best planned language for international communication, was at first viewed with suspicion by the Occidental community. Its co-founder Alice Vanderbilt Morris was an Esperantist, as were many of its staff, and many Occidentalists including de Wahl himself believed that its leadership under Esperantist William Edward Collinson meant that it had been set up with a staff of professional linguists under a neutral and scientific pretext to bolster a final recommendation for Esperanto. Relations soon improved, however, as it became clear that the IALA intended to be as impartial as possible by familiarizing itself with all existing planned languages. Ric Berger, a prominent Occidentalist who later joined Interlingua in the 1950s, made a personal visit to Morris in 1935 in which she and her husband showed a curiosity for Occidental and invited him to speak in the language, vastly improving Berger's opinion of the organization.\nIn 1945, the IALA announced that it planned to create its own language and showed four possible versions under consideration, all of which were naturalistic as opposed to schematic. Occidentalists were by and large pleased that the IALA had decided to create a language so similar in nature to Occidental, seeing it as a credible association that gave weight to their argument that an auxiliary language should proceed from study of natural languages instead of attempting to fit them into an artificial system. Ric Berger was particularly positive in describing the upcoming language as a victory for the natural school and \"almost the same language\" in 1948. Berger still had reservations, however, doubting whether a project with such a similar aspect and structure would be able to \"suddenly cause prejudices [against planned languages] to fall and create unity among the partisans of international languages\". Berger also feared that it might simply \"disperse the partisans of the natural language with nothing to show for it\" after Occidental had created \"unity in the naturalistic school\" for so long.\nWhile the two languages had a 90 per cent identical vocabulary without orthographic differences taken into account (e.g. with and considered the same word), structurally and derivationally they were very different. De Wahl's Rule in Occidental had mostly done away with Latin double stem verbs (verbs such as act: , or send: , ), while Interlingua simply accepted them as part and parcel of a naturalistic system. The control languages (Italian, Spanish and/or Portuguese, French, English) used by Interlingua to form its vocabulary for the most part require an eligible word to be found in three source languages (the \"rule of three\"), which would conflict with Occidental's Germanic substrate and various other words which would be by definition ineligible in a unified language that retained Interlingua's methodology. Interlingua also allowed optional irregular verbal conjugations such as , and as the first-person singular, third-person plural and subjunctive form of , the verb 'to be'.\nOccidental was also still recovering from the war. \"Cosmoglotta\" continued to report into 1946 on who had survived the war, who among them were ready to participate again and those who were still out of touch. The magazine was financially strained by inflated postwar printing costs and its inability to collect payments from certain countries, a marked contrast to the well-funded New York-based IALA.\nInternational politics was another difficulty for Occidentalists after the war. The beginning of the Cold War created an uncomfortable situation for the Occidental-Union, whose name unfortunately coincided with that of an anti-Russian political league; the Swiss Occidentalists believed that was why all of de Wahl's letters from Tallinn were intercepted. De Wahl remained unaware of developments in the language and the proposal for the rest of his life. In early 1948 the Czechoslovak Occidentalists had begun requesting a new name that would allow them to continue their linguistic activities without suspicion, proposing the name Interal (International auxiliari lingue), to which the union responded that the term \"Interlingue\" would be more appropriate and that they were free to introduce the language as \"Interlingue (Occidental)\", or even remove the mention of Occidental in parentheses if they wanted. Ric Berger began advocating for a change of name from Occidental to Interlingue in 1948 which he also hoped would aid in a fusion between the two languages. The official vote on the name change to Interlingue took place in 1949 and was passed with 91 per cent support, making the official name Interlingue, with Interlingue (Occidental) also permitted, starting September 1949.\nThe 1951 debut of Interlingua weakened Interlingue-Occidental, which until then had been unchallenged in the field of naturalistic planned auxiliary languages. V\u0115ra Barandovsk\u00e1-Frank's perception of the situation at the time was as follows (translated from Esperanto):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the field of naturalistic planned languages Occidental-Interlingue was until then unchallenged (especially after the death of Otto Jespersen, author of Novial), as all new projects were nearly imitations of it. This applied to Interlingua as well, but it carried with it a dictionary of 27 000 words put together by professional linguists that brought great respect, despite in principle only confirming the path that de Wahl had started. [...] In these circumstances the efforts by Ric Berger to move all users of Interlingue en masse to Interlingua de IALA was a shock. His heresy caused doubt and interruptions in Interlingue circles, especially after he became involved in the publication of \"Revista de Interlingua\". The former idea of a natural fusion of both languages was shown to be unrealistic, with the new language becoming a rival.\nDon Harlow similarly summarizes the year 1951 for Occidental:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Interlingua had a ready-made constituency. Almost thirty years had passed since the creation of Occidental, whose strength in the \"naturalistic\" world had prevented other \"naturalistic\" projects from developing their own movements. But Occidental's star had waned since the war. Now, like a bolt from the blue, came this heaven-sent gift: a new constructed language even more \"naturalistic\" than Occidental. In spite of attempts by diehard supporters of Occidental to stave off the inevitable \u2014 for instance, by such tactics as renaming their language Interlingue \u2014 most remaining Occidentalists made the short pilgrimage to the shrine of Interlingua.\nStagnation and revival.\nWhile the migration of so many users to Interlingua had severely weakened Interlingue, the ensuing drop in activity was gradual and took place over decades. \"Cosmoglotta B\" ceased publication after 1950, and the frequency of \"Cosmoglotta A\" began to gradually drop: once every second month from 1952, and then once per quarter from 1963. Other bulletins in Interlingue continued to appear during this time such as \"Cive del Munde\" (Switzerland), \"Voce de Praha\" (Czechoslovakia), \"Sved Interlinguist\" (Sweden), \"International Memorandum\" (United Kingdom), \"Interlinguistic Novas\" (France), \"Jurnale Scolari International\" (France), \"Buletine Pedagogic International\" (France), \"Super li Frontieras\" (France), \"Interlingue-Postillon\" (1958, Germany), \"Novas de Oriente\" (1958, Japan), \"Amicitie european\" (1959, Switzerland), \"Teorie e practica\" (Switzerland-Czechoslovakia, 1967), and \"Novas in Interlingue\" (Czechoslovakia, 1971). Barandovsk\u00e1-Frank believed that the ebb in interest in Occidental-Interlingue occurred in concert with the aging of the generation that was first drawn to it from other planned languages:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Most of those interested in Interlingue belonged to the generation that became acquainted in turn with Volap\u00fck, Esperanto and Ido, later on finding the most aesthetic (essentially naturalistic) solution in Occidental-Interlingue. Many subsequently moved to IALA's Interlingua, which however did not prove to be much more successful despite the impression its scientific origin made, and those who remained loyal to Occidental-Interlingue did not succeed in imparting their enthusiasm to a new generation.\nActivity in Interlingue reached a low during the 1980s and early 1990s, when \"Cosmoglotta\" publication ceased for a few years. While issue 269 was published in 1972 after publishing once per season between 1963, issue 289 was not reached until summer 2000 for an average of less than one issue per year. According to Harlow, \"in 1985 Occidental's last periodical, \"Cosmoglotta\", ceased publication, and its editor, Mr. Adrian Pilgrim, is quoted as having described Occidental as a 'dead language.'\" A decade later, a documentary film in 1994 by Steve Hawley and Steyger on planned languages introduced Interlingue speaker Donald Gasper as \"one of the last remaining speakers of the language Occidental\".\nAs was the case for other planned languages, the arrival of the Internet spurred Interlingue's revival. In the year 1999 the first Yahoo! Group in Occidental was founded, \"Cosmoglotta\" had begun publishing intermittently again, and the language became a subject of discussion in literature on auxiliary languages. One example is \"The Esperanto Book\" released in 1995 by Harlow, who wrote that Occidental had an intentional emphasis on European forms and that some of its leading followers espoused a Eurocentric philosophy, which may have hindered its spread. Still, the opposite view was also common in the community and Occidental gained adherents in many nations including Asian nations. An Interlingue Wikipedia was approved in 2004. In recent years official meetings of Interlingue speakers have resumed: one in Ulm in 2013, another in Munich in 2014 with three participants, and a third in Ulm the next year with five.\nThe most recent edition of \"Cosmoglotta\" is volume 333, for the period from January to June 2024.\nRecent years have shown new books published in Interlingue such as \"The Little Prince\", the Gospel of Mark, , and works including \"Li sercha in li castelle Dewahl e altri racontas\", \"Antologie hispan,\" and \"Fabules, racontas e mites\".\nLanguage philosophy.\nDe Wahl was first introduced to planned languages through Volap\u00fck, an international auxiliary language released in 1879. De Wahl later became one of the earliest users of Esperanto (), which he encountered for the first time in 1888 during his period as a Volap\u00fckist and for which he was in the process of composing a dictionary of marine terms. He quickly became a fervent supporter of Esperanto for a number of years in which he collaborated with Zamenhof on some parts of the language's design and translated one of the first works into Esperanto: \"Princidino Mary\", published in 1889 originally under the name Princino Mary. He remained an Esperantist until 1894 when the vote to reform Esperanto failed; he was one of just two that voted neither for Esperanto unchanged, nor for the reform proposed by Zamenhof, but for a completely new reform. Occidental would not be announced for a full 28 years after de Wahl had abandoned Esperanto, a period in which he spent working with other language creators trying to develop a system that combined naturalism and regularity, a combination that became a frequently referenced selling point in the promotion of Occidental.\nAmong those de Wahl worked with while developing Occidental were Waldemar Rosenberger (Idiom Neutral), Julius Lott (Mundolingue), and Antoni Grabowski (Modern Latin for a time, before returning to Esperanto). The method sought after by these \"partisans of naturalism\" was the distillation of existing words into their parts to obtain the international roots within them (such as naturalisation to nat-ur-al-is-ation), then used in other words to keep root words to a minimum while maintaining a natural appearance. This decomposition of existing words gave rise to a large number of affixes. For example, just those used to form nouns referring to a type of person are as follows: \"-er-\" ( \u2013 miller), \"-or-\" ( \u2013 editor), \"-ari-\" ( \u2013 millionaire), \"-on-\" (, spy), \"-ard\" (, liar), \"-astr-\" (, lousy poet), \"-es\" (, Frenchman), \"-essa\" (, queen). In de Wahl's opinion it was always preferable to opt for a productive suffix than to be forced to coin new words from completely new radicals later on. In addition to this, de Wahl's rule developed later allowed for regular derivation from double-stem Latin verbs.\nThe Delegation for the Adoption of an International Auxiliary Language, a body of academics formed to study the problem of an international language and which recommended Esperanto with reforms (leading to the language known as Ido), occurred in 1907 before Occidental was announced. De Wahl thus chose to send a memorandum of principles on which to base an international language, a memorandum which arrived after the committee had already adjourned. It was only noted in passing by Louis Couturat, who was already familiar with de Wahl and his collaborators. The principles stated in the memorandum are listed in a request for the committee to declare:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;1. that none of the existing systems are satisfactory;\n2. that the international language to construct should be based on international material;\n3. that it should have a precise system of formation of words which, by its own rules, obtains words which are truly international;\n4. that it should have a natural grammar that produces no unnatural forms;\n5. that it should have an international orthography.\nDe Wahl published in 1922 a modification of Otto Jespersen's principle that \"That international language is best which in every point offers the greatest facility to the greatest number\", stating that the international language should be easiest for the majority of those \"who must apply it\", or in other words those that need it in international relations. De Wahl believed that the number of speakers did not always need to be taken into account, particularly in specialized areas such as botany where for example the term Oenethera biennis (a type of plant) should be implemented unchanged in an international language even if the entire world population of botanists, those most often familiar with and likely to use the word, did not exceed 10,000.\nThis also implied that words belonging to particular cultures should be imported without modifications, which De Wahl believed brought new ideas of value to European culture that had become \"sick\" after World War I. He cited the terms \"karma\", \"ko-tau\" (kowtow), \"geisha\", and \"mahd\u00ed\" in 1924 as examples of those that should not be put in a \"vocalic corset\" through obligatory endings (e.g. , , , in Esperanto) when imported into the international language:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn an article on the future development of language, de Wahl wrote in 1927 that due to European dominance in the sciences and other areas Occidental required a form and derivation recognizable to Europeans, but that it should also be fitted with a grammatical structure capable of taking on more analytical, non-derived forms in the future (such as the equivalents of \"bake man\" for \"baker\" or \"wise way\" for \"wisdom\") if worldwide linguistic trends began to show a preference for them.\nDe Wahl believed that there was a fine balance to be maintained between schematic regularity versus naturalism in an international language, where too much of the former may be convenient for the early learner but abhorrent for a speaker, and vice versa:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Exceptions are not made to make study more difficult for foreigners, but to make speaking shorter and more fluid [...] It is clear that in this language as the most impersonal, abstract and businesslike one of all, regularity will be greater and more expanded than in all other national and tribal languages and idioms. But it will never be able to attain a total schematism [...] Also here the real solution will be a harmonization of the two contrary principles. It requires the sensitive penetration of the real necessity in the instinct of the international superpopulation.\"\nWhile primarily Romance in vocabulary, de Wahl opted for a large Germanic substrate which he felt was more expressive for technical and material vocabulary (, (east), (to swim), , etc.), with Romance and Greek vocabulary more appropriate in the derivation of international words ( for woman to form , for dog to form (canine), etc.) as well as mental, corporal and natural conceptions. Minor Romance languages such as Ladin, Proven\u00e7al (Occitan) and Catalan along with creoles were important in the development of Occidental for de Wahl, who wrote as early as 1912 that his language under development was more similar to Proven\u00e7al than Italian or Spanish. The Swiss magazine \"Der Landbote\" made a similar comment while reviewing the language in 1945, commenting humorously that \"reading through the few examples of Occidental gives us the impression of a half-learned Catalan by a foreigner who doesn't much understand the grammar.\"\nDe Wahl stressed that Occidental's natural appearance did not imply wholesale importation of national expressions and usage, and warned that doing so would lead to chaos. One of his articles on this subject was directed toward English and French users who he believed incorrectly saw Occidental as a mix of the two: \"(Occidental's chaotic appearance) is not the fault of Occidental itself, but rather that of its users and especially the French and English, or those that think that the international language should be a mixture of those two languages [...] that is a fundamental error, especially if these forms present exceptions and irregularities in Occidental's system.\" Alphonse Matejka wrote in \"Cosmoglotta\" that de Wahl \"always claimed a minimum of autonomy for his language and bitterly fought against all propositions that intended to augment the naturalism of the language only by blindly imitating the Romance languages, or as de Wahl said crudely in one of his letters to me, 'by aping French or English'\".\nOccidental's erring on the side of regularity led to vocabulary that was still recognizable but different from the international norm, such as in place of impossibil (\u00edn + poss + ibil), {{lang|ie| (scientific, from scient-ie + -ic), and {{lang|ie|descrition}} (description, from descri-r + -tion). This is one of the greatest differences between it and Interlingua, which has a vocabulary taken from so-called 'prototypes' (the most recent common ancestor to its source languages) while Interlingue/Occidental focused on active, spontaneous derivation. Vocabulary was deemed technically permissible even if it did not match forms in other living languages, with these derived words described as \"forms that living languages would have been able to produce using their own means\".\nVocabulary.\nThough seemingly favourable to the Romance language family, de Wahl did not see Occidental as a Romance language and did not tolerate any nationalism or chauvinism in the choice of words for the language. His opinion on justice in the choice of vocabulary was that: \"However many special, new, significant words each [culture] has respectively added to the common human culture, that much they receive.\" In an article entitled \"International o Romanic\" (International or Romance) in 1929, he gave examples from a number of categories in which particular languages had a particularly large influence. Those included Greek for science and philosophy ({{lang|ie|teorema}}, {{lang|ie|teosofie}}, {{lang|ie|astronomie}}), Latin for politics and law ({{lang|ie|social}}, {{lang|ie|republica}}, {{lang|ie|commission}}), Scandinavian, Dutch and English for navigation ({{lang|ie|log}}, {{lang|ie|fregatte}}, {{lang|ie|mast}}, {{lang|ie|brigg}}, {{lang|ie|bote}}), and various other international vocabulary originating in other languages ({{lang|ie|sabat}}, {{lang|ie|alcohol}}, {{lang|ie|sultan}}, {{lang|ie|divan}}, {{lang|ie|nirvana}}, {{lang|ie|orang-utan}}, {{lang|ie|bushido}}, {{lang|ie|t\u00e9}}, {{lang|ie|dalai-lama}}, {{lang|ie|cigar}}, {{lang|ie|jazz}}, {{lang|ie|zebra}}, {{lang|ie|bumerang}}, etc.).\nSymbol.\nThe symbol of Occidental and its dimensions were chosen in 1936 after some deliberation and many other proposed symbols that included stylized letters, a star (as in Esperanto and Ido), a setting sun to represent the sun in the west (the Occident), a globe, and more. The tilde, already used by the Occidental-Union, was eventually selected based on five criteria: symbolic character, simplicity, originality, unlikeliness to be confused with another symbol, and for being bichromatic (having two colours) as opposed to polychromatic. Beyond the five criteria, the Occidentalists at the time referenced the advantages of the lack of a fixed meaning for the tilde in the public sphere, and its similarity to a waveform, implying speech.\nLinguistic features.\nOrthography.\nInterlingue is written with 26 Latin letters: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, and z. The names of the letters are \"a, be, ce, de, e, ef, ge, ha, i, jot, ka, el, em, en, o, pe, qu, er, es, te, u, ve, duplic ve, ix, ypsilon\", and \"zet\". Accents are written on the five vowels to indicate irregular stress, with the acute accent (\u00e1 \u00e9 \u00ed \u00f3 \u00fa) preferred, but others (\u00e8, \u00ea, etc.) permitted.\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nSources on the pronunciations of the vowels are contradictory. Some say that the vowels have their Continental values (that is, [a e i o u]), others that they have different qualities when long and short; they also differ on the number of diphthongs (e.g. \"au eu ay ey\"). Earlier texts on Occidental described seven vowels (the five continental vowels plus y like {{IPAblink|y}}, namely French \"u\" or German \"\u00fc\", and \"eu\" as German \"\u00f6\"), but by the 1940s the official recommendation was that vocalic \"y\" be pronounced like \"i\" and eu as a diphthong instead of \"\u00f6\". Rough English equivalents for the vowels are as follows:\nInterlingue has non-obligatory vowel length. Rough English equivalents of the sounds are as follows:\nVowels are short in the following cases:\nExamples of long vowels: {{lang|ie|pur}}, {{lang|ie|robe}}, {{lang|ie|blu}}, {{lang|ie|fibre}}, {{lang|ie|table}}.\nExamples of short vowels: {{lang|ie|calm}}, {{lang|ie|old}}, {{lang|ie|potte}}, {{lang|ie|flagga}}, {{lang|ie|mann}}, {{lang|ie|fox}}, {{lang|ie|storc}}, {{lang|ie|in}}, {{lang|ie|it}}.\nConsonants.\nThe consonants are pronounced as in English, with the following exceptions:\nOther doubled consonants are pronounced as a single consonant, unless when separated they would be pronounced differently. Ex. {{lang|ie|grammatica}} is pronounced as if written {{lang|ie|gramatica}}, but {{lang|ie|acceptar}} and {{lang|ie|suggestion}} are pronounced as if written as ac followed by ceptar, and sug followed by gestion.\nStress.\nWords are generally stressed on the vowel before the final consonant: intercalar, parol, forme. Pluralizing a noun does not change the stress: paroles, formes. The endings -bil, -ic, -im, -ul and -um do not change the stress (even when more than one is present in a single word), nor does the adverbial ending -men: rapidmen, duplic, bonissim, singul, possibil, maximum, statisticas. Two vowels together are diphthongized and do not count as two syllables for the purpose of stress: familie, potentie, unless the word is a single consonant or consonant cluster followed by two vowels: die, deo. Compound words are stressed based on the last word in the compound: hodie, substrae. In cases where the accent is irregular, it is indicated by an accent: caf\u00e9, \u00ednpossibil, numer\u00f3, n\u00famere, felicit\u00e1. The accent mark may also be used for emphasis as needed: Y\u00f3 ea con la (ne t\u00fa).\nGrammar.\nArticles.\nLike English, Interlingue has definite and an indefinite articles. The definite article (the) is \"li\", and the indefinite (a, an) is \"un\". Plural of a noun is made by adding \"-s\" after a vowel, or \"-es\" after most consonants. To avoid pronunciation and stress changes, words ending in -c, -g, and -m only add an -s: un libre, du libres, li tric, li trics, li plug, li plugs, li album, pluri albums.\nThe ending of the definite article can be modified to lo (masculine), la (feminine), lu (neuter), lis (plural), los (masculine plural), e las (feminine plural). The article itself can also be pluralized before words that are difficult to pluralize on their own: lis s (the s's).\nPersonal pronouns.\nInterlingue has two forms for the personal pronouns: one for the subject form (nominative), and one for the object form (accusative or dative, i.e. the oblique form):\nThe formal second person is \"vu\", which is also the second person plural. The indefinite personal pronoun \"one\" is \"on\". One can also specify the gender of third person plural by using \"illos\" (masculine) or e\"llas\" (feminine).\nGrammatical endings.\nOnly a few parts of speech in Interlingue (such as verbs in the infinitive) have entirely obligatory endings, while many other endings are optional though sometimes recommended. Some grammatical endings are:\nCorrelatives.\nWhile correlatives were not made to match a pre-determined scheme (such as the correlatives in Esperanto), the majority match the prefixes and suffixes in the chart below.\nNotes on the correlatives:\nAlcun (some) and necun (no, none) are respectively the adjectives of alquel and nequel.\nThe -al series is adverbialized with the -men ending: qualmen (how) talmen (that way).\nCorrelatives can take the plural ending: queles, quales, tis, omnis, etc.\nCi (here) and ta (there) can be affixed to ti and to to indicate proximity or distance: ti libre (this book), ti-ci libre (this book here), ti-ta libre (that book there), tis (these), tis-ci (these here), tis-ta (those there), to-ci (this here), to-ta (that there).\nMany derivatives are formed from the correlatives: qualit\u00e1 from qual + it\u00e1, quantit\u00e1 from quant + -it\u00e1, omnipotent from omni + potent.\nVerbs.\nVerbs in Interlingue have three endings: -ar, -er, and -ir. Conjugation is performed with a combination of endings and auxiliary verbs. The verb {{lang|ie|esser}} (to be) is exceptional in being written {{lang|ie|es}} in the present tense, while the {{lang|ie|esse}} form is the imperative.\nThe present participle is used to qualify nouns: {{lang|ie|un cat ama}} ({{Translation|a cat loves}}), {{lang|ie|un amant cat}} ({{Translation|a loving cat}}) and is often seen in adjectives such as {{lang|ie|fatigant}} (tiring, from {{lang|ie|fatigar}}, to tire). The gerund is used to indicate another action or state of being going on at the same time: {{lang|ie|scriente un missage, yo videt que...}} ({{Translation|writing a message, I saw that...}}).\nAdverbs.\nInterlingue has primary adverbs and derived adverbs. Primary adverbs are not generated from other parts of speech and are thus not formed using any special endings: \"tre\" (very), \"sempre\" (always), etc.\nDerived adverbs are formed by adding the suffix -men to an adjective (rapid = quick, rapidmen = quickly) Adjectives may be used as adverbs when the sense is clear:\nIl ha bon laborat = He has worked well (\"He has worked good\")\nNoi serchat long = We looked for a long time (\"We searched long\")\nDerivation.\nThe application of de Wahl's rule to verbs, and the usage of numerous suffixes and prefixes, was created to resolve irregularities that had plagued creators of language projects before Occidental, who were forced to make the choice between regularity and unnatural forms, or irregularity and natural forms. The prevailing view before its application was that natural forms needed to be sacrificed for the sake of regularity, while those that opted for naturalism were forced to admit numerous irregularities when doing so (Idiom Neutral for example had a list of 81 verbs with special radicals used when forming derivatives), a paradox summed up by Louis Couturat in 1903 as follows:\nIn short, one finds oneself confronted by the antinomy that the words that are international are not regular, and the words that are regular are not international; the prevailing opinion [of naturalists such as Julius Lott and de Wahl] was that regularity should be sacrificed for internationality in the formation of words.\nThe rules created by de Wahl to resolve this were first described in 1909 in the \"Discussiones\" of Peano's Academia pro Interlingua and are as follows:\nOnce these rules were applied, Occidental was left with six exceptions. They are:\nSuffixes are added either to the verbal root or the present theme of the verb (the infinitive minus -r). An example of the latter is the suffix -ment: move/r, move/ment (not movetment), experi/r, experi/ment (not experitment), and -ntie (English -nce): tolera/r (tolerate), tolera/ntie, existe/r (exist), existe/ntie.\nAffixes.\nThe major prefixes and suffixes used in word derivation in Interlingue are added to either the present theme (infinitive minus -r), verbal root (infinitive minus two preceding vowels), or perfect theme (present theme + t or +s for verbs finishing with -d or -r) of verbs, as well as other types of speech. Some of the affixes used are:\nEase of learning.\nAs an international auxiliary language, ease of learning through regular derivation and recognizable vocabulary was a key principle in Occidental's creation. \"Cosmoglotta\" often featured letters from new users and former users of other international languages (primarily Esperanto and Ido) attesting to the language's simplicity. New users demonstrated their quick command of the language, and experienced auxiliary language users shared their experiences. Because many users of the language had encountered it after first learning Esperanto, data on learnability of the language for those without experience in other international auxiliary languages is scarce. One experiment to ascertain learning time was carried out in the years 1956 to 1957 in a Swiss Catholic high school (gymnasium) in Disentis on the time required to learn the language. The experiment showed that the students participating in the study, who had previous experience with French, Latin, and Greek, mastered both written and spoken Interlingue after 30 hours of study.\nInterlingue literature.\nSome original texts published as separate books are:\nExample texts.\nTranslation: \"Material civilization, science, and even art unify themselves more and more. The educated European feels himself almost at home in all lands that have European civilization, that is, more and more, in the entire world. Today almost all states war with the same armaments. Without pause the modes of intercommunication improve, and in consequence from that the world seems to decrease. A Parisian is now closer to an Englishman or a German than he was a hundred years before to a French peasant.\""}
{"id": "22762", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22762", "title": "Odyssey3", "text": ""}
{"id": "22763", "revid": "47154815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22763", "title": "Osiris", "text": "Ancient Egyptian god of the afterlife\nOsiris (, from Egyptian \"wsjr\") was the god of fertility, agriculture, the afterlife, the dead, resurrection, life, and vegetation in ancient Egyptian religion. He was classically depicted as a green-skinned deity with a pharaoh's beard, partially mummy-wrapped at the legs, wearing a distinctive atef crown and holding a symbolic crook and flail. He was one of the first to be associated with the mummy wrap. When his brother Seth cut him to pieces after killing him, with her sister Nephthys, Osiris's sister-wife, Isis, searched Egypt to find each part of Osiris. She collected all but one \u2013 Osiris's genitalia. She then wrapped his body up, enabling him to return to life. Osiris was widely worshipped until the decline of ancient Egyptian religion during the rise of Christianity in the Roman Empire.\nOsiris was at times considered the eldest son of the earth god Geb and the sky goddess Nut, as well as brother and husband of Isis, and brother of Set, Nephthys, and Horus the Elder, with Horus the Younger being considered his posthumously begotten son. Through syncretism with Iah, he was also a god of the Moon.\nOsiris was the judge and lord of the dead and the underworld, the \"Lord of Silence\" and Khenti-Amentiu, meaning \"Foremost of the Westerners\". In the Old Kingdom (2686\u20132181 BC) the pharaoh was considered a son of the sun god Ra who, after his death, ascended to join Ra in the sky. After the spread of the Osiris cult, however, the kings of Egypt were associated with Osiris in death \u2013 as Osiris rose from the dead, they would unite with him and inherit eternal life through imitative magic. Through the hope of new life after death, Osiris began to be associated with the cycles in nature, in particular the sprouting of vegetation and annual flooding of the Nile River, as well as the heliacal rising of Orion and Sirius at the start of the new year. He became the sovereign that granted all life, \"He Who is Permanently Benign and Youthful\".\nThe first evidence of the worship of Osiris is from the middle of the Fifth Dynasty of Egypt (25th century BC), though it is likely he was worshiped much earlier; the Khenti-Amentiu epithet dates to at least the First Dynasty, and was used as a pharaonic title. Most information available on the Osiris myth is derived from allusions in the Pyramid Texts at the end of the Fifth Dynasty, later New Kingdom source documents such as the Shabaka Stone and \"The Contendings of Horus and Seth\", and much later, in the narratives of Greek authors including Plutarch and Diodorus Siculus. Some Egyptologists believe the Osiris mythos may have originated in a former living ruler\u2014possibly a shepherd who lived in Predynastic times (5500\u20133100 BC) in the Nile Delta, whose beneficial rule led to him being revered as a god. The accoutrements of the shepherd, the crook and the flail \u2013 once insignia of the Delta god Andjety, with whom Osiris was associated \u2013 support this theory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology of the name.\n\"Osiris\" is a Latin transliteration of the Ancient Greek , which in turn is the Greek adaptation of the original name in the Egyptian language. In Egyptian hieroglyphs the name appears as \"wsjr\", which some Egyptologists instead choose to transliterate as \"\ua723sjr\" or \"jsjrj\". Since hieroglyphic writing lacks vowels, Egyptologists have vocalized the name in various ways, such as Asar, Ausar, Ausir, Wesir, Usir, or Usire.\nSeveral proposals have been made for the etymology and meaning of the original name; as Egyptologist Mark J. Smith notes, none are fully convincing. Most take \"wsjr\" as the accepted transliteration, following Adolf Erman:\nHowever, recently alternative transliterations have been proposed:\nAppearance.\nOsiris is represented in his most developed form of iconography wearing the \"Atef\" crown, which is similar to the White crown of Upper Egypt, but with the addition of two curling ostrich feathers at each side. He also carries the crook and flail. The crook is thought to represent Osiris as a shepherd god. The symbolism of the flail is more uncertain with shepherd's whip, fly-whisk, or association with the god Andjety of the ninth nome of Lower Egypt proposed.\nHe was commonly depicted as a pharaoh with a complexion of either green (the color of rebirth) or black (alluding to the fertility of the Nile floodplain) in mummiform (wearing the trappings of mummification from chest downward).\nEarly mythology.\nThe Pyramid Texts describe early conceptions of an afterlife in terms of eternal travelling with the sun god amongst the stars. Amongst these mortuary texts, at the beginning of the Fourth Dynasty, is found: \"An offering the king gives and Anubis\". By the end of the Fifth Dynasty, the formula in all tombs becomes \"An offering the king gives and Osiris\".\nFather of Horus.\nOsiris is the mythological father of the god Horus, whose conception is described in the Osiris myth (a central myth in ancient Egyptian belief). The myth describes Osiris as having been killed by his brother Set, who wanted Osiris's throne. His wife, Isis, finds the body of Osiris and hides it in the reeds where it is found and dismembered by Set. Isis retrieves and joins the fragmented pieces of Osiris, then briefly revives him by use of magic. This spell gives her time to become pregnant by Osiris. Isis later gives birth to Horus. Since Horus was born after Osiris's resurrection, Horus became thought of as a representation of new beginnings and the vanquisher of the usurper Set.\n\"Ptah-Seker\" (who resulted from the identification of the creator god Ptah with Seker) thus gradually became identified with Osiris, the two becoming Ptah-Seker-Osiris. As the sun was thought to spend the night in the underworld, and was subsequently \"reborn\" every morning, Ptah-Seker-Osiris was identified as king of the underworld, god of the afterlife, life, death, and regeneration. Osiris also has the aspect and form of Seker-Osiris.\nRam god.\nOsiris's soul, or rather his \"ba\", was occasionally worshipped in its own right, almost as if it were a distinct god, especially in the Delta city of Mendes. This aspect of Osiris was referred to as \"Banebdjedet\", which is grammatically feminine (also spelt \"\"Banebded\" or \"Banebdjed\"\"), literally \"the \"ba\" of the lord of the \"djed\", which roughly means \"The soul of the lord of the pillar\". The \"djed\", a type of pillar, was usually understood as the backbone of Osiris.\nThe Nile supplying water, and Osiris (strongly connected to the vegetable regeneration) who died only to be resurrected, represented continuity and stability. As \"Banebdjed\", Osiris was given epithets such as \"Lord of the Sky\" and \"Life of the (sun god) Ra\". \"Ba\" does not mean \"soul\" in the western sense, and has to do with power, reputation, force of character, especially in the case of a god.\nSince the \"ba\" was associated with power, and also happened to be a word for ram in Egyptian, Banebdjed was depicted as a ram, or as Ram-headed. A living, sacred ram was kept at Mendes and worshipped as the incarnation of the god, and upon death, the rams were mummified and buried in a ram-specific necropolis. Banebdjed was consequently said to be Horus's father, as Banebdjed was an aspect of Osiris.\nRegarding the association of Osiris with the ram, the god's traditional crook and flail are the instruments of the shepherd, which has suggested to some scholars also an origin for Osiris in herding tribes of the upper Nile.\nMythology.\nPlutarch recounts one version of the Osiris myth in which Set (Osiris's brother), along with the Queen of Ethiopia, conspired with 72 accomplices to plot the assassination of Osiris. Set fooled Osiris into getting into a box, which Set then shut, sealed with lead, and threw into the Nile. Osiris's wife, Isis, searched for his remains until she finally found him embedded in a tamarisk tree trunk, which was holding up the roof of a palace in Byblos on the Phoenician coast. She managed to remove the coffin and retrieve her husband's body.\nIn one version of the myth, Isis used a spell to briefly revive Osiris so he could impregnate her. After embalming and burying Osiris, Isis conceived and gave birth to their son, Horus. Thereafter Osiris lived on as the god of the underworld. Because of his death and resurrection, Osiris was associated with the flooding and retreating of the Nile and thus with the yearly growth and death of crops along the Nile valley.\nDiodorus Siculus gives another version of the myth in which Osiris was described as an ancient king who taught the Egyptians the arts of civilization, including agriculture, then travelled the world with his sister Isis, the satyrs, and the nine muses, before finally returning to Egypt. Osiris was then murdered by his evil brother Typhon, who was identified with Set. Typhon divided the body into twenty-six pieces, which he distributed amongst his fellow conspirators in order to implicate them in the murder. Isis and Hercules (Horus) avenged the death of Osiris and slew Typhon. Isis recovered all the parts of Osiris's body, except the phallus, and secretly buried them. She made replicas of them and distributed them to several locations, which then became centres of Osiris worship.\nWorship.\nAnnual ceremonies were performed in honor of Osiris in various places across Egypt. Evidences of which were discovered during underwater archaeological excavations of Franck Goddio and his team in the sunken city of Thonis-Heracleion. These ceremonies were fertility rites which symbolised the resurrection of Osiris. Recent scholars emphasize \"the androgynous character of [Osiris's] fertility\" clear from surviving material. For instance, Osiris's fertility has to come both from being castrated/cut-into-pieces and the reassembly by female Isis, whose embrace of her reassembled Osiris produces the perfect king, Horus. Further, as attested by tomb-inscriptions, both women and men could syncretize (identify) with Osiris at their death, another set of evidence that underlines Osiris's androgynous nature.\nDeath and institution as god of the dead.\nPlutarch and others have noted that the sacrifices to Osiris were \"gloomy, solemn, and mournful...\" (Isis and Osiris, 69) and that the great mystery festival, celebrated in two phases, began at Abydos commemorating the death of the god, on the same day that grain was planted in the ground (Isis and Osiris, 13). The annual festival involved the construction of \"Osiris Beds\" formed in shape of Osiris, filled with soil and sown with seed. The germinating seed symbolized Osiris rising from the dead. An almost pristine example was found in the tomb of Tutankhamun. The imiut emblem- an image of a stuffed, headless skin of an animal tied to a pole mounting a pot, was a symbol associated both with Osiris as god of the underworld and with Anubis, god of mummification, was sometimes included among a deceased person's funerary equipment.\nThe first phase of the festival was a public drama depicting the murder and dismemberment of Osiris, the search for his body by Isis, his triumphal return as the resurrected god, and the battle in which Horus defeated Set.\nAccording to Julius Firmicus Maternus of the fourth century, this play was re-enacted each year by worshippers who \"beat their breasts and gashed their shoulders... When they pretend that the mutilated remains of the god have been found and rejoined...they turn from mourning to rejoicing.\" (\"De Errore Profanarum Religionum\").\nThe passion of Osiris was reflected in his name 'Wenennefer\" (\"the one who continues to be perfect\"), which also alludes to his post mortem power.\nIkhernofret Stela.\nMuch of the extant information about the rites of Osiris can be found on the Ikhernofret Stela at Abydos erected in the Twelfth Dynasty by Ikhernofret, possibly a priest of Osiris or other official (the titles of Ikhernofret are described in his stela from Abydos) during the reign of Senwosret III (Pharaoh Sesostris, about 1875 BC). The ritual reenactment of Osiris's funeral rites were held in the last month of the inundation (the annual Nile flood), coinciding with Spring, and held at Abydos which was the traditional place where the body of Osiris drifted ashore after having been drowned in the Nile.\nThe part of the myth recounting the chopping up of the body into 14 pieces by Set is not recounted in this particular stela. Although it is attested to be a part of the rituals by a version of the Papyrus Jumilhac, in which it took Isis 12 days to reassemble the pieces, coinciding with the festival of ploughing. Some elements of the ceremony were held in the temple, while others involved public participation in a form of theatre. The Stela of Ikhernofret recounts the programme of events of the public elements over the five days of the Festival:\nWheat and clay rituals.\nContrasting with the public \"theatrical\" ceremonies sourced from the Middle Kingdom Ikhernofret Stele, more esoteric ceremonies were performed inside the temples by priests. Plutarch mentions that (for much later period) two days after the beginning of the festival \"the priests bring forth a sacred chest containing a small golden coffer, into which they pour some potable water...and a great shout arises from the company for joy that Osiris is found (or resurrected). Then they knead some fertile soil with the water\u00a0... and fashion therefrom a crescent-shaped figure, which they cloth and adorn, this indicating that they regard these gods as the substance of Earth and Water.\" (\"Isis and Osiris,\" 39). Yet his accounts were still obscure, for he also wrote, \"I pass over the cutting of the wood\" \u2013 opting not to describe it, since he considered it as a most sacred ritual (\"Ibid.\" 21).\nIn the Osirian temple at Denderah, an inscription (translated by Budge, Chapter XV, Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection) describes in detail the making of wheat paste models of each dismembered piece of Osiris to be sent out to the town where each piece is discovered by Isis. At the temple of Mendes, figures of Osiris were made from wheat and paste placed in a trough on the day of the murder, then water was added for several days, until finally the mixture was kneaded into a mold of Osiris and taken to the temple to be buried (the sacred grain for these cakes were grown only in the temple fields). Molds were made from the wood of a red tree in the forms of the sixteen dismembered parts of Osiris, the cakes of \"divine\" bread were made from each mold, placed in a silver chest and set near the head of the god with \"the inward parts of Osiris\" as described in the Book of the Dead (XVII).\nJudgement.\nThe idea of divine justice being exercised after death for wrongdoing during life is first encountered during the Old Kingdom in a Sixth Dynasty tomb containing fragments of what would be described later as the Negative Confessions performed in front of the 42 Assessors of Ma'at.\nAt death a person faced judgment by a tribunal of forty-two divine judges. If they led a life in conformance with the precepts of the goddess Ma'at, who represented truth and right living, the person was welcomed into the kingdom of Osiris. If found guilty, the person was thrown to the soul-eating demon Ammit and did not share in eternal life. The person who is taken by the devourer is subject first to terrifying punishment and then annihilated. These depictions of punishment may have influenced medieval perceptions of the inferno in hell via early Christian and Coptic texts. Purification for those who are considered justified may be found in the descriptions of \"Flame Island\", where they experience the triumph over evil and rebirth. For the damned, complete destruction into a state of non-being awaits, but there is no suggestion of eternal torture.\nDuring the reign of Seti I, Osiris was also invoked in royal decrees to pursue the living when wrongdoing was observed but kept secret and not reported.\nGreco-Roman era.\nHellenization.\nThe early Ptolemaic kings promoted a new god, Serapis, who combined traits of Osiris with those of various Greek gods and was portrayed in a Hellenistic form. Serapis was often treated as the consort of Isis and became the patron deity of the Ptolemies' capital, Alexandria. Serapis's origins are not known. Some ancient authors claim the cult of Serapis was established at Alexandria by Alexander the Great himself, but most who discuss the subject of Serapis's origins give a story similar to that by Plutarch. Writing about 400 years after the fact, Plutarch claimed that Ptolemy I established the cult after dreaming of a colossal statue at Sinope in Anatolia. His councillors identified the statue as the Greek god Pluto and said that the Egyptian name for Pluto was Serapis. This name may have been a Hellenization of \"Osiris-Apis\". Osiris-Apis was a patron deity of the Memphite Necropolis and the father of the Apis bull who was worshipped there, and texts from Ptolemaic times treat \"Serapis\" as the Greek translation of \"Osiris-Apis\". But little of the early evidence for Serapis's cult comes from Memphis, and much of it comes from the Mediterranean world with no reference to an Egyptian origin for Serapis, so Mark Smith expresses doubt that Serapis originated as a Greek form of Osiris-Apis's name and leaves open the possibility that Serapis originated outside Egypt.\nDestruction of cult.\nThe cult of Isis and Osiris continued at Philae until at least the 450s CE, long after the imperial decrees of the late 4th century that ordered the closing of temples to \"pagan\" gods. Philae was the last major ancient Egyptian temple to be closed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22764", "revid": "41211452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22764", "title": "Orthodox Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith", "text": "Minority Bah\u00e1'\u00ed sect\nThe Orthodox Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith is an extremely small Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed sect that was formed in 1960 by Mason Remey, and subsequently was the name used by one of his disputed successors, Joel Marangella. The sect is defined by a belief that the Guardianship of Shoghi Effendi (1921\u20131957) continued with further appointees, whereas the mainstream Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds follow a line of leadership that transitioned to the elected Universal House of Justice in 1963 with no eligible appointees as Guardian. \nOther than on the matter of leadership and organization, there are few differences between the Orthodox and mainstream Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds regarding their doctrine. As a group who believe that Mason Remey was the second Guardian of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, they are excommunicated by the majority of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds and labelled covenant-breakers. Those who supported Mason Remey feel in turn that the majority strayed from the original teachings.\nMembership data of the Orthodox Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds is scarce. They are mostly located in the United States, with few members and no communal religious life. One source estimated them at no more than 100 members as of 1988, with the largest concentration being 11 in Roswell, New Mexico. In an Illinois court case in 2007 they reported membership in the United States at 40, and a news agency reported them at \"about 50\" in 2010. Websites claiming to represent the Orthodox Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds indicate followers in the United States and India.\nHistory.\nFollowing the unexpected death of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith's first Guardian Shoghi Effendi in 1957, the 27 living Hands of the Cause, gathered and decided that he had died \"without having appointed his successor,\" and that the Universal House of Justice would decide on the situation after its first election. Charles Mason Remey, one of the Hands, declared himself the successor to Shoghi Effendi in 1960. Almost the whole Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed world rejected his claim, which did not even address the requirements that Guardians be descendants of Baha'u'llah\u2014making him ineligible\u2014and that appointments must be clearly confirmed by the nine resident Hands of the Cause in Haifa. Initially the NSA of France and about 100 Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, mostly Americans, followed Remey. He was shunned as a covenant-breaker. \nInitially, Remey had followers in Pakistan, India, the United States, and parts of Europe. He settled in Florence, Italy, until the end of his life. From there he appointed three local spiritual assemblies in Santa Fe, New Mexico, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, and Lucknow, India, then organized the election of two National Assemblies \u2013 in the United States and Pakistan.\nIn 1964 the Santa Fe assembly filed a lawsuit against the National Spiritual Assembly (NSA) of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds of the United States to receive the legal title to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed House of Worship in Illinois, and all other property owned by the NSA. The NSA counter-sued and won. The Santa Fe assembly lost the right to use the term \"Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed\" in printed material. Remey then changed the name of his sect from \"Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds Under the Hereditary Guardianship\" to \"Abha World Faith\" and also referred to it as the \"Orthodox Faith of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h\". In 1966, Remey asked the Santa Fe assembly to dissolve, as well as the second International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council that he had appointed with Joel Marangella, residing in France, as president.\nBeginning in 1966\u201367, Remey was abandoned by almost all of his followers due to his criticism of Shoghi Effendi and other statements. The followers of Mason Remey were not organized until several of them began forming their own groups based on different understandings of succession, even before his death in 1974. The majority of them claimed that Remey was showing signs of senility. \nThe \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Iranica\" reported the following in 1988:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Remey died in 1974, having appointed a third Guardian, but the number of adherents to the Orthodox faction remains extremely small. Although successful in Pakistan, the Remeyites seem to have attracted no followers in Iran. Other small groups have broken away from the main body from time to time, but none of these has attracted a sizeable following.\nJoel Marangella.\nIn 1961 Joel Marangella received a letter from Remey, and a note that, \"...in or after 1963. You will know when to break the seal.\" In 1964 Remey appointed members to a second International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council with Marangella as president, significant due to Remey's claim to Guardianship being based on the same appointment. In 1965 Remey activated the council, and in 1966 wrote letters passing the \"affairs of the Faith\" to the council, then later dissolving it. In 1969 Marangella made an announcement that the letter of 1961 was Remey's appointment of him as the third Guardian, and that he had been the Guardian since 1964, invalidating Remey's pronouncements from that point forward.\nIn 1970 Marangella appointed members to a \"National Bureau of the Orthodox Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in New York\", which two years later was moved to New Mexico, and subsequently changed its name to \"Mother Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council of the United States\" (1978) and \"Provisional National Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council\" (2000), with all members appointed by Joel Marangella.\nMarangella gained the support of most of Remey's followers, who came to be known as Orthodox Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. Joel Marangella died in San Diego, California on Sept 1, 2013. A website claiming to represent Orthodox Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds indicates followers in the United States and India, and a fourth Guardian named Nosrat\u2019u\u2019llah Bahremand.\nRuling on Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed trademarks.\nIn 2006, the mainstream Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed administration filed a lawsuit accusing the Orthodox Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds of violating the order issued in 1966. The Orthodox Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds denied that they were the same group.\nThe federal 7th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in 2008 that the 1966 decision against Mason Remey's use of Baha'i trademarks does not apply to any of the successor groups, such as, \"Franklin D. Schlatter, Joel B. Marangella, the Provisional National Baha\u2019i Council (\"PNBC\"), the Second International Baha\u2019I Council (d/b/a Baha\u2019is Under the Provisions of the Covenant) (\"SIBC\"), and the Baha\u2019i Publishers Under the Provisions of the Covenant (\"BPUPC\")\".\nDeseret News reported in 2010:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Though the judges criticized the ruling from more than four decades ago as wrongfully trying to resolve an internal religious dispute, they determined it was a moot point since the 1966 defendants' denomination is now dissolved.\nTuesday's ruling sidestepped questions about whether a religious organization can trademark its name or icons.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22773", "revid": "50880312", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22773", "title": "Oxidative phosphorylation", "text": "Metabolic pathway\nOxidative phosphorylation or electron transport-linked phosphorylation or terminal oxidation, is the metabolic pathway in which cells use enzymes to oxidize nutrients, thereby releasing chemical energy in order to produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP). In eukaryotes, this takes place inside mitochondria. Almost all aerobic organisms carry out oxidative phosphorylation. This pathway is so pervasive because it releases more energy than fermentation.\nIn aerobic respiration, the energy stored in the chemical bonds of glucose is released by the cell in glycolysis and subsequently the citric acid cycle, producing carbon dioxide and the energetic electron donors NADH and FADH\u2082. Oxidative phosphorylation uses these molecules and O2 to produce ATP, which is used throughout the cell whenever energy is needed. During oxidative phosphorylation, electrons are transferred from the electron donors to a series of electron acceptors in a series of redox reactions ending in oxygen, whose reaction releases half of the total energy.\nIn eukaryotes, these redox reactions are catalyzed by a series of protein complexes within the inner mitochondrial membrane; whereas, in prokaryotes, these proteins are located in the cell's plasma membrane. These linked sets of proteins are called the electron transport chain. In mitochondria, five main protein complexes are involved, whereas prokaryotes have various other enzymes, using a variety of electron donors and acceptors.\nThe energy transferred by electrons flowing through this electron transport chain is used to transport protons across the inner membrane. This generates potential energy in the form of a pH gradient and the resulting electrical potential across this membrane. This store of energy is tapped when protons flow back across the membrane through ATP synthase in a process called chemiosmosis. The ATP synthase uses the energy to transform adenosine diphosphate (ADP) into adenosine triphosphate, in a phosphorylation reaction. The reaction is driven by the proton flow, which forces the rotation of a part of the enzyme. The ATP synthase is a rotary mechanical motor.\nAlthough oxidative phosphorylation is a vital part of metabolism, it produces reactive oxygen species such as superoxide and hydrogen peroxide, which lead to propagation of free radicals, damaging cells and contributing to disease and, possibly, aging and senescence. The enzymes carrying out this metabolic pathway are also the target of many drugs and poisons that inhibit their activities.\nChemiosmosis.\nOxidative phosphorylation works by using energy-releasing chemical reactions to drive energy-requiring reactions. The two sets of reactions are said to be \"coupled\". This means one cannot occur without the other. The chain of redox reactions driving the flow of electrons through the electron transport chain, from electron donors such as NADH to electron acceptors such as oxygen and hydrogen (protons), is an exergonic process\u00a0\u2013 it releases energy, whereas the synthesis of ATP is an endergonic process, which requires an input of energy. Both the electron transport chain and the ATP synthase are embedded in a membrane, and energy is transferred from the electron transport chain to the ATP synthase by movements of protons across this membrane, in a process called \"chemiosmosis\". A current of protons is driven from the negative N-side of the membrane to the positive P-side through the proton-pumping enzymes of the electron transport chain. The movement of protons creates an electrochemical gradient across the membrane, which is called the proton-motive force. It has two components: a difference in proton concentration (a H+ gradient, \u0394pH) and a difference in electric potential, with the N-side having a negative charge.\nATP synthase releases this stored energy by completing the circuit and allowing protons to flow down the electrochemical gradient, back to the N-side of the membrane. The electrochemical gradient drives the rotation of part of the enzyme's structure and couples this motion to the synthesis of ATP.\nThe two components of the proton-motive force are thermodynamically equivalent: In mitochondria, the largest part of energy is provided by the potential; in alkaliphile bacteria the electrical energy even has to compensate for a counteracting inverse pH difference. Inversely, chloroplasts operate mainly on \u0394pH. However, they also require a small membrane potential for the kinetics of ATP synthesis. In the case of the fusobacterium \"Propionigenium modestum\" it drives the counter-rotation of subunits a and c of the FO motor of ATP synthase.\nThe amount of energy released by oxidative phosphorylation is high, compared with the amount produced by fermentation. Glycolysis produces only 2 ATP molecules, but somewhere between 30 and 36 ATPs are produced by the oxidative phosphorylation of the 10 NADH and 2 succinate molecules made by converting one molecule of glucose to carbon dioxide and water, while each cycle of beta oxidation of a fatty acid yields about 14 ATPs. These ATP yields are theoretical maximum values; in practice, some protons leak across the membrane, lowering the yield of ATP.\nElectron and proton transfer molecules.\nThe electron transport chain carries both protons and electrons, passing electrons from donors to acceptors, and transporting protons across a membrane. These processes use both soluble and protein-bound transfer molecules. In the mitochondria, electrons are transferred within the intermembrane space by the water-soluble electron transfer protein cytochrome c. This carries only electrons, and these are transferred by the reduction and oxidation of an iron atom that the protein holds within a heme group in its structure. Cytochrome c is also found in some bacteria, where it is located within the periplasmic space.\nWithin the inner mitochondrial membrane, the lipid-soluble electron carrier coenzyme Q10 (Q) carries both electrons and protons by a redox cycle. This small benzoquinone molecule is very hydrophobic, so it diffuses freely within the membrane. When Q accepts two electrons and two protons, it becomes reduced to the \"ubiquinol\" form (QH2); when QH2 releases two electrons and two protons, it becomes oxidized back to the \"ubiquinone\" (Q) form. As a result, if two enzymes are arranged so that Q is reduced on one side of the membrane and QH2 oxidized on the other, ubiquinone will couple these reactions and shuttle protons across the membrane. Some bacterial electron transport chains use different quinones, such as menaquinone, in addition to ubiquinone.\nWithin proteins, electrons are transferred between flavin cofactors, iron\u2013sulfur clusters and cytochromes. There are several types of iron\u2013sulfur cluster. The simplest kind found in the electron transfer chain consists of two iron atoms joined by two atoms of inorganic sulfur; these are called [2Fe\u20132S] clusters. The second kind, called [4Fe\u20134S], contains a cube of four iron atoms and four sulfur atoms. Each iron atom in these clusters is coordinated by an additional amino acid, usually by the sulfur atom of cysteine. Metal ion cofactors undergo redox reactions without binding or releasing protons, so in the electron transport chain they serve solely to transport electrons through proteins. Electrons move quite long distances through proteins by hopping along chains of these cofactors. This occurs by quantum tunnelling, which is rapid over distances of less than 1.4\u00d710\u22129 m.\nEukaryotic electron transport chains.\nMany catabolic biochemical processes, such as glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and beta oxidation, produce the reduced coenzyme NADH. This coenzyme contains electrons that have a high transfer potential; in other words, they will release a large amount of energy upon oxidation. However, the cell does not release this energy all at once, as this would be an uncontrollable reaction. Instead, the electrons are removed from NADH and passed to oxygen through a series of enzymes that each release a small amount of the energy. This set of enzymes, consisting of complexes I through IV, is called the electron transport chain and is found in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion. Succinate is also oxidized by the electron transport chain, but feeds into the pathway at a different point.\nIn eukaryotes, the enzymes in this electron transport system use the energy released from O2 by NADH to pump protons across the inner membrane of the mitochondrion. This causes protons to build up in the intermembrane space, and generates an electrochemical gradient across the membrane. The energy stored in this potential is then used by ATP synthase to produce ATP. Oxidative phosphorylation in the eukaryotic mitochondrion is the best-understood example of this process. The mitochondrion is present in almost all eukaryotes, with the exception of anaerobic protozoa such as \"Trichomonas vaginalis\" that instead reduce protons to hydrogen in a remnant mitochondrion called a hydrogenosome.\nNADH-coenzyme Q oxidoreductase (complex I).\nNADH-coenzyme Q oxidoreductase, also known as \"NADH dehydrogenase\" or \"complex I\", is the first protein in the electron transport chain. Complex I is a giant enzyme with the mammalian complex I having 46 subunits and a molecular mass of about . The structure is known in detail only from a bacterium; in most organisms the complex resembles a boot with a large \"ball\" poking out from the membrane into the mitochondrion. The genes that encode the individual proteins are contained in both the cell nucleus and the mitochondrial genome, as is the case for many enzymes present in the mitochondrion.\nThe reaction that is catalyzed by this enzyme is the two electron oxidation of NADH by coenzyme Q10 or \"ubiquinone\" (represented as Q in the equation below), a lipid-soluble quinone that is found in the mitochondrion membrane:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe start of the reaction, and indeed of the entire electron chain, is the binding of a NADH molecule to complex I and the donation of two electrons. The electrons enter complex I via a prosthetic group attached to the complex, flavin mononucleotide (FMN). The addition of electrons to FMN converts it to its reduced form, FMNH2. The electrons are then transferred through a series of iron\u2013sulfur clusters: the second kind of prosthetic group present in the complex. There are both [2Fe\u20132S] and [4Fe\u20134S] iron\u2013sulfur clusters in complex I.\nAs the electrons pass through this complex, four protons are pumped from the matrix into the intermembrane space. Exactly how this occurs is unclear, but it seems to involve conformational changes in complex I that cause the protein to bind protons on the N-side of the membrane and release them on the P-side of the membrane. Finally, the electrons are transferred from the chain of iron\u2013sulfur clusters to a ubiquinone molecule in the membrane. Reduction of ubiquinone also contributes to the generation of a proton gradient, as two protons are taken up from the matrix as it is reduced to ubiquinol (QH2).\nSuccinate-Q oxidoreductase (complex II).\nSuccinate-Q oxidoreductase, also known as \"complex II\" or \"succinate dehydrogenase\", is a second entry point to the electron transport chain. It is unusual because it is the only enzyme that is part of both the citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain. Complex II consists of four protein subunits and contains a bound flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) cofactor, iron\u2013sulfur clusters, and a heme group that does not participate in electron transfer to coenzyme Q, but is believed to be important in decreasing production of reactive oxygen species. It oxidizes succinate to fumarate and reduces ubiquinone. As this reaction releases less energy than the oxidation of NADH, complex II does not transport protons across the membrane and does not contribute to the proton gradient.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn some eukaryotes, such as the parasitic worm \"Ascaris suum\", an enzyme similar to complex II, fumarate reductase (menaquinol:fumarate\noxidoreductase, or QFR), operates in reverse to oxidize ubiquinol and reduce fumarate. This allows the worm to survive in the anaerobic environment of the large intestine, carrying out anaerobic oxidative phosphorylation with fumarate as the electron acceptor. Another unconventional function of complex II is seen in the malaria parasite \"Plasmodium falciparum\". Here, the reversed action of complex II as an oxidase is important in regenerating ubiquinol, which the parasite uses in an unusual form of pyrimidine biosynthesis.\nElectron transfer flavoprotein-Q oxidoreductase.\nElectron transfer flavoprotein-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (ETF-Q oxidoreductase), also known as \"electron transferring-flavoprotein dehydrogenase\", is a third entry point to the electron transport chain. It is an enzyme that accepts electrons from electron-transferring flavoprotein in the mitochondrial matrix, and uses these electrons to reduce ubiquinone. This enzyme contains a flavin and a [4Fe\u20134S] cluster, but, unlike the other respiratory complexes, it attaches to the surface of the membrane and does not cross the lipid bilayer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn mammals, this metabolic pathway is important in beta oxidation of fatty acids and catabolism of amino acids and choline, as it accepts electrons from multiple acetyl-CoA dehydrogenases. In plants, ETF-Q oxidoreductase is also important in the metabolic responses that allow survival in extended periods of darkness.\nQ-cytochrome c oxidoreductase (complex III).\nQ-cytochrome c oxidoreductase is also known as \"cytochrome c reductase\", \"cytochrome bc1 complex\", or simply \"complex III\". In mammals, this enzyme is a dimer, with each subunit complex containing 11 protein subunits, an [2Fe-2S] iron\u2013sulfur cluster and three cytochromes: one cytochrome c1 and two b cytochromes. A cytochrome is a kind of electron-transferring protein that contains at least one heme group. The iron atoms inside complex III's heme groups alternate between a reduced ferrous (+2) and oxidized ferric (+3) state as the electrons are transferred through the protein.\nThe reaction catalyzed by complex III is the oxidation of one molecule of ubiquinol and the reduction of two molecules of cytochrome c, a heme protein loosely associated with the mitochondrion. Unlike coenzyme Q, which carries two electrons, cytochrome c carries only one electron.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs only one of the electrons can be transferred from the QH2 donor to a cytochrome c acceptor at a time, the reaction mechanism of complex III is more elaborate than those of the other respiratory complexes, and occurs in two steps called the Q cycle. In the first step, the enzyme binds three substrates, first, QH2, which is then oxidized, with one electron being passed to the second substrate, cytochrome c. The two protons released from QH2 pass into the intermembrane space. The third substrate is Q, which accepts the second electron from the QH2 and is reduced to Q.\u2212, which is the ubisemiquinone free radical. The first two substrates are released, but this ubisemiquinone intermediate remains bound. In the second step, a second molecule of QH2 is bound and again passes its first electron to a cytochrome c acceptor. The second electron is passed to the bound ubisemiquinone, reducing it to QH2 as it gains two protons from the mitochondrial matrix. This QH2 is then released from the enzyme.\nAs coenzyme Q is reduced to ubiquinol on the inner side of the membrane and oxidized to ubiquinone on the other, a net transfer of protons across the membrane occurs, adding to the proton gradient. The rather complex two-step mechanism by which this occurs is important, as it increases the efficiency of proton transfer. If, instead of the Q cycle, one molecule of QH2 were used to directly reduce two molecules of cytochrome c, the efficiency would be halved, with only one proton transferred per cytochrome c reduced.\nCytochrome c oxidase (complex IV).\nCytochrome c oxidase, also known as \"complex IV\", is the final protein complex in the electron transport chain. The mammalian enzyme has an extremely complicated structure and contains 13 subunits, two heme groups, as well as multiple metal ion cofactors\u00a0\u2013 in all, three atoms of copper, one of magnesium and one of zinc.\nThis enzyme mediates the final reaction in the electron transport chain and transfers electrons to oxygen and hydrogen (protons), while pumping protons across the membrane. The final electron acceptor oxygen is reduced to water in this step. Both the direct pumping of protons and the consumption of matrix protons in the reduction of oxygen contribute to the proton gradient. The reaction catalyzed is the oxidation of cytochrome c and the reduction of oxygen:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlternative reductases and oxidases.\nMany eukaryotic organisms have electron transport chains that differ from the much-studied mammalian enzymes described above. For example, plants have alternative NADH oxidases, which oxidize NADH in the cytosol rather than in the mitochondrial matrix, and pass these electrons to the ubiquinone pool. These enzymes do not transport protons, and, therefore, reduce ubiquinone without altering the electrochemical gradient across the inner membrane.\nAnother example of a divergent electron transport chain is the \"alternative oxidase\", which is found in plants, as well as some fungi, protists, and possibly some animals. This enzyme transfers electrons directly from ubiquinol to oxygen.\nThe electron transport pathways produced by these alternative NADH and ubiquinone oxidases have lower ATP yields than the full pathway. The advantages produced by a shortened pathway are not entirely clear. However, the alternative oxidase is produced in response to stresses such as cold, reactive oxygen species, and infection by pathogens, as well as other factors that inhibit the full electron transport chain. Alternative pathways might, therefore, enhance an organism's resistance to injury, by reducing oxidative stress.\nOrganization of complexes.\nThe original model for how the respiratory chain complexes are organized was that they diffuse freely and independently in the mitochondrial membrane. However, recent data suggest that the complexes might form higher-order structures called supercomplexes or \"respirasomes\". In this model, the various complexes exist as organized sets of interacting enzymes. These associations might allow channeling of substrates between the various enzyme complexes, increasing the rate and efficiency of electron transfer. Within such mammalian supercomplexes, some components would be present in higher amounts than others, with some data suggesting a ratio between complexes I/II/III/IV and the ATP synthase of approximately 1:1:3:7:4. However, the debate over this supercomplex hypothesis is not completely resolved, as some data do not appear to fit with this model.\nProkaryotic electron transport chains.\nIn contrast to the general similarity in structure and function of the electron transport chains in eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea possess a large variety of electron-transfer enzymes. These use an equally wide set of chemicals as substrates. In common with eukaryotes, prokaryotic electron transport uses the energy released from the oxidation of a substrate to pump ions across a membrane and generate an electrochemical gradient. For bacteria, oxidative phosphorylation is understood in most detail in \"Escherichia coli\", while archaeal systems are, at present, poorly understood.\nThe main difference between eukaryotic and prokaryotic oxidative phosphorylation is that bacteria and archaea use many different substances to donate or accept electrons. This allows prokaryotes to grow under a wide variety of environmental conditions. In \"E. coli\", for example, oxidative phosphorylation can be driven by a large number of pairs of reducing agents and oxidizing agents, which are listed below. The midpoint potential of a chemical measures how much energy is released when it is oxidized or reduced, with reducing agents having negative potentials and oxidizing agents positive potentials.\nAs shown above, \"E. coli\" can grow with reducing agents such as formate, hydrogen, or lactate as electron donors, and nitrate, DMSO, or oxygen as acceptors. The larger the difference in midpoint potential between an oxidizing and reducing agent, the more energy is released when they react. Out of these compounds, the succinate/fumarate pair is unusual, as its midpoint potential is close to zero. Succinate can therefore be oxidized to fumarate if a strong oxidizing agent such as oxygen is available, or fumarate can be reduced to succinate using a strong reducing agent such as formate. These alternative reactions are catalyzed by succinate dehydrogenase and fumarate reductase, respectively.\nSome prokaryotes use redox pairs that have only a small difference in midpoint potential. For example, nitrifying bacteria such as \"Nitrobacter\" oxidize nitrite to nitrate, donating the electrons to oxygen. The small amount of energy released in this reaction is enough to pump protons and generate ATP, but not enough to produce NADH or NADPH directly for use in anabolism. This problem is solved by using a nitrite oxidoreductase to produce enough proton-motive force to run part of the electron transport chain in reverse, causing complex I to generate NADH.\nProkaryotes control their use of these electron donors and acceptors by varying which enzymes are produced in response to environmental conditions. This flexibility is possible because different oxidases and reductases use the same ubiquinone pool. This allows many combinations of enzymes to function together, linked by the common ubiquinol intermediate. These respiratory chains therefore have a modular design, with easily interchangeable sets of enzyme systems.\nIn addition to this metabolic diversity, prokaryotes also possess a range of isozymes\u00a0\u2013 different enzymes that catalyze the same reaction. For example, in \"E. coli\", there are two different types of ubiquinol oxidase using oxygen as an electron acceptor. Under highly aerobic conditions, the cell uses an oxidase with a low affinity for oxygen that can transport two protons per electron. However, if levels of oxygen fall, they switch to an oxidase that transfers only one proton per electron, but has a high affinity for oxygen.\nATP synthase (complex V).\nATP synthase, also called \"complex V\", is the final enzyme in the oxidative phosphorylation pathway. This enzyme is found in all forms of life and functions in the same way in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The enzyme uses the energy stored in a proton gradient across a membrane to drive the synthesis of ATP from ADP and phosphate (Pi). Estimates of the number of protons required to synthesize one ATP have ranged from three to four, with some suggesting cells can vary this ratio, to suit different conditions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis phosphorylation reaction is an equilibrium, which can be shifted by altering the proton-motive force. In the absence of a proton-motive force, the ATP synthase reaction will run from right to left, hydrolyzing ATP and pumping protons out of the matrix across the membrane. However, when the proton-motive force is high, the reaction is forced to run in the opposite direction; it proceeds from left to right, allowing protons to flow down their concentration gradient and turning ADP into ATP. Indeed, in the closely related vacuolar type H+-ATPases, the hydrolysis reaction is used to acidify cellular compartments, by pumping protons and hydrolysing ATP.\nATP synthase is a massive protein complex with a mushroom-like shape. The mammalian enzyme complex contains 16 subunits and has a mass of approximately 600 kilodaltons. The portion embedded within the membrane is called FO and contains a ring of c subunits and the proton channel. The stalk and the ball-shaped headpiece is called F1 and is the site of ATP synthesis. The ball-shaped complex at the end of the F1 portion contains six proteins of two different kinds (three \u03b1 subunits and three \u03b2 subunits), whereas the \"stalk\" consists of one protein: the \u03b3 subunit, with the tip of the stalk extending into the ball of \u03b1 and \u03b2 subunits. Both the \u03b1 and \u03b2 subunits bind nucleotides, but only the \u03b2 subunits catalyze the ATP synthesis reaction. Reaching along the side of the F1 portion and back into the membrane is a long rod-like subunit that anchors the \u03b1 and \u03b2 subunits into the base of the enzyme.\nAs protons cross the membrane through the channel in the base of ATP synthase, the FO proton-driven motor rotates. Rotation might be caused by changes in the ionization of amino acids in the ring of c subunits causing electrostatic interactions that propel the ring of c subunits past the proton channel. This rotating ring in turn drives the rotation of the central axle (the \u03b3 subunit stalk) within the \u03b1 and \u03b2 subunits. The \u03b1 and \u03b2 subunits are prevented from rotating themselves by the side-arm, which acts as a stator. This movement of the tip of the \u03b3 subunit within the ball of \u03b1 and \u03b2 subunits provides the energy for the active sites in the \u03b2 subunits to undergo a cycle of movements that produces and then releases ATP.\nThis ATP synthesis reaction is called the \"binding change mechanism\" and involves the active site of a \u03b2 subunit cycling between three states. In the \"open\" state, ADP and phosphate enter the active site (shown in brown in the diagram). The protein then closes up around the molecules and binds them loosely\u00a0\u2013 the \"loose\" state (shown in red). The enzyme then changes shape again and forces these molecules together, with the active site in the resulting \"tight\" state (shown in pink) binding the newly produced ATP molecule with very high affinity. Finally, the active site cycles back to the open state, releasing ATP and binding more ADP and phosphate, ready for the next cycle.\nIn some bacteria and archaea, ATP synthesis is driven by the movement of sodium ions through the cell membrane, rather than the movement of protons. Archaea such as \"Methanococcus\" also contain the A1Ao synthase, a form of the enzyme that contains additional proteins with little similarity in sequence to other bacterial and eukaryotic ATP synthase subunits. It is possible that, in some species, the A1Ao form of the enzyme is a specialized sodium-driven ATP synthase, but this might not be true in all cases.\nOxidative phosphorylation - energetics.\nThe transport of electrons from redox pair NAD+/ NADH to the final redox pair 1/2 O2/ H2O can be summarized as\n1/2 O2 + NADH + H+ \u2192 H2O + NAD+\nThe potential difference between these two redox pairs is 1.14 volt, which is equivalent to -52 kcal/mol or -2600 kJ per 6\u00a0mol of O2.\nWhen one NADH is oxidized through the electron transfer chain, three ATPs are produced, which is equivalent to 7.3 kcal/mol x 3 = 21.9 kcal/mol.\nThe conservation of the energy can be calculated by the following formula\nEfficiency = (21.9 x 100%) / 52 = 42%\nSo we can conclude that when NADH is oxidized, about 42% of energy is conserved in the form of three ATPs and the remaining (58%) energy is lost as heat (unless the chemical energy of ATP under physiological conditions was underestimated).\nReactive oxygen species.\nMolecular oxygen is a good terminal electron acceptor because it is a strong oxidizing agent. The reduction of oxygen does involve potentially harmful intermediates. Although the transfer of four electrons and four protons reduces oxygen to water, which is harmless, transfer of one or two electrons produces superoxide or peroxide anions, which are dangerously reactive.\nThese reactive oxygen species and their reaction products, such as the hydroxyl radical, are very harmful to cells, as they oxidize proteins and cause mutations in DNA. This cellular damage may contribute to disease and is proposed as one cause of aging.\nThe cytochrome c oxidase complex is highly efficient at reducing oxygen to water, and it releases very few partly reduced intermediates; however small amounts of superoxide anion and peroxide are produced by the electron transport chain. Particularly important is the reduction of coenzyme Q in complex III, as a highly reactive ubisemiquinone free radical is formed as an intermediate in the Q cycle. This unstable species can lead to electron \"leakage\" when electrons transfer directly to oxygen, forming superoxide. As the production of reactive oxygen species by these proton-pumping complexes is greatest at high membrane potentials, it has been proposed that mitochondria regulate their activity to maintain the membrane potential within a narrow range that balances ATP production against oxidant generation. For instance, oxidants can activate uncoupling proteins that reduce membrane potential.\nTo counteract these reactive oxygen species, cells contain numerous antioxidant systems, including antioxidant vitamins such as vitamin C and vitamin E, and antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase, catalase, and peroxidases, which detoxify the reactive species, limiting damage to the cell.\nIn hypoxic/anoxic conditions.\nAs oxygen is fundamental for oxidative phosphorylation, a shortage in O2 level can alter ATP production rates. The proton motive force and ATP production can be maintained by intracellular acidosis. Cytosolic protons that have accumulated with ATP hydrolysis and lactic acidosis can freely diffuse across the mitochondrial outer-membrane and acidify the inter-membrane space, hence directly contributing to the proton motive force and ATP production.\nWhen exposed to hypoxia/anoxia (no oxygen), most animals will see damage done to their mitochondria. From some species, these conditions can happen due to environmental variables, such as low tides, low temperatures, or general living conditions, like living in a hypoxic underground burrow. In humans, these conditions are commonly met in medical emergencies such as strokes, ischemia, and asphyxia.\nDespite this, or perhaps due to it, some species have developed their own defense mechanisms against anoxia/hypoxia, as well as during reperfusion/reoxygenation. These mechanisms are diverse and differ between endotherms and ectotherms and can differ even at the species level.\nEndotherms.\nHypoxia/anoxia intolerance.\nMost mammals and birds are intolerant to low/no oxygen conditions. For the heart, in the absence of oxygen, the first four complexes of the electron transport chain decrease in activity. This will lead to protons leaking through the inner mitochondrial membrane without complexes I, III, and IV pushing protons back through to maintain the proton gradient. There is also electron leak (an event where electrons leak out of the electron transport chain), which happens because NADH dehydrogenase within Complex I becomes damaged, which allows for the production of ROS (reactive oxygen species) during ischemia. This will lead to the reversing of Complex V, which forces protons from the matrix back into the inner membrane space, against their concentration gradient. Forcing protons against their concentration gradient requires energy, so Complex V uses up ATP as an energy source.\nReoxygenation of intolerant animals.\nWhen oxygen re-enters the system, animals are faced with a different set of problems. Since ATP was used up during the anoxic period, it leads to a lack of ADP within the system. This is due to ADP's natural degradation into AMP, resulting in ADP being drained from the system. With no ADP in the system, Complex V is unable to start, meaning the protons will not flow through it to enter the matrix. Due to Complex V's reversal during anoxia, the proton gradient has become hyperpolarized (where the proton gradient is highly positively charged). Another factor in this problem is that succinate built up during anoxia, so when oxygen is reintroduced, succinate donates electrons to Complex II. The hyperpolarized gradient and succinate buildup leads to reverse electron transport, causing oxidative stress, which can lead to cellular damage and diseases.\nHypoxia/anoxia tolerance.\nThe naked mole rat (\"Heterocephalus glaber\") is a hypoxia-tolerant species that sleeps in deep burrows and in large colonies. The depth of these burrows reduces access to oxygen, and sleeping in large groups will deplete the area of oxygen quicker than usual, leading to hypoxia. The naked mole rat has the unique ability to survive low oxygen conditions for no less than several hours, and zero oxygen conditions for 18 minutes. One of the ways of combatting hypoxia in the brain is decreasing the reliance on oxygen for ATP production, achieved by decreased respiration rates and proton leak.\nReoxygenation of tolerant animals.\nHypoxia/anoxia tolerant species handle ROS production during reoxygenation better than the intolerant. In the cortex of the naked mole rats, they show better homeostasis of ROS production than intolerant species and seem to lack the burst of ROS that typically comes with reoxygenation.\nEctotherms.\nHypoxia/anoxia intolerance.\nResearch on intolerant ectotherms is more limited than on tolerant ectotherms and intolerant endotherms, but it is shown that anoxia/hypoxia intolerance is different in terms for how long the intolerant survive as opposed to the tolerant between endotherms and ectotherms. While intolerant endotherms only last minutes, intolerant ectotherms can last hours, such as subtidal scallops (\"Argopecten irradians\"). This difference in intolerance could be due to a couple of different factors. One advantage is that the ectothermic inner mitochondrial membrane is less leaky, so less protons will leak through the inner membrane due to differences in the phospholipid bilayer composition. Another advantage ectotherms tend to have in this category is an ability for their mitochondria to properly function in a wide range of temperatures, such as the western fence lizard (\"Sceloporus occidentalis).\" While western fence lizards are not considered a hypoxia-tolerant animal, they still showed less temperature sensitivity in their mitochondria than mice mitochondria.\nReoxygenation of intolerant animals.\nWhile it is unclear how reoxygenation affects intolerant ectotherms at the mitochondrial level, there is some research showing how some of them respond. In the hypoxia-sensitive shovelnose ray (\"Aptychotrema rostrata),\" it is shown that ROS production is lower upon reoxygenation compared to rays only exposed to normoxia (normal oxygen levels). This differs from the hypoxia-sensitive endotherm, which would see an increase in ROS production. However, the ray's levels were still higher than the more hypoxia-tolerant Epaulette shark (\"Hemiscyllum ocellatum\"), which potentially sees hypoxia due to the bouts of low tides that can be seen in reef platforms. Subtidal scallops will see both a decrease in maximal respiration and a depolarization of the membrane during reoxygenation.\nHypoxia/anoxia tolerance.\nHypoxia/Anoxia tolerant ectotherms have shown unique strategies for surviving anoxia. Pond turtles, such as the painted turtle (\"Chrysemys picta bellii\"), will experience anoxia during winter while they overwinter at the bottom of frozen ponds. In their cardiac mitochondria, the reversing of Complex V, the usage of ATP, and the build-up of succinate are all prevented during anoxia. Crucian carps (\"Carassius carassius\") also overwinter in frozen ponds and show no loss membrane potential in their cardiac mitochondria during anoxia, but this relies on complexes I and III to be active.\nReoxygenation of tolerant animals.\nPond turtles are able to completely avoid ROS production upon reoxygenation. However, crucian carp cannot and are unable to prevent the death of brain cells upon reoxygenation.\nInhibitors.\nThere are several well-known drugs and toxins that inhibit oxidative phosphorylation. Although any one of these toxins inhibits only one enzyme in the electron transport chain, inhibition of any step in this process will halt the rest of the process. For example, if oligomycin inhibits ATP synthase, protons cannot pass back into the mitochondrion. As a result, the proton pumps are unable to operate, as the gradient becomes too strong for them to overcome. NADH is then no longer oxidized and the citric acid cycle ceases to operate because the concentration of NAD+ falls below the concentration that these enzymes can use.\nMany site-specific inhibitors of the electron transport chain have contributed to the present knowledge of mitochondrial respiration. Synthesis of ATP is also dependent on the electron transport chain, so all site-specific inhibitors also inhibit ATP formation. The fish poison rotenone, the barbiturate drug amytal, and the antibiotic piericidin A inhibit NADH and coenzyme Q.\nCarbon monoxide, cyanide, hydrogen sulfide and azide effectively inhibit cytochrome oxidase. Carbon monoxide reacts with the reduced form of the cytochrome while cyanide and azide react with the oxidised form. An antibiotic, antimycin A, and British anti-Lewisite, an antidote used against chemical weapons, are the two important inhibitors of the site between cytochrome B and C1.\nNot all inhibitors of oxidative phosphorylation are toxins. In brown adipose tissue, regulated proton channels called uncoupling proteins can uncouple respiration from ATP synthesis. This rapid respiration produces heat, and is particularly important as a way of maintaining body temperature for hibernating animals, although these proteins may also have a more general function in cells' responses to stress.\nHistory.\nThe field of oxidative phosphorylation began with the report in 1906 by Arthur Harden of a vital role for phosphate in cellular fermentation, but initially only sugar phosphates were known to be involved. However, in the early 1940s, the link between the oxidation of sugars and the generation of ATP was firmly established by Herman Kalckar, confirming the central role of ATP in energy transfer that had been proposed by Fritz Albert Lipmann in 1941. Later, in 1949, Morris Friedkin and Albert L. Lehninger proved that the coenzyme NADH linked metabolic pathways such as the citric acid cycle and the synthesis of ATP. The term \"oxidative phosphorylation\" was coined by Volodymyr Belitser in 1939.\nFor another twenty years, the mechanism by which ATP is generated remained mysterious, with scientists searching for an elusive \"high-energy intermediate\" that would link oxidation and phosphorylation reactions. This puzzle was solved by Peter D. Mitchell with the publication of the chemiosmotic theory in 1961. At first, this proposal was highly controversial, but it was slowly accepted and Mitchell was awarded a Nobel prize in 1978. Subsequent research concentrated on purifying and characterizing the enzymes involved, with major contributions being made by David E. Green on the complexes of the electron-transport chain, as well as Efraim Racker on the ATP synthase. A critical step towards solving the mechanism of the ATP synthase was provided by Paul D. Boyer, by his development in 1973 of the \"binding change\" mechanism, followed by his radical proposal of rotational catalysis in 1982. More recent work has included structural studies on the enzymes involved in oxidative phosphorylation by John E. Walker, with Walker and Boyer being awarded a Nobel Prize in 1997.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22774", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22774", "title": "Oxus River", "text": ""}
{"id": "22775", "revid": "1318876166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22775", "title": "Old fashioned (cocktail)", "text": "Cocktail made with whiskey, bitters and sugar\nThe old fashioned is a cocktail made by muddling sugar with bitters and water, adding whiskey (typically rye or bourbon) or sometimes brandy, and garnishing with an orange slice or zest and a cocktail cherry. It is traditionally served with ice in an old fashioned glass (also known as a rocks glass).\nDeveloped during the 19th century and given its name in the 1880s, it is an IBA official cocktail. It is also one of six basic drinks listed in David A. Embury's \"The Fine Art of Mixing Drinks\".\nHistory.\nThe recipe for the old fashioned dates to the early 1800s, though not by that name. The term \"old-fashioned cocktails\" dates to 1880, and recipes by that name appear in cocktail books of the late 1880s and 1890s, with of Chicago the earliest known.\nAn old fashioned was one of the simpler and earlier versions of cocktails, before the development of advanced bartending techniques and recipes in the later part of the 19th century. The first documented definition of the word \"cocktail\" was in response to a reader's letter asking to define the word in the 6 May 1806, issue of \"The Balance and Columbian Repository\" in Hudson, New York. In the 13 May 1806, issue, the paper's editor wrote that it was a potent concoction of spirits, bitters, water, and sugar; it was also referred to at the time as a bittered sling.\nJ.E. Alexander describes the cocktail similarly in 1833, as he encountered it in New York City, as being rum, gin, or brandy, significant water, bitters, and sugar, though he includes a nutmeg garnish as well.\nBy the 1860s, it was common for orange cura\u00e7ao, absinthe, and other liqueurs to be added to the cocktail. As cocktails became more complex, drinkers accustomed to simpler cocktails began to ask bartenders for something akin to the pre-1850s drinks. The original concoction, albeit in different proportions, came back into vogue, and was referred to as \"old-fashioned\". The most popular of the in-vogue \"old-fashioned\" cocktails were made with whiskey, according to a Chicago barman, quoted in the \"Chicago Daily Tribune\" in 1882, with rye being more popular than Bourbon. The recipe he describes is a similar combination of spirits, bitters, water, and sugar of seventy-six years earlier.\nMyths.\nThe invention of the old fashioned is sometimes credited to the Pendennis Club, a gentlemen's club founded in 1881 in Louisville, Kentucky, and its introduction to New York to James E. Pepper, a prominent bourbon distiller and member of the club. This attribution is due to Albert Stevens Crockett of the Waldorf-Astoria, writing in the 1930s:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Cocktails\"\nOld-Fashioned Whiskey\nThis was brought to the old Waldorf in the days of its \u201csit-down\u201d Bar, and introduced by, or in honor of, Col. James E. Pepper, of Kentucky, proprietor of a celebrated whiskey of the period. The Old-fashioned Whiskey cocktail was said to have been the invention of a bartender at the famous Pendennis Club in Louisville, of which Col. Pepper was a member.\nThis is flatly contradicted by the historical record \u2013 multiple recipes by the name \"Old-Fashioned Whiskey Cocktail\" were published over 30 years before Crockett's claim, and the cocktail itself had existed for decades earlier. Cocktail historians also reject this claim \u2013 Robert Simonson rejects it, and David Wondrich rejects this origin story as a \"myth\", writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Since the \"Chicago Daily Tribune\" was already discussing \u2018old fashioned cocktails\u2019 in February of 1880 and the Pendennis Club wasn\u2019t founded until 1881, I think it\u2019s safe to pronounce this myth busted.\nThe popular story of how making an old-fashioned cocktail with brandy instead of whiskey began attributes it to the Chicago World's Fair in 1893, when the recently opened Korbel winery offered samples of their wine and brandy. Central European immigrants from Milwaukee took a liking to the Bohemian-born Korbel brothers' brandy, and brought it back to their home state and began using it in cocktails. This story is most likely false, however, and the practice more likely began after the Second World War due to supply shortages in spirits other than brandy.\nPopularity.\nIn January 2020, drinks journal \"Drinks International\" reported the old fashioned to be the top selling classic cocktail internationally, for the 6th straight year, based on its annual, global poll of 100 bars.\nWith its purported conception rooted in the city's history, in 2015 the city of Louisville named the old fashioned as its official cocktail. Each year, during the first two weeks of June, Louisville celebrates \"Old Fashioned Fortnight\", which encompasses bourbon events, cocktail specials, and National Bourbon Day which is always celebrated on 14 June.\nDue to the popularity of the cocktail (when made with brandy) in the state of Wisconsin, the brandy old fashioned was named Wisconsin's state cocktail in 2023.\nRecipe.\nEarly cocktails primarily used Holland gin or brandy, and did not use ice; they consisted of spirit, water, sugar, and bitters, often garnished with a grating of nutmeg. Sugar in turn was cut from a sugarloaf. By the 1860s, cocktails were generally iced, sugar syrup generally replaced solid sugar, whiskey had become a popular spirit, and a lemon twist replaced nutmeg as a garnish. Build was inconsistent: some were stirred, some shaken, some strained off the ice, some built in the glass. By the time \"old-fashioned cocktails\" started to be referred to in the 1880s, this still referred to various spirits \u2013 a whiskey version was called an \"old fashioned whiskey cocktail\" \u2013 but specified a lump of sugar, rather than syrup, building in the glass, and sometimes left a spoon in the glass, to stir or eat the partially undissolved sugar. This continued until Prohibition. Sugar cubes largely replaced sugar loafs around 1900, but some recipes continued to specify a sugar loaf. Orange slices began to be used as early as 1905.\nAfter the repeal of Prohibition, recipes for an \"old-fashioned\" in the 1930s specified whiskey, and included other fruit (orange slice, cherry), which is reflected in the IBA recipe. These recipes existed prior to Prohibition, but were uncommon or considered different cocktails, not an old fashioned. With the cocktail renaissance in the 2000s, craft cocktail versions returned to the pre-Prohibition recipes, with only a lemon twist (or orange twist, or both, known as \"rabbit ears\"). By the 2020s, craft cocktail versions generally used sugar syrup, rather than solid sugar, due to better dissolving, consistency, and speed. Traditionally it is built in the glass, but others stir in a mixing glass and then strain over an ice cube.\nHistorical recipes.\nThe earliest recipe for an old-fashioned cocktail is given by Theodore Proulx of Chapin &amp; Gore of Chicago in 1888:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Old-fashioned Cocktail.\nTake one-half lump of sugar, and dissolve it with water in a bar or whisky glass, which have the same meaning; then pour out the water; add a little bitters, syrup and absinthe as you would to any other cocktail; twist a piece of lemon-peel; drop in two or three pieces of ice, one jigger of whisky; stir with a spoon, and strain into another whisky glass.\nNo. 2. Prepared like the old-fashion No. 1, with the exception that you use one chunk of ice only and leave it in the glass instead of strain it.\nPoints to note include that this uses whiskey, without including it in the name; that it specifies either stirring and straining or building in the glass; it includes both half a lump of sugar and (sugar) syrup; and that it includes absinthe in addition to bitters. Proulx also gives a recipe for \"Toddy\u2013Old-fashioned\", with only a lump of sugar, water, ice, and whiskey, with the spoon in the glass.\nGeorge Kappeler provides several of the earliest published recipes for old-fashioned cocktails in his 1895 book. Recipes are given for whiskey, brandy, Holland gin, and Old Tom gin. The whiskey old fashioned recipe specifies the following (with a jigger being ):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dissolve a small lump of sugar with a little water in a whiskey-glass; add two dashes Angostura bitters, a small piece ice, a piece lemon-peel, one jigger whiskey.\nMix with small bar-spoon and serve, leaving spoon in the glass.\nBy the 1860s, as illustrated by Jerry Thomas's 1862 book, basic cocktail recipes included Cura\u00e7ao or other liqueurs. These liqueurs were not mentioned in the early 19th century descriptions, nor the \"Chicago Daily Tribune\" descriptions of the \"old-fashioned\" cocktails of the early 1880s; they were absent from Kappeler's old-fashioned recipes as well. The differences of the old-fashioned cocktail recipes from the cocktail recipes of the late 19th Century are mainly preparation methods, the use of sugar and water in lieu of simple or gum syrup, and the absence of additional liqueurs. These old-fashioned cocktail recipes are literally for cocktails done the old-fashioned way.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRecipes varied in the fruit they used. In 1905, the Hoffman House Old Fashioned Whiskey Cocktail included an orange slice, though this was absent from other recipes. In 1934, an \"Old Fashioned Cocktail (Whiskey)\" featured a lemon peel, orange peel, and slice of pineapple.\nA book by David Embury published in 1948 provides a slight variation, specifying 12 parts American whiskey, 1 part simple syrup, 1\u20133 dashes Angostura bitters, a twist of lemon peel over the top, and serve garnished with the lemon peel. Two additional recipes from the 1900s vary in the precise ingredients but omit the cherry which was introduced after 1930 as well as the soda water which the occasional recipe calls for. Orange bitters were a popular ingredient in the late 19th century.\nModifications.\nThe original old fashioned recipe would have showcased the whiskey available in America in the 19th century: Irish, Bourbon or rye whiskey. But in some regions, especially Wisconsin, brandy is substituted for whiskey (sometimes called a brandy old fashioned). Eventually the use of other spirits became common, such as a gin recipe becoming popularized in the late 1940s.\nCommon garnishes for an old fashioned include an orange slice or a maraschino cherry or both, although these modifications came around 1930, some time after the original recipe was invented. While some recipes began making sparse use of the orange zest for flavor, the practice of muddling orange and other fruit gained prevalence as late as the 1990s.\nSome modern variants have greatly sweetened the old-fashioned, e.g. by adding blood orange soda or lemon-lime soda to make a fizzy old-fashioned, or muddled strawberries to make a strawberry old-fashioned. In Wisconsin, an \"old fashioned, sweet\" is made with lemon-lime soda, and \"old fashioned, sour\" is made with grapefruit soda.\nModern versions may also include elaborately carved ice. Cocktail critic David Wondrich notes that this goes against the simple spirit of the old-fashioned.\nAnother more modern variation is the smoked old fashioned. The glass is smoked by a torch, smoking gun, or cocktail smoker. There is also an option through dry ice, the Smokin' Steve Old Fashioned, created by Steve Haddadin.\nCultural impact.\nThe old fashioned is the cocktail of choice of Don Draper, the lead character on the \"Mad Men\" television series, set in the 1960s. The use of the drink in the series coincided with a renewed interest in this and other classic cocktails in the 2000s.\nIt was also the basis of an oft-quoted line from the 1963 movie \"It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World\", when boozy pilot Jim Backus decides to make the cocktail and leaves passenger Buddy Hackett to fly the plane. When Hackett asks, \"What if something happens?\" Backus replies, \"What could happen to an old-fashioned?\" This scene is satirized in \"Archer\" season 3 episode 1 (\"Heart of Archness\") when Sterling Archer attempts to make an old fashioned on Rip Riley's seaplane but lacks the basic ingredients.\nThe cocktail is the subject of the Cole Porter song \"Make It Another Old-Fashioned, Please\" from \"Panama Hattie\", although the song asks to leave out the cherries, orange and bitters, and \"Just make it a straight rye\". It also features in the Panic! at the Disco song \"Old Fashioned\" from \"Pray for the Wicked\" (2018), being former frontman Brendon Urie's favourite drink.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22776", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22776", "title": "Omnipotence", "text": "Property of possessing maximal power\nOmnipotence is the property of possessing maximal power. Monotheistic religions generally attribute omnipotence only to the deity of their faith. In the monotheistic religious philosophy of Abrahamic religions, omnipotence is often listed as one of God's characteristics, along with omniscience, omnipresence, and omnibenevolence.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"omnipotence\" derives from the Latin prefix \"omni\"-, meaning \"all\", and the word \"potens\", meaning \"potent\" or \"powerful\". Thus the term means \"all-powerful\".\nMeanings.\nScholasticism.\nThe term omnipotent has been used to connote a number of different positions. These positions include, but are not limited to, the following:\nThomas Aquinas acknowledged difficulty in comprehending the deity's power: \"All confess that God is omnipotent; but it seems difficult to explain in what His omnipotence precisely consists: for there may be doubt as to the precise meaning of the word 'all' when we say that God can do all things. If, however, we consider the matter aright, since power is said in reference to possible things, this phrase, 'God can do all things,' is rightly understood to mean that God can do all things that are possible; and for this reason He is said to be omnipotent.\" In Scholasticism, omnipotence is generally understood to be compatible with certain limitations or restrictions. A proposition that is necessarily true is one whose negation is self-contradictory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is sometimes objected that this aspect of omnipotence involves the contradiction that God cannot do all that He can do; but the argument is sophistical; it is no contradiction to assert that God can realize whatever is possible, but that no number of actualized possibilities exhausts His power. Omnipotence is perfect power, free from all mere potentiality. Hence, although God does not bring into external being all that He is able to accomplish, His power must not be understood as passing through successive stages before its effect is accomplished. The activity of God is simple and eternal, without evolution or change. The transition from possibility to actuality or from act to potentiality, occurs only in creatures. When it is said that God can or could do a thing, the terms are not to be understood in the sense in which they are applied to created causes, but as conveying the idea of a Being, the range of Whose activity is limited only by His sovereign Will.\nAquinas says that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Power is predicated of God not as something really distinct from His knowledge and will, but as differing from them logically; inasmuch as power implies a notion of a principle putting into execution what the will commands, and what knowledge directs, which three things in God are identified. Or we may say, that the knowledge or will of God, according as it is the effective principle, has the notion of power contained in it. Hence the consideration of the knowledge and will of God precedes the consideration of His power, as the cause precedes the operation and effect.\nThe adaptation of means to ends in the universe does not argue, as John Stuart Mill would have it, that the power of the designer is limited, but only that God has willed to manifest his glory by a world so constituted rather than by another. Indeed, the production of secondary causes, capable of accomplishing certain effects, requires greater power than the direct accomplishment of these same effects. On the other hand, even though no creature existed, God's power would not be barren, for \"creatures are not an end to God.\" Regarding the deity's power, medieval theologians contended that there are certain things that even an omnipotent deity cannot do. The statement \"a deity can do anything\" is only sensible with an assumed suppressed clause, \"that implies the perfection of true power\". This standard scholastic answer allows that acts of creatures such as walking can be performed by humans but not by a deity. Rather than an advantage in power, human acts such as walking, sitting, or giving birth were possible only because of a \"defect\" in human power. The capacity to sin, for example, is not a power but a defect or infirmity. In response to questions of a deity performing impossibilities, e.g. making square circles, Aquinas says that \"everything that does not imply a contradiction in terms, is numbered amongst those possible things, in respect of which God is called omnipotent: whereas whatever implies contradiction does not come within the scope of divine omnipotence, because it cannot have the aspect of possibility. Hence it is better to say that such things cannot be done, than that God cannot do them. Nor is this contrary to the word of the angel, saying: 'No word shall be impossible with God.' For whatever implies a contradiction cannot be a word, because no intellect can possibly conceive such a thing.\"\nC. S. Lewis has adopted a scholastic position in the course of his work \"The Problem of Pain\". Lewis follows Aquinas' view on contradiction:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His Omnipotence means power to do all that is intrinsically possible, not to do the intrinsically impossible. You may attribute miracles to him, but not nonsense. This is no limit to his power. If you choose to say 'God can give a creature free will and at the same time withhold free will from it,' you have not succeeded in saying \"anything\" about God: meaningless combinations of words do not suddenly acquire meaning simply because we prefix to them the two other words 'God can.'... It is no more possible for God than for the weakest of his creatures to carry out both of two mutually exclusive alternatives; not because his power meets an obstacle, but because nonsense remains nonsense even when we talk it about God.\nAs a stage of normal child development.\nSigmund Freud freely used the same term in a comparable way. Referring with respect to an adult neurotic to \"the \"omnipotence\" which he ascribed to his thoughts and feelings\", Freud reckoned that \"this belief is a frank acknowledgement of a relic of the old megalomania of infancy\". Similarly Freud concluded that \"we can detect an element of megalomania in most other forms of paranoic disorder. We are justified in assuming that this megalomania is essentially of an infantile nature and that, as development proceeds, it is sacrificed to social considerations\". Freud saw megalomania as an obstacle to psychoanalysis. In the second half of the 20th century object relations theory, both in the States and among British Kleinians, set about \"rethinking megalomania... intent on transforming an obstacle... into a complex organization that linked object relations and defence mechanisms\" in such a way as to offer new \"prospects for therapy\".\nEdmund Bergler, one of his early followers, considered that \"as Freud and Ferenczi have shown, the child lives in a sort of megalomania for a long period; he knows only one yardstick, and that is his own over-inflated ego ... megalomania, it must be understood, is normal in the very young child\". Bergler was of the opinion that in later life \"the activity of gambling in itself unconsciously activates the megalomania and grandiosity of childhood, reverting to the \"fiction of omnipotence\"\".\nHeinz Kohut regarded \"the narcissistic patient's \"megalomania\" as a part of normal development.\nD. W. Winnicott took a more positive view of a belief in early omnipotence, seeing it as essential to the child's well-being; and \"good-enough\" mothering as essential to enable the child to \"cope with the immense shock of loss of omnipotence\"\u2014as opposed to whatever \"prematurely forces it out of its narcissistic universe\".\nRejection or limitation.\nSome monotheists reject the view that a deity is or could be omnipotent, or take the view that, by choosing to create creatures with free will, a deity has chosen to limit divine omnipotence. In Conservative and Reform Judaism, and some movements within Protestant Christianity, including open theism, deities are said to act in the world through persuasion, and not by coercion (this is a matter of choice\u2014a deity could act miraculously, and perhaps on occasion does so\u2014while for process theism it is a matter of necessity\u2014creatures have inherent powers that a deity cannot, even in principle, override). Deities are manifested in the world through inspiration and the creation of possibility, not necessarily by miracles or violations of the laws of nature.\nPhilosophical grounds.\nProcess theology rejects unlimited omnipotence on a philosophical basis, arguing that omnipotence as classically understood would be less than perfect, and is therefore incompatible with the idea of a perfect deity. The idea is grounded in Plato's oft-overlooked statement that \"being is power\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My notion would be, that anything which possesses any sort of power to affect another, or to be affected by another, if only for a single moment, however trifling the cause and however slight the effect, has real existence; and I hold that the definition of being is simply power.\u2014\u200a\nFrom this premise, Charles Hartshorne argues further that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Power is influence, and perfect power is perfect influence ... power must be exercised upon something, at least if by power we mean influence, control; but the something controlled cannot be absolutely inert, since the merely passive, that which has no active tendency of its own, is nothing; yet if the something acted upon is itself partly active, then there must be some resistance, however slight, to the \"absolute\" power, and how can power which is resisted be absolute?\u2014\u200a\nThe argument can be stated as follows:\nFor example, although someone might control a lump of jelly-pudding almost completely, the inability of that pudding to stage any resistance renders that person's power rather unimpressive. Power can only be said to be great if it is over something that has defenses and its own agenda. If a deity's power is to be great, it must therefore be over beings that have at least some of their own defenses and agenda. Thus, if a deity does not have absolute power, it must therefore embody some of the characteristics of power, and some of the characteristics of persuasion. This view is known as dipolar theism.\nThe most popular works espousing this point are from Harold Kushner (in Judaism). The need for a modified view of omnipotence was also articulated by Alfred North Whitehead in the early 20th century and expanded upon by Charles Hartshorne. Hartshorne proceeded within the context of the theological system known as process theology.\nThomas Jay Oord argues that omnipotence dies a death of a thousand philosophical qualifications. To make any sense, the word must undergo various logical, ontological, mathematical, theological, and existential qualifications so that it loses specificity.\nScriptural grounds.\nIn the Authorized King James Version of the Bible, as well as several other versions, in Revelation 19:6 it is stated \"the Lord God omnipotent reigneth\" (, \"all-mighty\").\nThomas Jay Oord argues that omnipotence is not found in the Hebrew and Greek scriptures. The Hebrew words Shaddai (breasts) and Sabaoth (hosts) are wrongly translated as \"God almighty\" or \"divine omnipotence\". Pantokrator, the Greek word in the New Testament and Septuagint often translated in English as \"almighty\", actually means \"all-holding\" rather than almighty or omnipotent. Oord offers an alternative view of divine power he calls \"amipotence,\" which is the maximal power of God's uncontrolling love.\nUncertainty.\nTrying to develop a theory to explain, assign or reject omnipotence on grounds of logic has little merit, since being omnipotent, in a Cartesian sense, would mean the omnipotent being is above logic, a view supported by Ren\u00e9 Descartes. He issues this idea in his \"Meditations on First Philosophy\". This view is called universal possibilism.\nAccording to Hindu philosophy the essence of Brahman can never be understood or known since Brahman is beyond both existence and non-existence, transcending and including time, causation and space, and thus can never be known in the same material sense as one traditionally \"understands\" a given concept or object.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22779", "revid": "1588193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22779", "title": "Oxycontin", "text": ""}
{"id": "22780", "revid": "50446187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22780", "title": "Octopus", "text": "Soft-bodied eight-limbed order of molluscs\nAn octopus (pl.: octopuses or octopodes) is a soft-bodied, eight-limbed mollusc of the order Octopoda (, ). The order consists of some 300 species and is grouped within the class Cephalopoda with squids, cuttlefish, and nautiloids. Like other cephalopods, an octopus is bilaterally symmetric with two eyes and a beaked mouth at the centre point of the eight limbs. An octopus can radically deform its shape, enabling it to squeeze through small gaps. They trail their appendages behind them as they swim. The siphon is used for respiration and locomotion (by water jet propulsion). Octopuses have a complex nervous system and excellent sight, and are among the most intelligent and behaviourally diverse invertebrates.\nOctopuses inhabit various ocean habitats, including coral reefs, pelagic waters, and the seabed; some live in the intertidal zone and others at abyssal depths. Most species grow quickly, mature early, and are short-lived. In most species, the male uses a specially-adapted arm to deliver sperm directly into the female's mantle cavity, after which he becomes senescent and dies, while the female deposits fertilised eggs in a den and cares for them until they hatch, after which she also dies. They are predators and hunt crustaceans, bivalves, gastropods and fish. Strategies to defend themselves against their own predators include expelling ink, camouflage, and threat displays, the ability to jet quickly through the water and hide, and deceit. All octopuses are venomous, but only the blue-ringed octopuses are known to be deadly to humans.\nOctopuses appear in mythology as sea monsters such as the kraken of Norway and the Akkorokamui of the Ainu, and possibly the Gorgon of ancient Greece. A battle with an octopus appears in Victor Hugo's book \"Toilers of the Sea\". Octopuses appear in Japanese \"shunga\" erotic art. They are eaten and considered a delicacy by humans in many parts of the world, especially the Mediterranean and Asia.\nEtymology and pluralisation.\nThe scientific Latin term was derived from Ancient Greek (), a compound form of (, 'eight') and (, 'foot'), itself a variant form of , a word used for example by Alexander of Tralles (c.\u2009525 \u2013 c.\u2009605). \nThe standard pluralised form of \"octopus\" in English is \"octopuses\"; the Ancient Greek plural , (), has also been used historically. The alternative plural \"octopi\" is usually considered etymologically incorrect because it wrongly assumes that \"octopus\" is a Latin second-declension noun or adjective when, in either Greek or Latin, it is a third-declension noun. Historically, the first plural to commonly appear in English language sources, in the early 19th century, is the Latinate form \"octopi\", followed by the English form \"octopuses\" in the latter half of the same century. The Hellenic plural is roughly contemporary in usage, although it is also the rarest.\n\"Fowler's Modern English Usage\" states that the only acceptable plural in English is \"octopuses\", that \"octopi\" is misconceived, and \"octopodes\" pedantic; the last is nonetheless used frequently enough to be acknowledged by the descriptivist \"Merriam-Webster 11th Collegiate Dictionary\" and \"Webster's New World College Dictionary\". The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" lists \"octopuses\", \"octopi\", and \"octopodes\", in that order, reflecting frequency of use, calling \"octopodes\" rare and noting that \"octopi\" is based on a misunderstanding. The \"New Oxford American Dictionary\" (3rd Edition, 2010) lists \"octopuses\" as the only acceptable pluralisation, and indicates that \"octopodes\" is occasionally used, but that \"octopi\" is incorrect.\nAnatomy and physiology.\nSize.\nThe giant Pacific octopus (\"Enteroctopus dofleini\") is often cited as the largest octopus species. Adults usually weigh , with an arm span of up to . The largest specimen of this species to be scientifically documented reached a live mass of . Much larger sizes have been claimed: one specimen was recorded as with an arm span of . A carcass of the seven-arm octopus, \"Haliphron atlanticus\", weighed and was estimated to have had a live mass of . The smallest species is \"Octopus wolfi\", which is around and weighs less than .\nExternal characteristics.\nThe octopus has an elongated body that is bilaterally symmetrical along its dorso-ventral (back to belly) axis; the head and foot are on the ventral side, but act as the anterior (front). The head contains both the mouth and the brain. The mouth has a sharp chitinous beak and is surrounded by and underneath the foot, which evolved into flexible, prehensile cephalopod limbs, known as \"arms\", which are attached to each other near their base by a webbed structure. The arms can be described based on side and sequence position (such as L1, R1, L2, R2) and divide into four pairs. The two rear appendages are generally used to walk on the sea floor, while the other six are used to forage for food. The bulbous and hollow mantle is fused to the back of the head and contains most of the vital organs. The mantle also has a cavity with muscular walls and a pair of gills; it is connected to the exterior by a funnel or siphon.\nThe skin consists of a thin epidermis with mucous cells and sensory cells and a fibrous dermis made of collagen and containing various cells that allow colour change. Most of the body is made of soft tissue, allowing it to squeeze through tiny gaps; even the larger species can pass through a gap little more than in diameter. Lacking skeletal support, the arms work as muscular hydrostats and feature longitudinal, transverse, and circular muscles around a central axial nerve. They can squash and stretch, coil at any place in any direction or stiffen.\nThe interior surfaces of the arms are covered with circular, adhesive suckers. The suckers allow the octopus to secure itself in place or to handle objects. Each sucker is typically circular and bowl-like and has two distinct parts: an outer disc-shaped infundibulum and an inner cup-like acetabulum, both of which are thick muscles covered in connective tissue. A chitinous cuticle lines the outer surface. When a sucker attaches to a surface, the orifice between the two structures is sealed and the infundibulum flattens. Muscle contractions allow for attachment and detachment. Each of the eight arms senses and responds to light, allowing the octopus to control its limbs even if its head is obscured.\nThe cranium has two cartilaginous capsules each containing one large eye, which resembles those of fish. The cornea is formed from a translucent epidermal layer; the slit-shaped pupil forms a hole in the iris just behind the cornea. The lens hangs behind the pupil; photoreceptive retinal cells line the back. The pupil can expand and contract; a retinal pigment screens incident light in bright conditions.\nSome species differ in form from the typical body shape. Basal species, the Cirrina, have gelatinous bodies with two fins located above the eyes, an internal shell and mostly webbed arms that are lined with fleshy papillae or cirri underneath.\nCirculatory system.\nOctopuses have a closed circulatory system, in which the blood remains inside blood vessels. They have three hearts; a systemic or main heart that circulates blood around the body and two branchial or gill hearts that pump it through the two gills. The systemic heart becomes inactive when the animal is swimming. Thus, the octopus loses energy quickly and mostly crawls. Octopus blood contains the copper-rich protein haemocyanin to transport oxygen. This makes the blood viscous and it requires great pressure to pump it around the body; blood pressures can surpass . In cold conditions with low oxygen levels, haemocyanin transports oxygen more efficiently than haemoglobin. The haemocyanin is dissolved in the blood plasma instead of carried within blood cells and gives the blood a bluish colour.\nThe systemic heart has muscular contractile walls and consists of a single ventricle and two atria, which attach it to each of the two gills. The blood vessels consist of arteries, capillaries and veins and are lined with a cellular endothelium unlike that of most other invertebrates. The blood circulates through the aorta and capillary system, to the \"venae cavae\", after which the blood is pumped through the gills by the branchial hearts and back to the main heart. Much of the venous system is contractile, which helps circulate the blood.\nRespiration.\nRespiration involves drawing water into the mantle cavity through an aperture, passing it through the gills, and expelling it through the siphon. Ingress is achieved by contraction of radial muscles in the mantle wall, and flapper valves shut when strong, circular muscles expel the water through the siphon. Extensive connective tissue lattices support the respiratory muscles and allow them to inflate the respiratory chamber. The lamella structure of the gills allows for high oxygen uptake, up to 65% in water at . Respiration can also play a role in locomotion, as an octopus can propel its body shooting water out of the siphon.\nThe thin skin absorbs additional oxygen. When resting, around 41% of oxygen absorption is through the skin, reduced to 33% when the octopus swims, despite the amount of oxygen absorption increasing as water flows over the body. When it is resting after a meal, skin absorption can drop to 3%.\nDigestion and excretion.\nThe digestive system begins with the buccal mass which consists of the mouth with the beak, the pharynx, radula and salivary glands. The radula is serrated and made of chitin. Food is broken down and is forced into the esophagus by two lateral extensions of the esophageal side walls in addition to the radula. From there it is transferred to the gastrointestinal tract, which is mostly suspended from the roof of the mantle cavity. The tract consists of a crop, where the food is stored; a stomach, where it is mixed with other gut material; a caecum where the food is separated into particles and liquids and which absorbs fats; the digestive gland, where liver cells break down and absorb the fluid and become \"brown bodies\"; and the intestine, where the built-up waste is turned into faecal ropes by secretions and ejected out of the funnel via the rectum.\nDuring osmoregulation, fluid is added to the pericardia of the branchial hearts. The octopus has two nephridia (equivalent to vertebrate kidneys) that are associated with the branchial hearts; these and their associated ducts connect the pericardial cavities with the mantle cavity. Each branch of the vena cava has renal appendages that pass over the thin-walled nephridium before reaching the branchial heart. Urine is created in the pericardial cavity, and is altered by excretion, of mostly ammonia, and absorption from the renal appendages, as it is passed along the associated duct and through the nephridiopore into the mantle cavity.\nNervous system and senses.\nOctopuses and their relatives have a more expansive and complex nervous system than other invertebrates, containing over 500 million neurons, around the same as a dog. One part is localised in the brain, contained in a cartilaginous capsule. Two-thirds of the neurons are in the nerve cords of its arms. This allows their arms to perform actions with a degree of independence. Learning mainly occurs in the brain, while arms make decisions independently when supplied with information. A severed arm can still move and respond to stimuli. Unlike in many other animals, including other mollusks, the movement of octopuses and their relatives are not organised in their brains via internal somatotopic maps of their bodies. Octopuses have the same jumping genes that are active in the human brain, implying an evolutionary convergence at molecular level.\nLike other cephalopods, octopuses have camera-like eyes. Colour vision appears to vary from species to species, for example, it is present in \"A. aegina\" but absent in \"O. vulgaris\". Opsins in the skin respond to different wavelengths of light and help the animals choose a colouration that matches the surroundings and camouflages them; chromatophores in the skin can respond to light independently of the eyes. An alternative hypothesis is that cephalopod eyes in species that only have a single photoreceptor protein may use chromatic aberration to turn monochromatic vision into colour vision, though this lowers image quality. This would explain pupils shaped like the letter \"U\", the letter \"W\", or a dumbbell, as well as the need for colourful mating displays.\nAttached to the optic capsules are two organs called statocysts (sac-like structures containing a mineralised mass and sensitive hairs), that allow the octopus to sense the orientation of its body, relative to both gravity and time (angular acceleration). An autonomic response keeps the octopus's eyes oriented so that the pupil is always horizontal. Octopuses may also use the statocyst to hear. The common octopus can hear sounds between 400\u00a0Hz and 1000\u00a0Hz, and hears best at 600\u00a0Hz.\nOctopuses have an excellent somatosensory system. Their suction cups are equipped with chemoreceptors so they can taste what they touch. Octopus arms move easily because the sensors recognise octopus skin and prevent self-attachment. Octopuses appear to have poor proprioceptive sense and must see their arms to keep track of their position.\nInk sac.\nThe ink sac is located under the digestive gland. A gland attached to the sac produces the ink, and the sac holds it. The sac is close enough to the funnel for the octopus to shoot out the ink with a water jet. As the animal begins to shoot, the ink passes through glands which mix it with mucus and it leaves the funnel as a thick, dark blob which helps the animal to escape from a predator. The main pigment in the ink is melanin, which gives it its black colour. Cirrate octopuses usually lack the ink sac.\nLife cycle.\nReproduction.\nOctopuses have two sexes and have only one gonad (testis in males and ovary in females) located posteriorly. The gonad deposits gametes into an adjacent cavity called the gonocoel. A gonoduct bridges the gonocoel with the mantle cavity. An optic gland creates hormones that cause the octopus to mature and age and stimulate gamete production. The timing of reproduction and lifespan depends on environmental conditions such as temperature, light and nutrition, which trigger the gland. The male has a specialised arm called a hectocotylus which it uses to transfer spermatophores (packets of sperm) into the female's mantle cavity. The hectocotylus in \"Octopus\" is usually the R3 arm, which has a spoon-shaped depression and a suckerless tip. Fertilisation may occur in the mantle cavity or in the surrounding water.\nReproduction has been studied in some species. In the giant Pacific octopus, courtship includes changes in skin texture and colour, mostly in the male. The male may cling to the top or side of the female or position himself beside her. There is some speculation that he may first use his hectocotylus to remove any spermatophore or sperm already present in the female. He picks up a spermatophore from his spermatophoric sac with the hectocotylus, inserts it into the female's mantle cavity, and deposits it in the correct location in the opening of the oviduct. Two spermatophores are transferred in this way; these are about one metre (yard) long, and the empty ends may protrude from the female's mantle. A complex hydraulic mechanism releases the sperm from the spermatophore. \nThe eggs have large yolks; cleavage (division) is relatively shallow and a germinal disc develops at the pole. During gastrulation, the disc surrounds the yolk, forming a yolk sac, which eventually forms part of the gut. The embryo forms as the dorsal side of the disc grows upward, with a shell gland, gills, mantle and eyes on its dorsal side. The arms and funnel form on the ventral side of the disc, with the former moving upward to surround the mouth. The embryo consumes the yolk during development. \nOver a month after mating, Giant Pacific octopuses lay eggs. The species can lay 180,000 eggs in a single clutch, while \"O. rubescens\" clutches host up to 45,000 eggs while \"O. vulgaris\" clutches can include 500,000 eggs. Fertilised octopus eggs are laid as strings within a shelter. Female giant Pacific octopuses nurture and protect their eggs for five months (160 days) until they hatch. In colder waters, such as those off Alaska, it may take up to ten months for the eggs to completely develop. In the argonaut (paper nautilus), the female is much larger than the male. She secretes a thin shell shaped like a cornucopia, in which the eggs are deposited and in which she also resides and broods the young while swimming.\nMost young octopuses hatch as paralarvae, \"Octopus\" larvae in particular are planktonic for weeks or months. Larvae feed on shrimp, isopods and amphipods, eventually settling on the ocean floor to mature. Species that produce larger eggs instead hatch as benthic animals similar to the adults. These include the southern blue-ringed, Caribbean reef, California two-spot and \"Eledone moschata.\"\nLifespan.\nOctopuses have short lifespans, living up to four years. The lifecycles of some species finish in less than half a year. For most octopuses, the ultimate life stage is senescence. It is the breakdown of cellular function without repair or replacement. It may last from weeks to a few months at most. Males senesce after maturity, while for females, it comes after they lay an egg clutch. During senescence, an octopus does not feed, quickly weakens, and becomes sluggish. Lesions begin to form and the octopus literally degenerates. They may die of starvation or get picked off by predators. Senescence is triggered by the optic glands and experimental removal of them after spawning was found to extend their lifecycle and activity.\nDistribution and habitat.\nOctopuses inhabit every ocean, with species adapted to many habitats. As juveniles, common octopuses inhabit shallow tide pools. The Hawaiian day octopus (\"Octopus cyanea\") lives on coral reefs, while argonauts float in pelagic waters. \"Abdopus aculeatus\" is a near-shore species and can be found in seagrass beds. Some species can survive in deeper environments. The spoon-armed octopus (\"Bathypolypus arcticus\") can live deep, and \"Vulcanoctopus hydrothermalis\" lives in depths of around hydrothermal vents. Species such as \"Megaleledone setebos\" and \"Pareledone charcoti\", can survive in the waters of the Antarctic, which reach . No species are known to live in fresh water.\nThe cirrate species are often free-swimming and live in deep-water habitats. Although several species live at bathyal and abyssal depths, only a single indisputable record documents their presence in the hadal zone; a species of \"Grimpoteuthis\" (dumbo octopus) photographed at .\nBehaviour and ecology.\nOctopuses are mostly solitary though a few are known to live in groups and interact regularly, usually in the context of dominance and reproductive competition. This is likely the result of abundant food supplies combined with fewer den sites. The Larger Pacific striped octopus has been described as particularly social, living in groups of up to 40. Octopuses hide in dens, which are typically crevices in rocky or other hard structures, including man-made ones. Small species may use abandoned shells and bottles. They can navigate to a den without having to retrace their outward route. They are not migratory.\nOctopuses bring captured prey to the den to eat. Dens are often surrounded by a midden of dead and uneaten food items. These middens may attract scavengers such as fish, molluscs, and echinoderms. On rare occasions, octopuses hunt cooperatively with other species, with fish as their partners. They regulate the species composition of the hunting \u2009and the behavior of their \u2009by punching them.\nFeeding.\nOctopuses are generally predatory and feed on prey such as crustaceans, bivalves, gastropods, fish, and other cephalopods, including members of the same species. Major items in the diet of the giant Pacific octopus include bivalves such as the cockle \"Clinocardium nuttallii\", clams and scallops and crustaceans such as crabs. It typically rejects moon snails because they are too large; limpets, rock scallops, chitons and abalone, because they are too securely fixed to the rock. Small cirrate octopuses such as those of the genera \"Grimpoteuthis\" and \"Opisthoteuthis\" typically prey on polychaetes, copepods, amphipods and isopods.\nOctopuses typically locate prey by feeling through their environment; some species hide and ambush their target. When prey tries to escape, the octopus jets after it. Octopuses may drill into the shells of crustaceans, bivalves and gastropods. It used to be thought that drilling was done by the radula, but it has now been shown that minute teeth at the tip of the salivary papilla are involved, and an enzyme in the toxic saliva is used to dissolve the calcium carbonate of the shell. This can take hours and once the shell is penetrated, the prey dies almost instantaneously. With crabs, tough-shelled species are more likely to be drilled, and soft-shelled crabs are torn apart.\nSome species have other modes of feeding. \"Grimpoteuthis\" either lacks or has a small radula and swallows prey whole. In the deep-sea genus \"Stauroteuthis\", the suckers in most species have been altered into photophores which are believed to fool prey by directing them to the mouth, making them one of the few bioluminescent octopuses.\nLocomotion.\nOctopuses mainly move about by relatively slow crawling with some swimming in a head-first position. Jet propulsion or backward swimming, is their fastest means of locomotion, while crawling is slowest. While crawling, the suckers adhere and detach from the substrate as the animal hauls itself forward with its powerful arm muscles. In 2005, \"Adopus aculeatus\" and veined octopus (\"Amphioctopus marginatus\") were found to walk on two arms, while at the same time mimicking plant matter. This form of locomotion allows these octopuses to move quickly away from a potential predator without being recognised. Some species of octopus can crawl out of the water briefly, which they may do between tide pools. \"Stilt walking\" is used by the veined octopus when carrying stacked coconut shells. The octopus carries the shells underneath it with two arms, and progresses with an awkward gait supported by its remaining arms, which are stiffened.\nMost octopuses swim by expelling a jet of water from the mantle through the siphon into the sea. The direction of travel depends on the orientation of the siphon. When swimming, the head is at the front and the siphon is pointed backward but, when jetting, the visceral hump leads, the siphon points at the head and the arms trail behind, with the animal presenting a fusiform appearance. In an alternative method of swimming, some species flatten themselves dorso-ventrally, and swim with the arms splayed; this may provide lift and be faster than normal swimming. Jetting is used to escape from danger, but is physiologically inefficient, requiring a mantle pressure so high as to stop the heart from beating, resulting in a progressive oxygen deficit.\nCirrate octopuses cannot produce jet propulsion and swim using their fins. Their neutrally buoyant bodies float along while the fins are spread. They can also contract their arms and surrounding web to make sudden moves known as \"take-offs\". Another form of locomotion is \"pumping\", which involves symmetrical contractions of muscles in their webs producing peristaltic waves, moving them slowly.\nIntelligence.\nOctopuses are highly intelligent. Maze and problem-solving experiments have shown evidence of a memory system that can store both short- and long-term memory. In laboratory experiments, octopuses can readily be trained to distinguish between different shapes and patterns. They have been reported to practise observational learning, although the validity of these findings is contested. The veined octopus collects discarded coconut shells, then uses them to build a shelter, an example of tool use. Octopuses have also been observed in what has been described as play: including moving around a bottle by jetting water at it. Octopuses often break out of aquariums and sometimes into others in search of food. Evidence indicates that octopuses have sentience and can feel pain.\nCamouflage and colour change.\nOctopuses use camouflage to hunt and to avoid predators. To do this, they use specialised skin cells that change colour. Chromatophores contain yellow, orange, red, brown, or black pigments; most species have three of these colours, while some have two or four. Other colour-changing cells are reflective iridophores and white leucophores. This colour-changing ability is also used to communicate with or warn other octopuses. The energy cost of the complete activation of the chromatophore system is high, nearly matching the energy used at rest.\nOctopuses can create distracting patterns with waves of dark colouration across the body, a display known as the \"passing cloud\". Muscles in the skin change the texture of the mantle to achieve greater camouflage. In some species, the mantle can take on the bumpy appearance of algae-covered rocks. Diurnal, shallow water octopuses have more complex skin than their nocturnal and deep-sea counterparts. In the latter species, skin anatomy is limited to one colour or pattern.\nOctopus' \"moving rock\" trick involves mimicking a rock and then inching across the open space with a speed matching that of the surrounding water.\nDefence.\nAside from humans, octopuses are prey for fishes, seabirds, sea otters, pinnipeds, cetaceans, and other cephalopods. Octopuses typically hide or disguise themselves by camouflage and mimicry; some have conspicuous warning coloration (aposematism) or deimatic behaviour (\"bluffing\" a threatening appearance). An octopus may hide in their dens for as much as 40% of the day. When the octopus is approached, it may reach out an arm to investigate. 66% of \"E. dofleini\" in one study had scars, with 50% missing arms. The blue rings of the venomous blue-ringed octopus are hidden in muscular skin folds which contract when the animal is threatened, revealing the iridescent warning. The Atlantic white-spotted octopus (\"Callistoctopus macropus\") becomes redder with bright white spots in a deimatic display. Displays are often reinforced by stretching out the animal's arms, fins or web to make it look as big and threatening as possible.\nOctopus try to escape from a predator by ejecting an ink cloud, which acts as a \"smoke-screen\" or a decoy, as well as to interfere with the attacker's sense of smell. When severed by a predator, some octopuses can detach their arm, which can grow back. Some octopuses, such as the mimic octopus, can combine their flexible bodies with their colour-changing ability to mimic other, more dangerous animals, such as lionfish, sea snakes, and eels.\nPathogens and parasites.\nCephalopods are known to be the intermediate or final hosts of various parasitic cestodes, nematodes and copepods; 150 species of protistan and metazoan parasites are recognised. The Dicyemidae are a family of tiny worms found in the renal appendages of many species; it is unclear whether they are parasitic or endosymbionts. Coccidians in the genus \"Aggregata\" living in the gut cause serious illness in the host. Octopuses have an innate immune system; their haemocytes locate the foreign invader and attack it via phagocytosis, encapsulation, infiltration, or cytotoxicity. The haemocytes also contribute to healing injures. A gram-negative bacterium, \"Vibrio lentus\", can cause skin lesions, exposure of muscle and sometimes death.\nEvolution.\nThe scientific name Octopoda was first given as the order of octopuses in 1818 by English biologist William Elford Leach, who classified them as Octopoida the previous year. Octopoda consists of around 300 known species and were historically divided into two suborders, the Incirrina and the Cirrina. More recent evidence suggests cirrates are the most basal species, not a unique clade. The incirrate octopuses (the majority of species) lack the cirri and paired swimming fins of the cirrates. In addition, the internal shell of incirrates is either present as a pair of stylets or absent altogether.\nFossil history and phylogeny.\nThe Cephalopoda descended from a mollusc resembling the Monoplacophora in the Cambrian some 530 million years ago. The Coleoidea, which brought their shells inside the body, diverged from the nautiloids in the Devonian some 416 million years ago. Around 276 million years ago, during the Permian, the coleoids split into two groups, the Vampyropoda and the Decabrachia. The octopuses arose from the Muensterelloidea within the Vampyropoda in the Jurassic. The earliest octopus likely lived near the sea floor (benthic to demersal) in shallow marine environments. Octopuses consist mostly of soft tissue, and so fossils are relatively rare. As soft-bodied cephalopods, they lack the external shell of most molluscs, including other cephalopods like the nautiloids and the (extinct) Ammonoidea. They have eight limbs like other Coleoidea, but lack the extra specialised feeding appendages known as tentacles which are longer and thinner with suckers only at their club-like ends. The vampire squid (\"Vampyroteuthis\") also lacks tentacles but has sensory filaments.\nThe cladograms are based on Sanchez et al., 2018, who created a molecular phylogeny based on mitochondrial and nuclear DNA marker sequences. The position of the Eledonidae is from Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez et al., 2020, with a similar methodology. Divergence dates are from Kr\u00f6ger et al., 2011 and Fuchs et al., 2019.\nThe molecular analysis of the octopods shows that the suborder Cirrina (Cirromorphida) and the superfamily Argonautoidea are paraphyletic and are broken up; these names are shown in quotation marks and italics on the cladogram.\nRNA editing and the genome.\nOctopuses, like other coleoid cephalopods but unlike more basal cephalopods or other molluscs, are capable of greater RNA editing, changing the nucleic acid sequence of the primary transcript of RNA molecules, than any other organisms. Much editing is done in the nervous system, particularly for excitability and neuronal morphology. Coleoids rely mostly on ADAR enzymes for RNA editing, which requires large, double-stranded RNA structures. The many editing sites are conserved in the coleoid genome and the mutation rates for the sites are hampered. Hence, greater transcriptome plasticity has come at the cost of slower genome evolution.\nThe octopus genome is unremarkably bilaterian except for large developments of two gene families: protocadherins, which regulate the development of neurons; and the C2H2 zinc-finger transcription factors. Many novel genes in both cephalopods generally and octopus specifically manifest in the animals' skin, suckers, and nervous system.\nRelationship to humans.\nCultural significance.\nAncient seafaring people were aware of the octopus, as evidenced by artworks and designs. It was depicted on coins during the Minoan civilization possibly as early as 1650 BCE and on pottery in Mycenaean Greece around between 1200 and 1100 BCE. A Hawaiian creation myth suggests that the octopus is the lone survivor of a previous age. The legendary sea monster, the kraken is conceived as octopus-like. Similarly, Medusa was compared to an octopus, with her snake-hair resembling the creature's arms. The Akkorokamui is a gigantic octopus-like monster from Ainu folklore, worshipped in Shinto. \nIn the Asuka-era Japanese legend \"Taishokan\", a female diver battles an octopus to recover a stolen jewel, which became the inspiration for woodblock printings. Similarly, in the 1973 novel \"Gravity's Rainbow\" an octopus named Grigori attacks a woman on the beach. A battle with an octopus plays a significant role in Victor Hugo's 1866 book \"Travailleurs de la mer\" (\"Toilers of the Sea\"). The octopus continues to be depicted as antagonistic in films such as \"Wake of the Red Witch\" (1948). \nIn political cartoons, octopuses have been used to symbolise empires and large organizations, the arms representing long reach. Octopus also have an erotic appeal. Japanese erotic art, \"shunga\", includes ukiyo-e woodblock prints such as Katsushika Hokusai's 1814 print \"Tako to ama\" (\"The Dream of the Fisherman's Wife\"), in which a woman is sexually intertwined with a large and a small octopus. This art style would inspire Pablo Picasso's 1903 drawing \"An Erotic Drawing: Woman and Octopus\". Some individual octopuses gained celebrity status, notably Paul the Octopus who predicted the winners of the 2010 FIFA World Cup.\nDanger to humans.\nOctopuses generally avoid humans, but some conflictual incidents have been verified. For example, a Pacific octopus, said to be nearly perfectly camouflaged, \"lunged\" at a diver and \"wrangled\" over his camera before it let go. Another diver recorded the encounter on video. All species are venomous, but only blue-ringed octopuses have venom that is lethal to humans. Blue-ringed octopuses rank amongst the most dangerous marine animals; their bites are reported each year across the animals' range from Australia to the eastern Indo-Pacific Ocean. They bite only when provoked or accidentally touched; bites are small and usually painless. The venom appears to be able to penetrate the skin without a puncture, given prolonged contact. It contains tetrodotoxin, which causes paralysis by blocking the transmission of nerve impulses to the muscles. This causes death by respiratory failure leading to cerebral anoxia. No antidote is known, but if breathing can be kept going artificially, patients recover within 24 hours. Bites have been recorded from captive octopuses of other species; they leave temporary swellings.\nAs a food source.\nOctopuses are fished around the world and between 1988 and 1995, catches varied between 245,320 and 322,999 metric tons. The world catch peaked in 2007 at 380,000 tons, and had fallen by a tenth by 2012. Methods to capture octopuses include pots, trapping, trawling, snaring, drift fishing, spearing, hooking and catching by hands. Octopuses are also bycatch. Attempts to farm octopuses commercially are controversial.\nOctopus is eaten in many cultures, such as those on the Mediterranean and Asian coasts. The arms and other body parts are prepared in ways that vary by species and geography. Live octopuses or their wriggling pieces are consumed as \"san-nakji\" in Korean cuisine. If not prepared properly, however, the severed arms can choke the diner with their suction cups, causing at least one death in 2010. Animal welfare groups have objected to the live consumption of octopuses on the basis that they can experience pain.\nScience and technology.\nIn classical Greece, Aristotle (384\u2013322 BC) commented on their colour-changing abilities, both for camouflage and for signalling, in his \"Historia animalium\": \"The octopus\u00a0... seeks its prey by so changing its colour as to render it like the colour of the stones adjacent to it; it does so also when alarmed.\" Aristotle noted that the octopus had a hectocotyl arm and suggested it might be used in reproduction. This claim was widely ignored until the 19th century. It was described in 1829 by the French zoologist Georges Cuvier, who supposed it to be a parasitic worm, naming it as a new species, \"Hectocotylus octopodis\". Other zoologists thought it a spermatophore; the German zoologist Heinrich M\u00fcller believed it was \"designed\" to detach during copulation. In 1856, the Danish zoologist Japetus Steenstrup demonstrated that it is used to transfer sperm, and only rarely detaches.\nOctopuses offer many possibilities in biological research; the California two-spot octopus had its genome sequenced, allowing exploration of its molecular adaptations. Having independently evolved mammal-like intelligence, octopuses were compared by the philosopher Peter Godfrey-Smith, who studied the nature of intelligence, to hypothetical intelligent extraterrestrials. Their intelligence and flexible bodies enable them to escape from supposedly secure tanks in public aquariums.\nDue to their intelligence, many argue that octopuses should be given protections when used for experiments. In the UK from 1993 to 2012, the common octopus (\"Octopus vulgaris\") was the only invertebrate protected under the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986. In 2012, this legislation was extended to include all cephalopods in accordance with a general EU directive. \nSome robotics research is exploring biomimicry of octopus features. Octopus arms can move and sense largely autonomously without intervention from the animal's central nervous system. In 2015 a team in Italy built soft-bodied robots able to crawl and swim, requiring only minimal computation. In 2017, a German company made an arm with a soft pneumatically controlled silicone gripper fitted with two rows of suckers. It was able to grasp objects such as a metal tube, a magazine, or a ball, and to fill a glass by pouring water from a bottle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22781", "revid": "32955798", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22781", "title": "Omniscience", "text": "Property of possessing maximal knowledge\nOmniscience is the property of possessing maximal knowledge. In Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism and the Abrahamic religions, it is often attributed to a divine being or an all-knowing spirit, entity or person. In Jainism, omniscience is an attribute that any individual can eventually attain. In Buddhism, there are differing beliefs about omniscience among different schools.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"omniscience\" derives from the Latin word \"sciens\" (\"to know\" or \"conscious\") and the prefix \"omni\" (\"all\" or \"every\"), but also means \"all-seeing\".\nIn religion.\nBuddhism.\nThe topic of omniscience has been much debated in various Indian traditions, but no more so than by the Buddhists. After Dharmakirti's excursions into the subject of what constitutes a valid cognition, \u015a\u0101ntarak\u1e63ita and his student Kamala\u015b\u012bla thoroughly investigated the subject in the Tattvasamgraha and its commentary the Panjika. The arguments in the text can be broadly grouped into four sections:\nChristianity.\nSome modern Christian theologians argue that God's omniscience is inherent rather than total, and that God chooses to limit his omniscience in order to preserve the free will and dignity of his creatures. John Calvin, among other theologians of the 16th century, comfortable with the definition of God as being omniscient in the total sense, in order for worthy beings' abilities to choose freely, embraced the doctrine of predestination.\nHinduism.\nIn the Bhakti tradition of Vaishnavism, where Vishnu is worshipped as the supreme God, Vishnu is attributed with numerous qualities such as omniscience, energy, strength, lordship, vigour, and splendour.\nIslam.\nGod in Islam is attributed with absolute omniscience. God knows the past, the present, and the future. It is compulsory for a Muslim to believe that God is indeed omniscient as stated in one of the six articles of faith which is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Say: Do you instruct God about your religion? But God knows all that is in the heavens and on the earth; God is Knowing of all things\u2014\u200a\nIt is believed that humans can only change their predestination (wealth, health, deed etc.) and not divine decree (date of birth, date of death, family etc.), thus allowing free will.\nBaha'i Faith.\nOmniscience is an attribute of God, yet it is also an attribute that reveals sciences to humanity: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In like manner, the moment the word expressing My attribute \u201cThe Omniscient\u201d issueth forth from My mouth, every created thing will, according to its capacity and limitations, be invested with the power to unfold the knowledge of the most marvelous sciences, and will be empowered to manifest them in the course of time at the bidding of Him Who is the Almighty, the All-Knowing.\u2014\u200a\nJainism.\nIn Jainism, omniscience is considered the highest type of perception. In the words of a Jain scholar, \"The perfect manifestation of the innate nature of the self, arising on the complete annihilation of the obstructive veils, is called omniscience.\"\nJainism views infinite knowledge as an inherent capability of every soul. \"Arihanta\" is the word used by Jains to refer to those human beings who have conquered all inner passions (like attachment, greed, pride, anger) and possess \"Kevala Jnana\" (infinite knowledge). They are said to be of two kinds:\nOmniscience and free will.\nWhether omniscience, particularly regarding the choices that a human will make, is compatible with free will has been debated by theologians and philosophers. The argument that divine foreknowledge is not compatible with free will is known as theological fatalism. It is argued that if humans are free to choose between alternatives, God could not know what this choice will be.\nA question arises: if an omniscient entity knows everything, even about its own decisions in the future, does it therefore forbid any free will to that entity? William Lane Craig states that the question subdivides into two:\nHowever, this kind of argument fails to recognize its use of the modal fallacy. It is possible to show that the first premise of arguments like these is fallacious.\nOmniscience and the privacy of conscious experience.\nSome philosophers, such as Patrick Grim, Linda Zagzebski, Stephan Torre, and William Mander have discussed the issue of whether the apparent exclusively first-person nature of conscious experience is compatible with God's omniscience. There is a strong sense in which conscious experience is private, meaning that no outside observer can gain knowledge of what it is like to be me \"as me\". If a subject cannot know what it is like to be another subject in an objective manner, the question is whether that limitation applies to God as well. If it does, then God cannot be said to be omniscient since there is then a form of knowledge that God lacks access to.\nThe philosopher Patrick Grim most notably raised this issue. Linda Zagzebski argued against this by introducing the notion of \"perfect empathy\", a proposed relation that God can have to subjects that would allow God to have perfect knowledge of their conscious experience. William Mander argued that God can only have such knowledge if our experiences are part of God's broader experience. Stephan Torre claimed that God can have such knowledge if self-knowledge involves the ascription of properties, either to oneself or to others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22782", "revid": "14967932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22782", "title": "Ontogeny and phylogeny", "text": ""}
{"id": "22783", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22783", "title": "Ogg-Vorbis", "text": ""}
{"id": "22784", "revid": "47171495", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22784", "title": "Amiga Original Chip Set", "text": "Chipset used in Amiga personal computer\nThe Original Chip Set (OCS) is a chipset used in the earliest Commodore Amiga computers and defined the Amiga's graphics and sound capabilities. It was succeeded by the slightly improved Enhanced Chip Set (ECS) and the greatly improved Advanced Graphics Architecture (AGA).\nThe original chipset appeared in Amiga models built between 1985 and 1990: the Amiga 1000, Amiga 2000, Amiga CDTV, and Amiga 500.\nOverview of chips.\nThe chipset which gave the Amiga its unique graphics features consists of three main \"custom\" chips: \"Agnus\", \"Denise\", and \"Paula\". Both the original chipset and the enhanced chipset were manufactured using NMOS logic technology by Commodore's chip manufacturing subsidiary, MOS Technology. According to Jay Miner, the OCS chipset was fabricated in 5\u00a0\u03bcm manufacturing process while AGA Lisa was implemented in 1.5\u00a0\u03bcm process. All three custom chips were originally packaged in 48-pin DIPs; later versions of Agnus, known as Fat Agnus, were packaged in an 84-pin PLCC.\nAgnus is the central chip in the design. It controls all access to chip RAM from both the central 68000 processor and the other custom chips, using a complicated priority system. Agnus includes sub-components known as the \"blitter\" (fast transfer of data in memory without the intervention of the processor) and the \"Copper\" (video-synchronized co-processor). The original Agnus can address 512 KB of chip RAM. Later revisions, dubbed 'Fat Agnus', added 512 KB pseudo-fast RAM, which for ECS was changed to 1\u00a0MB (sometimes called 'Fatter Agnus') and subsequently to 2\u00a0MB chip RAM.\nDenise is the main video processor. Without using overscan, the Amiga's graphics display is 320 or 640 pixels wide by 200 (NTSC) or 256 (PAL) pixels tall. Denise also supports interlacing, which doubles the vertical resolution, at the cost of intrusive flickering on typical monitors of that era. (Various flicker fixer solutions appeared.) Planar bitmap graphics are used, which splits the individual bits per pixel into separate areas of memory, called bitplanes. In normal operation, Denise allows between one and five bitplanes, giving two to 32 unique colors. These colors are selected from a palette of 4096 colors (four bits per RGB component). A 6th bitplane is available for two special video modes: Halfbrite mode and Hold-And-Modify (HAM) mode. Denise also supports eight sprites, single pixel scrolling, and a \"dual-playfield\" mode. Denise also handles mouse and digital joystick input.\nPaula is primarily the audio chip, with four independent hardware-mixed 8-bit PCM sound channels, each of which supports 65 volume levels (no sound to maximum volume) and waveform output rates from roughly 20 samples per second to almost 29,000 samples per second. Paula also handles interrupts and various I/O functions including the floppy disk drive, the serial port, and analog joysticks.\nThere are many similarities\u00a0\u2013 both in overall functionality and in the division of functionality into the three component chips\u00a0\u2013 between the OCS chipset and the much earlier and simpler chipset of the Atari 8-bit computers, consisting of the ANTIC, GTIA and POKEY chips; both chipsets were conceptually designed by Jay Miner, which explains the similarity.\nAgnus.\nThe Agnus chip is in overall control of the entire chipset's operation. All operations are synchronised to the position of the video beam. This includes access to the built-in RAM, known as chip RAM because the chipset has access to it. Both the central 68000 processor and other members of the chipset have to arbitrate for access to chip RAM via \"Agnus\". In computing architecture terms, this is Direct Memory Access (DMA), where Agnus is the DMA Controller (DMAC).\nAgnus has a complex and priority-based memory access policy that attempts to best coordinate requests for memory access among competing resources. For example, bitplane data fetches are prioritized over blitter transfers as the immediate display of frame buffer data is considered more important than the processing of memory by the blitter. Agnus also attempts to order accesses in such a way so as to overlap CPU bus cycles with DMA cycles. As the original 68000 processor in Amigas tended only to access memory on every second available memory cycle, Agnus operates a system where \"odd\" memory access cycles are allocated first and as needed to time-critical custom chip DMA while any remaining cycles are available to the CPU, thus the CPU does not generally get locked out of memory access and does not appear to slow down. However, non-time-critical custom chip access, such as \"blitter\" transfers, can use up any spare odd or even cycles and, if the \"BLITHOG\" (blitter hog) flag is set, Agnus can lock out the even cycles from the CPU in deference to the \"blitter\".\nAgnus's timings are measured in \"color clocks\" of 280\u00a0ns. This is equivalent to two low resolution (140\u00a0ns) pixels or four high resolution (70\u00a0ns) pixels. Like Denise, these timings were designed for display on household TVs, and can be synchronized to an external clock source.\nBlitter.\nThe \"blitter\" is a sub-component of Agnus. \"Blit\" is shorthand for \"block image transfer\" or bit blit. The blitter is a highly parallel memory transfer and logic operation unit. It has three modes of operation: copying blocks of memory, filling blocks (e.g. polygon filling) and line drawing.\nThe blitter allows rapid copying of video memory, meaning that the CPU can be freed for other tasks. The blitter was primarily used for drawing and redrawing graphics images on the screen, called \"bobs\", short for \"blitter objects\".\nThe blitter's block copying mode takes zero to three data sources in memory, called A, B and C, performs a programmable Boolean function on the data sources and writes the result to a destination area, D. Any of these four areas can overlap. The blitter runs either from the start of the block to the end, known as \"ascending\" mode, or in reverse, \"descending\" mode. This type of operation is known today as a Bitwise ternary logic instruction.\nBlocks are \"rectangular\"; they have a \"width\" in multiples of 16 bits, a height measured in \"lines\", and a \"stride\" distance to move from the end of one line to the next. This allows the blitter to operate on any video resolution up to 1,024\u00d71,024 pixels. The copy automatically performs a per-pixel logical operation. These operations are described generically using minterms. This is most commonly used to do direct copies (D = A), or apply a pixel mask around blitted objects (D = (C AND B) OR A). The copy can also barrel shift each line by 0 to 15 pixels. This allows the blitter to draw at pixel offsets that are not exactly multiples of 16.\nThese functions allow the Amiga to move GUI windows around the screen rapidly as each is represented in graphical memory space as a rectangular block of memory which may be shifted to any required screen memory location at will.\nThe blitter's line mode draws single-pixel thick lines using Bresenham's line algorithm. It can also apply a 16-bit repeating pattern to the line. The line mode can also be used to draw rotated bobs: each line of bob data is used as line pattern while the line mode draws the tilted bob line by line.\nThe blitter's filling mode is used to fill per-line horizontal spans. On each span, it reads each pixel in turn from right to left. Whenever it reads a set pixel, it toggles filling mode on or off. When filling mode is on, it sets every pixel until filling mode is turned off or the line ends. Together, these modes allow the blitter to draw individual flat-shaded polygons. Later Amigas tended to use a combination of a faster CPU and blitter for many operations.\nCopper.\nThe \"Copper\" is another sub-component of Agnus; The name is short for \"co-processor\". The Copper is a programmable finite-state machine that executes a programmed instruction stream, synchronized with the video hardware.\nWhen it is turned on, the Copper has three states; either reading an instruction, executing it, or waiting for a specific video beam position. The Copper runs a program called the \"Copper list\" in parallel with the main CPU. The Copper runs in sync with the video beam, and it can be used to perform various operations which require video synchronization. Most commonly it is used to control video output, but it can write to most of the chipset registers and thus can be used to initiate blits, set audio registers, or interrupt the CPU.\nThe Copper list has three kinds of instructions, each one being a pair of two bytes, four bytes in total:\nThe length of the Copper list program is limited by execution time. The Copper restarts executing the Copper list at the start of each new video frame. There is no explicit \"end\" instruction; instead, the WAIT instruction is used to wait for a location which is never reached.\nExternal video timing.\nUnder normal circumstances, the Amiga generates its own video timings, but Agnus also supports synchronising the system to an external signal so as to achieve genlocking with external video hardware. There is also a 1-bit output on this connector that indicates whether the Amiga is outputting background color or not, permitting easy overlaying of Amiga video onto external video. This made the Amiga particularly attractive as a character generator for titling videos and broadcast work, as it avoided the use and expense of A/B roll and chroma key units that would be required without the genlock support. The support of overscan, interlacing and genlocking capabilities, and the fact that the display timing was very close to broadcast standards (NTSC or PAL), made the Amiga the first ideal computer for video purposes, and indeed, it was used in many studios for digitizing video data (sometimes called frame-grabbing), subtitling and interactive video news.\nDenise.\nDenise is programmed to fetch planar video data from one to five bitplanes and translate that into a color lookup. The number of bitplanes is arbitrary, thus if 32 colors are not needed, 2, 4, 8 or 16 can be used instead. The number of bitplanes (and resolution) can be changed on the fly, usually by the Copper. This allows for very economical use of RAM, and balancing of CPU processing speed vs graphical sophistication when executing from Chip RAM (as modes beyond 4bpp in low resolution, or 2bpp in high resolution, use extra DMA channels that can slow or temporarily halt the CPU in addition to the usual non-conflicting channels). There can also be a sixth bitplane, which can be used in three special graphics modes:\nThere are two horizontal graphics resolutions, \"lowres\" with 140\u00a0ns pixels and \"hires\" with 70\u00a0ns pixels, with a default of 320 or 640 horizontal pixels wide without using overscan. As the pixel output is regulated by the main system clock, which is based directly on the NTSC colorburst clock, these sizes very nearly fill the width of a standard television with only a thin \"underscan\" border between the graphics and the screen border when compared to many other contemporary home computers, for an appearance closer to a games console but with finer detail. On top of this, Denise supports reasonably extensive overscan. Technically modes with enough data for up to 400 or 800 pixels (+25%) may be specified. Although this is only actually useful for scrolling and special effects that involve partial display of large graphics as a separate hardware limit is met at 368 or 736 pixels. This is the maximum that will fit between the end of one blanking period and the start of the next. Still it is unlikely that even this many pixels will be visible on any display other than a dedicated monitor that allows adjusting the horizontal scan width. On a standard CRT, much of the image will disappear behind the screen bezel, and LCDs will crop off the image at the edge of the panel. Because of the highly regular structure of the Amiga's timing in relation to scanlines and allocation of DMA resources to various uses besides normal \"playfield\" graphics, increased horizontal resolution is also a tradeoff between number of pixels and how many hardware sprites are available, as increasing the DMA slots dedicated to playfield video ends up stealing some (from 1 to 7 of the total 8) the sprite engine.http://.\nVertical resolution, without overscan, is 200 pixels for a 60\u00a0Hz NTSC Amiga or 256 for a 50\u00a0Hz PAL Amiga. This can be doubled using an interlaced display, and, as with horizontal resolution, increased using overscan, to a maximum of 241 (or 483) for NTSC, and 283 (or 567) for PAL (interlaced modes gaining one extra line as the maximum is determined by how many lines are taken from the available total by blanking and sync, and the total scanlines in non-interlaced modes are half the original, broadcast-spec odd-numbered interlaced counts, rounded down). \nStarting with ECS, Denise was upgraded to support \"Productivity\" mode which allowed for 640x400 non-interlaced albeit with only 4 colors.\nDenise can composite up to eight 16-pixel-wide sprites per scan line (in automatic mode) on top, underneath, or between playfields, and detect collisions between sprites and the playfields or between sprites. These sprites have three visible colors and one transparent color. Optionally, adjacent pairs of sprites can be \"attached\" to make a single 15-color sprite. The Sprite DMA reads data to form a sprite channel as controlled by its registers, enabling the vertical reuse of sprites. There has to be one empty scanline in between two successive list entries to allow for updating sprite data. Using Copper or CPU register manipulations, each sprite \"channel\" can be reused multiple times in a single frame to increase the total sprites per frame. Sprite \"position\" registers may also be changed during a scanline, increasing the total number of sprites on a single scanline. However, the sprite \"data\", or shape, is only fetched a single time per scanline and can't change. The first Amiga game to utilize the sprite re-position registers during a scanline was \"Hybris\" released in 1988.\nThe Denise chip does not support a dedicated text mode.\nFinally, Denise next to the CIAs is responsible for handling mouse/joystick X/Y inputs.\nThe notion that Denise fetches bit plane and sprite data is a simplification. It is Agnus who is maintaining horizontal and vertical screen position counters and initiating the DRAM read operations. Denise has a number of bit plane registers which hold 16 bits of data each, enough to draw 16 pixels. When Agnus issues a write to register 1, all registers are then transferred into separate shift registers from which pixels are generated (at the same time new values are loaded from DRAM). Denise is not aware of any memory addresses either.\nPaula.\nThe Paula chip, designed by Glenn Keller, from MOS Technology, is the interrupt controller, but also includes logic for audio playback, floppy disk drive control, serial port input/output and mouse/joystick buttons two and three signals. The logic remained functionally identical across all Amiga models from Commodore.\nAudio.\nPaula has four DMA-driven 8-bit PCM sound channels. Two sound channels are mixed into the left audio output, and the other two are mixed into the right output, producing stereo audio output. The only supported hardware sample format is signed linear 8-bit two's complement. Each sound channel has an independent frequency and a 6-bit volume control (64 levels). Internally, the audio hardware is implemented by four state machines, each having eight different states.\nAdditionally the hardware allows one channel in a channel pair to modulate the other channel's period or amplitude. It is rarely used on the Amiga due to both frequency and volume being controllable in better ways, but could be used to achieve different kinds of tremolo and vibrato, and even rudimentary FM synthesis effects.\nAudio may be output using two methods. Most often, DMA-driven audio is used. As explained in the discussion of Agnus, memory access is prioritized and one DMA slot per scan line is available for each of the four sound channels. On a regular NTSC or PAL display, DMA audio playback is limited to a maximum output rate of 28,867 values per channel (PAL: 28837) per second totaling 57674 (PAL: 57734) values per second on each stereo output. This rate can be increased with the ECS and AGA chipsets by using a video mode with higher horizontal scan rate.\nAlternately, Paula may signal the CPU to load a new sample into any of the four audio output buffers by generating an interrupt when a new sample is needed. This allows for output rates that exceed 57\u00a0kHz per channel and increases the number of possible voices (simultaneous sounds) through software mixing.\nThe Amiga contains an analog low-pass filter (reconstruction filter) which is external to Paula. The filter is a 12\u00a0dB/oct Butterworth low-pass filter at approximately 3.3\u00a0kHz. The filter can only be applied globally to all four channels. In models after the Amiga\u00a01000 (excluding the very first revision of the Amiga\u00a0500), the brightness of the power LED is used to indicate the status of the filter. The filter is active when the LED is at normal brightness, and deactivated when dimmed (on early Amiga\u00a0500 models the LED went completely off). Models released before Amiga 1200 also have a static \"tone knob\" type low-pass filter that is enabled regardless of the optional \"LED filter\". This filter is a 6\u00a0dB/oct low-pass filter with cutoff frequency at 4.5 or 5\u00a0kHz.\nA software technique was later developed which can play back 14-bit audio by combining two channels set at different volumes. This results in two 14-bit channels instead of four 8-bit channels. This is achieved by playing the high byte of a 16-bit sample at maximum volume, and the low byte at minimum volume (both ranges overlap, so the low byte needs to be shifted right two bits). The bit shift operation requires a small amount of CPU or blitter overhead, whereas conventional 8-bit playback is almost entirely DMA driven. This technique was incorporated into the retargetable audio subsystem AHI, allowing compatible applications to use this mode transparently.\nFloppy disk controller.\nThe floppy controller is unusually flexible. It can read and write raw bit sequences directly from and to the disk via DMA or programmed I/O at 500 (double density) or 250\u00a0kbit/s (single density or GCR). MFM or GCR were the two most commonly used formats though in theory any run-length limited code could be used. It also provides a number of convenient features, such as sync-on-word (in MFM coding, $4489 is usually used as the sync word). MFM encoding/decoding is usually done with the blitter \u2014 one pass for decode, three passes for encode. Normally the entire track is read or written in one shot, rather than sector-by-sector; this made it possible to get rid of most of the inter-sector gaps that most floppy disk formats need to safely prevent the \"bleeding\" of a written sector into the previously-existing header of the next sector due to speed variations of the drive. If all sectors and their headers are always written in one go, such bleeding is only an issue at the end of the track (which still must not bleed back into its beginning), so that only one gap per track is needed. This way, for the native Amiga disk format, the raw storage capacity of 3.5\u00a0inch DD disks was increased from the typical 720\u00a0KB to 880\u00a0KB, although the less-than-ideal file system of the earlier Amiga models reduced this again to approximately 830\u00a0KB of actual payload data.\nIn addition to the native 880\u00a0KB 3.5-inch disk format, the controller can handle many foreign formats, such as:\nThe Amiga 3000 introduced a special, dual-speed floppy drive that also allowed use of high density disks with double capacity without any change to Paula's floppy controller.\nSerial port.\nThe serial port is rudimentary, using programmed input/output only and lacking a FIFO buffer. However, virtually any bit rate can be selected, including all standard rates, MIDI rate, as well as extremely high custom rates."}
{"id": "22785", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22785", "title": "Ogg Vorbis", "text": ""}
{"id": "22786", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22786", "title": "Optic neuritis", "text": "Inflammation of the optic nerve\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nOptic neuritis (ON) is a debilitating condition that is defined as inflammation of cranial nerve II which results in disruption of the neurologic pathways that allow visual sensory information received by the retina to be able to be transmitted to the visual cortex of the brain. This disorder of the optic nerve may arise through various pathophysiologic mechanisms, such as through demyelination or inflammation, leading to partial or total loss of vision. Optic neuritis may be a result of standalone idiopathic disease, but is often a manifestation that occurs secondary to an underlying disease.\nSigns of ON classically present as sudden-onset visual impairment in one or both eyes that can range in severity from mild visual blurring to complete blindness in the affected eye(s). Although pain is typically considered a hallmark feature of optic neuritis, the absence of pain does not preclude a diagnosis or consideration of ON as some patients may report painlessness.\nON is typically subtyped into \"typical\" ON and \"atypical\" ON. The most commonly considered etiologies are multiple sclerosis (MS), neuromyelitis optica (NMO) / neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD), and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-antibody-associated disease (MOGAD). Other etiologies include idiopathic ON, infections (eg, syphilis, Lyme disease, and viral infections such as herpes simplex and varicella-zoster), and systemic autoimmune diseases (eg, systemic lupus erythematosus and sarcoidosis).\nDiagnosis of ON can be made with a combination of symptom manifestation, clinical exam findings, imaging findings, and serologic studies.\nModern medical practice employs high-dose steroids, such as IV methylprednisolone, as the first-line treatment for optic neuritis.\nOptic neuritis should not be confused with optic neuropathy, which is a condition manifesting as visual impairment that occurs as a result of damage to the optic nerve from any cause - one of those causes being optic neuritis.\nClassification.\nDefinition.\nThe optic nerve comprises axons that emerge from the retina of the eye and carry visual information to the primary visual nuclei, most of which is relayed to the occipital cortex of the brain to be processed into vision. The phrase optic neuritis is derived from the pathophysiologic changes observed in this disorder whereby the optic nerve (\"optic\") becomes inflamed (\"neuritis\"). As such, optic neuritis is typically a manifestation of an underlying, causative etiology. Because of the breadth of underlying causes of optic neuritis, this disorder is typically classified into the subtypes of \"typical\" ON and \"atypical\" ON. Typical ON refers to a demyelinating etiology which most commonly stems from multiple sclerosis or standalone idiopathic disease. Atypical ON essentially refers to optic neuritis from any other cause.\nTypical Optic Neuritis.\nON is classified as typical optic neuritis when demyelination is the causative pathophysiologic aberrancy. This classification attributes the manifestation of ON primarily to multiple sclerosis or standalone idiopathic disease, of which multiple sclerosis is the most common underlying etiology of all subtypes of optic neuritis.\nMultiple Sclerosis.\nMultiple sclerosis, in brief, is an autoimmune disease that results in demyelination of the nerves in the central nervous system (CNS). Demyelination in MS can be diffusely affect the CNS leading to a multitude of physical manifestations. Optic neuritis is acquired this way when MS spreads to the optic nerve. Optic neuritis is often among the first, if not the foremost, manifestation of MS. One review found that inflammatory demyelinating optic neuritic (IDON) is the initial presentation of MS in approximately 20% of studied patients, while another review found that up to 50% of MS patients will develop optic neuritis during their disease course.\nIdiopathic Disease.\nIdiopathic optic neuritis (ION) generally refers to optic neuritis that does not present with serologic markers attributable to a known underlying cause (eg, NMOSD, MOGAD, etc.). Opinions among specialists seem to differ as to whether idiopathic optic neuritis should be classified as MS-associated ON or if it should not be exclusively associated with MS. A group of reviewers from China propose that ION should not be associated with MS and hence defined with the literal meaning of \"idiopathic\" as ON with an unknown cause. On the other hand, multiple groups of Western reviewers propose that ION should be considered a preceding manifestation, among a collection of manifestations, that precedes the development of MS in the absence of other serologic findings.\nAtypical Optic Neuritis.\nON is classified as atypical optic neuritis when the underlying cause is an etiology other than multiple sclerosis or standalone idiopathic disease. Atypical ON is most frequently seen as an early manifestation of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD), formerly known as neuromyelitis optica (NMO). Other causes of atypical ON include myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-antibody-associated disease (MOGAD), other autoimmune disorders (eg, Sarcoidosis, Sjogren syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus), and infections (Bacterial [Tuberculosis, syphillis, meningitis, Lyme's disease, Bartonella] or Viral [measles, mumps, rubella, chicken pox, herpes]).\nNMOSD (Formerly NMO).\nNeuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) is a disorder consisting of six syndromes that cause inflammation and demyelination of the CNS. The hallmark diagnostic criteria of NMOSD is the presence of the aquaporin-4 immunoglobulin G antibodies (AQP4-IgG) found on serology, which is the underlying aberrancy of this autoimmune condition that engenders its distinction from multiple sclerosis. Clinical manifestations of NMOSD, such as optic neuritis, occur due to antibody-mediated damage against the aquaporin-4 transmembrane water channels which are found in the foot processes of astrocytes at high concentrations within the optic nerve, brainstem, and spinal cord.\nMOGAD.\nMyelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-antibody-associated disease (MOGAD) is an autoimmune condition against the myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) located on both the myelin sheathe and oligodendrocyte cell surfaces of the CNS. Cell-mediated and complement-mediated inflammation results hallmark findings of perivenous and confluent white matter demyelination.\nInfection.\nA wide range of attributable infectious etiologies have been found to cause optic neuritis and can arise from varying pathophysiologic mechanisms. The underlying inflammation and demyelination has been shown to manifest as anterior optic neuritis, retrobulbar optic neuritis (normal optic disc), neuroretinitis (optic disc edema with the macular star), or anterior optic neuropathy. It has been proposed that optic nerve involvement secondary to herpes zoster virus infection can arise from direct nerve inflammation or an ischemic mechanism leading to inflammatory thrombosis. Optic nerve involvement secondary to cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection has been proposed to involve a similar mechanism in patients with CMV retinitis. The pathogenesis of ON secondary to HIV has been proposed to arise from autoimmune, vascular, and degenerative ischemic pathways.\nOther Causes.\nOther etiologies associated with optic neuritis include congenital anomalies, glaucoma, elevated intracranial pressure (i.e. papilledema), compression, nutritional and toxic optic neuropathy, trauma, inherited optic neuropathy, or infiltration (eg, neoplastic or granulomatous).\nWhen an inflammatory recurrent optic neuritis is not demyelinating, it is called chronic relapsing inflammatory optic neuropathy (CRION).\nSigns and symptoms.\nMajor symptoms are:\nPatients with optic neuritis may experience dyschromatopsia which describes a range of color vision in the affected eye (especially red), with colors appearing subtly washed out compared to the other eye. Patients may also experience difficulties judging movement in depth, which can be particular troublesome during driving or sport (Pulfrich effect). Likewise, transient worsening of vision with increase of body temperature (Uhthoff's phenomenon) and glare disability are a frequent complaint.\nInvolvement of the optic nerve may be unilateral or bilateral, depending on the underlying etiology. For example, MS-optic neuritis often presents unilaterally while NMOSD-optic neuritis and MOGAD-optic neuritis more often present bilaterally.\nHowever not everyone who has optic neuritis has problems with their vision.\nEarly Symptoms.\nEarly symptoms that require investigation include symptoms from multiple sclerosis (twitching, lack of coordination, slurred speech, frequent episodes of partial vision loss or blurred vision), episodes of \"disturbed/blackened\" rather than blurry indicate moderate stage and require immediate medical attention to prevent further loss of vision. Other early symptoms are reduced night vision, photophobia and red eyes.\nVariation in symptoms with age.\nSeveral case studies in children have demonstrated the absence of pain in more than half of cases (approximately 60%) in their pediatric study population, with the most common symptom reported simply as \"blurriness\". Other remarkable differences between the presentation of adult optic neuritis as compared to pediatric cases include more often unilateral optic neuritis in adults, while children much predominantly present with bilateral involvement.\nDiagnosis.\nThe World Health Organization's ICD-11 classification includes optic neuritis. However a 2022 review found that there is no consensus regarding the classification of optic neuritis, and precise diagnostic criteria are not available. In practice, optic neuritis is diagnosed by a combination of features pertaining to symptom manifestation, clinical evaluation, and imaging findings.\nClinical Evaluation.\nA trained healthcare provider may evaluate a patient for optic neuritis by identifying the presence and degree of visual acuity loss, visual field loss, color vision deficits, and an afferent pupillary defect in the affected eye. The presence, absence, or degree of these manifestations may have associations with specific underlying etiologies of optic neuritis, but are often insufficient to definitively establish a diagnosis of optic neuritis and its associated cause.\nFundoscopy is another modality of clinical evaluation that is performed with an ophthalmoscope. Findings that support a diagnosis of optic neuritis include optic disc edema, disc inflammation, disc hemorrhages, or ocular inflammation. However, these findings are not always present in every patient, such as in patients with idiopathic optic neuritis which often have normal fundoscopic findings.\nMRI.\nMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a robust and sensitive diagnostic modality for the detection of optic neuritis. Imaging of the optic nerve with MRI shows increased signal on the affected side. There is contrast enhancement of the symptomatic optic nerve and sheaths acutely or intrinsic signal increase (looking brighter) within \u2265 3 months. One study found that MRI of the orbits with fat suppression and gadolinium enhancement detected acute optic neuritis lesions in 95% of affected individuals within 20 days of vision loss. Another study found that T2-weighted images with fat suppression and short tau inversion recovery (STIR) detected lesions in up to 89% of acute optic neuritis cases with abnormalities persisting for as long as 6 weeks in 92% of cases.\nIdentification of optic nerve, orbital, brain, and meningeal involvement with MRI can also help to better characterize the underlying cause of optic neuritis upon initial evaluation. Unilateral optic nerve involvement is more common MS while bilateral optic nerve involvement is more common in NMOSD and MOGAD. T2-hyperintense and gadolinium-enhancing lesions in multiple regions of the brain and/or spinal cord may be highly suggestive or diagnostic of MS. Such lesions found in the periependymal, fornix, and hypothalamic lesions may be more suggestive of NMOSD. Involvement of the optic chiasm or optic tract are more suggestive of NMOSD-optic neuritis; involvement of the retrobulbar optic nerve can be seen in both NMOSD and MOGAD, but more commonly in MOGAD; perineural optic nerve involvement is often suggestive of MOGAD-optic neuritis, but should not preclude the investigation of other autoimmune or infectious etiologies.\nOCT.\nOptical coherence tomography (OCT) is a sensitive imaging modality that can reveal subtle pathologic changes in the optic nerve and retina. OCT may reveal changes in thickness of the retinal nerve fiber layers (RNFL) at the peripapillary retina and macula. The OCT shows corresponding optic disc swelling acutely or an inter-eye difference in the thickness of the neurons and their nerves connecting the eye with the brain in above 4-5% within \u2265 3 months after onset. The OCT inter-eye difference (also called retinal asymmetry) has been included into the 2025 revision of the McDonald criteria for multiple sclerosis (MS). A good diagnosis depends on timing. For OCT, the mGCIPL is most sensitive in the chronic phase. This matters when testing is needed to confirm optic nerve involvement for dissemination in space (DIS) in MS.\nNew advancements in OCT technology have allowed for the development of OCT angiography which can provide information on the thickness of retinal blood vessels. Whereas OCT has yet to demonstrate identifiable correlations between acute RNFL changes and visual outcomes or treatment responses, OCT angiography may offer novel diagnostic and prognostic insight.\nVEP.\nVisual evoked potential (VEP) is a sensitive test that measures the P100 latency of axonal transmission along the optic nerve. The P100 latency typically peaks at 100 milliseconds after visual stimulus presentation, and a prolonged P100 latency suggests abnormal conduction along this pathway which confirms the presence of optic neuropathy.\nTreatment.\nMany patients see full recovery but some see some lasting effects.\nSteroids.\nHigh dose steroids may be given intravenously (IV) or orally, though IV steroids such as methylprednisolone are typically recommended. Studies, including the Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial (ONTT), support such a guideline based on the statistically significant outcomes showing the efficacy of this treatment modality in restoring visual acuity and lessening ON's other associated symptoms.\nIn most MS-associated optic neuritis, visual function spontaneously improves over 2\u20133 months, and there is evidence that corticosteroid treatment does not affect the long term outcome. However, for optic neuritis that is not MS-associated (or atypical optic neuritis) the evidence is less clear and therefore the threshold for treatment with intravenous corticosteroids is lower. Intravenous corticosteroids also reduce the risk of developing MS in the following two years in patients with MRI lesions; but this effect disappears by the third year of follow up.\nParadoxically, oral administration of corticosteroids in this situation may lead to more recurrent attacks than in non-treated patients (though oral steroids are generally prescribed after the intravenous course, to wean the patient off the medication). This effect of corticosteroids seems to be limited to optic neuritis and has not been observed in other diseases treated with corticosteroids.\nA Cochrane systematic review studied the effect of corticosteroids for treating people with acute optic neuritis. Specific corticosteroids studied included intravenous and oral methylprednisone, and oral prednisone. The authors conclude that current evidence does not show a benefit of either intravenous or oral corticosteroids for rate of recovery of vision (in terms of visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, or visual fields). There are a number of reasons why this might be the case.\nImmunosuppressants.\nImmunosuppressants may also be used in treatment.\nPain relief.\nPain relief may also be used.\nEpidemiology.\nOptic neuritis typically affects young adults ranging 18\u201345 years of age, with a mean age of 30\u201335 years. There is a strong female predominance. The annual incidence is approximately 5/100,000, with a prevalence estimated to be 115/100,000 (0.12%).\nSociety and culture.\nIn Charles Dickens' \"Bleak House\", the main character, Esther Summerville, has a transient episode of visual loss, the symptoms of which are also seen in people who have optic neuritis. Legal historian William Searle Holdsworth suggested that the events in \"Bleak House\" took place in 1827.\nIn an episode of \"Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman\" (\"Season of Miracles\", season five), Reverend Timothy Johnson is struck blind by optic neuritis on Christmas Day 1872. He remains blind for the duration of the series.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22787", "revid": "60840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22787", "title": "List of organizations with .int domain names", "text": "This is a list of organizations with .int domain names, in alphabetical order of the second-level domain name. As of 2022[ [update]], the .int domain file contains 168 second-level domain designations, but this list has not been updated since 2012.\nOrganizations in the .int domain are generally international organizations established by treaty. However, some (such as the YMCA) do not meet current restrictions and were grandfathered in from prior acceptance.\nTable annotations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22788", "revid": "44822735", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22788", "title": "Organization of American States", "text": "International organization of states in the Americas\nThe Organization of American States (OAS or OEA; ; ; ) is an international organization founded on 30 April 1948 to promote cooperation among its member states within the Americas.\nHeadquartered in Washington, D.C., United States, the OAS is a \"multilateral regional body focused on human rights, electoral oversight, social and economic development, and security in the Western Hemisphere\", according to the Council on Foreign Relations. As of November 2023, 32 states in the Americas are OAS members.\nAlbert Ramdin of Suriname was inaugurated as OAS secretary general in May 2025, replacing Luis Almagro of Uruguay.\nHistory.\n19th century.\nThe notion of an international union in the American continent was first put forward during the liberation of America by Jos\u00e9 de San Mart\u00edn and Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar who, at the 1826 Congress of Panama, still being part of Colombia, proposed creating a league of American republics, with a common military, a mutual defense pact, and a supranational parliamentary assembly. The meeting was attended by representatives of Gran Colombia, comprising the present-day countries of Colombia, Ecuador, Panama, and Venezuela, Argentina, Peru, Bolivia, the United Provinces of Central America, and Mexico but the grandly titled \"Treaty of Union, League, and Perpetual Confederation\" was ultimately ratified only by Gran Colombia. Bol\u00edvar's dream soon floundered with civil war in Gran Colombia, the disintegration of Central America, and the emergence of national rather than New World outlooks in the newly independent American republics. Bol\u00edvar's dream of inter-American unity was meant to unify Hispanic American nations against external powers.\nFounding of the International Union of American Republics.\nThe pursuit of regional solidarity and cooperation again came to the forefront in 1889\u20131890, at the First International Conference of American States. Gathered together in Washington, D.C., 18 nations resolved to found the International Union of American Republics, served by a permanent secretariat called the Commercial Bureau of the American Republics (renamed the International Commercial Bureau at the Second International Conference in 1901\u20131902). These two bodies, in existence as of 14 April 1890, represent the point of inception to which the OAS and its General Secretariat trace their origins.\n20th century.\nAt the fourth International Conference of American States (Buenos Aires, 1910), the name of the organization was changed to the Union of American Republics and the Bureau became the Pan American Union. The Pan American Union Building was constructed in 1910, on Constitution Avenue, Northwest, Washington, D.C.\nIn the mid-1930s, U.S. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt organized an inter-American conference in Buenos Aires. One of the items at the conference was a \"League of Nations of the Americas\", an idea proposed by Colombia, Guatemala, and the Dominican Republic. At the subsequent Inter-American Conference for the Maintenance of Peace, 21 nations pledged to remain neutral in the event of a conflict between any two members. The experience of World War II convinced hemispheric governments that unilateral action could not ensure the territorial integrity of the American nations in the event of external aggression. To meet the challenges of global conflict in the postwar world and to contain conflicts within the hemisphere, they adopted a system of collective security, the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (Rio Treaty) signed in 1947 in Rio de Janeiro.\nCreation of the OAS.\nThe ninth International Conference of American States was held in Bogot\u00e1 between March and May 1948 and led by United States Secretary of State George Marshall, a meeting which led to a pledge by members to fight communism in the Western Hemisphere. This was the event that saw the birth of the OAS as it stands today, with the signature by 21 American countries of the Charter of the Organization of American States on 30 April 1948 (in effect since December 1951). The meeting also adopted the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man, the world's first general human rights instrument.\nThe transition from the Pan American Union to OAS would have been smooth if it had not been for the assassination of Colombian leader Jorge Eli\u00e9cer Gait\u00e1n. The Director General of the Pan American Union, Alberto Lleras Camargo, became the Organization's first Secretary General.\n21st century.\nThe OAS conducted an audit of the 2019 Bolivian general election, which opposition supporters argued was fraudulent. The OAS report contended that the results were marred by \"clear manipulation\" and significant irregularities leading to the 2019 Bolivian political crisis. Bolivian president Evo Morales resigned soon after, having lost the confidence of the country's military in what he described as a coup. Some media outlets debated whether it should be referred to as a coup. On 21 December, the Technical Mission of Electoral Experts sent by the European Union published a 67-page report which made similar observations and conclusions to that of the OAS. They noted that \"there were minutes with an unusually high number of null votes, blank votes and a hundred percent participation of voters in a series of polling stations\" and highlighted the general failure of the TSE to declare these irregularities. Studies commissioned by the American left-leaning think tank CEPR argued that the OAS report's statistical analysis was inaccurate and unreliable. The author of the OAS's vote return analysis stated that the CEPR's explanation of the results was implausible. The organization has been criticized by Mexico and the CEPR for their perception of interference into the internal affairs of Bolivia. The OAS observed the subsequent 2020 Bolivian general election stating there was no evidence of fraud. \"The New York Times\" concluded that there was some fraud, but that it was unclear how much or if it was sufficient to change the result of the election, and suggested the initial analysis by the OAS was flawed.\nIn November 2021, OAS condemned the outcome of the Nicaraguan general election. In April 2022, Nicaragua reported the completion of its withdrawal process from the OAS initiated in November 2021. The OAS stated that, due to the terms of treaty, the withdrawal would not take effect until 2023. The move was completed on 19 November that year.\nMilestones.\nSignificant milestones in the history of the OAS since the signing of the Charter have included the following:\nGoals and purpose.\nIn the words of Article 1 of the Charter, the goal of the member nations in creating the OAS was \"to achieve an order of peace and justice, to promote their solidarity, to strengthen their collaboration, and to defend their sovereignty, their territorial integrity, and their independence.\" Article 2 then defines eight essential purposes:\nOver the course of the 1990s, with the end of the Cold War, the return to democracy in Latin America, and the thrust toward globalization, the OAS made major efforts to reinvent itself to fit the new context. Its stated priorities now include the following:\nOrganizational structure.\nThe Organization of American States is composed of a General Secretariat, the Permanent Council, the Inter-American Council for Integral Development, and a number of committees.\nThe General Secretariat of the Organization of American States consists of six secretariats.\nThe various committees of the Organization of American States include:\nThe various commissions of the Organization of American States include: \nGeneral Assembly.\nThe General Assembly is the supreme decision-making body of OAS. It convenes once every year in a regular session. In special circumstances, and with the approval of two-thirds of the member states, the Permanent Council can convene special sessions.\nThe Organization's member states take turns hosting the General Assembly on a rotating basis. The states are represented at its sessions by their chosen delegates: generally, their ministers of foreign affairs, or their appointed deputies. Each state has one vote, and most matters are settled by a majority vote, except for those for which the Charter or the General Assembly's own rules of procedure specifically require a two-thirds majority.\nThe General Assembly's powers include setting the OAS's general course and policies by means of resolutions and declarations; approving its budget and determining the contributions payable by the member states; approving the reports and previous year's actions of the OAS's specialized agencies; and electing members to serve on those agencies.\nSpecialized agencies.\nThe OAS has five specialized agencies:\nOfficial languages.\nThe Organization's official languages are Spanish, Portuguese, French, and English. The Charter, the basic instrument governing OAS, makes no reference to the use of official languages. These references are to be found in the Rules of Procedure governing the various OAS bodies. Article 51 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly, the supreme body of the OAS, which meets once a year, states that English, French, Portuguese, and Spanish are the four official languages. Article 28 stipulates that a Style Committee shall be set up with representatives of the four official languages to review the General Assembly resolutions and declarations. Article 53 states that proposals shall be presented in the four official languages. The Rules of Procedure and Statutes of other bodies, such as the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CIDI), the Permanent Executive Committee of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CEPCIDI), the Inter-American Commission of Women (CIM), the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission (CICAD), the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) and the Inter-American Juridical Committee (CJI), technical bodies of the OAS, also mention the four official languages in which their meetings are to be conducted. Policy is therefore dictated through these instruments that require use of the four official languages at meetings.\nAlthough a number of other languages have official status in one or more member states of OAS (Dutch in Suriname; Haitian Creole alongside French in Haiti; Quechua and Aymara in Peru, Ecuador and Bolivia; Guaran\u00ed in Paraguay), they are not official languages of the Organization.\nFunding and accountability.\nThe OAS has two funds, one for the General Secretariat, and one for specific programs and initiatives. The General Assembly asks for contributions from each member country based on its capacity to pay. In 2018 the General Secretariat's budget was $85 million of which the US contributed $50 million. In 2017 the US contributed $17 million to the fund for specific programs which was almost a third of the total contributions for that year.\nOAS Office of the Inspector General audits.\nThe OAS Office of the Inspector General (OIG) conducts forensic internal performance audits, to assess the General Secretariat in achieving the objectives recommended in administration and operations of the OAS and its safeguarding of resources used to undertake programs across Latin America and the Caribbean. The OIG's internal audit reports are presented to the OAS Audit Committee, and the Secretary General as well as member states of the OAS upon request. The OIG maintains whistleblower provisions to report irregular activity to the OIG for review.\nFinancial audits.\nUnder General Assembly Resolution 123, adopted on April 14, 1973 Financial audits of the accounts of the OAS are published annually. The annual reports are presented to the General Secretariat by The Audit Committee (formerly The OAS Board of External Auditors.) The Committee members are composed of three members elected by the OAS's General Assembly.\nMembership and adhesions.\nUpon its foundation in 1948, the OAS had 21 members, most of them in Latin America:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe later expansion of the OAS included Canada and the newly independent nations of the Caribbean. Members with later admission dates (sorted chronologically):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCanada and the OAS.\nAlthough admission into OAS's predecessor, the Pan American Union, was initially restricted to republics, several overtures were still made for Canada to join the organization in 1928, 1933, 1936, and 1938. During the 1936 Pan American Union Conference, the organization extended its membership from only \"American republics\" to \"American states\" to accommodate Canada's admission as a constitutional monarchy. However, U.S. opposition to Canadian membership prevented their admittance, with the U.S. fearing the admittance of Canada to the OAS would bring with it British influence that could impede its freedom of action within the organization. The U.S. reversed its position on Canadian membership in 1947. However, by that time, Canadian foreign policy had adopted an Atlanticist position with a European focus; resulting in the Canadian government seeing little value in pursuing OAS membership.\nFrom the 1960s to the 1980s, the Canadian government expressed some interest in joining the OAS, having successfully applied for permanent observer status in 1972 to evaluate potential membership. In the 1980s, the Canadian government incrementally increased its participation in OAS activities. Canada signed the Charter of the Organization of American States in 1989. Canada's membership in the OAS was formalized when the decision was ratified in 1990.\nSanctions against the Dominican Republic during Trujillo regime.\nDuring the 6th Conference of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of American States (OAS) in Costa Rica, from 16 to 20 August 1960, a conviction against the State of the Dominican Republic was agreed to unanimously. The penalty was motivated because the foreign ministers checked the veracity of the claim that the Rafael Trujillo regime had sponsored an attack against R\u00f3mulo Betancourt, at that time the constitutional president of Venezuela. The meeting was attended by foreign ministers from 21 American nations, including Cuba, which at that time had not yet been expelled from the inter-American system.\nAll countries, including the United States and Haiti, broke off diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic. Additionally an economic blockade that affected the exports of sugar was applied, which at that time was the pillar of the Dominican economy.\nIt was the first application of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, which had been adopted at the OAS on 29 July 1960.\nPermanent observers.\nAs of 31 January 2014, there are 69 permanent observer countries including the four countries with territory or territories in the Americas\u2014Denmark, France, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom; as well as the European Union and India.\nIn March 2022, the OAS voted to suspend Russia as a permanent observer due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nSuspensions, withdrawals and termination.\nCuba.\nThe current government of Cuba was excluded from participation in the Organization under a decision adopted by the Eighth Meeting of Consultation in Punta del Este, Uruguay, on 31 January 1962. The vote was passed by 14 in favor, with one against (Cuba) and six abstentions (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, and Mexico). The operative part of the resolution reads as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis meant that the Cuban nation was still technically a member state, but that the current government was denied the right of representation and attendance at meetings and of participation in activities. The OAS's position was that although Cuba's participation was suspended, its obligations under the Charter, the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man, etc. still hold: for instance, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights continues to publish reports on Cuba's human rights situation and to hear individual cases involving Cuban nationals. However, this stance was occasionally questioned by other individual member states.\nThe resolution to exclude Cuba was controversial when it was adopted, and the reintegration of Cuba into the Inter-American system has remained a frequent source of contention among the countries of the hemisphere ever since. Cuba's position was stated in an official note sent to the Organization \"merely as a courtesy\" by Minister of Foreign Affairs Ra\u00fal Roa on 4 November 1964: \"Cuba was arbitrarily excluded ... The Organization of American States has no juridical, factual, or moral jurisdiction, nor competence, over a state which it has illegally deprived of its rights.\" The reincorporation of Cuba as an active member regularly arose as a topic within the inter-American system\u00a0\u2013 for instance, it was intimated by the outgoing ambassador of Mexico in 1998\u00a0\u2013 but most observers did not see it as a serious possibility while the present government remained in power. Since 1960, the Cuban administration had repeatedly characterized the OAS as the \"Ministry of Colonies\" of the United States of America. Fidel Castro and his brother Ra\u00fal attacked the OAS as a \"Yankee bordello\" and \"instrument of imperialist domination\" and vowed that Cuba would never join, although OAS rescinded the nation's expulsion in 2009 and invited it to apply for readmission. Venezuelan President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez promised to veto any final declaration of the 2009 Summit of the Americas due to Cuba's exclusion.\nOn 17 April 2009, after a \"trading of warm words\" between the administrations of U.S. President Barack Obama and Cuban leader Ra\u00fal Castro, OAS Secretary General Jos\u00e9 Miguel Insulza said he would ask the 2009 General Assembly to annul the 1962 resolution excluding Cuba.\nOn 3 June 2009, foreign ministers assembled in San Pedro Sula, Honduras, for the OAS's 39th General Assembly, passed a vote to lift Cuba's suspension from the OAS. The United States had been pressuring the OAS for weeks to condition Cuba's readmission to the group on democratic principles and commitment to human rights. Ecuador's Foreign Minister Fander Falcon\u00ed said there will be no such conditions. \"This is a new proposal, it has no conditions\u2014of any kind\", Falcon\u00ed said. \"That suspension was made in the Cold War, in the language of the Cold War. What we have done here is fix a historic error.\" The suspension was lifted at the end of the General Assembly, but, to be readmitted to the Organization, Cuba will need to comply with all the treaties signed by the Member States, including the Inter-American Democratic Charter of 2001. A statement issued by the Cuban government on 8 June 2009 said that while Cuba welcomed the Assembly's gesture, in light of the Organization's historical record, \"Cuba will not return to the OAS\".\nSuspension of Honduras (2009\u20132011).\nFollowing the expulsion of its President Manuel Zelaya, Honduras' membership of the Organization was suspended unanimously at midnight on 5 July 2009. The \"de facto\" government had already announced it was leaving the OAS hours earlier; this was not, however, taken into account by the OAS, which did not recognize that government as legitimate. An extraordinary meeting had been conducted by the OAS in Washington, D.C., with Zelaya in attendance. The suspension of Honduras was approved unanimously with 33 votes (Honduras did not vote). This was the first suspension carried out by the OAS since that of Cuba in 1962.\nAfter Zelaya's return to Honduras in 2011, the country was re-admitted to the Organization on 1 June 2011 with 32 votes in favor and 1 (Ecuador) against. Venezuela expressed some reservations.\nNicaragua.\nOn 7 November 2021, Nicaragua held a general election which saw President Daniel Ortega re-elected to a fourth term in office. In a vote by the OAS Permanent Council, 25 member states voted in favour of a resolution condemning the election. Seven countries, including Mexico, Honduras and Bolivia, abstained. The motion stated that the election was \"not free, fair or transparent and lack[s] democratic legitimacy\" and also instructed the Permanent Council to undertake an assessment of the situation and \"take appropriate action\".\nIn response to this statement, Nicaraguan Foreign Minister Denis Moncada announced on 19 November that Nicaragua would leave the OAS. Moncada called the bloc \"an instrument of interference and intervention\" and accused it of \"facilitating the hegemony of the United States with its interventionism over the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.\" According to Article 143 of the OAS Charter, the process to withdraw from the organization takes two years after its announcement.\nIn April 2022, Nicaragua announced that it had completed its withdrawal from the OAS. It said the OAS offices in Managua had been closed. The OAS stated that, due to the terms of treaty, the withdrawal would not take effect until 2023. Nicaragua eventually completed its withdrawal from the OAS on 19 November that year.\nVenezuela.\nOn 28 April 2017, Venezuela notified the OAS of its denunciation of the Charter of the OAS, which as per Article 143 would lead to the withdrawal of Venezuela from the OAS effective two years from the date of notification. During this period, the country did not plan on participating in the OAS.\nDuring the 2019 Venezuelan presidential crisis, the President of the National Assembly of Venezuela Juan Guaid\u00f3, who was recognized by the National Assembly as the acting president, sent a letter to the OAS Secretary General annulling the previous denunciation of the OAS Charter, and expressing his desire for Venezuela to remain a member of the OAS. The National Assembly designated a special envoy as representative to the OAS, lawyer Gustavo Tarre Brice\u00f1o, who the OAS voted to recognize as Venezuela's delegate in April. In October 2022, a bloc of leftist OAS member states led a motion to remove Tarre's representation in the organization. Out of 35 members, 19 nations voted in favor of the motion and 4 against. The motion fell short of the 24 votes required for a two-thirds majority.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22789", "revid": "1311686841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22789", "title": "World Organisation for Animal Health", "text": "Intergovernmental organisation\nThe World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH), formerly the (OIE), is an intergovernmental organisation founded in 1924, coordinating, supporting and promoting animal disease control. The primary objective of WOAH is to control epizootic diseases and prevent their spread. Further objectives include the sharing of transparent, scientific information; international solidarity; sanitary safety; and the promotion of veterinary services\u201a food safety and animal welfare.\nWOAH is recognised by the World Trade Organisation (WTO) as an international reference for the safe trade of animals and animal products regarding risks due to animal diseases and zoonoses.\nWOAH is not a part of the United Nations (UN) system. Its autonomy is institutional and financial, and its own constitutional texts govern its activities. Since its first General Session held in Paris, the Organisation has carried out its work under the authority of a committee consisting of delegates of the contracting governments. The Organisation maintains permanent relations with over 70 partner organisations and has regional and sub-regional offices on every continent.\nDuring its 91st General Session, the World Assembly of Delegates elected Dr Emmanuelle Soubeyran as Director General for a five-year mandate (2024\u20132029).\nHistory.\nOrigin and founding.\n1920s: Establishment and early years\nThe Organisation's creation dates to the early 20th century, making it one of the oldest existing Intergovernmental Organisations. The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) was created through an International Agreement signed on 25 January 1924. Earlier, in May 1921, a rinderpest\u202fpandemic motivated Delegates at the International Conference for the Study of Epizootics, with diplomats from 43 countries, to express a call for the establishment of an international organisation to coordinate responses against infectious animal diseases at a global level.\nThe need to fight animal diseases at a global level led to the creation of the through the international agreement signed in January 1924.\n1940s: Second World War and compatibility with newly founded agencies\nThe OIE had established its new headquarters by the end of the 1930s, but activities were slowed down by the eruption of the Second World War and the subsequent occupation of Paris by the Nazis in 1940. After the war, the existence of the OIE was initially challenged by the creation by the United Nations of the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) in 1946, and the World Health Organisation (WHO) in 1948, as both specialist agencies which partially cover the aims of the OIE. However, the opposition of numerous OIE Members and Delegates when the issue was raised in 1946 and 1951, kept the functions of the Organisation alive.\n1950s to 1960s: Animal health legislation in the EU and Official agreements\nBy 1960, the OIE had signed an official agreement with FAO in 1952 and had lent its support to the first attempts to harmonise animal health legislation within the European Community after the signing of the Treaty of Rome in 1957. In 1960, an official agreement was signed between the OIE and WHO.\n1990s: Recognition as an international standard-setting organisation\nThe 1990s witnessed the signing of various agreements with the OIE and organisations worldwide. In 1998, the OIE accepted a formal cooperation with the World Trade Organisation. The Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, also known as the SPS Agreement, clearly defined the OIE as the reference organisation for animal health and zoonoses whereby Members are required to base sanitary or phytosanitary measures on international standards, guidelines, and recommendations. \nAfter this, governments began to understand the importance of the Organisation. Between 1990 and 1999, 41 countries became Members. Set up between 1991 and 1999, the Regional Representations, for Asia and the Pacific (1971, then 1991), Eastern Europe (1994), the Americas (1997), and, lastly, the Middle East (1999) and Africa (1999) have allowed the Organisation to keep abreast of the challenges of its Members.\n2000 to 2009: The World Organisation for Animal Health and further strategic agreements\nIn May 2003, the Office became the \"World Organisation for Animal Health\", however, it kept its historical acronym OIE, which was in use until May 2022.\nDuring this decade the OIE reached agreements with organisations and agencies, alongside a new agreement with WHO in 2002, including The World Bank, and World Veterinary Association amongst others.\n2010-2020: Rinderpest eradication and increased collaboration with partners\nIn 2011, the national Delegates of OIE Members unanimously adopted a resolution that officially recognized, following thorough control by the OIE with the support of FAO, that all 198 countries and territories with rinderpest-susceptible animals are free of the disease.\nHaving celebrated the 85th anniversary of its creation the year before, the OIE adopted its 5th Strategic Plan, which set a roadmap for its global missions in animal health and welfare from 2011 to 2015. The plan sought to continue the key priorities set in previous plans with an enhanced focus on more activities directed to food security, poverty alleviation and animal health, and veterinary public health. Furthermore, the Organisation set a focus on the \u201cOne Health\u201d concept, in cooperation with partner organisations.\nIn January 2017, the outgoing Obama administration designated the OIE as an organisation entitled to benefits of the International Organizations Immunities Act.\nIn March 2022, The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH), the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), and the World Health Organization (WHO), signed a groundbreaking agreement to strengthen cooperation in the era of One Health, to sustainably balance and optimize the health of humans, animals, plants and the environment.\n2022: The World Organisation for Animal Health \u2013 WOAH\nIn May 2022, the Organisation stopped using the historical acronym \"OIE\", and started to use the new acronym \"WOAH\".\n2024: The Organisation commemorates its 100th anniversary, a significant milestone marking the Organisation's continued commitment to the health and well-being of animals worldwide.\nCurrent policies and objectives.\nOverall focus.\nWOAH works to improve animal health and welfare worldwide. They do this in several ways. The Organisation monitors the emergence of animal diseases in terrestrial and aquatic animals, either domestic or wild, so they can act before the situation imperils animal health and welfare, public health, or livelihoods. By collecting, analysing, and disseminating veterinary scientific information, through standards, global initiatives, and publications, WOAH collaborates with a wide network of people and has a thorough knowledge base and pool of informative resources. The Organisation also ensures that its Members have the tools and capacity to equip their Veterinary Services and respond to the threats of animal diseases.\nEnsure transparency in the global animal disease situation\nAnother key objective for WOAH is the provision of increased transparency, well-structured policies, increased resources to support Members, strengthened partnerships, and the notification and monitoring of global diseases and shared information via the Organisation's health information system, WAHIS.\nDisseminate comprehensive information on animal disease events\nTimely dissemination of information is crucial to containing\u202foutbreaks. The World Animal Health Information Database Interface provides access to all data held within WOAH's World Animal Health Information System (WAHIS). This interface provides access to immediate notifications on animal disease events, allowing the Organisation's Members to share follow-up reports in response to exceptional disease events in their countries or territories.\nOrganisational structure.\nWOAH functions under the authority of a World Assembly of Delegates designated by the Governments of Members. The Organisation is placed under the responsibility of a Director General elected by the World Assembly of Delegates. The International Committee passes resolutions, developed with the support of Commissions elected by delegates, and implemented at WOAH's headquarters.\nMembership.\nAs of May 2023, with the latest appointment of St Vincent and the Grenadines, WOAH counts 183 Members.\nThe World Assembly of Delegates.\nComposed of 183 Delegates, the World Assembly of Delegates is the highest authority of WOAH. Delegates belonging to all Members meet at least once a year at a General Session of the Assembly which lasts five days, held yearly in May in Paris. At the annual General Session, Delegates vote on important issues on animal diseases and animal health especially issues related to international trade.\nCouncil.\nWOAH's Council meets at least twice a year to examine technical and administrative issues, such as the working programme and budgets that will be presented to the Assembly. The Council comprises the President of the World Assembly of Delegates, the Vice President, the Past President, and six Delegates representing all the regions. The current President is Dr Susana Pombo from Portugal.\nDirector general.\nWOAH has had eight directors general since its creation.\nHeadquarters.\nWOAH's headquarters is based in Paris, in the 17th arrondissement. It was in 1939 that WOAH moved to the aristocratic district of Parc Monceau, after having occupied premises since 1927 near the Champs de Mars and the Eiffel Tower, that had been provided by the French Higher Public Health Council. In May 1938, the WOAH members gave Dr Emmanuel Leclainche, the Organisation's founder and first Director General, full powers to buy a townhouse in Paris, using the reserve fund. Leclainche chose the mansion from four properties selected by a commission comprising the President of the WOAH, H.C.L.E. Berger (Netherlands), the vice-president, Carlo Bisanti (Italy), and the accountant, Gottlieb Fl\u00fcckiger (Switzerland). On 22 February 1939, WOAH, represented by E. Leclainche, bought the mansion from the Marquise de Montebello.\nThe 13th General Session of WOAH was held from 30 May to 5 June 1939, at 12 rue de Prony after rebuilding work had been completed. Due to the Second World War, a General Session was not held until 1946, from 2 to 5 October. Following their entry into Paris in June 1940, the German occupying forces temporarily closed and sealed WOAH headquarters. The efforts of President Gottlieb Fl\u00fcckiger, elected in 1939, resulted in its re-opening.\n12 rue de Prony was built in 1879, in Neo-Renaissance style, by the celebrated architect Jean-Louis Pascal for the Austrian baron Jonas von K\u00f6nigswater, a former banker and railway owner. A succession of major works to renovate and modernise the headquarters were undertaken by the directors general elected after Leclainche: Gaston Ramon, Ren\u00e9 Vittoz, Louis Blajan, Jean Blancou and Bernard Vallat. Due to the headlong development of the Organisation (tripling of the staff and the budget since 2001), additional premises have been rented at 14 rue de Prony since 2004. On 16 March 2009, WOAH purchased a large part of the 14 rue de Prony building, adjoining its headquarters.\nRegional representations.\nWOAH also maintains representations in Africa, the Americas, Asia and the Pacific, Europe, and the Middle East. These representations provide services to WOAH Members to help strengthen surveillance and control of animal diseases in regions.\nThese representations can be found in the following destinations:\nAfrica\nAmericas\nAsia and the Pacific \nEurope\nMiddle East\nSpecialist commissions.\nWOAH's Specialist Commissions collaborate with its global scientific network and are responsible for the official recognition of animal health status. They advise on epidemiology and the prevention and control of animal diseases.\nThe Organisation's Specialist Commissions include: The Aquatic Animal Health Standards Commission, the Biological Standards Commission, the Scientific Commission for Animal Diseases and the Terrestrial Animal Health Standards Commission.\nCreated in 1960, the Aquatic Animal Health Standards Commission is responsible for overseeing the developments of the Aquatic Animal Health Code, ensuring that the aquatic codes reflect current scientific information. The commission is made up of internationally recognised specialists elected by the World Assembly of Delegates, these experts provide advice on the diagnosis, prevention, and control of aquatic diseases. In addition, they act as a focal point for the exchange of information regarding aquatic diseases.\nCharged with the responsibility of approving methods of animal disease diagnosis, the Biological Standards Commission works to develop international standards for laboratory diagnostic tests and vaccines for WOAH-listed animal diseases of mammals, birds, and bees. The Scientific Commission, on the other hand, examines voluntary requests from the Organisation's Members regarding disease-specific animal health status.\nRegional commissions.\nWOAH has five Regional Commissions which serve to express concerns affecting its Members in different regions of the world. These Commissions are entrusted with studying programmes for the control of the main epizootic diseases and organise the coordination of Veterinary Services. WOAH's Regional Commissions currently cover regions across Africa, the Americas, Asia, Far East and Oceania, Europe, and the Middle East. They include:\nAfrica\nAmericas\nAsia and Pacific\nEurope \nAd hoc groups, reference laboratories, and collaborating centres.\nAdditionally, ad hoc groups convened at the initiative of the Director General provide expert advice on key topics. Working groups also review developments in their fields and WOAH maintains a network of Collaborating Centres that provide scientific expertise and support to WOAH and its members. Also, reference laboratories are designated to pursue scientific and technical problems relating to diseases. These reference laboratories provide scientific and technical training to personnel from Members and coordinate scientific and technical studies in collaboration with other laboratories or organisations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22790", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22790", "title": "Ozzie Smith", "text": "American professional baseball player (born 1954)\nOsborne Earl Smith (born December 26, 1954) is an American former professional baseball player. Nicknamed \"The Wizard of Oz\", Smith played shortstop for the San Diego Padres and St. Louis Cardinals in Major League Baseball, winning the National League Gold Glove Award for defensive play at shortstop for 13 consecutive seasons. A 15-time All-Star, Smith accumulated 2,460 hits and 580 stolen bases during his career, and won the National League Silver Slugger Award as the best hitter at shortstop in 1987. He was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility in 2002. He was also elected to the St. Louis Cardinals Hall of Fame in the inaugural class of 2014.\nSmith was born in Mobile, Alabama; his family moved to Watts, Los Angeles, when he was six years old. While participating in childhood athletic activities, Smith possessed quick reflexes; he went on to play baseball at Locke High School in Los Angeles, then at California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo. Drafted as an amateur player by the Padres, Smith made his major league debut in 1978. He quickly established himself as an outstanding fielder, and later became known for performing backflips on special occasions while taking his position at the beginning of a game. Smith won his first Gold Glove Award in 1980 and made his first All-Star Game appearance in 1981.\nWhen Smith clashed with the Padres' owners, Cardinals manager Whitey Herzog flew to San Diego to persuade the shortstop that he would be an appreciated and core component of the St. Louis team. Herzog's overture worked; Smith waived his contract's \"no trade\" clause and was traded to the Cardinals for shortstop Garry Templeton in 1982.\nUpon joining the Cardinals, Smith helped the team win the 1982 World Series. Three years later, his game-winning home run during Game 5 of the 1985 National League Championship Series prompted broadcaster Jack Buck's \"Go crazy, folks!\" play-by-play call. Despite a rotator cuff injury during the 1985 season, Smith posted career highs in multiple offensive categories in 1987. Smith continued to earn Gold Gloves and All-Star appearances annually until 1993. During the 1995 season, Smith had shoulder surgery and was out nearly three months. After tension with his new manager Tony La Russa developed in 1996, Smith retired at season's end, and his uniform number (No. 1) was subsequently retired by the Cardinals. Smith served as host of the television show \"This Week in Baseball\" from 1997 to 1998.\nEarly life.\nSmith was born in Mobile, Alabama, the second of Clovi and Marvella Smith's six children (five boys and one girl). His father worked as a sandblaster at Brookley Air Force Base. When Smith was six, his family moved to the Watts section of Los Angeles. His father became a delivery truck driver for Safeway stores, while his mother became an aide at a nursing home. His mother was an influential part of his life who stressed the importance of education and encouraged him to pursue his dreams.\nSmith played a variety of sports in his youth, though considered baseball to be his favorite. He developed quick reflexes through various athletic and leisure activities, such as bouncing a ball off the concrete steps in front of his house, moving in closer to reduce reaction time with each throw. When not at the local YMCA or playing sports, Smith sometimes went with friends to the neighborhood lumberyard, springboarding off inner tubes and doing flips into sawdust piles (a precursor to his famous backflips). In 1965, at age 10, he endured the Watts Riots with his family, recalling, \"We had to sleep on the floor because of all the sniping and looting going on.\"\nWhile Smith was attending junior high school, his parents divorced. Continuing to pursue his interest in baseball, he would ride the bus for nearly an hour to reach Dodger Stadium, cheering for the Los Angeles Dodgers at about 25 games a year. Upon becoming a student at Locke High School, Smith played on the basketball and baseball teams. Smith was a teammate of future National Basketball Association player Marques Johnson on the basketball team, and a teammate of future fellow Hall-of-Fame player Eddie Murray on the baseball side. After high school, Smith attended Cal Poly San Luis Obispo in 1974 on a partial academic scholarship, and managed to walk on to the baseball team. He learned to switch-hit from Cal Poly coach Berdy Harr. When Cal Poly's starting shortstop broke his leg midway through the 1974 season, Smith took over the starting role. He was named an All-American athlete and established school records in career at-bats (754) and stolen bases (110) before graduating in 1977.\nProfessional baseball career.\nSan Diego Padres (1978\u20131981).\nSmith was playing semi-professional baseball in Clarinda, Iowa, when in June 1976 he was selected in the seventh round of the amateur entry draft by the Detroit Tigers. The parties could not agree on a contract; Smith wanted a $10,000 ($ today) signing bonus, while the Tigers offered $8,500 ($ today). Smith returned to Cal Poly for his senior year, then in the 1977 draft was selected in the fourth round by the San Diego Padres, ultimately agreeing to a contract that included a $5,000 signing bonus ($ today). Smith spent his first year of professional baseball during 1977 with the Class A Walla Walla Padres of the Northwest League.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"As I was in the air, the ball took a bad hop and caromed behind me, but I was able to catch it with my bare hand. I hit the ground, bounced back up, and threw Burroughs out at first.\"\n\u2014Ozzie Smith describes a fielding play he made in 1978\nSmith began 1978 as a non-roster invitee to the San Diego Padres' spring training camp in Yuma, Arizona. Smith credited Padres manager Alvin Dark for giving him confidence by telling reporters the shortstop job was Smith's until he proved he can't handle it. Even though Dark was fired in the middle of training camp, Smith made his Major League Baseball (MLB) debut on April 7, 1978.\nIt did not take long for Smith to earn recognition in the major leagues, making what some consider his greatest fielding play only 10 games into his rookie season. The Padres played host to the Atlanta Braves on April 20, 1978, and with two out in the top of the fourth inning, Atlanta's Jeff Burroughs hit a ground ball up the middle. Smith described the play by saying, \"He hit a ball back up the middle that everybody thought was going into center field. I instinctively broke to my left and dove behind second. As I was in the air, the ball took a bad hop and caromed behind me, but I was able to catch it with my bare hand. I hit the ground, bounced back up, and threw Burroughs out at first.\"\nDuring a roadtrip to Houston, later in the season, Smith met a part-time usherette at the Astrodome named Denise while making his way to the team bus outside the stadium. The couple developed a relationship that was sometimes long-distance in nature, and eventually decided to marry. It was also during the 1978 season where Smith introduced a signature move. Padres promotion director Andy Strasberg knew Smith could perform backflips, though only did them during practice before fans entered the stadium. Strasberg asked Smith to do a backflip for fans during Fan Appreciation Day on October 1, the Padres' last home game of the season. After conferring with veteran teammate Gene Tenace, Smith went ahead with the backflip, and it proved to be wildly popular. Smith finished the 1978 season with a .258 batting average and .970 fielding percentage, placing him second in the National League Rookie of the Year voting to Bob Horner.\nAfter working with a hitting instructor during the offseason, Smith failed to record a base hit in his first 32 at-bats of the 1979 season. Among players with enough at-bats to qualify for the 1979 National League Triple Crown, Smith finished the season last in batting average (.211), home runs (0), and RBI (27). Off the field, conflict developed between Padres' ownership and the combination of Smith and his agent, Ed Gottlieb. The parties entered into a contract dispute before the 1980 season, and when negotiations lasted into spring training, the Padres renewed Smith's contract at his 1979 salary of $72,500 Smith's agent told the Padres the shortstop would forgo the season to race in the Tour de France, despite the fact Smith admitted to The Break Room on 96.5 WCMF in Rochester, New York, he had never heard of the Tour. Angered by the Padres' attitude during those contract talks, Gottlieb took out a help-wanted ad in the \"San Diego Union\", part of which read, \"Padre baseball player wants part-time employment to supplement income.\" When Joan Kroc, wife of Padres owner Ray Kroc, publicly offered Smith a job as an assistant gardener on her estate, Smith and Gottlieb's relationship with the organization deteriorated further.\nMeanwhile, Smith was winning recognition for his accomplishments on the field. In 1980, he set the single-season record for most assists by a shortstop (621), and began his string of 13 consecutive Gold Glove awards. Smith's fielding play prompted the \"Yuma Daily Sun\" to use the nickname \"the Wizard of Oz\" in a March 1981 feature article about Smith. While \"the Wizard of Oz\" nickname was an allusion to the 1939 motion picture of the same name, Smith also came to be known as simply \"the Wizard\" during his playing career, as Smith's Baseball Hall of Fame plaque would later attest. In 1981, Smith made his first All-Star Game appearance as a reserve player.\nTrade.\nWhile Smith was having problems with the Padres' owners, the St. Louis Cardinals also found themselves unhappy with their shortstop, Garry Templeton. Templeton's relationship with Cardinal Nation had become increasingly strained and finally came to a head during a game at Busch Stadium on August 26, 1981, when (after being heckled for not running out a ground ball) he made obscene gestures at fans, and had to be physically pulled off the field by manager Whitey Herzog.\nGiven the task of overhauling the Cardinals by owner Gussie Busch (and specifically to unload Templeton), Herzog was looking to trade Templeton when he was approached by Padres General Manager Jack McKeon at the 1981 baseball winter meetings. While McKeon had previously told Herzog that Smith was untouchable in any trade, the Padres were now so angry at Smith's agent Gottlieb that McKeon was willing to deal. McKeon and Herzog agreed in principle to a six-player trade, with Templeton for Smith as the centerpiece. It was then that Padres manager Dick Williams informed Herzog a no-trade clause had been included in Smith's 1981 contract. Upon learning of the trade, Smith's initial reaction was to invoke the clause and stay in San Diego, but he was still interested to hear what the Cardinals had to say. While the deal for the players beside Templeton and Smith went through, Herzog flew to San Diego to meet with Smith and Gottlieb over the Christmas holiday. Smith later recalled that, \"Whitey told me that with me playing shortstop for the St. Louis Cardinals, we could win the pennant. He made me feel wanted, which was a feeling I was quickly losing from the Padres. The mere fact that Whitey would come all the way out there to talk to us was more than enough to convince me that St. Louis was the place I wanted to be.\"\nSt. Louis Cardinals (1982\u20131996).\n1982\u20131984.\nOn December 10, 1981, the Padres traded Smith, Steve Mura, and a player to be named later to the Cardinals for Templeton, Sixto Lezcano and a player to be named later. The teams completed the trade on February 19, 1982, with the Padres sending Al Olmsted to the Cardinals, and St. Louis sending Luis DeLeon to the Padres. Herzog believed Smith could improve his offensive production by hitting more ground balls, and subsequently created a motivational tool designed to help Smith concentrate on that task. Approaching Smith one day during spring training, Herzog said, \"Every time you hit a fly ball, you owe me a buck. Every time you hit a ground ball, I owe you a buck. We'll keep that going all year.\" Smith agreed to the wager, and by the end of the season had won close to $300 from Herzog. As the 1982 season got underway, Herzog's newly assembled team won 12 games in a row during the month of April, and finished the season atop the National League East division. Herzog would later say of Smith's contributions: \"If he saved two runs a game on defense, which he did many a night, it seemed to me that was just as valuable to the team as a player who drove in two runs a game on offense.\"\nSmith became a father during the 1982 season with the birth of his son O.J., today known as Nikko, on April 28. Smith also developed a lasting friendship with teammate Willie McGee during the season, and Smith said he likes to think he \"helped Willie get over some of the rough spots of adjusting to the major leagues\". Smith later participated in the postseason for the first time when the Cardinals faced the Atlanta Braves in the best-of-five 1982 National League Championship Series (NLCS). In Game 1, Smith drove in the series' first run by hitting a sacrifice fly that scored McGee, ultimately going five for nine in St. Louis' three-game series sweep.\nJust as Herzog had predicted in December, Smith found himself as the team's starting shortstop in the best-of-seven 1982 World Series against the Milwaukee Brewers. During the series, Smith scored three runs, had five hits, and did not commit an error in the field. When St. Louis was trailing 3\u20131 with one out in the sixth inning of Game 7, Smith started a rally with a base hit to left field, eventually scoring the first of the team's three runs that inning. The Cardinals scored two more runs in the 8th inning for a 6\u20133 win and the championship.\nIn January 1983, Smith and the Cardinals agreed on a new contract that paid Smith $1 million per year.\nDuring the 1983 season, Smith was voted the National League's starting shortstop in the All-Star Game for the first time in 1983, and at season's end won a fourth consecutive Gold Glove Award.\nIn July 1984, Smith's wrist was broken by a pitch as he batted against the Padres. He returned from the disabled list after a month, but his return to the lineup was not enough to propel the Cardinals to a postseason berth.\n1985\u20131986.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Smith corks one into right, down the line! It may go ... Go crazy, folks, go crazy! It's a home run, and the Cardinals have won the game, by the score of 3 to 2, on a home run by the Wizard! Go crazy!\"\n\u2014Jack Buck\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"And that's driven to deep right field, back goes Marshall ... gone!\n\u2014NBC's Vin Scully\nIn 1985, Smith amassed a .276 batting average, 31 stolen bases, and 591 assists in the field. The Cardinals as a team won 101 games during the season and earned another postseason berth. Facing the Los Angeles Dodgers in the now best-of-seven NLCS, a split of the first four games set the stage for Game 5 at Busch Stadium. With the score tied at two runs apiece in the bottom of the ninth inning, Dodgers manager Tommy Lasorda called upon closer Tom Niedenfuer to pitch. Smith batted left-handed against Niedenfuer with one out. Smith, who had never hit a home run in his previous 2,967 left-handed major league at-bats, pulled an inside fastball down the right-field line for a walk-off home run, ending Game 5 in a 3\u20132 Cardinals victory. Smith said, \"I was trying to get an extra-base hit and get into scoring position. Fortunately, I was able to get the ball up.\" The home run not only prompted broadcaster Jack Buck's \"Go crazy folks\" play-by-play call, but was also later voted the greatest moment in Busch Stadium history by Cardinals fans.\nAfter Smith's teammate Jack Clark hit a late-inning home run of his own in Game 6 to defeat the Dodgers, the Cardinals moved on to face the Kansas City Royals in the 1985 World Series. Once again sportswriters were quick to draw attention to Smith's outstanding defensive play instead of his 2 for 23 effort at the plate. After the Cardinals took a three-games-to-two advantage, a controversial Game 6 call by umpire Don Denkinger overshadowed the remainder of the Series (which the Royals won in seven games).\nWhat was not publicly known during the regular season and playoffs was that Smith had torn his rotator cuff after suffering an impingement in his right shoulder during the July 11\u201314 homestand against the Padres. After suffering the impingement diving back into first base on a pickoff throw, Smith altered his throwing motion to such a degree that the rotator cuff tear subsequently developed. The , Smith opted to forgo surgery and instead built up his arm strength via weightlifting, playing through whatever pain he encountered. Said Smith, \"I didn't tell anybody about the injury, because I wanted to keep playing and didn't want anybody thinking they could run on me or take advantage of the injury. I tried to do almost everything, except throw a baseball, left-handed: opening a door, turning on the radio\u2014everything. It didn't get any better, but it was good enough that I didn't have to have surgery.\"\nBecause of his injury, Smith let his then four-year-old son Nikko perform his traditional Opening Day backflip before the Cardinals' first home game of the 1986 season. Smith made an \"eye-popping\" play later that season on August 4, during a game against the Philadelphia Phillies at Busch Stadium. In the top of the ninth inning, Phillies pinch-hitter Von Hayes hit a short fly ball to left field, which was pursued by both Smith and left fielder Curt Ford. Running with his back to home plate, Smith dove forward, simultaneously catching the ball while parallel to the ground and flying over the diving Ford, avoiding a collision by inches.\n1987\u20131990.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The thing about Ozzie is, if he misses a ball, you assume it's uncatchable. If any other shortstop misses a ball, your first thought is, 'Would Ozzie have had it?'\"\n\u00a0\u2014Former New York Mets shortstop Bud Harrelson in 1987\nAfter hitting in either the second or eighth spot in the batting order for most of his time in St. Louis, Herzog made Smith the number-two hitter full-time during the 1987 season. Over the course of the year, Smith accrued a .303 batting average, 43 stolen bases, 75 RBIs, 104 runs scored, and 40 doubles, good enough to earn him the Silver Slugger Award at shortstop. In addition to winning the Gold Glove Award at shortstop for the eighth consecutive time, Smith posted a career-high on-base percentage of .392. Smith was also the leading vote-getter in the 1987 All-Star Game. The Cardinals earned a postseason berth with 95 wins, and subsequently faced the San Francisco Giants in the 1987 National League Championship Series. Smith contributed a triple during the series, and the Cardinals won the contest in seven games.\nThe 1987 World Series matched the Cardinals against the American League champion Minnesota Twins. The home team won every game of the contest, as Minnesota won the series. In 28 at-bats during the Series, Smith scored three runs and had two RBIs. Smith finished second in MVP balloting to Andre Dawson, who had played on the last-place Chicago Cubs, largely because Smith and teammate Jack Clark split the first-place vote. Following the 1987 season, Smith was awarded the largest contract in the National League at $2.34 million.\nWhile the team did not see the postseason for the remainder of the decade, Smith continued to rack up All-Star appearances and Gold Gloves. Combined with the attention he received from his contract, Smith continued to be a national figure. Known as a savvy dresser, he made the April 1988 cover of \"GQ\" magazine. Smith was witness to change within the Cardinal organization when owner Gussie Busch died in 1989 and Herzog quit as manager during the 1990 season.\n1990\u20131995.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"No one paid attention to my offense. So having 2,000 hits is one of the things that is an accomplishment.\"\n\u2014Ozzie Smith, from the 1993 St. Louis Cardinals Yearbook\nJoe Torre became Smith's new manager in 1990, but the team did not reach the postseason during Torre's nearly five-year tenure. While the Cardinals celebrated their 100th anniversary in 1992, Smith marked milestones of his own, stealing his 500th career base on April 26, then notching a triple on May 26 in front of the home crowd for his 2,000th hit. St. Louis had a one-game lead in the National League East division on June 1, 1992, but injuries took their toll on the team, including Smith's two-week illness in late July after contracting chicken pox for the first time. As a testament to his national visibility during this time, Smith appeared in a 1992 episode of \"The Simpsons\" titled \"Homer at the Bat\". Smith became a free agent for the first time in his career on November 2, 1992, only to re-sign with the Cardinals on December 6.\nSmith won his final Gold Glove in 1992, and his 13 consecutive Gold Gloves at shortstop in the National League has yet to be matched. The 1993 season marked the only time between 1981 and 1996 where Smith failed to make the All-Star team, and Smith finished the 1993 season with a .288 batting average and .974 fielding percentage. He appeared in 98 games during the strike-shortened 1994 season, and later missed nearly three months of the 1995 season after shoulder surgery on May 31. Smith was recognized for his community service efforts with the 1994 Branch Rickey Award and the 1995 Roberto Clemente Award. In February 1994, Smith took on the role of honorary chairman and official spokesman for the Missouri Governor's Council on Physical Fitness and Health.\n1996.\nAs Smith entered the 1996 season, he finalized a divorce from his wife Denise during the first half of the year. Meanwhile, manager Tony La Russa began his first season with the Cardinals in tandem with a new ownership group. After General Manager Walt Jocketty acquired shortstop Royce Clayton during the offseason, La Russa emphasized an open competition for the spot that would give the Cardinals the best chance to win. When spring training concluded, Smith had amassed a .288 batting average and zero errors in the field, and Clayton batted .190 with eight errors. Smith believed he had earned the position with his spring training performance, but La Russa disagreed, and awarded Clayton the majority of playing time in the platoon situation that developed, where Smith typically saw action every third game. La Russa said, I think it's fair to say he misunderstood how he compared to Royce in spring training ... When I and the coaches evaluated the play in spring training\u2014the whole game\u2014Royce started very slowly offensively and you could see him start to get better. By what he was able to do defensively and on the bases, Royce deserved to play the majority of the games.\nSmith missed the first month of the season with a hamstring injury, and continued to harbor ill feelings toward La Russa that had developed after spring training ended. In a closed-door meeting in mid-May, La Russa asked Smith if he would like to be traded. Instead, Smith and his agent negotiated a compromise with Cardinals management, agreeing to a buyout of special provisions in his contract in conjunction with Smith announcing his retirement. The agreement prompted a press conference at Busch Stadium on June 19, 1996, during which Smith announced he would retire from baseball at season's end.\nAs Smith made his final tour of the National League, he was honored by many teams, and received a standing ovation at the 1996 All-Star Game in Philadelphia. Between June 19 and September 1, Smith's batting average increased from .239 to .286. On September 2 Smith tied a career high by scoring four runs, one of which was a home run, and another on a close play at home plate in the bottom of the 10th inning against division leader Houston. The victory moved the Cardinals to within a half game of Houston in the National League Central Division, and the Cardinals went on to win the division by six games. The Cardinals held a special ceremony at Busch Stadium on September 28, 1996, before a game against the Cincinnati Reds, honoring Smith by retiring his uniform number. Noted for his ritual backflip before Opening Days, All-Star Games, and postseason games, Smith chose this occasion to perform it for one of the last times.\nIn the postseason, the Cardinals first faced the San Diego Padres in the 1996 National League Division Series. After sitting out Game\u00a01, Smith got the start in Game\u00a02 at Busch Stadium, helping his team go up two games in the series by notching a run, a hit and two walks at the plate, along with an assist and a putout in the field. The Cardinals then swept the series by winning Game\u00a03 in San Diego.\nThe Cardinals faced the Atlanta Braves in the 1996 National League Championship Series. Smith started Game 1 and subsequently registered three putouts and one assist in the field, but went hitless in four at-bats in the Cardinals' 4\u20132 loss. The Cardinals then won Games 2, 3, and 4, contests in which Smith did not appear. Upon receiving the start in Game 5, Smith nearly duplicated his Game 1 performance with four putouts, one assist, and no hits in four at-bats as part of another Cardinals defeat. The Cardinals also failed to win Game 6 or Game 7 in Atlanta, ending their season. When the Cardinals were trailing by 10 runs during Game 7 on October 17, Smith flied out to right field while pinch-hitting in the sixth inning, marking the end of his playing career.\nSmith finished his career with distinctions ranging from the accumulation of more than 27.5 million votes in All-Star balloting, to holding the record for the most MLB at-bats without hitting a grand slam.\nPost-playing career.\nUpon retirement, Smith took over from Mel Allen as the host of the television series \"This Week in Baseball\" (\"TWIB\") in 1997. Smith also became color commentator for the local broadcast of Cardinals games on KPLR-TV from 1997 to 1999. When his stint on \"This Week in Baseball\" concluded, Smith then moved on to do work for CNN-SI beginning in 1999. After La Russa retired as manager of the Cardinals in 2011, Smith became active in the organization again, starting with his stint as a special instructor for the team's 2012 spring training camp.\nOn January 8, 2002, Smith learned via a phone call he had been elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame on his first ballot by receiving 91.7% of the votes cast. As it happened, the Olympic torch was passing through St. Louis on its way to Salt Lake City for the 2002 Winter Olympics, and Smith served as a torchbearer in a ceremony with St. Louis Rams' quarterback Kurt Warner that evening. Smith was inducted into the Hall of Fame during ceremonies on July 28, 2002. During his speech, he compared his baseball experiences with the characters from the novel \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\", after which his son Dustin presented his Hall of Fame plaque. Days later on August 11, Smith was back at Busch Memorial Stadium for the unveiling of a statue in his likeness made by sculptor Harry Weber. Weber chose to emphasize Smith's defensive skills by showing Smith stretched horizontal to the ground while fielding a baseball. At the ceremony Weber told Smith, \"You spent half of your career up in the air. That makes it difficult for a sculptor to do something with it.\"\nSmith has also been an entrepreneur in a variety of business ventures. Smith opened \"Ozzie's\" restaurant and sports bar in 1988, started a youth sports academy in 1990, became an investor in a grocery store chain in 1999, and partnered with David Slay to open a restaurant in the early 2000s. Of those businesses the youth academy remains in operation, with the restaurant having closed in 2010 after changing ownership and locations once. Aside from appearing in numerous radio and television commercials in the St. Louis area since retiring from baseball, Smith authored a children's book in 2006 and launched his own brand of salad dressing in 2008.\nBesides the National Baseball Hall of Fame, Smith has also been inducted or honored in other halls of fame and recognitions. In 1999, he ranked number\u00a087 on \"The Sporting News\"' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, and finished third in voting at shortstop for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. He was honored with induction into the Missouri Sports Hall of Fame, Alabama Sports Hall of Fame and the St. Louis Walk of Fame, and received an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree from Cal Poly. In January 2014, the Cardinals announced Smith among 22 former players and personnel to be inducted into the St. Louis Cardinals Hall of Fame Museum for the inaugural class of 2014.\nIn March 2023, Smith returned to his alma mater, as his statue in Baggett Stadium was rededicated as part of Ozzie Smith Plaza at the facility's entrance.\nSmith, who has served as president of the Gateway PGA REACH Foundation in St. Louis since 2010, has been helping grow the game of golf - especially with youth. The Golf Course Superintendents Association of America honored Smith with its highest honor in 2025, the Old Tom Morris Award.\nPersonal life.\nSmith is the father to three children from his marriage to former wife Denise: sons Nikko and Dustin, and daughter Taryn. Nikko cracked the top ten finalists of the 2005 edition of \"American Idol\". In 2012, Smith made news headlines again, when he sold all of his Gold Gloves at auction together for more than $500,000.\nSmith still lives in and remains a visible figure around St. Louis, making varied appearances like playing the role of the Wizard in the St. Louis Municipal Opera's summer 2001 production of \"The Wizard of Oz\". He is the host of Cardinals Insider, a weekly news magazine television show about the club. Since 2016, he has opened five regenerative medicine clinics around Missouri.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22791", "revid": "48386110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22791", "title": "Boeing OC-135B Open Skies", "text": "US Air Force observation aircraft\nThe OC-135B Open Skies is a United States Air Force observation aircraft that supports the Treaty on Open Skies. The aircraft, a modified WC-135B, flies unarmed observation flights over participating parties of the treaty. Three OC-135B aircraft were modified by the Aeronautical Systems Center's 4950th Test Wing at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio but only two were ever used. The first operationally-capable OC-135B was assigned to the 24th Reconnaissance Squadron at Offutt AFB in October 1993. It is now fitted with a basic set of navigational and sensor equipment, and was placed in inviolate storage at the Aerospace Maintenance and Regeneration Center at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base near Tucson, Arizona in 1997. Two fully operational OC-135B aircraft were delivered in 1996 with the full complement of treaty-allowed sensors, which includes an infrared line scanner, synthetic aperture radar and video scanning sensors. \nIn May 2020, the Trump administration said it would exit the treaty and gave the required six-month notice. In November, it announced plans to liquidate the two 60-year-old jets, offering them to other countries.\nDescription of aircraft.\nThe interior seats 35 people, including the cockpit crew, aircraft maintenance crew, with bunks for the Crew Chiefs to sleep, foreign country representatives and crew members from the U.S. Department of Defense's Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA). Cameras installed include one vertical and two oblique KS-87E framing cameras used for low-altitude photography approximately 3,000\u00a0feet (900\u00a0m) above the ground, and one KA-91C panoramic camera, which scans from side to side to provide a wide sweep for each picture used for high-altitude photography at approximately .\nThe data annotation and recording system (DARMS) processes navigational, altitude, time and camera signals to annotate each picture with correct position, altitude, time, roll angle and other information. In addition, this system records every picture taken according to camera, frame and navigational position. A keyboard with trackball is the input device for operation of this system. Two Barco VGA color monitors display camera annotation and other camera data on screen for the sensor operator and observer use.\nCamera control, located in the sensor operator's console, operates and adjusts individual cameras for cloud cover, frame overlap and other functions. The sensor operator console seats four and has all the equipment listed above plus camera bay heating control, chronometers, emergency oxygen, interphone and individual lighting. The flight following console also seats four and includes most of the equipment listed above except for DARMS and camera controls.\nSeven commercial Norcold Tek II coolers with individual refrigeration units maintain temperature and humidity control to maintain peak film performance. The units can be removed, if necessary, from the aircraft in order to transport film. The coolers are capable of storing of film or lots of food and drinks when in country.\nFlight path.\nThe aircraft flies on its intended flight path throughout the entire mission with no reliance on ground-based navigation devices. A top-of-the-line commercial system, Litton 92 INS/GPS, which is an integrated inertial navigation system (INS) with a global positioning system (GPS), provides continuous updates. The GPS updates the INS several times per second to correct any deviations in the flight path. The INS also feeds precise latitude, longitude, time, roll angle and barometric altitude to the DARMS and camera systems. A true airspeed computer feeds true airspeed data to the INS.\nA combined altitude radar altimeter provides precise height above ground information to the pilot for navigational purposes as well as a signal to DARMS for film annotation. It is accurate from above the ground level. Plus, a metric altimeter is installed on the pilot's instrument panel for altitude reference when flying in countries that use meters for altitude reference.\nThe aircraft are being upgraded with the Block 30 Pacer Crag Navigational System upgrade, a first step in making them compliant with ICAO mandated Global Air Traffic Management and Global Air Navigation Standards guidelines.\nModifications.\nThe OC-135B modifications center around four cameras installed in the rear of the aircraft. Since its primary mission is to take pictures, most of the installed equipment and systems provide direct support to the cameras and the camera operator. Other modifications to the aircraft also included installing an auxiliary power unit, crew luggage compartment, sensor operator console, flight following console and upgraded avionics. Though the aircraft feature a large window in the cargo door, this is simply a remnant of their previous weather reconnaissance role.\nOther modifications support the aircrew. A gaseous oxygen system replaced the liquid oxygen system to be more compatible with foreign airfields, and fluorescent lighting system was added throughout the cabin to provide adequate lighting for operation and inspections. Four upgraded seats with a conference table, interphone, lighting and oxygen comprise the mission commanders' station for both countries' mission commanders. A four channel interphone system enables segregated communications between various elements on board. \nThe auxiliary power unit enables the aircraft to start engines and provides electrical power and cabin heat independent of ground support equipment. It was manufactured by Allied Signal with the installation and design of the installation by E-Systems and World Auxiliary Power Company.\nUntil 2022 the aircraft were assigned to Air Combat Command at the 55th Wing, 45th Reconnaissance Squadron, Offutt Air Force Base near Omaha, Nebraska, for operations, training and maintenance. These aircraft are now located in the boneyard at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base and are being decommissioned. When tasked, ACC's role was to transport a DTRA observation team to an Open Skies point of entry airport, conduct the observation flight, and then return the team to the continental United States.\nSpecifications (OC-135).\n\"Data from\" Jane's all the World's Aircraft 1994\u201395 (crew and operational equipment), AF Fact Sheet : OC-135B OPEN SKIESGeneral characteristics* Crew: Seven (three pilots, two navigators, and two sensor maintenance technicians)* Capacity: 31 mission crew, including DTRA mission flight crew: mission commander, deputy mission commander, two sensor operators and one flight follower* Aspect ratio: * Airfoil: root: BAC 310/311/312; tip: BAC 313\nPerformance* Maximum speed: Mach * Endurance: * g limits: * Roll rate: \nAvionics\nSee also.\nRelated development\nRelated lists\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes public domain text from the following United States Government source:"}
{"id": "22792", "revid": "46354005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22792", "title": "Treaty on Open Skies", "text": "Promoting openness and transparency of military forces and activities\nThe Treaty on Open Skies establishes a program of unarmed aerial surveillance flights over the entire territory of its participants. The treaty is designed to enhance mutual understanding and confidence by giving all participants, regardless of size, a direct role in gathering information about military forces and activities of concern to them. It entered into force on 1 January 2002, and currently has 32 party states. The idea of allowing countries to openly surveil each other is thought to prevent misunderstandings (e.g., to assure a potential opponent that one's country is not about to go to war) and limit the escalation of tensions. It also provides mutual accountability for countries to follow through on treaty promises.\nThe concept of \"mutual aerial observation\" was initially proposed to Soviet Premier Nikolai Bulganin at the Geneva Conference of 1955 by U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower; however, the Soviets promptly rejected the concept and it lay dormant for several years. The treaty was eventually signed as an initiative of U.S. president (and former Central Intelligence Agency Director) George H. W. Bush in 1989. Negotiated by the then-members of NATO and the Warsaw Pact, the agreement was signed in Helsinki, Finland, on 24 March 1992.\nOn 22 November 2020, the United States withdrew from the treaty, and on 15 January 2021, Russia also announced its intention to leave, citing the U.S. withdrawal and the inability of member nations to guarantee that information gathered would not be shared with the U.S. Russia formally withdrew in December 2021.\nMembership.\nThe 32 state parties to the Open Skies Treaty are Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark (including Greenland), Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine, and the United Kingdom. Kyrgyzstan signed the treaty but has not yet ratified it. Canada and Hungary are the depositaries of the treaty in recognition of their special contributions to the Open Skies process. Depositary countries maintain treaty documents and provide administrative support.\nThe Open Skies treaty is one of unlimited duration, and is open to accession by other states. Republics of the former Soviet Union (U.S.S.R.) that have not already become state parties to the treaty may join it at any time. Applications from other interested countries are subject to a consensus decision by the Open Skies Consultative Commission (OSCC). Eight countries have joined into the treaty since it entered into force in 2002: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovenia, and Sweden.\nOpen Skies Consultative Commission.\nThe Open Skies Consultative Commission is the implementing body for the Treaty on Open Skies. It comprises representatives from each state party to the treaty and meets monthly at the Vienna headquarters of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.\nSummary.\nTerritory.\nThe Open Skies regulations covers the territory over which the parties exercise sovereignty, including mainland, islands, and internal and territorial waters. The treaty specifies that the entire territory of a member state is open to observation. Observation flights may only be restricted for reasons of flight safety and not for reasons of national security.\nAircraft.\nObservation aircraft may be provided by either the observing party or by the observed party (the \"taxi option\"), at the latter's choice. All Open Skies aircraft and sensors must pass specific certification and pre-flight inspection procedures to ensure that they are compliant with treaty standards.\nThe official certified U.S. Open Skies aircraft is the OC-135B Open Skies.\nCanada uses a C-130 Hercules aircraft equipped with a \"SAMSON\" sensor pod to conduct flights over other treaty nations. The pod is a converted CC-130 fuel tank modified to carry the permitted sensors, along with associated on-board mission systems. A consortium of nations consisting of Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg, Canada, France, Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain own and operate this system. The costs of maintaining the SAMSON Pod are shared, based on each nation's flight quota and actual use.\nBulgaria, Romania, Russia, and Ukraine use the Antonov An-30 for their flights. The Czech Republic also used to use the An-30 for this purpose but apparently retired all of theirs from service in 2003.\nRussia also uses a Tu-154M-ON monitoring aircraft. Germany formerly used this type as well until the aircraft was lost in a 1997 accident. Russia is phasing out both An-30 and Tu-154M-ON and replacing them with two Tu-214ON with the registrations RA-64519 and RA-64525. This aircraft's new sensor suite, though, is being challenged by the US.\nSweden uses a Saab 340 aircraft (\"OS-100\") that was certified in 2004.\nUntil 2008, the U.K. designated aircraft was an Andover C.1(PR) aircraft, registration XS596. Since then the U.K. has used a variety of aircraft including a Saab 340, an An-30, and an OC-135.\nIn 2017, the German Air Force purchased an Airbus A319 as its future Open Skies aircraft.\nSensors.\nOpen Skies aircraft may have video, optical panoramic, and framing cameras for daylight photography, infrared line scanners for a day/night capability, and synthetic aperture radar for a day/night all weather capability. Photographic image quality will permit recognition of major military equipment (e.g., permit a member state to distinguish between a tank and a truck), thus allowing significant transparency of military forces and activities. Sensor categories may be added and capabilities improved by agreement among member states. All sensors used in Open Skies must be commercially available to all signatories. Imagery resolution is limited to 30 centimetres.\nQuotas.\nEach state party is obligated to receive observation flights per its passive quota allocation. Each state party may conduct as many observation flights\u00a0\u2013 its active quota\u00a0\u2013 as its passive quota. During the first three years after entry into force, each state was obligated to accept no more than seventy-five percent of its passive quota. Since the overall annual passive quota for the United States is 42, this means that it was obligated to accept no more than 31 observation flights a year during this three-year period. Only two flights were requested over the United States during 2005, by the Russian Federation and Republic of Belarus group of states parties (which functions as a single entity for quota allocation purposes). The United States is entitled to 8 of the 31 annual flights available over Russia/Belarus. Additionally, the United States is entitled to one flight over Ukraine, which is shared with Canada.\nData sharing and availability.\nImagery collected from Open Skies missions is available to any state party upon request for the cost of reproduction. As a result, the data available to each state party is much greater than that which it can collect itself under the treaty quota system.\nHistory.\nAt a Geneva Conference meeting with Soviet Premier Nikolai Bulganin in 1955, U.S. President Eisenhower proposed that the United States and Soviet Union conduct surveillance overflights of each other's territory to reassure each country that the other was not preparing to attack. The fears and suspicions of the Cold War led Soviet General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev to reject Eisenhower's proposal, known as the Open Skies proposal.\n34 years later, the Open Skies concept was reintroduced by U.S. President George H. W. Bush as a means to build confidence and security between all North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Warsaw Pact countries. In February 1990, an international Open Skies conference involving all NATO and Warsaw Pact countries was held in Ottawa, Canada. Subsequent rounds of negotiations were held in Budapest, Hungary; Vienna, Austria; and Helsinki, Finland.\nOn 24 March 1992, the Open Skies Treaty was signed in Helsinki by U.S. Secretary of State James Baker and foreign ministers from 23 other countries. The treaty entered into force on 2 January 2002, after Russia and Belarus completed ratification procedures.\nIn November 1992, President George H. W. Bush assigned responsibility for overall training, management, leadership, coordination, and support for U.S. Open Skies observation missions to the On-Site Inspection Agency (OSIA), a part of the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA). Until entry into force in January 2002, DTRA support for the treaty involved participating in training and joint trial flights (JTFs). The U.S. has conducted over 70 JTFs since 1993. By March 2003, DTRA had successfully certified 16 camera configurations on the OC-135B aircraft. They also had contributed to the certification of the Bulgarian An-30, Hungarian An-26, SAMSON POD Group (see above) C-130H, Romanian An-30, Russian An-30, and Ukrainian An-30. The United States successfully flew its first Open Skies mission over Russia in December 2002.\nFormal observation flights began in August 2002. During the first treaty year, state parties conducted 67 observation flights. In 2004, state parties conducted 74 missions, and planned 110 missions for 2005. On 8 and 9 March 2007, Russia conducted overflights of Canada under the Treaty. The OSCC continues to address modalities for conducting observation missions and other implementation issues.\nSince 2002, a total of 40 missions have taken place over the U.K. There were 24 quota missions conducted by: Russia \u2013 20; Ukraine \u2013 three; and Sweden \u2013 one. There were 16 training flights conducted by: Benelux (joint with Estonia); Estonia (joint with Benelux); Georgia \u2013 three (one joint with Sweden); Sweden \u2013 three (one joint with Georgia); U.S. \u2013 three; Latvia; Lithuania; Romania; Slovenia; and Yugoslavia. Also since 2002, the U.K. has undertaken a total of 51 open skies missions \u2013 38 were quota missions to the following countries: Ukraine (five); Georgia (seven); and Russia (26); 13 missions were training missions to the following nations: Bulgaria; Yugoslavia; Estonia; Slovenia (three); Sweden (three); US; Latvia, Lithuania, and the Benelux. The flights cost approximately \u00a350,000 per operational mission, and approximately \u00a325,000 for training missions with an approximate annual cost of \u00a3175,000.\nA Russian Defence Ministry spokesman stated on 4 February 2016 that Turkey had refused a Russian Open Skies mission, planned to take place on 1\u20135 February 2016, to fly over areas adjacent to Syria, as well as over NATO air bases. According to Russia, Turkey gave no explanation regarding the limitations, and claimed that they indicated illegal military activity in Syrian territory. The OSCC has not commented on the alleged violation of the Treaty by Turkey.\nBy 2016, Russian aircraft was using upgraded equipment for missions.\nChallenges to the treaty.\nBoth Russia and the United States alleged that the other was violating the provisions of the treaty. U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo cited Russia's access refusal in the Russian-controlled areas of Georgia. On 20 September 2019, the U.S. and Canada were denied access to a military exercise in central Russia.\nAmerican withdrawal.\nIn October 2019, documents from the U.S. House of Representatives indicated that President Donald Trump was considering withdrawing from the Open Skies Treaty. Ukraine was against the move, fearing it would enable Russia to reduce further or ban overflights, thus reducing their knowledge of Russian military movements.\nIn April 2020, it was reported that Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Secretary of Defense Mark Esper had agreed to proceed with U.S. withdrawal from the Treaty on Open Skies. On 21 May 2020, President Trump announced that the United States would be withdrawing from the treaty due to alleged Russian violations.\nOn 22 May 2020, the United States submitted notice of withdrawal from the Treaty on Open Skies. Senate Democrats questioned the appropriateness of withdrawal so close to the 2020 United States presidential election.\nOn 22 November 2020, United States official sources\u2014including U.S. Department of State websites, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, and the National Security Council's official Twitter account\u2014announced that the six-month period was over and the U.S. was no longer a party to the Treaty. The U.S. said it would share some of its intelligence and reconnaissance information with European allies to make up for any loss of critical information from the withdrawal.\nRussian withdrawal.\nIn January 2021, Russia announced that it would follow the United States in withdrawing from the Treaty on Open Skies. The Biden administration informed Moscow in May 2021 that it would not re-enter the pact; on 7 June 2021 Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a law that formalized Russia's exit from the Treaty on Open Skies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22794", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22794", "title": "Limited overs cricket", "text": "Version(s) of the sport of cricket\nLimited overs cricket, also known as white ball cricket, is a version of the sport of cricket in which a match is generally completed within one day. There are a number of formats, including List A cricket (8-hour games), Twenty20 cricket (3-hour games), and 100-ball cricket (2.5 hours). The name reflects the rule that in the match each team bowls a set maximum number of overs (sets of 6 legal balls), usually between 20 and 50, although shorter and longer forms of limited overs cricket have been played.\nThe concept contrasts with Test and first-class matches, which can take up to five days to complete. One-day cricket is popular with spectators as it can encourage aggressive, risky, entertaining batting, often results in cliffhanger endings, and ensures that a spectator can watch an entire match without committing to five days of continuous attendance.\nStructure.\nEach team bats only once, and each innings is limited to a set number of overs, usually fifty in a One Day International and between forty and sixty in a List A. List A is a classification of the limited-overs (one-day) form of cricket, technically as the domestic level.\nDespite its name, important one-day matches, international and domestic, often have two days set aside, the second day being a \"reserve\" day to allow more chance of the game being completed if a result is not possible on the first day (for instance if play is prevented or interrupted by rain).\nTiebreaker.\nIn some tied limited-overs games, a Super Over is played, wherein each team bats for a one-over innings with two wickets in hand. A tied Super Over may be followed by another Super Over.\nPlayer restrictions.\nBowling restrictions.\nIn almost all competitive one-day games, a restriction is placed on the number of overs that may be bowled by any one bowler. This is to prevent a side playing two top-class bowlers with extremely good stamina who can bowl throughout their opponents' innings. The usual limitation is set so that a side must include at least five players who bowl i.e. each bowler can only bowl 20% of the overs. For example, the usual limit for twenty-over cricket is four overs per bowler, for forty-over cricket eight per bowler and for fifty-over cricket ten per bowler. There are exceptions: Pro Cricket in the United States restricted bowlers to five overs each, thus leaving a side requiring only four bowlers.\nWhite balls.\nLimited over cricket is usually played with white balls rather than the traditional red balls. This was introduced because the team batting second is likely to need to play under floodlights and a white ball is easier to see under these conditions. The white balls are supposed to be otherwise identical to traditional balls, but according to BBC Sport, some cricketers claim that the harder surface causes white balls to swing more.\nHistory.\nThe idea for a one-day, limited 50-over cricket tournament, was first played in the inaugural match of the All India Pooja Cricket Tournament in 1951 at Tripunithura in Kochi, Kerala. It is thought to be the brain child of KV Kelappan Thampuran, a former cricketer and the first Secretary of the Kerala Cricket Association. The first limited-overs tournament between first-class English teams was the Midlands Knock-Out Cup, which took place in May 1962. Played with 65-over innings, the Cup was organised by Mike Turner, secretary of the Leicestershire County Cricket Club. The competition was small, with three other county teams participating in addition to Leicestershire. However, it drew commercial television coverage and positive commentary by journalists, who noted the potential to attract sponsors and spectators amid declining attendance levels.\nThe following year, the first full-scale one-day competition between first-class teams was played, the knock-out Gillette Cup, won by Sussex. The number of overs was reduced to 60 for the 1964 season. League one-day cricket also began in England, when the John Player Sunday League was started in 1969 with 40-over matches. Both these competitions continued, with changes in sponsorship, till 2010, when they were replaced by the ECB 40. This was in turn replaced by the 50-over One-Day Cup in 2014.\nThe first Limited Overs International (LOI) or One-Day International (ODI) match was played between Australia and England in Melbourne on 5 January 1971, and the quadrennial cricket World Cup began in 1975. Many of the \"packaging\" innovations, such as coloured clothing, were as a result of World Series Cricket, a \"rebel\" series set up outside the cricketing establishment by Australian entrepreneur Kerry Packer. For more details, see History of cricket.\nTwenty20, a curtailed form of one-day cricket with 20 overs (120 legal balls) per side, was first played in England in 2003. It has proven very popular, and several Twenty20 matches have been played between national teams. It makes several changes to the usual laws of cricket, including the use of a Super Over (one or more additional overs played by each team) to decide the result of tied matches.\n100-ball cricket (2.5-hour games), another form of one-day cricket with 100 deliveries per side, launched in England in 2021. It is designed to further shorten game time and to attract a new audience. It makes further changes to the usual laws of cricket, such as the involvement of overs that last 5 balls each.\nThere are now also T10 leagues with a format of 10 overs per side (resulting in 90-minute games). The Emirates Cricket Board also launched Ninety\u201390 Bash, an upcoming annual franchise-based 90-ball cricket league in the United Arab Emirates.\nOne Day Internationals.\nOne Day International matches are usually played in brightly coloured clothing often in a \"day-night\" format where the first innings of the day occurs in the afternoon and the second occurs under stadium lights.\nOne Day International tournaments.\nIn the early days of ODI cricket, the number of overs was generally 60 overs per side, and matches were also played with 40, 45 or 55 overs per side, but now it has been uniformly fixed at 50 overs.\nEvery four years, the Cricket World Cup involves all the Test-playing nations and other national sides who qualify through the ICC World Cup Qualifier. It usually consists of round-robin stages, followed by semi-finals and a final. The International Cricket Council (ICC) determines the venue far in advance.\nThe ICC Champions Trophy involves all the Test-playing nations, and is held between World Cups. It usually consists of a round-robin group stage, semifinals, and a final.\nEach Test-playing country often hosts triangular tournaments, between the host nation and two touring sides. There is usually a round-robin group, and then the leading two teams play each other in a final, or sometimes a best-of-three final. When there is only one touring side, there is still often a best-of-five or best-of-seven series of limited overs matches.\nThe ICC World Cricket League is an ODI competition for national teams with Associate or Affiliate status.\nList A status.\nList A cricket is a classification of the limited-overs (one-day) form of the sport of cricket. Much as domestic first-class cricket is the level below international Test match cricket, so List A cricket is the domestic level of one-day cricket below One Day Internationals. Twenty20 matches do not qualify for the present.\nMost cricketing nations have some form of domestic List A competition. The number of overs in List A cricket ranges from forty to sixty overs per side.\nThe Association of Cricket Statisticians and Historians created this category for the purpose of providing an equivalent to first-class cricket, to allow the generation of career records and statistics for comparable one-day matches. Only the more important one-day competitions in each country, plus matches against a touring Test team, are included. The categorisation of cricket matches as \"List A\" was not officially endorsed by the International Cricket Council until 2006, when the ICC announced that it and its member associations would be determining this classification in a manner similar to that done for first class matches.\nMatches that qualify as List A:\nMatches that do not qualify as List A:\nDomestic competitions.\nDomestic one-day competitions exist in almost every country where cricket is played. The table below lists the limited overs tournaments that take place in each full member nation.\nOne-day records.\nThe world record for the highest innings total in any List A limited overs match is 506 for 2 by Tamil Nadu against Arunachal Pradesh in Bengaluru on 21 November 2022. On 17 June 2022, England set a new international record, totalling 498 for 4 against Netherlands at Amstelveen. The lowest ever total is 18 by West Indies U-19 against Barbados at Blairmont in 2007. The record low score in ODIs is 35, by Zimbabwe against Sri Lanka in Harare on 25 April 2004 and United States against Nepal in Kirtipur on 12 February 2020.\nThe most runs scored by both sides in any List A limited overs match is 872: Australia, batting first, scored 434 for four in 50 overs, and yet were beaten by South Africa who scored 438 for nine with a ball to spare during their One Day International at Johannesburg in 2006.\nThe highest individual innings is 272 by Narayan Jagadeesan for Tamil Nadu against Arunachal Pradesh in Bengaluru in 2022. The best bowling figures are eight for 10 by Shahbaz Nadeem for Jharkhand against Ranchi at Chennai in 2018. The highest international individual innings is by Rohit Sharma who scored 264. The highest score in any formal limited overs match is believed to be United's 630 for five against Bay Area in a 45 overs match at Richmond, California in August 2006.\nThe most runs in an over was scored by Herschelle Gibbs of the South African cricket team when, in the 2007 Cricket World Cup in the West Indies, he hit 6 sixes in one over bowled by Daan van Bunge of the Netherlands. This record is shared by Yuvraj Singh of India who achieved this feat in the 2007 ICC World Twenty20 in South Africa, he hit 6 sixes in an over bowled by Stuart Broad of England. This was later also achieved by Kieron Pollard, Jaskaran Malhotra, Dipendra Singh Airee, and Darius Visser in international cricket.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22796", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22796", "title": "Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe", "text": "Security-oriented intergovernmental organization\nThe Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) is a regional security-oriented intergovernmental organization comprising member states in Europe, North America, and Asia. Its mandate includes issues such as arms control, the promotion of human rights, freedom of the press, and free and fair elections. It employs around 3,460 people, mostly in its field operations but also in its secretariat in Vienna, Austria, and its institutions. It has observer status at the United Nations.\nThe OSCE had its origins in 1975: its predecessors came together during the era of the Cold War to form a forum for discussion between the Western Bloc and the Eastern Bloc. Most of its 57\u00a0participating countries are in Europe, but with some members in Asia or in North America. The participating countries comprise much of the land area of the Northern Hemisphere.\nThe OSCE is concerned with early warning, conflict prevention, crisis management, and post-conflict rehabilitation.\nHistory.\nRoots.\nThe Organization has its roots in the 1975 Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE). Talks had been mooted about a European security grouping since the 1950s but the Cold War prevented any substantial progress until the talks at Dipoli in Espoo began in November 1972. These talks were held at the suggestion of the Soviet Union which wished to use the talks to maintain its control over the communist states in Eastern Europe, and President of Finland Urho Kekkonen hosted them in order to bolster his policy of neutrality. Western Europe, however, saw these talks as a way to reduce the tension in the region, furthering economic cooperation and obtaining humanitarian improvements for the populations of the communist bloc.\nThe recommendations of the talks, in the form of \"The Blue Book\", gave the practical foundations for a three-stage conference called the \"Helsinki process\". The CSCE opened in Helsinki on 3 July 1973 with 35 states sending representatives. Stage\u00a0I took only five days to agree to follow the Blue Book. Stage\u00a0II was the main working phase and was conducted in Geneva from 18 September 1973 until 21 July 1975.\nThe result of Stage\u00a0II was the Helsinki Final Act. This was signed by the 35\u00a0participating states during Stage\u00a0III, which took place in Finlandia Hall between 30 July \u2013 1 August 1975. It was opened by the Holy See's diplomat Cardinal Agostino Casaroli, who was the chairman of the conference.\nThe concepts of improving relations and implementing the act were developed over a series of follow-up meetings, with major gatherings in Belgrade (4 October 1977\u00a0\u2013 8 March 1978), Madrid (11 November 1980\u00a0\u2013 9 September 1983) and Vienna (4 November 1986\u00a0\u2013 19 January 1989).\nThe Copenhagen commitment was written \"to ensure that individuals are permitted to exercise their rights to peaceful assembly and freedom of association, including the right to form, join and participate effectively in non-governmental organizations, which seek the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.\"\nThe Moscow Mechanism was agreed in 1991.\nCSCE becomes OSCE.\nThe fall of the Soviet Union required a change of role for the CSCE. The Charter of Paris for a New Europe, signed on 21 November 1990, marked the beginning of this change. The process was capped by the renaming of the CSCE as the OSCE on 1 January 1995, in accordance with the results of a conference held in Budapest in 1994. The OSCE now had a formal secretariat, a Senior Council, a Parliamentary Assembly, a Conflict Prevention Centre, and an Office for Free Elections, which later became the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.\nIn December 1996, the \"Lisbon Declaration on a Common and Comprehensive Security Model for Europe for the Twenty-First Century\" affirmed the universal and indivisible nature of security on the European continent.\nIn Istanbul on 19 November 1999, the OSCE ended a two-day summit by calling for a political settlement in Chechnya&lt;ref name=\"RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty 1999 z527\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and adopting a Charter for European Security.\nThrough its Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR), the OSCE observes and assesses elections in its member states, in order to support fair and transparent democratic processes, in keeping with the mutual standards to which the organization is committed; between 1994 and 2004 the OSCE sent teams of observers to monitor more than 150 elections, typically focusing on elections in emerging democracies. In 2004, at the invitation of the United States Government, the ODIHR deployed an assessment mission, made up of participants from six OSCE member states, which observed that year's US presidential election and produced a report. It was the first time that a US presidential election was the subject of OSCE monitoring, although the organization had previously monitored state-level American elections in Florida and California, in 2002 and 2003.\nCriticism of OSCE.\nMembers of OSCE have criticized the organization for being in a position where Russia, and sometimes Belarus, can veto all OSCE decisions, Moscow has, for a number of years, not allowed the approval of the organization's budget, the organization of official OSCE events or the extension of missions. In November 2023 they vetoed the appointment of Estonia as chairman for 2024.\nOSCE missions and operations.\n1992 Georgia Mission.\nThe OSCE Mission to Georgia was established in November 1992 with its headquarters in the capital Tbilisi. The Mission's mandate expired on 31 December 2008. Between these dates it was powerless to control the outbreak of the August 2008 Russo-Georgian war.\n1993 Mission to Moldova.\nThe objective of the mission to Moldova is to facilitate a comprehensive and lasting political settlement of the Transnistria conflict in all its aspects, strengthening the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova within its internationally recognized borders with a special status for Transnistria.\nOSCE promoted a 5+2 format as a diplomatic negotiation platform, which began in 2005, suspended by Russia and Transnistria in 2006 until it started again in 2012, before making slow progress over the next ten years. The process stopped following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine as two of the parties were then at war with each other.\nIn December 2022 Russia blocked the renewal of the annual mandate by limiting it to a six-month period, repeated again in June 2023 to another six-month period.\n1995 Mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nThe Bosnian War concluded in 1995 with the Dayton Agreement with the ongoing OSCE Mission being mandated to help secure lasting peace and therefore to build a stable, secure, and democratic state through building sustainable democratic institutions, strengthening good governance and human rights principles, and supporting the development of a multi-national and multi-ethnic democratic society.\n1998 Kosovo Mission.\nThe OSCE Kosovo Verification Mission was established by the Permanent Council in October 1998 and shuttered in June 1999 amidst the recalcitrance of the Milosevic regime.\nThe 1999 OSCE Mission in Kosovo took over the work in Kosovo where it concentrates on institution and democracy building, as well as human rights.\nThe OSCE's refusal to police events surrounding the 2008 Kosovo declaration of independence still rankles in Russia.\n2001 Mission to Macedonia.\nThe ongoing Mission to Macedonia is monitoring and supporting the implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement that put an end to the 2001 armed conflict in North Macedonia.\n2001 Mission to Serbia.\nThe current mission to Serbia started after Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107 lost his power as President of Serbia and Montenegro in 2000. The mission was mandated to assist the authorities and civil society with democratic development and human rights protection, including the rights of persons belonging to national minorities. To promote democratization, tolerance and the rule of law.\n2006 Mission to Montenegro.\nThe current mission began with the 2006 Montenegrin independence referendum, monitored by OSCE, with a mandate being granted with the objective of assisting and promoting the implementation of OSCE principles and commitments including the politico-military and human aspects of security and stability.\n2012 Texas election.\nBefore the U.S. presidential elections of November 2012, the OSCE announced its intention to send electoral observers to Texas and to other U.S. states. This prompted the Attorney General of Texas Greg Abbott to send letters to U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and to the OSCE, threatening to arrest OSCE officials if they should enter electoral premises in Texas and break Texas law. In reply, the U.S. Department of State stated that OSCE observers enjoyed immunities. In the event, no incidents between OSCE and Texas authorities were recorded during the elections.\n2017 Turkey constitutional referendum.\nIn April 2017, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan criticized the OSCE for reporting that opposition \"No\" campaigners in the Turkish constitutional referendum had faced bans, police interventions and arrests. Erdo\u011fan said: \"Now the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe says if the result is 'yes', that means there are a lot of problems. Who are you? First of all, you should know your place. This is not your duty.\"\nOSCE involvement in Ukraine (2014\u20132021).\nOn 21 March 2014, the OSCE deployed its Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine at the request of Ukraine's government. The mission has received mixed reviews. While some observers have applauded its function as the \"eyes and ears of the international community\", others have accused the mission of bias towards either Russia or Ukraine.\nOn 27 April 2014, the Girkin group that had taken control in the city of Sloviansk took eight members of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission (OSCE SMM) as hostages. The group appointed Vyacheslav Ponomarev as mayor of the city.\nDuring the war in Donbas, an OSCE observer allowed Russian separatists to travel in a vehicle with the organization's markings; this prompted allegations that the OSCE was biased in the war and not interested in carrying out its duties of mediating a ceasefire. The organization issued a statement regretting the incident.\nMoreover, the OSCE Observer Mission at Russian Checkpoints Gukovo and Donetsk (which is organizationally separate from the Special Monitoring Mission) also received criticism alleging that only two checkpoints on the Russian\u2013Ukrainian border are currently being monitored, which Daniel Baer, the US ambassador to the OSCE at the time, described as \"seriously inadequate\".\nThe mission has been criticized for taking months to deploy drones to help monitor borders as well as withdrawing them after only several weeks of use due to Russian electronic attacks. Drones have been reintroduced to observe the conflict in 2018.\nIn 2014, an advisor to the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence wrongly claimed that approximately 80% of the OSCE observers located near Mariupol were Russian citizens and that many had ties to Russian security agencies such as the FSB and the GRU. In reality, one observer out of 17 in Mariupol was a Russian citizen. In total, the mission reports the number of Russian citizens in its ranks as 39 out of 720, or 5,4%. The organization has also been accused of allegedly revealing the locations of Ukrainian troops to Russian forces during the conflict.\nOn 1 December 2014, the mission was in the area to \"facilitate a local ceasefire and monitor the repair works on a power station\", that it \"heard an exchange of artillery fire between unspecified parties\", and that \"artillery rounds were impacting at approximately 1km to the east of the SMM's position; therefore the SMM left due to security concerns\". Furthermore, the report states that the \"SMM team in the JCCC was in constant contact with the SMM team in Staromikhailivka\". No mention of a wounded observer is made.\nOn 27 October 2015, a suspended OSCE monitor confirmed he had been a former employee of Russia's Main Intelligence Directorate. The suspended SMM stated that he had no trouble receiving the position and neither the OSCE nor Ukraine's Security Service thoroughly checked his background. Following the report the OSCE issued a comment stating the monitor had been fired due to violations of the organization's code of conduct.\nOn 6 April 2016, photos of OSCE monitors attending the wedding of a Russian separatist emerged. The wedding had taken place in June 2015. The OSCE expressed regret over the incident, issuing a statement saying \"The unprofessional behaviour displayed by the monitors in the picture is an individual incident that should not be abused to cast a shadow on the reputation of other mission members.\" The OSCE reported that the monitors were no longer with the OSCE special monitoring mission.\nIn April 2017, an OSCE vehicle struck a mine, which killed one SMM member and injured two. Two armoured vehicles were on patrol near Luhansk when one struck the mine. The dead man was an American paramedic, while the injured included a woman from Germany and a man from the Czech Republic.\nOn 18 July 2018, the German broadcaster ARD reported that Russian intelligence services had received inside information about the activities of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine from a staff member of the OSCE. The insider information consisted of observers' preferences in alcohol and women, their financial situation, and their contacts in Ukraine. The OSCE issued a statement expressing concern over the alleged security breach.\nRussia has accused members of the Mission of working for the Ukrainian SBU and of spying on the pro-Russian separatists. Furthermore, Russia has accused the mission of bias after it reported troop movements from separatist forces, accusing the mission of ignoring similar moves from Ukraine. Russia's foreign minister also has claimed that the mission failed to pay sufficient attention to human and minority rights within the Government-controlled areas of Ukraine. Furthermore, he criticized that the mission did not clearly attribute ceasefire violations to either side.\n2022 Mission to Armenia.\nAn OSCE Needs Assessment Team was sent to Armenia between 21 and 27 October 2022 following the Armenia\u2013Azerbaijan border crisis. The request was made by the government of Armenia. The OSCE sent international experts to monitor the Armenia\u2013Azerbaijan border.\nOSCE involvement in Ukraine (2022\u2013present).\nThe 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine began on 24 February. The OSCE mandate in Ukraine expired on 31 March 2022, due to objections by Russia. On 24 April 2022, the OSCE protested the detention of four staff members in Donetsk and Luhansk, without specifying who had detained them. On 20 September, two Ukrainian OSCE staffers were sentenced to 13 years of prison by a court in the Luhansk People's Republic for \"alleged high treason and espionage for the United States.\"\nIn March 2022, 45 participating States promoted, with the support of Ukraine, the activation of the Moscow Mechanism for the establishment of an independent expert mission on violations and abuses committed in the war of the Russian Federation, supported by Belarus, against Ukraine. The report of the Mission of Experts was presented to the OSCE Permanent Council on 13 April 2022 and documented clear patterns of violations of international humanitarian law by the Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine. OSCE/ODIHR continues to monitor the violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law in Ukraine.\nOn 2 June 2022, the same 45 participating States invoked again the Moscow Mechanism to establish a new mission of experts to consider, follow up and build upon the findings of the Moscow Mechanism report published in April 2022. The subsequent report, presented on 14 July 2022 to the OSCE Permanent Council, confirmed the outcomes of the previous mission and identified blatant violations of international humanitarian law, mainly attributable to the Russian armed forces, as well as widespread violations of human rights, especially in the territories under effective control of the Russian Federation.\nThe Russian delegation was not invited to the 29th OSCE Ministerial Council in December 2022 where the delegates considered the ramifications and regional security challenges created by Russia's continued war against Ukraine. There were calls to assess the reparations that Russia should be accountable for.\nSince the start of its invasion of Ukraine, Russia has seized \u20ac2.7 million worth of armored vehicles that were previously part of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. According to a letter that was sent by Russian OSCE representatives to OSCE Secretary-General Helga Schmid in January 2023, 71 trucks and cars were brought to the Luhansk People's Republic and the Donetsk People's Republic as \"evidence\" and criminal proceedings were initiated against former OSCE personnel for espionage.\nOSCE Parliamentary Assembly.\nIn 2004, the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly sent election observers to the U.S. presidential elections. The OSCE Parliamentary Assembly's president at the time was Democratic Congressman Alcee Hastings. Hastings had previously been impeached for corruption by the U.S. Congress. The OSCE faced criticism of partisanship and double standards due to Hastings's past and the fact that the OSCE's mandate was to promote democracy and the values of civil society.\nIn 2010, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe was criticized from within by the Latvian delegation for lacking transparency and democracy. Spencer Oliver (b. 1938) secretary general of the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly, who held the post from the organization's inception in 1992 until 2015, faced a challenge from the Latvian Artis Pabriks. According to the rules of the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly, the incumbent general secretary can only be replaced with a full consensus minus one. Pabriks called the rules \"quite shocking from the perspective of an organization that's monitoring elections\".\nRole of Civil Society Organizations at the OSCE Human Dimension Conference.\nThe Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) hosts the Human Dimension Conference, a key platform for dialogue on human rights, democratic institutions, and the rule of law across the OSCE region. Civil society organizations (CSOs) play a critical role in the conference by contributing expertise, raising awareness, and advocating for the protection of fundamental freedoms.\nThrough their participation, CSOs may attend plenary sessions, submit written statements, deliver oral interventions, and organize side events addressing issues such as human rights violations, civic space, and rule-of-law challenges. Their presence helps elevate international attention to pressing human rights concerns and ensures that the voices of grassroots actors are represented in regional dialogue.\nParticipation Procedure\nCSOs seeking to attend the Human Dimension Conference must undergo a formal registration process, administered by the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR). ODIHR provides detailed guidance on the application process, including eligibility requirements and procedural steps.\nAll necessary information regarding registration and participation\u2014including deadlines, documentation, and logistical details\u2014is made available on the OSCE's official website. For the 2024 Human Dimension Conference, details and registration materials can be accessed at: https://www.osce.org/chairmanship/2024WHDC\nSynopsis and list of members.\nLanguages.\nThe six official languages of the OSCE are English, French, German, Italian, Spanish and Russian.\nParticipating states.\nPartners for co-operation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLegal status.\nA unique aspect of the OSCE is the non-binding status of its constitutive charter. Rather than being a formal treaty ratified by national legislatures, the Helsinki Final Act represents a political commitment by the heads of government of all signatories to build security and cooperation in Europe on the basis of its provisions. This allows the OSCE to remain a flexible \"process\" for the evolution of improved cooperation, which avoids disputes and/or sanctions over implementation.\nBy agreeing to these commitments, signatories for the first time accepted that the treatment of citizens \"within\" their borders was also a matter of legitimate international concern. This open process of the OSCE is often given credit for helping build democracy in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, thus leading to the end of the Cold War. Unlike most international intergovernmental organizations, however, the OSCE does not have international legal personality on account of the lack of legal effect of its charter. As a result, its headquarters' host, Austria, had to confer legal personality on the organization in order to be able to sign a legal agreement regarding its presence in Vienna.\nStructure and institutions.\nPolitical direction to the organization is given by heads of state or government during summits. Summits are not regular or scheduled but held as needed. The last summit took place in Astana (Kazakhstan), on 1 and 2 December 2010. The high-level decision-making body of the organization is the OSCE Ministerial Council, which meets at the end of every year. At the ambassadorial level, the OSCE Permanent Council convenes weekly in Vienna and serves as the regular negotiating and decision-making body. The chairman of the Permanent Council is the ambassador to the Organization of the participating State which holds the chairmanship.\nIn addition to the Ministerial Council and Permanent Council, the Forum for Security Co-operation is also an OSCE decision-making body. It deals predominantly with matters of military co-operation, such as modalities for inspections according to the Vienna Document of 1999.\nThe OSCE's Secretariat is located in Vienna, Austria. The organization also has offices in Copenhagen, Geneva, The Hague, Prague and Warsaw.\nAs of \u00a02021[ [update]], the OSCE employed 3,568 staff, including 609 in its secretariat and institutions and 2,959 in its 17\u00a0field operations.\nThe Parliamentary Assembly of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe is made up of 323\u00a0parliamentarians from 57\u00a0member states. The Parliamentary Assembly performs its functions mainly via the Standing Committee, the Bureau, and 3\u00a0General Committees (Committee on Political Affairs and Security, Committee on Economic Affairs, Science, Technology and Environment, and Committee on Democracy, Human Rights and Humanitarian Questions).\nThe Parliamentary Assembly passes resolutions on matters such as political and security affairs, economic and environmental issues, and democracy and human rights. Representing the collective voice of OSCE parliamentarians, these resolutions and recommendations are meant to ensure that all participating states live up to their OSCE commitments. The Parliamentary Assembly also engages in parliamentary diplomacy, and has an extensive election observation program.\nThe oldest OSCE institution is the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR), established in 1991 following a decision made at the 1990 Summit of Paris. It is based in Warsaw, Poland, and is active throughout the OSCE area in the fields of election observation, democratic development, human rights, tolerance and non-discrimination, rule of law, and Roma and Sinti issues. The ODIHR has observed over 300\u00a0elections and referendums since 1995, sending more than 50,000 observers. It has operated outside its own area twice, sending a team that offered technical support to the 9 October 2004 presidential elections in Afghanistan, an OSCE Partner for Co-operation, and an election support team to assist with parliamentary and provincial council elections on 18 September 2005. ODIHR is headed by Matteo Mecacci, Italy.\nThe Office of the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media, established in December 1997, acts as a watchdog to provide early warning on violations of freedom of expression in OSCE participating States. The representative also assists participating States by advocating and promoting full compliance with OSCE norms, principles and commitments regarding freedom of expression and free media. As of 2020, the current representative is Teresa Ribeiro, Portugal.\nThe High Commissioner on National Minorities was created on 8 July 1992 by the Helsinki Summit Meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. It is charged with identifying and seeking early resolution of ethnic tension that might endanger peace, stability or friendly relations between participating states. As of 2020, the current representative is Kairat Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan).\nEach year the OSCE holds an OSCE Asian Conference with partner nations (currently Australia, Thailand, South Korea, Japan and Afghanistan).\nThe OSCE and the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic established the OSCE Academy in 2002. The aim of the OSCE Academy is \"to promote regional cooperation, conflict prevention and good governance in Central Asia through offering post-graduate education, professional training and intellectual exchange.\"\nField operations.\nAlmost all field operations of OSCE have been conducted in countries of former Yugoslavia and the former Soviet Union.\nActive.\nThe following field missions are currently active:\nDiscontinued.\nThe following field missions have been completed, closed or discontinued:\nChairmanship.\nThe OSCE chairmanship is assumed at yearly intervals by one participating state, which then plays the central role in managing the organization's work and in its external representation. The foreign minister of the country possessing the chair holds the OSCE's most senior position as chairman-in-office (CiO).\nThe responsibilities of the chairman-in-office include:\nThe CiO is assisted by the previous and incoming chairmen-in-office; the three of them together constitute the OSCE Troika. The CiO nominates personal representatives \u2013 experts in fields of priority for the CiO. The origin of the institution lies with the Charter of Paris for a New Europe (1990), and the Helsinki Document (1992) formally institutionalized this function.\nThe OSCE chair for 2022 was Poland, with Zbigniew Rau serving as chairman-in-office. The chair for 2023 was North Macedonia, represented by Bujar Osmani as chairman-in-office.\nChairmanship history.\nChairmanship of the OSCE is held by a member state on a calendar-year basis, with the minister for foreign affairs of that state performing the function of chairman-in-office. The table below shows the holders since 1991. Estonia was due to hold the chairmanship in 2024, however, this was not approved following objections from Russia and Belarus.\nSecretary general.\nWhile the chairman-in-office is the OSCE's most senior official, on a day-to-day basis the secretary general is the OSCE's chief administrative officer and can, when requested by the chairmanship, serve as a representative of the chairman-in-office. Since the establishment of the office in 1992, the secretaries general have been:\nSummits of heads of state and government.\nFiscal history.\nSince 1993, the OSCE's budget by year (in millions of euro) has been:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* 2021 ... \u20ac138.2 million\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nRelations with the United Nations.\nThe OSCE considers itself a regional organization in the sense of Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter and is an observer in the United Nations General Assembly. The Chairman-in-Office gives routine briefings to the United Nations Security Council.\nThe three dimensions.\nPolitico-military dimension (first dimension).\nThe OSCE takes a comprehensive approach to the politico-military dimension of security, which includes a number of commitments by participating States and mechanisms for conflict prevention and resolution. The organization also seeks to enhance military security by promoting greater openness, transparency and co-operation.\nThe end of the Cold War resulted in a huge amount of surplus weapons becoming available in what is known as the international grey market for weapons. The OSCE helps to stop the\u2014often illegal\u2014spread of such weapons and offers assistance with their destruction. The OSCE hosts the annual exchange of information under the Conventional Forces in Europe treaty. The OSCE has also implemented two additional exchanges of information, the Vienna Document and the Global Exchange of Military Information. The Open Skies Consultative Commission, the implementing body for the Treaty on Open Skies, meets monthly at its Vienna headquarters.\nThe actions taken by the OSCE in border monitoring range from conflict prevention to post-conflict management, capacity building and institutional support.\nWith its expertise in conflict prevention, crisis management and early warning, the OSCE contributes to worldwide efforts in combating terrorism.\nThe OSCE works to prevent conflicts from arising and to facilitate lasting comprehensive political settlements for existing conflicts. It also helps with the process of rehabilitation in post-conflict areas.\nThe OSCE's Forum for Security Co-operation provides a framework for political dialogue on military reform, while practical activities are conducted by field operations, as well as the Conflict Prevention Centre.\nOSCE police operations are an integral part of the organization's efforts in conflict prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation.\nThe OSCE was a rather small organization until selection by the international community to provide electoral organization to post war Bosnia and Herzegovina in early 1996. Ambassador Frowick was the first OSCE representative to initiate national election in September 1996, human rights issues and rule of law specifically designed to provide a foundation for judicial organization within Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nThe OSCE had regional offices and field offices, to include the office in Brcko in northeastern Bosnia and Herzegovina which remained in limbo until the Brcko Arbitration Agreement could be decided, finalized and implemented.\nBrcko become a \"special district\" and remains so today.\nThe OSCE essentially took the place of the United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina in part because the Bosnian leadership felt deep contempt for the UN efforts to stop the war which began in 1991 and ended in 1995. During the time the United Nations were attempting a political solution, thousands of UN troops were posted in and around Bosnia and Herzegovina with special emphasis on Sarajevo. From 1991 to 1995, over 200,000 Bosnians were killed and over one million displaced and another million as refugees.\nThe OSCE continues to have a presence and a number of initiatives to bring a sustained peace to the region.\nEconomic and environmental dimension (second dimension).\nActivities in the economic and environmental dimension include the monitoring of developments related to economic and environmental security in OSCE participating States, with the aim of alerting them to any threat of conflict; assisting States in the creation of economic and environmental policies, legislation and institutions to promote security in the OSCE region.\nAmong the economic activities of the OSCE feature activities related to migration management, transport and energy security. Most activities are implemented in co-operation with partner organizations.\nThe OSCE has developed a range of activities in the environmental sphere aimed at addressing ecologic threats to security in its participating States. Among the activities feature projects in the area of hazardous waste, water management and access to information under the Aarhus Convention.\nHuman dimension (third dimension).\nThe commitments made by OSCE participating States in the human dimension aim to ensure full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms; to abide by the rule of law; to promote the principles of democracy by building, strengthening and protecting democratic institutions; and to promote tolerance throughout the OSCE region.\nSince 2003, the OSCE has had an established mechanism for combating trafficking in human beings, as defined by Article 3 of the Palermo Protocol, which is aimed at raising public awareness of the problem and building the political will within participating states to tackle it effectively.\nThe OSCE actions against trafficking in human beings are coordinated by the Office of the Special Representative and Co-ordinator for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, a judge in the Criminal Court of Rome, took Office as the Special Representative in March 2010. From 2006 to 2009, this Office was held by Eva Biaudet, a former Finnish Minister of Health and Social Services. Biaudet currently serves as Finnish Ombudsman for Minorities. Her predecessor was former Austrian Minister Helga Konrad, who served as the first OSCE Special Representative for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings.\nThe activities around Combating Trafficking in Human Beings in the OSCE Region of the Office of the Special Representative include:\nThe OSCE claims to promote democracy and assist the participating states in building democratic institutions.\nEducation programmes are an integral part of the organization's efforts in conflict prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation.\nAs part of its democratization activities, the OSCE carries out election assistance projects in the run-up to, during, and following elections. However, the effectiveness of such assistance is arguable\u2014Kazakhstan, for example, despite being the former chair of the OSCE, is considered by many to be one of the least democratic countries in the world. Moreover, the recent democratic advances made in other Central Asian republics, notably Kyrgyzstan, have led to rumours of Soviet-style disruption of the Kyrgyz democratic process by, in particular, Kazakhstan and Russia. This may be in large part due to fears over the long-term stability of these countries' own quasi-dictatorships.\nThe equality of men and women is an integral part of sustainable democracy. The OSCE aims to provide equal opportunities for men and women and to integrate gender equality in policies and practices.\nThe OSCE's human rights activities focus on such priorities as freedom of movement and religion, preventing torture and trafficking in persons.\nOSCE could grant consultive status to NGOs and INGOs in the form of \"Researcher-in-residence programme\" (run by the Prague Office of the OSCE Secretariat): accredited representatives of national and international NGOs are granted access to all records and to numerous topical compilations related to OSCE field activities.\nThe OSCE observes relevant media developments in its participating states with a view to addressing and providing early warning on violations of freedom of expression.\nEthnic conflict is one of the main sources of large-scale violence in Europe today. The OSCE's approach is to identify and to seek early resolution of ethnic tensions, and to set standards for the rights of persons belonging to minority groups and High Commissioner on National Minorities has been established.\nOSCE Democracy Defender Award.\nThe Democracy Defender Award honors a person or group for contributions to the promotion of democracy and the defense of human rights \"in the spirit of Helsinki Final Act and other OSCE principles and commitments.\" The award was established in 2016 on the initiative of Ambassadors of 8\u00a0countries, and supported by the delegations of the 18\u00a0countries of the OSCE (22\u00a0countries in 2017).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Adapted Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22798", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22798", "title": "Omri", "text": "Biblical King of Israel\nOmri (, \"\u2018Omr\u012b\"; \"\u1e2a\u00fbmr\u00ee\" [\"\u1e2bu-um-ri-i\"]; fl. 9th century BCE) was, according to the Hebrew Bible, the sixth king of Israel. He was a successful military campaigner who extended the northern kingdom of Israel. Other monarchs from the House of Omri are Ahab, Ahaziah, Joram, and Athaliah. Like his predecessor, king Zimri, who ruled for only seven days, Omri is the second king mentioned in the Bible without a statement of his tribal origin. One possibility, though unproven, is that he was of the tribe of Issachar.\nNothing is said in Scripture about the lineage of Omri. His name may be Amorite, Arabic, or Hebrew in origin. Omri is credited with the construction of Samaria and establishing it as his capital. Although the Bible is silent about other actions taken during his reign, he is described as doing more evil than all the kings who preceded him. An alternative modern hypothesis maintains that, as founder of the House of Omri, an Israelite royal house, his kingdom formed the first state in the Land of Israel, and that the Kingdom of Judah only achieved statehood later.\nExtrabiblical sources such as the Mesha Stele and the Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III also mention his name; however, in the case of the Black Obelisk the reference is to the dynasty named for Omri rather than to Omri himself. Many scholars consider Omri the first truly historical figure in the Bible, though this is debated.\nName.\nThe name \"Omri\" itself is puzzling to scholars. Its etymology is uncertain, and theories have proposed an origin in several Semitic languages. In the Hebrew Bible, the name \"Omri\" appears three times outside of references to the king, first to denote a son of Becher, the second of Benjamin's ten sons, second to denote a descendant of Perez, son of Judah, and finally to denote a prince of the tribe of Issachar, seemingly suggesting an Israelite origin for the name. Likewise, that Jezreel was the site of Omri's estate has been taken by some scholars as indicating that Omri had called the area home, which may imply he was a scion of the tribe of Issachar, but this remains unproven. If Omri, and by extension his name, were indeed of Israelite provenance, a number of Hebrew etymologies have been proposed for \"\u2018Omr\u012b\": including a hypocorism of the unattested personal name \"\u2018Omr\u012byy\u0101\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e2\u05b8\u05de\u05b0\u05e8\u05b4\u05d9\u05b8\u05bc\u05d4\u200e \"servant of Yah\"), and derivation from the verb \"\u2018\u0101mar\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e2\u05b8\u05de\u05b7\u05e8\u200e) meaning \"to bind, gather\".\nReign.\nStruggle for the succession.\nAccording to the biblical narrative, Omri was \"commander of the army\" of King Elah when Zimri, \"commander of half the king's chariots\", murdered Elah and made himself king. Instead, the troops at Gibbethon chose Omri as king, and he led them to Tirzah where they besieged it. When Zimri saw that the city was taken, he committed suicide by shutting himself in the royal palace and setting it ablaze. He died after a reign of only seven days. Although Zimri was eliminated, \"half of the people\" supported Tibni in opposition to Omri. It took Omri four years to subdue Tibni and at last proclaim himself undisputed king of Israel.\nSamaria and successor.\nInitially, the capital was in Tirzah, which had been besieged and the royal palace had been burned down. The Jewish Encyclopedia suggests that \"the associations of Tirzah were so repellent and sanguinary, and the location so poor for a capital, that Omri purchased a new site\" for his residence. This was in Samaria, on a hill purchased from Shemer for two talents of silver, where Omri built a new capital for the kingdom. In Samaria, Omri reigned until his death and was buried there. His son Ahab became the next king.\nDate.\nOmri became king of Israel in the 31st year of Asa, king of Judah and reigned for 12 years, 6 years of which were in Tirzah. The biblical reference to the period of rivalry with Tibni is from the 27th year of Asa to the 31st year. There are several possible dates: William F. Albright has dated his reign to 876\u2013869 BCE, E. R. Thiele offers the dates of 888 BCE to 880 BCE for his rivalry with Tibni and 880\u2013874 BCE for his sole reign, while Paul L. Maier affirms that it happened between 881\u2013873 BCE.\nArchaeological sources.\nThe fortress at Jezreel was situated on one of the main east\u2013west routes through the kingdom. Hugh Williamson believes it served not only a military function, but also a political one; a very visible example of grandiose public works used as a means of social control and to assert claims of legitimacy.\nThe Moabite Mesha stele (on display in the Louvre) indicates that Omri expanded his holdings to include northern Moab east of the Jordan River. It makes reference to the oppression of Moab by \"Omri King of Israel\". Israel would later become identified in sources as the \"House of Omri\" (\"Bit-Humria\"), with the term \"Israel\" being used less and less as history progressed (the other defining term for \"Israel\" is \"Samaria\", beginning in the reign of Joash)..\nThe Assyrian Black Obelisk in the British Museum has been interpreted as referring to Jehu \"son of Omri\", though that interpretation has been questioned, in favor of the reading \"Omride\".\nThe Omride Dynasty.\nThe short-lived dynasty founded by Omri constituted a new chapter in the history of the Northern Kingdom of Israel. It ended almost fifty years of constant civil war over the throne. There was peace with the Kingdom of Judah to the south, and even cooperation between the two rival states, while relations with neighboring Sidon to the north were bolstered by marriages negotiated between the two royal courts. This state of peace with two powerful neighbors enabled the Kingdom of Israel to expand its influence and even political control in Transjordan, and these factors combined brought economic prosperity to the kingdom.\nOn the other hand, peace with Sidon also resulted in the penetration of Phoenician religious ideas into the kingdom and led to a \"kulturkampf\" between traditionalists (as personified by the prophet Elijah and his followers) and the aristocracy (as personified by Omri's son and heir Ahab and his consort Jezebel). In foreign affairs, this period paralleled the rise of the Kingdom of Aram based in Damascus, and Israel soon found itself at war in the northeast. Most threatening, however, was the ascendancy of Assyria, which was beginning to expand westward from Mesopotamia: the Battle of Qarqar (853 BCE), which pitted Shalmaneser III of Assyria against a coalition of local kings, including Ahab, was the first clash between Assyria and Israel. It was the first in a series of wars that would eventually lead to the destruction of the Kingdom of Israel in 722 BCE and the reduction of the Kingdom of Judah to an Assyrian tributary state.\nIn 841 BCE, the Assyrian king Shalmaneser III campaigned along the Mediterranean coast and forced Jehu to pay tribute. Assyrian kings frequently referred to Omri's successors as belonging to the \"House of Omri\" (\"Bit Hu-um-ri-a\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22799", "revid": "326639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22799", "title": "Oxycodone", "text": "Opioid medication\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOxycodone, sold under the brand name Roxicodone and OxyContin (which is the extended-release form) among others, is a semi-synthetic opioid used medically for the treatment of moderate to severe pain. It is highly addictive and is a commonly abused drug. It is usually taken by mouth, and is available in immediate-release and controlled-release formulations. Onset of pain relief typically begins within fifteen minutes and lasts for up to six hours with the immediate-release formulation. In the United Kingdom, it is available by injection. Combination products are also available with paracetamol (acetaminophen), ibuprofen, naloxone, naltrexone, and aspirin.\nCommon side effects include euphoria, constipation, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, drowsiness, dizziness, itching, dry mouth, and sweating. Side effects may also include addiction and dependence, substance abuse, irritability, depression or mania, delirium, hallucinations, hypoventilation, gastroparesis, bradycardia, and hypotension. Those allergic to codeine may also be allergic to oxycodone. Use of oxycodone in early pregnancy appears relatively safe. Opioid withdrawal may occur if rapidly stopped. Oxycodone acts by activating the \u03bc-opioid receptor. When taken by mouth, it has roughly 1.5 times the effect of the equivalent amount of morphine.\nOxycodone was originally produced from the opium poppy opiate alkaloid thebaine in 1916 in Germany. One year later, it was used medically for the first time in Germany. Oxycodone is a therapeutic alternative on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. It is available as a generic medication. In 2023, it was the 49th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 13million prescriptions. A number of abuse-deterrent formulations are available, such as in combination with naloxone or naltrexone.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedical uses.\nOxycodone is used for managing moderate to severe acute or chronic pain when other treatments are not sufficient. Oxycodone improves quality of life in certain types of pain. Numerous studies have been completed, and the appropriate use of this compound does improve the quality of life of patients with long term chronic pain syndromes.\nOxycodone can be taken in an immediate-release form (4 times daily for example with the brand name Shortec) or twice daily with extended-release forms (such as with e.g. the brand name \"Oxypro\") and both forms are Extended-release forms of oxycodone (OxyContin) and are used for around-the-clock treatment of pain worldwide, are not to be used on an \"as needed\" basis, while other forms such as the immediate-release forms are indicated as to be used as rescue medications in the treatment of pain (for example for in severe cancer pain or pain after surgery). There are many forms of the drug that are recognized by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), National Health Service (NHS) and NHS Scotland (NHS Scot) to be used for various indications.\nOxycodone is available as a controlled-release tablet. A 2006 review found that controlled-release oxycodone is comparable to immediate-release oxycodone, morphine, and hydromorphone in management of moderate to severe cancer pain, with fewer side effects than morphine. The author concluded that the controlled-release form is a valid alternative to morphine and a first-line treatment for cancer pain. In 2014, the European Association for Palliative Care recommended oxycodone by mouth as a second-line alternative to morphine by mouth for cancer pain.\nIn children between 11 and 16, the extended-release formulation is FDA-approved for the relief of cancer pain, trauma pain, or pain due to major surgery (for those already treated with opioids, who can tolerate at least 20\u00a0mg per day of oxycodone) \u2013 this provides an alternative to Duragesic (fentanyl), the only other extended-release opioid analgesic approved for children.\nOxycodone, in its extended-release form or in combination with naloxone, is sometimes used off-label in the treatment of severe and refractory restless legs syndrome.\nAvailable forms.\nOxycodone is available in a variety of formulations for by mouth or under the tongue:\nIn the US, oxycodone is only approved for use by mouth, available as tablets and oral solutions. Parenteral formulations of oxycodone (brand name OxyNorm) are also available in other parts of the world, however, and are widely used in the European Union. In Spain, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, oxycodone is approved for intravenous (IV) and intramuscular (IM) use. When first introduced in Germany during World War I, both IV and IM administrations of oxycodone were commonly used for postoperative pain management of Central Powers soldiers.\nSide effects.\nThe most common side effects of oxycodone include delayed gastric emptying, euphoria, anxiolysis (a reduction in anxiety), feelings of relaxation, and respiratory depression. Common side effects of oxycodone include constipation (23%), nausea (23%), vomiting (12%), somnolence (23%), dizziness (13%), itching (13%), dry mouth (6%), and sweating (5%). Less common side effects (experienced by less than 5% of patients) include loss of appetite, nervousness, abdominal pain, diarrhea, urinary retention, dyspnea, and hiccups.\nMost side effects generally become less intense over time, although issues related to constipation are likely to continue for the duration of use. Chronic use of this compound and associated constipation issues can become very serious, and have been implicated in life-threatening bowel perforations. A number of specific medications including naloxegol have been developed to address opioid induced constipation.\nOxycodone in combination with naloxone in managed-release tablets has been formulated to both deter abuse and reduce opioid-induced constipation.\nDependence and withdrawal.\nThe risk of experiencing severe withdrawal symptoms is high if a patient has become physically dependent and discontinues oxycodone abruptly. Medically, when the drug has been taken regularly over an extended period, it is withdrawn gradually rather than abruptly. People who regularly use oxycodone recreationally or at higher than prescribed doses are at even higher risk of severe withdrawal symptoms. The symptoms of oxycodone withdrawal, as with other opioids, may include \"anxiety, panic attack, nausea, insomnia, muscle pain, muscle weakness, fevers, and other flu-like symptoms\".\nWithdrawal symptoms have also been reported in newborns whose mothers had been either injecting or orally taking oxycodone during pregnancy.\nHormone levels.\nAs with other opioids, chronic use of oxycodone (particularly with higher doses) can often cause concurrent hypogonadism (low sex hormone levels).\nOverdose.\nIn high doses, overdoses, or in some persons not tolerant to opioids, oxycodone can cause shallow breathing, slowed heart rate, cold/clammy skin, pauses in breathing, low blood pressure, constricted pupils, circulatory collapse, respiratory arrest, and death.\nIn 2011, it was the leading cause of drug-related deaths in the U.S. However, from 2012 onwards, heroin and fentanyl have become more common causes of drug-related deaths.\nInteractions.\nOxycodone is metabolized by the enzymes CYP3A4 and CYP2D6. Therefore, its clearance can be altered by inhibitors and inducers of these enzymes, increasing and decreasing half-life, respectively. (For lists of CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 inhibitors and inducers, see here and here, respectively.) Natural genetic variation in these enzymes can also influence the clearance of oxycodone, which may be related to the wide inter-individual variability in its half-life and potency.\nRitonavir or lopinavir/ritonavir greatly increase plasma concentrations of oxycodone in healthy human volunteers due to inhibition of CYP3A4 and CYP2D6. Rifampicin greatly reduces plasma concentrations of oxycodone due to strong induction of CYP3A4. There is also a case report of fosphenytoin, a CYP3A4 inducer, dramatically reducing the analgesic effects of oxycodone in a chronic pain patient. Dosage or medication adjustments may be necessary in each case.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nOxycodone, a semi-synthetic opioid, is a highly selective full agonist of the \u03bc-opioid receptor (MOR). This is the main biological target of the endogenous opioid neuropeptide \u03b2-endorphin. Oxycodone has low affinity for the \u03b4-opioid receptor (DOR) and the \u03ba-opioid receptor (KOR), where it is an agonist similarly. After oxycodone binds to the MOR, a G protein-complex is released, which inhibits the release of neurotransmitters by the cell by decreasing the amount of cAMP produced, closing calcium channels, and opening potassium channels. Opioids like oxycodone are thought to produce their analgesic effects via activation of the MOR in the midbrain periaqueductal gray (PAG) and rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM). Conversely, they are thought to produce reward and addiction via activation of the MOR in the mesolimbic reward pathway, including in the ventral tegmental area, nucleus accumbens, and ventral pallidum. Tolerance to the analgesic and rewarding effects of opioids is complex and occurs due to receptor-level tolerance (e.g., MOR downregulation), cellular-level tolerance (e.g., cAMP upregulation), and system-level tolerance (e.g., neural adaptation due to induction of \u0394FosB expression).\nTaken orally, 20\u00a0mg of immediate-release oxycodone is considered to be equivalent in analgesic effect to 30\u00a0mg of morphine, while extended release oxycodone is considered to be twice as potent as oral morphine.\nSimilarly to most other opioids, oxycodone increases prolactin secretion, but its influence on testosterone levels is unknown. Unlike morphine, oxycodone lacks immunosuppressive activity (measured by natural killer cell activity and interleukin 2 production \"in vitro\"); the clinical relevance of this has not been clarified.\nActive metabolites.\nA few of the metabolites of oxycodone have also been found to be active as MOR agonists, some of which notably have much higher affinity for (as well as higher efficacy at) the MOR in comparison. Oxymorphone possesses 3- to 5-fold higher affinity for the MOR than does oxycodone, while noroxycodone and noroxymorphone possess one-third of and 3-fold higher affinity for the MOR, respectively, and MOR activation is 5- to 10-fold less with noroxycodone but 2-fold higher with noroxymorphone relative to oxycodone. Noroxycodone, noroxymorphone, and oxymorphone also have longer biological half-lives than oxycodone.\nHowever, despite the greater \"in vitro\" activity of some of its metabolites, it has been determined that oxycodone itself is responsible for 83.0% and 94.8% of its analgesic effect following oral and intravenous administration, respectively. Oxymorphone plays only a minor role, being responsible for 15.8% and 4.5% of the analgesic effect of oxycodone after oral and intravenous administration, respectively. Although the CYP2D6 genotype and the route of administration result in differential rates of oxymorphone formation, the unchanged parent compound remains the major contributor to the overall analgesic effect of oxycodone. In contrast to oxycodone and oxymorphone, noroxycodone and noroxymorphone, while also potent MOR agonists, poorly cross the blood\u2013brain barrier into the central nervous system, and for this reason are only minimally analgesic in comparison.\n\u03ba-opioid receptor.\nIn 1997, a group of Australian researchers proposed (based on a study in rats) that oxycodone acts on KORs, unlike morphine, which acts upon MORs. Further research by this group indicated the drug appears to be a high-affinity \u03ba2b-opioid receptor agonist. However, this conclusion has been disputed, primarily on the basis that oxycodone produces effects that are typical of MOR agonists. In 2006, research by a Japanese group suggested the effect of oxycodone is mediated by different receptors in different situations. Specifically in diabetic mice, the KOR appears to be involved in the antinociceptive effects of oxycodone, while in nondiabetic mice, the \u03bc1-opioid receptor seems to be primarily responsible for these effects.\nPharmacokinetics.\nInstant-release absorption profiles and Tmax.\nOxycodone can be administered orally, intravenously, via intravenous, intramuscular, or subcutaneous injection. Along with rectal, sublingual, buccal or intranasal drug delivery. The bioavailability of oral administration of oxycodone averages within a range of 60 to 87%, with rectal administration yielding the same results; Intranasal administration of oxycodone has a bioavailability of ~77%, the same half life as oral oxycodone, along with faster Tmax previously reported as 47% for nasal spray administration due to the solution in the study exceeding the 0.3- to 0.4-mL nasal mucosa limit. Buccal bioavailability ~55%, Tmax ~60 min. Sublingual bioavailability 20% (non alkalized) ~55% (alkalized) Tmax ~60 minutes.\nAfter a dose of conventional (immediate-release) oral oxycodone, the onset of action is 10 to 30 minutes, and peak plasma levels of the drug are attained within roughly 30 to 60 minutes; in contrast, after a dose of OxyContin (an oral controlled-release formulation), peak plasma levels of oxycodone occur in about three hours. Mean serum concentration of controlled-release oxycodone peaks at 78 ng/ml at 1 hour and drops to 20 ng/ml at 8 hours and under 10 ng/ml at 12 hours. The duration of instant-release oxycodone is 3 to 6 hours, although this can be variable depending on the individual.\nDistribution.\nOxycodone has a volume of distribution of 2.6L/kg, in the blood it is distributed to skeletal muscle, liver, intestinal tract, lungs, spleen, and brain. At equilibrium the unbound concentration in the brain is threefold higher than the unbound concentration in blood. Conventional oral preparations start to reduce pain within 10 to 15 minutes on an empty stomach; in contrast, OxyContin starts to reduce pain within one hour.\nMetabolism.\nThe metabolism of oxycodone in humans occurs in the liver mainly via the cytochrome P450 system and is extensive (about 95%) and complex, with many minor pathways and resulting metabolites. Around 10% (range 8\u201314%) of a dose of oxycodone is excreted essentially unchanged (unconjugated or conjugated) in the urine. The major metabolites of oxycodone are noroxycodone (70%), noroxymorphone (\"relatively high concentrations\"), and oxymorphone (5%). The immediate metabolism of oxycodone in humans is as follows:\nIn humans, N-demethylation of oxycodone to noroxycodone by CYP3A4 is the major metabolic pathway, accounting for 45% \u00b1 21% of a dose of oxycodone, while O-demethylation of oxycodone into oxymorphone by CYP2D6 and 6-ketoreduction of oxycodone into 6-oxycodols represent relatively minor metabolic pathways, accounting for 11% \u00b1 6% and 8% \u00b1 6% of a dose of oxycodone, respectively.\nSeveral of the immediate metabolites of oxycodone are subsequently conjugated with glucuronic acid and excreted in the urine. 6\u03b1-Oxycodol and 6\u03b2-oxycodol are further metabolized by N-demethylation to nor-6\u03b1-oxycodol and nor-6\u03b2-oxycodol, respectively, and by N-oxidation to 6\u03b1-oxycodol-N-oxide and 6\u03b2-oxycodol-N-oxide (which can subsequently be glucuronidated as well). Oxymorphone is also further metabolized, as follows:\nThe first pathway of the above three accounts for 40% of the metabolism of oxymorphone, making oxymorphone-3-glucuronide the main metabolite of oxymorphone, while the latter two pathways account for less than 10% of the metabolism of oxymorphone. After N-demethylation of oxymorphone, noroxymorphone is further glucuronidated to noroxymorphone-3-glucuronide.\nBecause oxycodone is metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system in the liver, its pharmacokinetics can be influenced by genetic polymorphisms and drug interactions concerning this system, as well as by liver function. Some people are fast metabolizers of oxycodone, while others are slow metabolizers, resulting in polymorphism-dependent alterations in relative analgesia and toxicity. While higher CYP2D6 activity increases the effects of oxycodone (owing to increased conversion into oxymorphone), higher CYP3A4 activity has the opposite effect and decreases the effects of oxycodone (owing to increased metabolism into noroxycodone and noroxymorphone). The dose of oxycodone must be reduced in patients with reduced liver function.\nElimination.\nThe clearance of oxycodone is 0.8\u00a0L/min. Oxycodone and its metabolites are mainly excreted in urine. Therefore, oxycodone accumulates in patients with kidney impairment. Oxycodone is eliminated in the urine 10% as unchanged oxycodone, 45% \u00b1 21% as \"N\"-demethylated metabolites (noroxycodone, noroxymorphone, noroxycodols), 11 \u00b1 6% as \"O\"-demethylated metabolites (oxymorphone, oxymorphols), and 8% \u00b1 6% as 6-keto-reduced metabolites (oxycodols).\nDuration of action.\nOral oxycodone has a half-life of 4.5 hours. The manufacturer of OxyContin (a controlled-release preparation of oxycodone), Purdue Pharma, claimed in its 1992 patent application that the duration of action of OxyContin is 12 hours in \"90% of patients\". Purdue has never performed any clinical studies in which OxyContin was given at more frequent intervals. In a separate filing, Purdue claimed that controlled-release oxycodone \"provides pain relief in said patient for at least 12 hours after administration\". However, in 2016, an investigation by the \"Los Angeles Times\" found that \"the drug wears off hours early in many people\", inducing symptoms of opiate withdrawal and intense cravings for OxyContin. One doctor, Lawrence Robbins, told journalists that over 70% of his patients would report that OxyContin would only provide 4\u20137 hours of relief. Doctors in the 1990s often would switch their patients to a dosing schedule of once every eight hours when patients complained that the duration of action for OxyContin was too short to be taken only twice a day. \nPurdue strongly discouraged the practice: Purdue's medical director Robert Reder wrote to one doctor in 1995 that \"OxyContin has been developed for [12-hour] dosing...I request that you not use a [8-hourly] dosing regimen.\" Purdue repeatedly released memos to its sales representatives ordering them to remind doctors not to deviate from a 12-hour dosing schedule. One such memo read, \"There is no Q8 dosing with OxyContin... [8-hour dosing] needs to be nipped in the bud. NOW!!\" The journalists who covered the investigation argued that Purdue Pharma has insisted on a 12-hour duration of action for nearly all patients, despite evidence to the contrary, to protect the reputation of OxyContin as a 12-hour drug and the willingness of health insurance and managed care companies to cover OxyContin despite its high cost relative to generic opiates such as morphine.\nPurdue sales representatives were instructed to encourage doctors to write prescriptions for larger 12-hour doses instead of more frequent dosing. An August 1996 memo to Purdue sales representatives in Tennessee entitled \"$$$$$$$$$$$$$ It's Bonus Time in the Neighborhood!\" reminded the representatives that their commissions would dramatically increase if they were successful in convincing doctors to prescribe larger doses. \"Los Angeles Times\" journalists argue using interviews from opioid addiction experts that such high doses of OxyContin spaced 12 hours apart create a combination of agony during opiate withdrawal (lower lows) and a schedule of reinforcement that relieves this agony fostering addiction.\nAs of 2024, the prescribing information for OxyContin still specifies a controversial 12-hour dosing schedule - which experts say promotes addiction - as the only option; it also still states, \"there are no well-controlled clinical studies evaluating the safety and efficacy with dosing more frequently than every 12 hours.\"\nChemistry.\nOxycodone's chemical name is derived from codeine. The chemical structures are very similar, differing only in that\nIt is also similar to hydrocodone, differing only in that it has a hydroxyl group at carbon-14.\nBiosynthesis.\nIn terms of biosynthesis, oxycodone has been found naturally in nectar extracts from the orchid family \"Epipactis helleborine\"; together along with another opioid: 3-{2-{3-{3-benzyloxypropyl}-3-indol, 7,8-didehydro- 4,5-epoxy-3,6-d-morphinan.\nThodey \"et al.\", 2014 introduce a microbial compound manufacturing system for compounds including oxycodone. The Thodey platform produces both natural and semisynthetic opioids including this one. This system uses \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" with transgenes from \"Papaver somniferum\" (the opium poppy) and \"Pseudomonas putida\" to turn a thebaine input into other opiates and opioids.\nDetection in biological fluids.\nOxycodone or its major metabolites may be measured in blood or urine to monitor for clearance, non-medical use, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning, or assist in a medicolegal death investigation. Many commercial opiate screening tests cross-react appreciably with oxycodone and its metabolites, but chromatographic techniques can easily distinguish oxycodone from other opiates.\nHistory.\nMartin Freund and (Jakob) Edmund Speyer of the University of Frankfurt in Germany published the first synthesis of oxycodone from thebaine in 1916. When Freund died, in 1920, Speyer wrote his obituary for the German Chemical Society. Speyer, born to a Jewish family in Frankfurt am Main in 1878, became a victim of the Holocaust. He died on 5 May 1942, the second day of deportations from the Lodz Ghetto; his death was noted in the ghetto's chronicle.\nThe first clinical use of the drug was documented in 1917, the year after it was first developed. It was first introduced to the U.S. market in May 1939. In early 1928, Merck introduced a combination product containing scopolamine, oxycodone, and ephedrine under the German initials for the ingredients SEE, which was later renamed Scophedal (SCOpolamine, ePHEDrine, and eukodAL) in 1942. It was last manufactured in 1987 but can be compounded. This combination is essentially an oxycodone analogue of the morphine-based \"twilight sleep\", with ephedrine added to reduce circulatory and respiratory effects. The drug became known as the \"Miracle Drug of the 1930s\" in Continental Europe and elsewhere and it was the Wehrmacht's choice for a battlefield analgesic for a time. The drug was expressly designed to provide what the patent application and package insert referred to as \"very deep analgesia and profound and intense euphoria\" as well as tranquillisation and anterograde amnesia useful for surgery and battlefield wounding cases. Oxycodone was allegedly chosen over other common opiates for this product because it had been shown to produce less sedation at equianalgesic doses compared to morphine, hydromorphone (Dilaudid), and hydrocodone (Dicodid).\nDuring Operation Himmler, Skophedal was also reportedly injected in massive overdose into the prisoners dressed in Polish Army uniforms in the staged incident on 1 September 1939 which opened the Second World War.\nThe personal notes of Adolf Hitler's physician, Theodor Morell, indicate Hitler received repeated injections of \"Eukodal\" (oxycodone; produced by Merck) and Scophedal, as well as Dolantin (pethidine), codeine, and morphine less frequently; oxycodone could not be obtained after late January 1945.\nIn the United States, the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) was passed by the United States Congress and signed into law by President Richard Nixon on 27 October 1970. The passing of the CSA resulted in all products containing oxycodone being classified as a Schedule II controlled substance.\nIn the early 1990s, Purdue Pharma, a privately held company based in Stamford, Connecticut, developed a controlled-release version of oxycodone: the prescription painkiller OxyContin (\"contin\" being short for \"continuous\", reflecting a longer duration of pain relief). It was approved by the FDA in 1995 after no long-term studies and no assessment of its addictive capabilities. David Kessler, the FDA commissioner at the time, later said of the approval of OxyContin: \"No doubt it was a mistake. It was certainly one of the worst medical mistakes, a major mistake.\" Upon its release in 1995, OxyContin was hailed as a medical breakthrough, a long-lasting narcotic that could help patients with moderate to severe pain. The drug became a blockbuster and has reportedly generated some US$35 billion in revenue for Purdue.\nSociety and culture.\nOpioid epidemic.\nOxycodone, like other opioid analgesics, tends to induce feelings of euphoria, relaxation, and reduced anxiety in those who are occasional users. The abuse of Oxycodone, as well as related opioids more broadly, is not unique to the United States and it is a common drug of abuse globally. \nUnited States.\nOxycodone is the most widely recreationally used opioid in America. In the United States, more than 12 million people use opioid drugs recreationally. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services estimates that about 11 million people in the U.S. consume oxycodone in a non-medical way annually.\nOpioids were responsible for 49,000 of the 72,000 drug overdose deaths in the U.S. in 2017. In 2007, about 42,800 emergency room visits occurred due to \"episodes\" involving oxycodone. In 2008, recreational use of oxycodone and hydrocodone was involved in 14,800 deaths. Some of the cases were due to overdoses of the acetaminophen component, resulting in fatal liver damage.\nIn September 2013, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) released updated labeling guidelines for long-acting and extended-release opioids requiring manufacturers to remove moderate pain as an indication for use, instead stating the drug is for \"pain severe enough to require daily, around-the-clock, long term opioid treatment\". The updated labeling does not restrict physicians from prescribing opioids for moderate pain, as needed.\nReformulated OxyContin is causing some recreational users to change to heroin, which is cheaper and easier to obtain.\nLawsuits.\nIn October 2017, \"The New Yorker\" published a story on Mortimer Sackler and Purdue Pharma regarding their ties to the production and manipulation of the oxycodone markets. The article links Raymond and Arthur Sackler's business practices with the rise of direct pharmaceutical marketing and eventually to the rise of addiction to oxycodone in the United States. The article implies that the Sackler family bears some responsibility for the opioid epidemic in the United States. In 2019, \"The New York Times\" ran a piece confirming that Richard Sackler, the son of Raymond Sackler, told company officials in 2008 to \"measure our performance by Rx's by strength, giving higher measures to higher strengths\". This was verified with documents tied to a lawsuit \u2013 which was filed by the Massachusetts attorney general, Maura Healey \u2013 claiming that Purdue Pharma and members of the Sackler family knew that high doses of OxyContin over long periods would increase the risk of serious side effects, including addiction. Despite Purdue Pharma's proposal for a US$12 billion settlement of the lawsuit, the attorneys general of 23 states, including Massachusetts, rejected the settlement offer in September 2019.\nAustralia.\nThe non-medical use of oxycodone existed since the early 1970s, but by 2015, 91% of a national sample of injecting drug users in Australia had reported using oxycodone, and 27% had injected it in the last six months.\nCanada.\nOpioid-related deaths in Ontario had increased by 242% from 1969 to 2014. By 2009 in Ontario there were more deaths from oxycodone overdoses than from cocaine overdoses. Deaths from opioid pain relievers had increased from 13.7 deaths per million residents in 1991 to 27.2 deaths per million residents in 2004. The non-medical use of oxycodone in Canada became a problem. Areas where oxycodone is most problematic are Atlantic Canada and Ontario, where its non-medical use is prevalent in rural towns and in many smaller to medium-sized cities. Oxycodone is also widely available across Western Canada, but methamphetamine and heroin are more serious problems in larger cities, while oxycodone is more common in rural towns. Oxycodone is diverted through doctor shopping, prescription forgery, pharmacy theft, and overprescription.\nThe recent formulations of oxycodone, particularly Purdue Pharma's crush-, chew-, injection- and dissolve-resistant OxyNEO which replaced the banned OxyContin product in Canada in early 2012, have led to a decline in the recreational use of this opiate but have increased the recreational use of the more potent drug fentanyl. According to a Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse study quoted in Maclean's magazine, there were at least 655 fentanyl-related deaths in Canada in five years.\nIn Alberta, the Blood Tribe police claimed that from the fall of 2014 through January 2015, oxycodone pills or a lethal fake variation referred to as Oxy 80s containing fentanyl made in illegal labs by members of organized crime were responsible for ten deaths on the Blood Reserve, which is located southwest of Lethbridge, Alberta. Province-wide, approximately 120 Albertans died from fentanyl-related overdoses in 2014.\nUnited Kingdom.\nPrescriptions of Oxycodone rose in Scotland by 430% between 2002 and 2008, prompting fears of usage problems that would mirror those of the United States. The first known death due to overdose in the UK occurred in 2002.\nPreventive measures.\nIn August 2010, Purdue Pharma reformulated their long-acting oxycodone line, marketed as OxyContin, using a polymer, Intac, to make the pills more difficult to crush or dissolve in water to reduce non-medical use of OxyContin. Inactive ingredients/excipients are butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), hypromellose, polyethylene glycol 400, polyethylene oxide, magnesium stearate, and titanium dioxide. The FDA approved relabeling the reformulated version as abuse-resistant in April 2013.\nPfizer manufactures a preparation of short-acting oxycodone, marketed as Oxecta, which contains inactive ingredients, referred to as tamper-resistant Aversion Technology. Approved by the FDA in the U.S. in June 2011, the new formulation, while not being able to deter oral recreational use, makes crushing, chewing, snorting, or injecting the opioid impractical because of a change in its chemical properties.\nLegal status.\nOxycodone is subject to international conventions on narcotic drugs. In addition, oxycodone is subject to national laws that differ by country. The 1931 Convention for Limiting the Manufacture and Regulating the Distribution of Narcotic Drugs of the League of Nations included oxycodone. The 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of the United Nations, which replaced the 1931 convention, categorized oxycodone in Schedule I. Global restrictions on Schedule I drugs include \"limit[ing] exclusively to medical and scientific purposes the production, manufacture, export, import, distribution of, trade in, use and possession of\" these drugs; \"requir[ing] medical prescriptions for the supply or dispensation of [these] drugs to individuals\"; and \"prevent[ing] the accumulation\" of quantities of these drugs \"in excess of those required for the normal conduct of business\".\nAustralia.\nOxycodone is in Schedule I (derived from the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs) of the Commonwealth's Narcotic Drugs Act 1967. In addition, it is in Schedule 8 of the Australian Standard for the Uniform Scheduling of Drugs and Poisons (\"Poisons Standard\"), meaning it is a \"controlled drug... which should be available for use but require[s] restriction of manufacture, supply, distribution, possession and use to reduce abuse, misuse and physical or psychological dependence\".\nCanada.\nOxycodone is a controlled substance under Schedule I of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA).\nIn February 2012, Ontario passed legislation to allow the expansion of an already existing drug-tracking system for publicly funded drugs to include those that are privately insured. This database will function to identify and monitor patient's attempts to seek prescriptions from multiple doctors or retrieve them from multiple pharmacies. Other provinces have proposed similar legislation, while some, such as Nova Scotia, have legislation already in effect for monitoring prescription drug use. These changes have coincided with other changes in Ontario's legislation to target the misuse of painkillers and high addiction rates to drugs such as oxycodone. As of 29 February 2012, Ontario passed legislation delisting oxycodone from the province's public drug benefit program. This was a first for any province to delist a drug based on addictive properties. The new law prohibits prescriptions for OxyNeo except to certain patients under the Exceptional Access Program including palliative care and in other extenuating circumstances. Patients already prescribed oxycodone will receive coverage for an additional year for OxyNeo, and after that, it will be disallowed unless designated under the exceptional access program.\nMuch of the legislative activity has stemmed from Purdue Pharma's decision in 2011 to begin a modification of OxyContin's composition to make it more difficult to crush for snorting or injecting. The new formulation, OxyNeo, is intended to be preventive in this regard and retain its effectiveness as a painkiller. Since introducing its \"Narcotics Safety and Awareness Act\", Ontario has committed to focusing on drug addiction, particularly in the monitoring and identification of problem opioid prescriptions, as well as the education of patients, doctors, and pharmacists. This Act, introduced in 2010, commits to the establishment of a unified database to fulfil this intention. Both the public and medical community have received the legislation positively, though concerns about the ramifications of legal changes have been expressed. Because laws are largely provincially regulated, many speculate a national strategy is needed to prevent smuggling across provincial borders from jurisdictions with looser restrictions.\nIn 2015, Purdue Pharma's abuse-resistant OxyNEO and six generic versions of OxyContin had been on the Canada-wide approved list for prescriptions since 2012. In June 2015, then-federal Minister of Health Rona Ambrose announced that within three years, all oxycodone products sold in Canada would need to be tamper-resistant. Some experts warned that the generic product manufacturers may not have the technology to achieve that goal, possibly giving Purdue Pharma a monopoly on this opiate.\nSeveral class-action suits across Canada have been launched against the Purdue group of companies and affiliates. Claimants argue the pharmaceutical manufacturers did not meet a standard of care and were negligent in doing so. These lawsuits reference earlier judgments in the United States, which held that Purdue was liable for wrongful marketing practices and misbranding. Since 2007, the Purdue companies have paid over CAN$650 million in settling litigation or facing criminal fines.\nGermany.\nThe drug is in Appendix III of the Narcotics Act (\"Bet\u00e4ubungsmittelgesetz\" or BtMG). The law allows only physicians, dentists, and veterinarians to prescribe oxycodone and the federal government to regulate the prescriptions (e.g., by requiring reporting).\nHong Kong.\nOxycodone is regulated under Part I of Schedule 1 of Hong Kong's Chapter 134 Dangerous Drugs Ordinance.\nJapan.\nOxycodone is a restricted drug in Japan. Its import and export are strictly restricted to specially designated organizations having a prior permit to import it. In a high-profile case an American who was a top Toyota executive living in Tokyo, who claimed to be unaware of the law, was arrested for importing oxycodone into Japan.\nSingapore.\nOxycodone is listed as a Class A drug in the Misuse of Drugs Act of Singapore, which means offences concerning the drug attract the most severe level of punishment. A conviction for unauthorized manufacture of the drug attracts a minimum sentence of 10 years of imprisonment and corporal punishment of 5 strokes of the cane, and a maximum sentence of life imprisonment or 30 years of imprisonment and 15 strokes of the cane. The minimum and maximum penalties for unauthorized trafficking in the drug are respectively 5 years of imprisonment and 5 strokes of the cane, and 20 years of imprisonment and 15 strokes of the cane.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOxycodone is a Class A drug under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. For Class A drugs, which are \"considered to be the most likely to cause harm\", possession without a prescription is punishable by up to seven years in prison, an unlimited fine, or both. Dealing of the drug illegally is punishable by up to life imprisonment, an unlimited fine, or both. Oxycodone is a Schedule 2 drug under the Misuse of Drugs Regulations 2001 which \"provide certain exemptions from the provisions of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971\".\nUnited States.\nUnder the Controlled Substances Act, oxycodone is a Schedule II controlled substance whether by itself or part of a multi-ingredient medication. The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) lists oxycodone both for sale and for use in manufacturing other opioids as ACSCN 9143 and in 2013 approved the following annual aggregate manufacturing quotas: 131.5 metric tons for sale, down from 153.75 in 2012, and 10.25 metric tons for conversion, unchanged from the previous year. In 2020, oxycodone possession was decriminalized in the U.S. state of Oregon.\nEconomics.\nThe International Narcotics Control Board estimated of oxycodone were manufactured worldwide in 1998; by 2007 this figure had grown to . United States accounted for 82% of consumption in 2007 at . Canada, Germany, Australia, and France combined accounted for 13% of consumption in 2007. In 2010, of oxycodone were illegally manufactured using a fake pill imprint. This accounted for 0.8% of consumption. These illicit tablets were later seized by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, according to the International Narcotics Control Board. The board also reported manufactured in 2010. This number had decreased from a record high of in 2009.\nNames.\nExpanded expressions for the compound oxycodone in the academic literature include \"dihydrohydroxycodeinone\", \"Eucodal\", \"Eukodal\", \"14-hydroxydihydrocodeinone\", and \"Nucodan\". In a UNESCO convention, the translations of \"oxycodone\" are \"oxycodon\" (Dutch), \"oxycodone\" (French), \"oxicodona\" (Spanish), \u0627\u0644\u0623\u0648\u0643\u0633\u064a\u0643\u0648\u062f\u0648\u0646\u200e (Arabic), \u7f9f\u8003\u916e (Chinese), and \u043e\u043a\u0441\u0438\u043a\u043e\u0434\u043e\u043d (Russian).\nThe word \"oxycodone\" should not be confused with \"oxandrolone\", \"oxazepam\", \"oxybutynin\", \"oxytocin\", or \"Roxanol\".\nOther brand names include Longtec and Shortec.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22800", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22800", "title": "Occidental College", "text": "Private liberal arts college in Los Angeles, California\nOccidental College (informally Oxy) is a private liberal arts college in Los Angeles, California, United States. Founded in 1887 as a coeducational college by clergy and members of the Presbyterian Church, it became non-sectarian in 1910. It is one of the oldest liberal arts colleges on the West Coast of the United States.\nOccidental's current campus is located in Eagle Rock, Los Angeles, and was designed by architect Myron Hunt. Due to its proximity to Hollywood and its architecture, the campus is frequently used as a filming location for film and television productions. Occidental is a founding member of the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference and its 20 varsity sports teams compete in NCAA Division III. The college's curriculum emphasizes diversity, global literacy, and civic engagement.\nNotable alumni include President Barack Obama, a Cabinet member, several members of the United States Congress, CEOs of notable companies, 10 Rhodes Scholars, and recipients of the Pulitzer Prize, Academy Award, BAFTA Award, Tony Award and Emmy Award.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nOccidental College was founded on April 20, 1887, by a group of Presbyterian clergy, missionaries, and laymen, including James George Bell, Lyman Stewart, and Thomas Bard. The cornerstone of the school's first building was laid in September 1887 in the Boyle Heights now East Los Angeles neighborhood of Los Angeles. The college's first term began a year later with 27 male and 13 female students, and tuition of $50 a year.\nIn 1896, the Boyle Heights building was destroyed by fire. The college temporarily relocated to the old St. Vincent's College campus on Hill Street before a new site was selected in Highland Park in 1898. Eventually, the college erected three main buildings: the Academy Building, the Stimson Library, and the Hall of Arts and Letters (the Hall still stands today, converted to apartments). The Highland Park site was also bisected by the tracks of the Santa Fe Railroad, and was the site of two presidential visits, first by William Howard Taft in 1909 and subsequently by Theodore Roosevelt in 1911.\nIn 1909, the Pomona College Board of Trustees suggested a merger between Pomona and Occidental, but the proposal came to nothing. The following year, the college severed formal ties with the Presbyterian Church and became a non-sectarian, non-denominational institution. The small size of the campus and the disruption caused by frequent freight trains pushed the college's trustees to find a new location.\n1900s.\nIn 1912, the school began construction of a new campus located in Los Angeles' Eagle Rock neighborhood. The Eagle Rock campus was designed by noted California architect Myron Hunt, also known as the planner of the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) campus and as designer of the Huntington Library and Art Gallery and the Rose Bowl. That same year, Occidental President John Willis Baer announced the trustees' decision to convert Occidental College into an all-men's institution. The plans were met with widespread backlash from students and faculty who protested the change. The community outcry garnered national headlines and the board later dropped the proposal.\nTwo weeks after Booker T. Washington came to visit Occidental, on March 27, 1914, Swan, Fowler, and Johnson Halls were dedicated at its new Eagle Rock campus. Patterson Field, today one of the oldest collegiate sports stadiums in Los Angeles, was opened in 1916. In April 1917, shortly after the United States entered World War I, the college formed a Students Army Training Corps to aid the war effort.\nUnder Occidental President Remsen Bird, the school opened a series of new Hunt-designed buildings, including Clapp Library (1924), Hillside Theatre and a women's dormitory (Orr Hall) in 1925, Alumni Gymnasium (1926), the Freeman Student Union (1928) and a music and speech building (1929). The Delta of California chapter of Phi Beta Kappa was established at Occidental in 1926, at a time when the only other chapters in California were at Stanford, UC Berkeley, and Pomona.\nEnglish novelist Aldous Huxley, who had spoken at Occidental's convocation ceremony in the then-new Thorne Hall in 1938, lampooned President Remsen Bird as Dr. Herbert Mulge of Tarzana College in his 1939 novel, \"After Many a Summer Dies the Swan\". Huxley was never again invited back to campus.\nDuring World War II, many students left Occidental to fight in the war. In July 1943, the U.S. Navy established a Navy V-12 officer training program on campus that produced hundreds of graduates before it was disbanded in 1945 at the end of the war. Occidental President Remsen Bird worked behind the scenes to help Oxy students of Japanese descent continue their education despite mandatory evacuation orders; his letters are included in the Japanese American Relocation Collection in Clapp Library.\nAfter having its first Rhodes Scholar, Clarence Spaulding, named in 1908, Oxy seniors John Paden and Aaron Segal were awarded Rhodes Scholarships in 1958, the only time Occidental has produced two Rhodes Scholars in a single year. Paden and Segal were among the ten Occidental students who participated in Crossroads Africa that year, a forerunner to the Peace Corps that later became a national program.\nIn 1969, 42 students were suspended for peacefully protesting military recruiting on campus. One year later, faculty voted to suspend classes in the wake of the Kent State shootings and America's invasion of Cambodia. Subsequently, Oxy students wrote 7,000 letters to Washington D.C., protesting U.S. involvement in the war in Southeast Asia. Occidental launched one of the country's first Upward Bound programs in 1966, aimed at increasing the number of low-income, underrepresented high school students who become the first in their family to go to college.\nAlso in 1969, the school opened its first two co-ed dormitories, and two more followed a year later. In 1988, John Brooks Slaughter, formerly Chancellor of the University of Maryland, became Occidental's first black president. Building on faculty and student advocacy and a series of grants the college had received previously to increase the diversity of the Occidental student body, Slaughter led the process of creating a new mission statement that is still used today. Also, Slaughter led the college's community outreach expansion with the creation of the Center for Volunteerism and Community Service, the predecessor for the current Center for Community Based Learning.\nIn November 1990, the college rededicated the campus' main chapel as the Herrick Memorial Chapel and Interfaith Center. The school also took down the crosses in the chapel in an attempt to \"broaden Occidental's appeal among non-Christian students.\"\n2000s.\nIn July 2006, Susan Westerberg Prager became Occidental's first female president. She left her position in 2007. Robert Skotheim served as interim president. In July 2009, Jonathan Veitch became Occidental's 15th president, and the first native Angeleno president.\nThe college received national scrutiny in 2014 when the U.S. Department of Education named Occidental College as one of 55 higher education institutions under investigation \"for possible violations of federal law over the handling of sexual violence and harassment.\" In response to student and faculty outcry the college adopted a new interim sexual misconduct policy, hired a former assistant district attorney as a full-time, independent Title IX coordinator, and added a new 24-hour, 7-days-a-week telephone hotline. The school also created a permanent Sexual Misconduct Advisory Board made up of students, faculty, and staff. Two years later, the investigation was concluded with the Office of Civil Rights finding that \"the preponderance of the evidence does not support a conclusion that the College violated Title IX, except with respect to the issue of promptness in several cases during the 2012-13 school years.\"\nPresident Barack Obama attended Occidental for two years prior to transferring to Columbia University. In 2015, \"birthers\" falsely claimed that Obama's Occidental College transcript revealed he received financial aid as a foreign student from Indonesia after the resurgence of a fake news story from 2009.\nIn July 2020, Harry J. Elam Jr., formerly vice provost for undergraduate education and Drama professor at Stanford University, became Occidental's 16th president. In August 2023, it was announced that he will retire in 2024 for health-related reasons. On March 26, 2024, it was announced that Tom Stritikus, late of Fort Lewis College, will become Occidental's president effective July 1.\nCampus.\nArchitect Myron Hunt created the original campus master plan for Occidental's Eagle Rock campus in 1911. He structured the campus in a Mediterranean style, with covered walkways and tile roofs. The campus landscape was designed and developed by Beatrix Farrand in the late 1930s. All of the 19 buildings designed by Hunt remain in use today.\nThe campus is noted for the outdoor Remsen Bird Amphitheater, where between 1960 and 1996 plays and musicals were performed in the summer. Financial cutbacks caused the theater department to end the summer festival programs. Since 1996 the Occidental Children's Theater has performed there each summer.\nOccidental College was ranked as the sixth \"Most Beautiful\" campus by \"Newsweek\" in 2012. The campus is home to a 1-megawatt ground-mounted solar array, which is the largest hillside array on an American college campus and the largest of its kind in Los Angeles. The 4,886-panel installation was completed in Spring 2013 and inaugurated on the school's 126-year anniversary.\nAcademics.\nThere are more than 40 majors offered on campus (and nine minor-only programs, including Public Health, Linguistics, and Classical Studies) and a 9:1 student\u2013faculty ratio. The average class size is 18 students and most students take four classes per semester. the most popular majors, based on 2021 graduates, were Econometrics &amp; Quantitative Economics (46), Psychology (38), Biology/Biological Sciences (37), Political Science &amp; Government (34), Environmental Studies (31), International Relations and Affairs (31).\nRankings.\nSince 1908, Occidental has graduated ten Rhodes Scholars. In \"U.S. News &amp; World Report's\" 2025 rankings of American liberal arts colleges, Occidental was tied for 34th overall, tied for 18th in \"Top Performers in Social Mobility,\" 71st for \"Best Value,\" and tied at 102nd for \"Economics.\" The 2017 edition of the \"Fiske Guide to Colleges\" gave Occidental four-star ratings (out of five) in academics and quality of life. Princeton Review's \"The Best 381 Colleges\" 2017 Edition gave Occidental ratings of 91 (out of 100) in academics and quality of life and 95 in financial aid. In \"Forbes\"' 2019 ranking of America's Top Colleges, Occidental ranks 102nd out of 650 liberal arts colleges, universities and service academies. \"Kiplinger's\" \"Best College Values 2019\" rankings places Occidental 58th among 149 liberal arts colleges.\nAdmissions.\nFall admission statistics\n\"U.S. News\" deemed Occidental's admissions \"more selective,\" with the class of 2020 acceptance rate being 37.3%. Of those admitted submitting such data, 52% were in the top 10% of their high school class. The SAT 25th\u201375th percentile scores were 1810\u20132120. Of those admitted to the class of 2020, 50% identified as persons of color, and 13% of those admitted were international students.\nIn 2023, it was announced by President Harry Elam that Occidental eliminated legacy preferences to the children of alumni in admissions.\nStudent life.\nAt the beginning of every school year, freshmen participate in convocation, a formal ceremony welcoming new students to the college in which the faculty wear their full academic regalia and students don robes. Founders Day is celebrated annually at the school on April 20, the day in 1887 when Occidental's incorporation papers were officially signed by the California Secretary of State.\nThere are also themed-living communities which consist of the Multicultural Hall in Pauley (open to all years), all-women housing (Berkus House, named after alumnus Dave Berkus), Food Justice house, and several communities that support and uplift the experiences of students of color and LGBTQIA students.\nMedia.\nThe campus newspaper is \"The Occidental\", an independent, student-run publication. It has been published continuously since 1893.\nKOXY is a student-run campus radio station, in operation in the 1960s and 1970s, and again since 2000. It originally operated on the frequency 104.7 in and around campus from 1968 to 2009, but switched to only being available by webstream in 2009. KOXY sponsors several on-campus events.\nIn 2010, students launched a TV station called CatAList; The station produces 20\u201330 minutes of student-run content weekly.\nGreek life.\nOccidental College's Greek Council consists of roughly eight members, both sororites and fraternities.\nAthletics.\nOccidental is one of the five schools that founded the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC) in 1915 and is currently a member of the SCIAC and NCAA Division III. Occidental features 21 varsity sports teams and a program of club sports and intramural competition. Approximately 25 percent of the student body participates in a varsity sports program.\nDuring the 2006\u20132007 athletic season, the Tigers cross country, American football and basketball teams were Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference champions. In 2014, diver Jessica Robson set the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference records for both 1m and 3m diving. The school's Blackshirts Rugby union team was also league champion for the first time in five years. In 2011, Jeremy Castro ('99) and Patrick Guthrie ('86) steered the squad to a NSCRO final, falling to Longwood University 36\u201327 in Virginia Beach, Virginia. In addition the college has a dance team that also performs at every home football and basketball game.\nOccidental athletics date back to 1894, when the college helped organize the first intercollegiate athletic competition in Southern California. Since then, Oxy has produced more than a dozen Olympians, world-record holders, and national champions, including 1935 national girls' tennis champion Pat Henry Yeomans '38, two-time diving gold medalist Sammy Lee '43, and pole vault silver medalist Bob Gutowski '57.\nOccidental has long-standing football rivalries with Pomona College and Whittier College; the Tigers have played both the Sagehens and the Poets over 100 times. In 1982, the Occidental College football team had the rare opportunity for national prominence when, due to the 1982 National Football League strike, their game with San Diego was broadcast on national television. In 2017, Occidental cancelled the remainder of its football season due to lack of healthy players, as few as 30 in some cases. The team forfeited two games and was outscored in the other three 170\u201319. The Tigers played nine games in 2019, finishing with a 1\u20138 record. It was the final season for the Tigers football team. The school dropped football in 2020.\nIn 2011, Occidental College lost a basketball game to Caltech with a score of 46 to 45 giving the Caltech Beavers their first conference win in 26 years and putting an end to their 310-game losing streak.\nIn 2019, the Occidental Men's Basketball Team reached the SCIAC championship game, ultimately losing to Pomona Pitzer in the Tournament Championship game.\nFamous Occidental College Tigers include NFL coach Jim E. Mora, former American Football League Most Valuable Player and politician Jack Kemp, former NFL player Vance Mueller, 2011 U.S. Senior Open Champion Olin Browne, CFL Quarterback Bryan James Scott (Toronto Argonauts) and CFL player Justin Goltz (Winnipeg Blue Bombers).\nNotable people.\nNotable graduates of Occidental College include filmmaker Terry Gilliam, football player and politician Jack Kemp, pioneering African-American physicist and inventor George Edward Alcorn Jr., former New Orleans Saints and Indianapolis Colts head coach Jim E. Mora, co-inventor of the hard disk drive William Goddard, psychopharmacologist and professor at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine Roland Griffiths, federal judge Jacqueline Nguyen, academic, film executive and novelist August Coppola, historian and chancellor of the California State University system Glenn Dumke, former Lieutenant Governor of California Robert Finch, adventurer and writer Homer Lea, poet Robinson Jeffers, librarian and writer Lawrence Clark Powell, entertainment journalist Sam Rubin, Tony Award-winning actress Joanna Gleason, civil rights activist Ernesto Galarza, television director Jesus Salvador Trevino, voice actress and internet personality Ashly Burch, entertainment executive John Branca, political scientist Eqbal Ahmad, journalist and current dean of Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism Steve Coll, actor and writer George Nader, veteran executive at Walt Disney Imagineering Joe Rohde, former CEO of Warner Music Group Stephen Cooper, President of Catholic University of America Peter Kilpatrick, Ambassador to Armenia and former charg\u00e9 d'affaires to Ukraine during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine Kristina Kvien, Dartmouth Professor Steve Swayne, and civil rights activist and initiator of \"We Shall Overcome\" Guy Carawan.\nNotable alumni who did not graduate from Occidental include the 44th U.S. President Barack Obama, former First Lady of Colorado Dottie Lamm, Academy Award\u2013winning actor and filmmaker Ben Affleck, actor Luke Wilson, actor Nicholas Braun, filmmaker and actor Cooper Raiff, producer Todd Garner, and actress Emily Osment.\nNotable faculty members include the American urban policy analyst Peter Dreier, former U.S. Ambassador to Finland Derek Shearer, former CNN and Fox News contributor Caroline Heldman, chemist Frank L. Lambert, art historian and author Amy Lyford, and the 2005 PEN American Center Literary Award winner in poetry Martha Ronk.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22801", "revid": "46739423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22801", "title": "1986 United States bombing of Libya", "text": "US April 1986 military operation in Libya\nThe United States Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps carried out air strikes, code-named Operation El Dorado Canyon, against Libya on 15 April 1986 in retaliation for the West Berlin discotheque bombing ten days earlier, which U.S. president Ronald Reagan blamed on Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi. There were 40 reported Libyan casualties; one U.S. plane was shot down. One of the claimed Libyan deaths was of a baby girl, reported to be Gaddafi's daughter, Hana Gaddafi. However, there are doubts both as to whether she was really killed, or even if she truly existed.\nOrigins.\nLibya represented a high priority for President Ronald Reagan shortly after his 1981 inauguration. Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi was firmly anti-Israel and had supported Resistance organizations in the Palestinian territories and Syria. There were reports that Libya was attempting to become a nuclear power and Gaddafi's occupation of Chad, which was rich in uranium, was of major concern to the United States. Gaddafi's ambitions to set up a federation of Arab and Muslim states in North Africa were alarming to U.S. interests. Furthermore, then-U.S. Secretary of State Alexander Haig wanted to take proactive measures against Gaddafi because he had been using former Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) operatives (most notably Edwin P. Wilson and Frank E. Terpil) to help set up terrorist camps.\nAfter the December 1985 Rome and Vienna airport attacks, which killed 19 and wounded approximately 140, Gaddafi indicated that he would continue to support the Red Army Faction, the Red Brigades, and the Irish Republican Army as long as the European governments allegedly \u201csupported anti-Gaddafi Libyans.\u201d\nAfter years of occasional skirmishes with Libya over Libyan territorial claims to the Gulf of Sidra, the United States contemplated a military attack to strike targets within the Libyan mainland. In March 1986, the United States, asserting the limit to territorial waters according to international law, sent a carrier task force to the region. Libya responded with aggressive counter-maneuvers on 24 March that led to a naval engagement in the Gulf of Sidra.\nOn 5 April 1986, alleged Libyan agents bombed \"La Belle\" nightclub in West Berlin, killing three people, including two U.S. servicemen and a Turkish woman, and injuring 229 people, including 79 Americans. West Germany and the United States obtained cable transcripts from Libyan agents in East Germany who were involved in the attack.\nMore detailed information was retrieved years later when Stasi archives were investigated by the reunited Germany. Libyan agents who had carried out the operation from the Libyan embassy in East Germany were identified and prosecuted by Germany in the 1990s.\nPreparations.\nThe attack mission against Libya had been preceded in October 1985 by an exercise in which the 20th TFW stationed at RAF Upper Heyford airbase in the UK, which was equipped with F-111E Aardvarks, received a top-secret order to launch a simulated attack mission on 18 October, with ten F-111Es armed with eight 500-lb practice bombs, against a simulated airfield located in Labrador, Canada south of CFB Goose Bay. The mission was designated Operation Ghost Rider. The mission was a full rehearsal for a long-range strike against Libya. The mission was completed successfully, with the exception of one aircraft that had all but one of its eight bombs hang up on one of its wing racks. The lessons learned were passed on to the 48th TFW which was equipped with the newer F-111F model.\nIn August 1985 six specially trained B-52H crews of the 23rd Bombardment Squadron in Minot, North Dakota, were designated as the Advanced Conventional Taskforce (ACT) and trained at specialized low-level conventional bombing missions, including the first ever use of Night Vision Goggles by B-52 crews. The specially trained crews were capable of delivering 6 strings of MK-117 munitions seconds apart with pinpoint accuracy operating from North Dakota. In six months of intensive training the special mission unit dropped more live ordnance in the Nevada and Utah test ranges than had been expended since the conclusion of the Vietnam War. The B-52 provided a powerful alternative or follow-on option, however, as the backbone of the U.S. nuclear deterrent there was some risk to using the B-52 option against an SA-6 defended target.\nElements of the then-secret 4450th Tactical Group (USAF) were put on standby to fly the strike mission against Libya. Over 30 F-117 Nighthawk stealth attack aircraft had already been delivered to Tactical Air Command (USAF) and were operating from Tonopah Test Range Airport in Nevada. European Command senior officers knew nothing about the stealth capabilities of the F-117, or that the aircraft even existed. Within an hour of the planned launch of the F-117s, Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger scrubbed the stealth mission, fearing a compromise of the secret aircraft and its development program. The air strike was carried out with conventional U.S. Navy and USAF aircraft. The F-117 would remain completely unknown to the world for several more months, before being unveiled in 1988 and featured prominently in media coverage of Operation Desert Storm.\nFor the Libyan raid, the United States was denied overflight rights by France, Spain, and Italy as well as the use of European continental bases, forcing the USAF portion of the operation to be flown around France and Spain, over Portugal and through the Straits of Gibraltar, adding 1,300 miles (2,100\u00a0km) each way and requiring multiple aerial refuelings. The French refusal alone added 2,800\u00a0km. French President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand refused overflight clearance because the United States was interested in limited action in Libya while France was more interested in action that would remove Gaddafi from power. Another factor in the French decision was the United States' last-minute failure to participate in a retaliatory air raid on Iranian positions after the 1983 Beirut barracks bombings.\nTargets.\nAfter several unproductive days of meetings with European and Arab nations, and influenced by an American serviceman's death, on 14 April Ronald Reagan ordered an air raid on the following Libyan targets:\nStrike force.\nAmong operational United States tactical aircraft, only the General Dynamics F-111 and the A-6 Intruder possessed the ability to attack at night with the required precision. Although the F-111s would be required to fly from distant bases, they were essential to mission success, because the eighteen A-6s available aboard and could not carry enough bombs to simultaneously inflict the desired damage on the five targets selected.\nUnited States Air Force.\nTwenty-eight McDonnell Douglas KC-10 Extenders and Boeing KC-135 Stratotankers took off from RAF Mildenhall and RAF Fairford shortly after 19:00 on 14 April. These tankers would conduct four silent refueling operations over the round-trip route the F-111s would fly to target. Within minutes the tankers were followed by twenty-four F-111F strike aircraft of the 48th Tactical Fighter Wing, flying from RAF Lakenheath and five EF-111A Ravens of the 20th Tactical Fighter Wing from RAF Upper Heyford. Six F-111s and one EF-111 were designated spares who returned to base after the first refueling was completed without any system failures among the designated strike aircraft. One F-111F had a flameout of one engine upon take off and was ordered back to base.\nNATO E3 A\u2019s flying out of Tripani airbase in Italy, supported many of these aircraft\nUnited States Navy.\n\"America\" was on station in the Gulf of Sidra, but \"Coral Sea\" was preparing to leave the Mediterranean, and made a high speed run from Naples through the Strait of Messina. \"America's\" air group would strike targets in downtown Benghazi and provide fighter and suppression support for the USAF bombers, while \"Coral Sea's\" planes would strike the Benina airfield outside Benghazi and provide fighter and suppression support for the Navy bombers. About 01:00 \"America\" launched six A-6E TRAM Intruder strike aircraft with Mark 82 bombs against the Jamahiriyah Guard barracks and six A-7 Corsair II strike support aircraft. \"Coral Sea\", operating east of \"America\" simultaneously launched eight A-6E TRAM Intruders and six F/A-18A Hornets. Additional fighters were launched for combat air patrol (CAP).\nThe raid.\nThe raid began in the early hours of 15 April, with the stated objectives of sending a message and reducing Libya's ability to support and train terrorists. Shortly after the raid Reagan warned \"Today, we have done what we had to do. If necessary, we shall do it again.\"\nCoordinated jamming by the EF-111s and EA-6B Prowlers began at 01:54 (Libyan time) as the A-7Es and F/A-18As began launching AGM-88 HARM and AGM-45 Shrike missiles for suppression of enemy air defenses (SEAD). The attack began at 0200 hours (Libyan time), and lasted about twelve minutes, with 60 tons of munitions dropped. The F-111 bombers' rules of engagement required target identification by both radar and Pave Tack prior to bomb release to minimize collateral damage. Of the nine F-111s targeting Bab al-Azizia, only three placed their GBU-10 Paveway II bombs on target. One F-111 was shot down by a Libyan SAM over the Gulf of Sidra and one F-111's bombs missed the barracks, striking diplomatic and civilian sites in Tripoli, and narrowly missing the French embassy. All three F-111s assigned to Sidi Bilal released their GBU-10 bombs on target. One of the six F-111s assigned to bomb the Tripoli airfield aborted its mission with a terrain-following radar malfunction, but the remaining five dropped BSU-49 high drag bombs destroying two Il-76 transport aircraft. \"America's\" A-6s damaged the Jamahiriyah MiG assembly warehouse and destroyed four MiG shipping crates. Two A-6s from \"Coral Sea\" aborted their mission, but five A-6s with CBU-59 APAM cluster bombs and one with Mk 82 bombs struck Benina airfield destroying three or four MiGs, two Mil Mi-8 helicopters, one Fokker F27 Friendship transport, and one small straight-wing aircraft. A Boeing 727 was also reportedly destroyed during the Benina strike.\nSome Libyan soldiers reportedly abandoned their positions in fright and confusion, while the officers were slow to give orders. Libyan anti-aircraft fire did not begin until after the planes had passed over their targets. No Libyan fighters launched, and HARM launches and jamming prevented any of the 2K12 Kub (SA-6), S-75 Dvina (SA-2), S-125 Neva/Pechora (SA-3), or Crotale SAM launches from homing. One SA-6 however was able to track onto an A-6 from VA-34 during the strike on the Jamahiriyah barracks but was evaded successfully.\nWithin twelve minutes, all United States aircraft were \"feet wet\" outbound over the Mediterranean. Navy strike aircraft had been recovered aboard their carriers by 02:53 (Libyan time) and surviving USAF planes, with the exception of one F-111, which landed in Naval Station Rota, Spain, with an overheated engine, had returned to Britain by 10:10 (Libyan time).\nAlthough the bombing operations were staged out of the UK, RAF Akrotiri in Cyprus was employed in the role of an alternate in case of emergency, and was used as such by at least one aircraft. This led to retaliatory action against the British base.\nLibyan air defenses.\nThe Libyan air defense network was extensive, and included:\nCovering Tripoli alone were:\nCasualties.\nLibyan.\nLibyan leader Muammar Gaddafi and his family rushed out of their residence in the Bab al-Azizia compound moments before the bombs dropped, forewarned by a telephone call from Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici, Malta's Prime Minister. Bonnici had been made aware of the presence of the American strike force by Prime Minister Bettino Craxi of Italy; the latter nation had detected the then-unidentified aircraft off the West coast of Sicily and scrambled a flight of F-104 Starfighters to intercept it, discovering the strike force's presence and being warned away by pilots with obvious American accents.\nAccording to medical staff in a nearby hospital, two dozen casualties were brought in wearing military uniforms, and two without uniforms. Total Libyan casualties were estimated at 60, including those at the bombed airbases. An infant girl was among the casualties; her body was shown to American reporters, who were told she was Gaddafi's recently adopted daughter Hana. However, there was and remains much skepticism over the claim. She may not have died; the adoption may have been posthumous; or he may have adopted a second daughter and given her the same name after the first one died.\nAmerican.\nTwo U.S. Air Force captains\u2014Fernando L. Ribas-Dominicci and Paul F. Lorence\u2014were killed when their F-111 fighter-bomber (callsign Karma-52) was shot down over the Gulf of Sidra. In the hours following the attack, the U.S. military refused to speculate as to whether or not the fighter-bomber had been shot down, with Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger suggesting that it could have experienced radio trouble or been diverted to another airfield. The next day, the Pentagon had announced it was no longer searching for the F-111 believed to be downed by a Libyan missile. On 25 December 1988, Gaddafi offered to release the body of Lorence to his family through Pope John Paul II. The body, returned in 1989, was identified as Ribas-Dominicci's from dental records. An autopsy conducted in Spain confirmed that he had drowned after his plane was shot down over the Gulf of Sidra. Libya denies that it held Lorence's body. However, Lorence's brother said that he and his mother saw television footage of a Libyan holding a white helmet with the name \"Lorence\" stenciled on the back. Furthermore, William C. Chasey, who toured the Bab al-Azizia barracks, claimed to have seen two flight suits and helmets engraved with the names \"Lorence\" and \"Ribas-Dominicci\", as well as the wreckage of their F-111. Gaddafi declared that the raid was a Libyan victory and stated that three American planes had been shot down, but Karma-52 was the only one that failed to return to base.\nAftermath.\nIn Libya.\nGaddafi's announcements.\nGaddafi announced that he had \"won a spectacular military victory over the United States\" and the country was officially renamed the \"Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriyah\".\nGaddafi said reconciliation between Libya and the United States was impossible so long as Reagan was in the White House; of the US president he said, \"He is mad. He is foolish. He is an Israeli dog.\" He said he had no plans to attack the United States or U.S. targets. He claimed that Reagan wanted to kill him, stating \"Was Reagan trying to kill me? Of course. The attack was concentrated on my house and I was in my house\", he also described how he rescued his family.\nWhen asked whether he was in danger of losing power, he said: \"Really, these reports and writings are not true. As you can see I am fine, and there has been no change in our country.\"\nOther events.\nThe Government of Libya said that the United States had fallen prey to arrogance and madness of power and wanted to become the world's policeman. It charged that any party that did not agree to become an American vassal was an outlaw, a terrorist, and a devil.\nGaddafi quashed an internal revolt, the organization of which he blamed on the United States, although Gaddafi appeared to have left the public sphere for a time in 1986 and 1987.\nThe Libyan Post dedicated several postage stamps issues to the event, from 1986 until 2001. The first issue was released in 1986, 13 July (ref. Scott catalogue n.1311 \u2013 Michel catalogue n.1699). The last issue was released in 2001, 15 April (ref. Scott catalogue n.1653 \u2013 Michel catalogue n.2748\u20132763).\nLibyan retaliation.\nImmediate.\nLibya responded by firing two Scud missiles at a United States Coast Guard station on the Italian island of Lampedusa which fell short of the island and landed in the sea.\nLater Libyan-connected terrorism.\nThere was only limited change in Libyan-connected terrorism.\nThe Libyan government was alleged to have ordered the hijacking of Pan Am Flight 73 in Pakistan on 5 September 1986, which resulted in the deaths of 20 people. The allegation did not come to light until it was reported by \"The Sunday Times\" in March 2004\u2014days after British Prime Minister Tony Blair paid the first official visit to Tripoli by a Western leader in a generation.\nIn October 1986, Gaddafi financed Jeff Fort's Al-Rukn faction of the Chicago Black P. Stones gang, in their emergence as an anti-American armed revolutionary movement. Al-Rukn members were arrested for preparing strikes on behalf of Libya, including blowing up US government buildings and bringing down an airplane; the Al-Rukn defendants were convicted in 1987 of \"offering to commit bombings and assassinations on US soil for Libyan payment.\"\nIn May 1987, Australia expelled diplomats and broke off relations with Libya, claiming Libya sought to fuel violence in Australia and Oceania.\nIn late 1987 French authorities stopped a merchant vessel, the MV \"Eksund\", which was attempting to deliver 150 tons of Soviet arms from Libya to the Irish Republican Army (IRA), partly in retaliation against the British for harboring American fighter planes.\nIn Beirut, Lebanon, two British hostages held by the Libyan-supported Abu Nidal Organization, Leigh Douglas and Philip Padfield, along with an American named Peter Kilburn, were shot dead in revenge. In addition, journalist John McCarthy was kidnapped, and tourist Paul Appleby was murdered in Jerusalem. Another British hostage named Alec Collett was also killed in retaliation for the bombing of Libya. Collett was shown being hanged in a video tape. His body was found in November 2009.\nOn 21 December 1988 Libya bombed Pan Am Flight 103, which exploded in mid-air and crashed on the town of Lockerbie in Scotland after a bomb detonated, killing all 259 people aboard, and 11 people in Lockerbie. Iran was initially thought to have been responsible for the bombing in revenge for the downing of Iran Air flight 655 by the American missile cruiser USS \"Vincennes\" over the Persian Gulf, but in 1991 two Libyans were charged, one of whom was convicted of the crime in a controversial judgement on 31 January 2001. The Libyan Government accepted responsibility for the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing on 29 May 2002, and offered $2.7 billion to compensate the families of the 270 victims. The convicted Libyan, Abdelbaset al-Megrahi, who was suffering from terminal prostate cancer, was released in August 2009 by the Scottish Government on compassionate grounds. He died in 2012. In May 2014 a group of relatives of the Lockerbie victims continued to campaign for al-Megrahi's name to be cleared by reopening the case.\nInternational response.\nImmediate.\nThe attack was condemned by many countries. By a vote of 79 in favor to 28 against with 33 abstentions, the United Nations General Assembly adopted resolution 41/38, which \"condemns the military attack perpetrated against the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on 15 April 1986, which constitutes a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law.\"\nA meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement said that it condemned the \"dastardly, blatant and unprovoked act of aggression\". The League of Arab States expressed that it was outraged at the United States aggression and that it reinforced an element of anarchy in international relations. The Assembly of Heads of State of the African Union said that the deliberate attempt to kill Libyans violated the principles of international law. The Government of Iran asserted that the attack constituted a policy of aggression, gunboat diplomacy, an act of war, and called for an extensive political and economic boycott of the United States. Others saw the United States motive as an attempt to eliminate Libya's revolution.\nChina stated that the U.S. attack violated norms of international relations and had aggravated tension in the region. The Soviet Union said that there was a clear link between the attack and U.S. policy aimed at stirring up existing hotbeds of tension and creating new ones, and at destabilizing the international situation. West Germany stated that international disputes required diplomatic and not military solutions, and France also criticized the bombing.\nSome observers held the opinion that Article 51 of the UN Charter set limitations on the use of force in exercising the legitimate right of self-defense in the absence of an act of aggression, and affirmed that there was no such act by Libya. It was charged that the United States did not exhaust the Charter provisions for settling disputes under Article 33. \"The Wall Street Journal\" protested that if other nations applied Article 51 as cavalierly as the United States, then \"the Nicaraguan government, very reasonably predicting that the U.S. is planning an attack on its territory, has the right to bomb Washington.\" British Shadow Foreign Secretary Denis Healey told ABC News that, \"by this same rationale of defense against future attack, Britain could bomb apartment blocks in New York and Chicago on the ground that they contained people sending money and military supplies to the Irish Republican Army.\"\nThe Reagan Administration did not subscribe to any such limitations. Legal Advisor to the State Department Abraham Sofaer argued that \u201cwhere an American is attacked because he is an American, in order to punish the U.S. or to coerce the U.S. into accepting a political position, the attack is one in which the U.S. has a sufficient interest to justify extending its protection through necessary and proportionate actions.\u201d\nMoreover, the Administration maintained the legality of their actions under the 1973 War Powers Resolution. Sofaer testified that the Administration had no expectation that the Freedom of Navigation operation in the Gulf of Sidra would result in combat, that it notified Congress within forty-eight hours after hostilities occurred, and that it consulted with congressional leaders prior to the bombing despite the potential risk of an information leak.\nOthers asserted that Libya was innocent in the bombing of the West Berlin discotheque.\nThe U.S. received support from the UK, Canada, Australia, Israel, and 25 other countries. Its doctrine of declaring a war on what it called \"terrorist havens\" was not repeated until 1998, when President Bill Clinton ordered strikes on six terrorist camps in Afghanistan. Margaret Thatcher's approval of the use of Royal Air Force bases led to substantial public criticism, including an unprecedented story in \"The Sunday Times\" suggesting the Queen was upset by an \"uncaring\" Prime Minister. However, the Americans strongly endorsed Thatcher, and the long-standing Special Relationship between the United States and Britain was strengthened.\nAlthough the Soviet Union was ostensibly friendly with Libya, it had, by the time of the Libya bombing, made its increasing ambivalence toward Libya apparent in public communications. Gaddafi had a history of verbally attacking the policy agendas and ideology of the Soviet Union, and he often engaged in various international interventions and meddling that conflicted with Soviet goals in a variety of spheres. During a period where the Soviet Union was apparently attempting to lead a subtle diplomatic effort that could impact its global status, close association with the whims of Gaddafi became a liability.\nIn the entire crisis, the Soviet Union explicitly announced that it would not provide additional help to Libya beyond resupplying basic armaments and munitions. It made no attempt to militarily intimidate the United States, despite the ongoing American operations in the Gulf of Sidra and its previous knowledge that the United States might launch an attack. The Soviet Union did not completely ignore the event, issuing a denunciation of this 'criminal' act by the United States.\nAfter the raid, Moscow did cancel a planned visit to the United States by foreign affairs minister Eduard Shevardnadze. At the same time, it clearly signaled that it did not want this action to affect negotiations about the upcoming summer summit between the United States and the Soviet Union and its plans for new arms control agreements.\nFormer U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark, acting for Libyan citizens who had been killed or injured in the bombing raid by the U.S. using British air bases, brought suit under international law against the United States and the United Kingdom in U.S. federal court. The lawsuit was dismissed as frivolous. A subsequent appeal was denied, and monetary sanctions against Clark were allowed. Saltany v. Reagan, 886 F. 2d 438 (D.C. Cir. 1989).\nUN response.\nEvery year, between at least 1994 and 2006, the United Nations General Assembly scheduled a declaration from the Organization of African Unity about the incident, but systematically deferred the discussion year after year until formally putting it aside (along with several other issues which had been similarly rescheduled for years) in 2005.\nFirst anniversary.\nOn the first anniversary of the bombing, April 1987, European and North American left-wing activists gathered to commemorate the anniversary. After a day of social and cultural networking with local Libyans, including a tour of Gaddafi's bombed house, the group gathered with other Libyans for a commemoration event.\n2009 comment.\nIn June 2009, during a visit to Italy, Gaddafi criticized American foreign policy and, asked as to the difference between al-Qaeda attacks and the 1986 U.S. bombing of Tripoli, he commented: \"If al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden has no state and is an outlaw, America is a state with international rules.\"\nSettlement of claims.\nOn 28 May 2008, the United States began negotiations with Libya on a comprehensive claims settlement agreement to resolve outstanding claims of American and Libyan nationals against each country in their respective courts. Gaddafi's son Saif al-Islam publicly announced that an agreement was being negotiated in July of that year. On 14 August 2008, the resulting U.S.-Libya Comprehensive Claims Settlement Agreement was signed in Tripoli by Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs David Welch and by Libyan Secretary for American Affairs Ahmad Fituri.\nIn October 2008, Libya paid US$1.5 billion (in three installments of $300 million on 9 October 2008, $600 million on 30 October 2008, and US$600 million 31 October 2008) into a fund used to compensate the following victims and their relatives:\nTo pay the settlement, Libya demanded US$1.5 billion from global oil companies operating in Libya's oil fields, under threat of \"serious consequences\" to their leases. Libya's settlement was at least partially funded by several companies, including some based in the U.S., that chose to cooperate with Libya's demand.\nOn 4 August 2008, President George W. Bush signed into law the Libyan Claims Resolution Act, which had unanimously passed Congress on 31 July. The Act provided for the restoration of Libya's sovereign, diplomatic, and official immunities before U.S. courts if the Secretary of State certified that the United States Government has received sufficient funds to resolve outstanding terrorism-related death and physical injury claims against Libya.\nOn 14 August 2008, the United States and Libya signed a comprehensive claims settlement agreement. Full diplomatic relations were restored between the two nations.\nIn songs and books.\nEnglish alternative band The The\u2019s 1986 album Infected features the song Sweet Bird of Truth which tells the fictionalised story of a US pilot on the Libya bombing raids. It continues to feature as a popular song on their live tours.\nIn 1986, hardcore punk band The Meatmen referred to the lack of French cooperation with the raid in their song 'French People Suck': \"French people suck, I just gotta' say/made the jet fighter pilots fly out of their way.\" This song appears on the album \"Rock &amp; Roll Juggernaut\" (Caroline Records).\nIn 1987, Neil Young wrote \"Mideast Vacation\" a song from his live album, \"Life\" about the bombing.\nOn Roger Waters's third studio album, \"Amused to Death\" the songs \"Late Home Tonight, Part I\" and \"Late Home Tonight, Part II\" recall the bombing from the perspective of two \"ordinary wives' and a young American F-111 pilot.\nIn Nelson DeMille's book \"The Lion's Game\", published in 2000, there is a detailed but fictionalised description of the attack from the point of view of one of the book's main protagonists.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22803", "revid": "84591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22803", "title": "Op-amp", "text": ""}
{"id": "22804", "revid": "2326713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22804", "title": "Operational amplifier", "text": "High-gain voltage amplifier with a differential input\nAn operational amplifier (often op amp or opamp) is a DC-coupled electronic amplifier with a differential input, a (usually) single-ended output voltage, and an extremely high gain. Its name comes from its original use of performing mathematical operations in analog computers. The voltage-feedback opamp (the focus of this article) amplifies the voltage difference between its two inputs, while the less common current-feedback op amp amplifies the current between its two inputs. \nBy using negative feedback, an op amp circuit's characteristics (e.g. its gain, input and output impedance, bandwidth, and functionality) can be determined by external components and have little dependence on temperature coefficients or engineering tolerance in the op amp itself. This flexibility has made the op amp a popular building block in analog circuits.\nToday, op amps are used widely in consumer, industrial, and scientific electronics. Many standard integrated circuit op amps cost only a few cents; however, some integrated or hybrid operational amplifiers with special performance specifications may cost over . Op amps may be packaged as components or used as elements of more complex integrated circuits.\nThe op amp is one type of differential amplifier. Other differential amplifier types include the fully differential amplifier (an op amp with a differential rather than single-ended output), the instrumentation amplifier (usually built from three op amps), the isolation amplifier (with galvanic isolation between input and output), and negative-feedback amplifier (usually built from one or more op amps and a resistive feedback network).\nOperation.\nThe amplifier's differential inputs consist of a non-inverting input (+) with voltage \"V\"+ and an inverting input (\u2212) with voltage \"V\"\u2212; ideally the op amp amplifies only the difference in voltage between the two, which is called the \"differential input voltage\". The output voltage of the op amp \"V\"out is given by the equation\nformula_1\nwhere \"A\"OL is the open-loop gain of the amplifier (the term \"open-loop\" refers to the absence of an external feedback loop from the output to the input).\nOpen-loop amplifier.\nThe magnitude of \"A\"OL is typically very large (100,000 or more for integrated circuit op amps, corresponding to +100\u00a0dB). Thus, even small microvolts of difference between \"V\"+ and \"V\"\u2212 may drive the amplifier into clipping or saturation. The magnitude of \"A\"OL is not well controlled by the manufacturing process, and so it is impractical to use an open-loop amplifier as a stand-alone differential amplifier.\nWithout negative feedback, and optionally positive feedback for regeneration, an \"open-loop\" op amp acts as a comparator, although comparator ICs are better suited. If the inverting input of an ideal op amp is held at ground (0\u00a0V), and the input voltage \"V\"in applied to the non-inverting input is positive, the output will be maximum positive; if \"V\"in is negative, the output will be maximum negative. \nClosed-loop amplifier.\nIf predictable operation is desired, negative feedback is used, by applying a portion of the output voltage to the inverting input. The \"closed-loop\" feedback greatly reduces the gain of the circuit. When negative feedback is used, the circuit's overall gain and response is determined primarily by the feedback network, rather than by the op-amp characteristics. If the feedback network is made of components with values small relative to the op amp's input impedance, the value of the op amp's open-loop response \"A\"OL does not seriously affect the circuit's performance. In this context, high input impedance at the input terminals and low output impedance at the output terminal(s) are particularly useful features of an op amp. \nThe response of the op-amp circuit with its input, output, and feedback circuits to an input is characterized mathematically by a transfer function; designing an op-amp circuit to have a desired transfer function is in the realm of electrical engineering. The transfer functions are important in most applications of op amps, such as in analog computers.\nIn the non-inverting amplifier on the right, the presence of negative feedback via the voltage divider \"R\"f, \"R\"g determines the \"closed-loop gain\" \"A\"CL = \"V\"out / \"V\"in. Equilibrium will be established when \"V\"out is just sufficient to pull the inverting input to the same voltage as \"V\"in. The voltage gain of the entire circuit is thus 1 + \"R\"f / \"R\"g. As a simple example, if \"V\"in = 1 V and Rf = \"R\"g, \"V\"out will be 2\u00a0V, exactly the amount required to keep \"V\"\u2212 at 1\u00a0V. Because of the feedback provided by the \"R\"f, \"R\"g network, this is a \"closed-loop\" circuit.\nAnother way to analyze this circuit proceeds by making the following (usually valid) assumptions:\nThe input signal \"V\"in appears at both (+) and (\u2212) pins per assumption 1, resulting in a current i through \"R\"g equal to \"V\"in / \"R\"g:\nformula_2\nBecause Kirchhoff's current law states that the same current must leave a node as enter it, and because the impedance into the (\u2212) pin is near infinity per assumption 2, we can assume practically all of the same current i flows through \"R\"f, creating an output voltage\nformula_3\nBy combining terms, we determine the closed-loop gain \"A\"CL:\nformula_4\nCharacteristics.\nIdeal op amps.\nAn ideal op amp is usually considered to have the following characteristics:\nThese ideals can be summarized by the two golden rules:\nThe first rule only applies in the usual case where the op amp is used in a negative feedback design, where there is a signal path of some sort feeding back from the output to the inverting input. These rules are commonly used as a good first approximation for analyzing or designing op-amp circuits.\nNone of these ideals can be perfectly realized. A real op amp may be modeled with non-infinite or non-zero parameters using equivalent resistors and capacitors in the op-amp model. The designer can then include these effects into the overall performance of the final circuit. Some parameters may turn out to have negligible effect on the final design while others represent actual limitations of the final performance.\nReal op amps.\nReal op amps differ from the ideal model in various aspects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNon-linear imperfections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPower considerations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassification.\nOp amps may be classified by their construction:\nIC op amps may be classified in many ways, including:\nHistorical timeline.\n1941: A vacuum tube op amp. An op amp, defined as a general-purpose, DC-coupled, high-gain, inverting feedback amplifier, is first found in https:// \"Summing Amplifier\" filed by Karl D. Swartzel Jr. of Bell Labs in 1941. This design uses three vacuum tubes to achieve a gain of 90 dB and operates on voltage rails of \u00b1350 V. It has a single inverting input rather than differential inverting and non-inverting inputs, as are common in today's op amps. Throughout World War II, Swartzel's design proved its value by being liberally used in the M9 artillery director designed at Bell Labs. This artillery director worked with the SCR-584 radar system to achieve extraordinary hit rates (near 90%) that would not have been possible otherwise.\n1947: An op amp with an explicit non-inverting input. In 1947, the operational amplifier was first formally defined and named in a paper by John R. Ragazzini of Columbia University. In this same paper a footnote mentions an op-amp design by a student that would turn out to be quite significant. This op amp, designed by Loebe Julie, has two major innovations. Its input stage use a long-tailed triode pair with loads matched to reduce drift in the output and, far more importantly, it is the first op-amp design to have two inputs (one inverting, the other non-inverting). The differential input makes a whole range of new functionality possible, but it would not be used for a long time due to the rise of the chopper-stabilized amplifier.\n1949: A chopper-stabilized op amp. In 1949, Edwin A. Goldberg designed a chopper-stabilized op amp. This set-up uses a normal op amp with an additional AC amplifier that goes alongside the op amp. The chopper gets an AC signal from DC by switching between the DC voltage and ground at a fast rate (60 or 400\u00a0Hz). This signal is then amplified, rectified, filtered and fed into the op amp's non-inverting input. This vastly improved the gain of the op amp while significantly reducing the output drift and DC offset. Unfortunately, any design that used a chopper couldn't use the non-inverting input for any other purpose. Nevertheless, the much-improved characteristics of the chopper-stabilized op amp made it the dominant way to use op amps. Techniques that used the non-inverting input were not widely practiced until the 1960s when op-amp ICs became available.\n1953: A commercially available op amp. In 1953, vacuum tube op amps became commercially available with the release of the model K2-W from George A. Philbrick Researches, Incorporated. The designation on the devices shown, GAP/R, is an acronym for the complete company name. Two nine-pin 12AX7 vacuum tubes were mounted in an octal package and had a model K2-P chopper add-on available. This op amp was based on a descendant of Loebe Julie's 1947 design and, along with its successors, would start the widespread use of op amps in industry.\n1961: A discrete IC op amp. With the birth of the transistor in 1947, and the silicon transistor in 1954, the concept of ICs became a reality. The introduction of the planar process in 1959 made transistors and ICs stable enough to be commercially useful. By 1961, solid-state, discrete op amps were being produced. These op amps are effectively small circuit boards with packages such as edge connectors. They usually have hand-selected resistors in order to improve things such as voltage offset and drift. The P45 (1961) has a gain of 94\u00a0dB and runs on \u00b115\u00a0V rails. It was intended to deal with signals in the range of \u00b110 V.\n1961: A varactor bridge op amp. There have been many different directions taken in op-amp design. Varactor bridge op amps started to be produced in the early 1960s. They were designed to have extremely small input current and are still amongst the best op amps available in terms of common-mode rejection with the ability to correctly deal with hundreds of volts at their inputs.\n1962: An op amp in a potted module. By 1962, several companies were producing modular potted packages that could be plugged into printed circuit boards. These packages were crucially important as they made the operational amplifier into a single black box which could be easily treated as a component in a larger circuit.\n1963: A monolithic IC op amp. In 1963, the first monolithic IC op amp, the \u03bcA702 designed by Bob Widlar at Fairchild Semiconductor, was released. Monolithic ICs consist of a single chip as opposed to a chip and discrete parts (a discrete IC) or multiple chips bonded and connected on a circuit board (a hybrid IC). Almost all modern op amps are monolithic ICs; however, this first IC did not meet with much success. Issues such as an uneven supply voltage, low gain and a small dynamic range held off the dominance of monolithic op amps until 1965 when the \u03bcA709 (also designed by Bob Widlar) was released.\n1968: Release of the \u03bcA741. The popularity of monolithic op amps was further improved with the release of the LM101 in 1967, which solved a variety of issues, and the subsequent release of the \u03bcA741 in 1968. The \u03bcA741 was extremely similar to the LM101 except that Fairchild's manufacturing processes allowed them to include a 30\u00a0pF compensation capacitor inside the chip instead of requiring external compensation. This simple difference has made the 741 a canonical op amp and a range of modern amps base their pinout on the 741s. The \u03bcA741 is still in production, and has become ubiquitous in electronics\u2014many manufacturers produce a version of this classic chip, recognizable by part numbers containing \"741\".\n1970: First high-speed, low-input current FET design.\nIn the 1970s high-speed, low-input current designs started to be made by using JFETs. These would be largely replaced by op amps made with MOSFETs in the 1980s. \n1972: Single-sided supply op amps being produced. A single-sided supply op amp is one where the input and output voltages can be as low as the negative power supply voltage instead of needing to be at least two volts above it. The result is that it can operate in many applications with the negative supply pin on the op amp being connected to the signal ground, thus eliminating the need for a separate negative power supply. The LM324, released in 1972, was one such op amp that came in a quad package (four separate op amps in one package) and became an industry standard.\nRecent trends. \nSupply voltages in analog circuits have decreased (as they have in digital logic) and low-voltage op amps have been introduced reflecting this. Supplies of 5\u00a0V and increasingly 3.3\u00a0V (sometimes as low as 1.8\u00a0V) are common. To maximize the signal range, modern op amps commonly have rail-to-rail output (the output signal can range from the lowest supply voltage to the highest) and sometimes rail-to-rail inputs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22805", "revid": "1071745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22805", "title": "Ordinary language", "text": ""}
{"id": "22807", "revid": "51013404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22807", "title": "Oh hell", "text": "Trick-taking card game\nOh hell or contract whist is a trick-taking card game of British origin in which the object is to take exactly the number of tricks bid. It was first described by B. C. Westall around 1930 and originally called oh! well. It was said to have been introduced into America via the New York clubs in 1931. Phillips and Westall describe it as \"one of the best round games\".\nName.\nThis English game was originally called oh! well, but is often known as contract whist in Britain and, less commonly, as nomination whist, while American sources call it oh pshaw or more frequently oh hell. David Parlett gives other names: blackout, bust, elevator and jungle bridge; while John McLeod adds blob, so called because the player's predicted bid is overwritten with a black blob if not achieved.\nConcept.\nThe game explores the idea of taking an exact number of tricks specified by a bid after the deal. Although the original game was played to 100 points, the modern variants differ from other trick-taking games in that players play a fixed number of deals. The game uses trumps, often decided by turning a card after the cards have been distributed. Like many popular social card games, the game has many local and regional variants in rules and variations in names.\nFamous players.\nProminent players of the game include former United States President Bill Clinton, who learned it from film director Steven Spielberg.\nHistory.\nThe rules are first described by B. C. Westall around 1930 under the name oh! well, and continued to be reprinted by Hubert Phillips until at least 1976. The game was introduced into the United States very shortly after appearing in Britain and was first recorded in the New York clubs in 1931. In these early rules, the number of cards dealt was fixed depending on the number of players and game was 100 points.\nOver the decades the game has been elaborated both in Britain and the United States, usually by increasing or decreasing the number of cards dealt per round, e.g., increasing the number from one to seven, from three to seventeen, or from seven to one and back to seven again. The game has many alternative names, but \"oh hell\" is by far the most common.\nThe original version, known as \"oh! well\", was described as \"one of the best round games\".\nRules.\nFour main variants are described below: the original British game known as oh! well, in which the number of cards dealt is the same every time (\u21d2), and three common modern variants. Nomination Whist is a British variant in which cards are dealt in \"descending and ascending \" (\u21d8\u21d7) sequence. In Australia and New Zealand this form is called, appropriately, 'Up and Down the River'. Oh Pshaw is an American name for the variant in which cards are dealt in \"ascending\" (\u21d7) sequence only (although Parlett describes a similar game as 'British Oh Hell'). Finally, the game as described below is a variant popular worldwide in which cards are also dealt in \"descending and ascending\" sequence (\u21d8\u21d7).\nCommon rules.\nThere are common rules that apply to all four variants and will not be repeated. There are three to seven players. A standard pack is used and cards rank in their normal order, Aces high. Deal, bidding and play are clockwise, always beginning with eldest hand, the player to the left of the dealer. The aim is to score the most points by correctly bidding the number of tricks you will take. To that end, a bidding round takes place after the cards are dealt; eldest hand begins by announcing the number of tricks they think they can take, e.g., \"none\" or \"five\", and the other players follow in turn. During play, eldest leads to the first trick and players must follow suit if able; otherwise they may trump or discard as they wish. The highest trump wins the trick or, if no trumps are played, the highest card of the led suit wins. The trick winner leads to the next trick.\nOh! well.\nPhillips and Westall describe \"oh! well\" as \"one of the best round games\", not only appealing to expert players, but also to beginners and youngsters because of the simplicity of its rules, which are as above with the following additional details:\nIf three play, the bottom card of the pack is removed and set aside face down. If five, six or seven play, then 2, 4 or 3 cards, respectively, are removed from the bottom of the pack. Otherwise the full pack is used. The dealer distributes the cards and turns the last, which is his, for trump. The dealer or scribe records the bids. The same number of cards is dealt in each deal (\u21d2).\nPlayers score 1 point for each trick taken. In addition, any player who achieves scores a bonus of 10 points. Game is 100 points. If played for stakes, players pay the differences in their points converted into money at the agreed rate. Alternatively players ante a stake to the pool and the winner takes all.\nContract whist.\nIn Britain a derivative of oh! well is played, known as contract whist or, less frequently, as nomination whist. The main difference is that the deals follow a \"descending and ascending\"(\u21d8\u21d7) sequence, in that the number of cards dealt starts at seven and decreases each time by one until only one card is dealt; it then rises again until finally seven cards are dealt again (7\u20131\u20137). The following rules are based on Arnold (2011):\nCards are dealt and the first one to receive a jack becomes the first dealer. Seven cards are then dealt to each player, one by one; the rest of the pack is placed face down as the stock and the top card turned for trump. In subsequent deals, the number of cards dealt reduces by one each time, so that by the seventh deal each player receives just one. In the eighth deal players receive two cards each and in the deals that follow, the number of cards dealt increases by one each time. The thirteenth deal is the last; seven cards are dealt and the game ends when it is over.\nIn the bidding, the dealer, who goes last as usual, must ensure that the total number of bids is not equal to the number of cards each player holds, thereby making it impossible for all players to make their bids.\nAs in oh! well, players score 1 point per trick and a bonus of 10 points if they achieve their bids. Otherwise the rules are as described above.\nIn a variation, the trump suit is fixed each time, rotating in the order: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2665 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2663 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2666 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2660.\nNote that the name Nomination whist is given to at least two other games.\nUp and down the river.\nIn this Australian and Kiwi version, there are four to eight players, each dealt 10 cards in the first deal. Again the cards dealt follow a \"descending and ascending\"(\u21d8\u21d7) sequence, the number reducing by one each time until each player receives just one card. The sequence then ascends to 10 cards for a total of 19 deals (10\u20131\u201310). Again, the dealer must ensure bids do not add up to the number of tricks in the deal. Players score 1 point for each trick taken plus 10 points for achieving their bid.\nOh Pshaw.\nOh Pshaw is an American variant recorded by \"Bicycle\", who describe it as \"an amusing game\" with a worldwide following. It is an \"ascending only\" (\u21d7) variant and the rules are as described above with the following additions:\n\"Bicycle\" says that 4 to 5 players are optimal. The game consists of a fixed number of deals. In the first, the dealer distributes one card to each player and turns the next for trump. In subsequent deals, the number of cards given to each player increases by one each time up to the maximum possible. So for example, if four play, there will be 13 deals. If three play, \"Bicycle\" advises limiting the game to 15 deals, rather than the theoretical maximum of 17. If no cards are left over in the last deal, the game is played at no trump.\nLike oh! well, but unlike contract whist, there is no restriction on the dealer as to the number of tricks s/he may bid. However, the scorekeeper must announce whether the bid total is \"over\", \"under\" or \"even\" compared with the available number of tricks in the deal/number of cards each player holds.\nThe normal scoring scheme is that players who achieve their bid score 1 point for each trick taken plus 10 bonus points. Players who fail to achieve their bid score nothing. The player with the highest score at the end of the game is the winner. If played for hard score, the winner is given a further 10 point bonus and then players settle with one another based on the difference in their scores. Scoring variations include all players receiving 1 point per trick taken whether or not they achieve their bid; those who do achieve their bid still earn a bonus of 10; and players who announce a bid of \u201cNone\u201d may score 5 points, 10 points, or 5 points plus 1 point for each trick in the deal, depending on local rules.\nBritish variant.\nOh Pshaw as described by \"Bicycle\" is almost identical with another \"ascending only\" (\u21d7) variant that Parlett calls British oh hell! Again, the number of cards dealt ascends from one to a number dependent on the number of players. There are no trumps if all the cards are dealt and there is no restriction on the dealer's bid. Players only score for the bonus, not the tricks. In a further variation, players bid simultaneously by clenching fists on the table and, on a signal being given, extending as many fingers as they intend to bid.\nOh hell.\nIn the game as described by John McLeod at pagat.com, players draw for the first deal, the highest card winning. If three to five play, 10 cards are dealt to each player in the first deal; if six play, 8 cards, and, if seven play, 7 cards. Thereafter the number of cards dealt follows a \"descending and ascending\" (\u21d8\u21d7) sequence. So if 4 play, there are 19 deals (10\u20131\u201310); in the first and last deals 10 cards are dealt and, for example, in the 10th deal only one card is dealt per player.\nAgain, in this variant, the dealer is constrained to ensure that the total of the bids is not equal to the number of tricks in that deal. This is known as the \"hook\". Cards are dealt and the next turned for trump.\nThere is a scorekeeper who keeps track of the bids and scores. McLeod describes two main systems:\nNames.\nOh hell is known by many names in English including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22808", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22808", "title": "On War", "text": "1832 treatise on war by von Clausewitz\nVom Kriege () is a book on war and military strategy by Prussian general Carl von Clausewitz (1780\u20131831), written mostly after the Napoleonic Wars, between 1816 and 1830, and published posthumously by his wife Marie von Br\u00fchl in 1832. It is one of the most important treatises on political-military analysis and strategy ever written, and remains both controversial and influential on military strategic thinking.\n\"Vom Kriege\" has been translated into English several times as On War. \"On War\" is an unfinished work. Clausewitz had set about revising his accumulated manuscripts in 1827, but did not live to finish the task. His wife edited his collected works and published them between 1832 and 1835.\nHis ten-volume collected works contain most of his larger historical and theoretical writings, though not his shorter articles and papers or his extensive correspondence with important political, military, intellectual and cultural leaders in the Prussian state. \"On War\" is formed by the first three volumes and represents his theoretical explorations.\nHistory.\nClausewitz was among those intrigued by the manner in which the leaders of the French Revolution, especially Napoleon, changed the conduct of war through their ability to motivate the populace and gain access to the full resources of the state, thus unleashing war on a greater scale than had previously been seen in Europe. Clausewitz believed that moral forces in battle had a significant influence on its outcome. Clausewitz was well-educated and had strong interests in art, history, science, and education. He was a professional soldier who spent a considerable part of his life fighting against Napoleon. In his lifetime, he had experienced both the French Revolutionary Army's (1792\u20141802) zeal and the conscripted armies employed by the French crown. The insights he gained from his political and military experiences, combined with a solid grasp of European history, provided the basis for his work.\nA wealth of historical examples is used to illustrate its various ideas. Napoleon and Frederick the Great figure prominently for having made very efficient use of the terrain, movement and the forces at their disposal.\nRegarding Clausewitz\u2019s intellectual-cultural background, Azar Gat argues that he expressed in the field of military theory the main themes of the Romantic reaction against the worldview of the Enlightenment, rejecting universal principles and stressing historical diversity and the forces of the human spirit. This explains the strength and value of many of his arguments, derived from this great cultural movement, but also his often harsh rhetoric against his predecessors.\nClausewitz's theory.\nDefinition of war.\nClausewitz argued that war theory cannot be a strict operational advice for generals. Instead, he wanted to highlight general principles that would result from the study of history and logical thinking. He contended that military campaigns could be planned only to a very small degree because incalculable influences or events, so-called \"friction\", would quickly make any too-detailed planning in advance obsolete. Military leaders must be capable to make decisions under time pressure with incomplete information since in his opinion \"three quarters of the things on which action is built in war\" are concealed and distorted by the \"fog of war\".\nIn his 1812 \"Bekenntnisschrift\" (\"Notes of Confession\"), he presents a more existential interpretation of war by envisioning war as the highest form of self-assertion by a people. That corresponded in every respect with the spirit of the time when the French Revolution and the conflicts that arose from it had caused the evolution of conscript armies and guerrillas. The people's armies supported the idea that war is an existential struggle.\nDuring the following years, however, Clausewitz gradually abandoned this exalted view and concluded that the war served as a mere instrument: \"Thus, war is an act of violence in order to force our will upon the enemy.\"\nPurpose, goal and means.\nClausewitz analyzed the conflicts of his time along the line of the categories \"Purpose\", \"Goal\" and \"Means\". He reasoned that the \"Purpose\" of war is one's will to be enforced, which is determined by politics. The \"Goal\" of the conflict is therefore to defeat the opponent in order to exact the \"Purpose\". The \"Goal\" is pursued with the help of a strategy, that might be brought about by various \"Means\" such as by the defeat or the elimination of opposing armed forces or by non-military \"Means\" (such as propaganda, economic sanctions and political isolation). Thus, any resource of the human body and mind and all the moral and physical powers of a state might serve as \"Means\" to achieve the set goal.\nOne of Clausewitz's best-known quotes summarizes that idea: \"War is the continuation of policy with other means.\"\nThat quote in itself allows for the interpretation that the military will take over from politics as soon as war has begun (as, for example, the German General Staff did during World War I). However, Clausewitz had postulated the \"primacy of politics\" and in this context elaborated: \"[...], we claim that war is nothing more than a continuation of the political process by applying other means. By applying other means we simultaneously assert that the political process does not end with the conclusion of the war or is being transformed into something entirely different, but that it continues to exist and proceed in its essence, regardless of the structure of the means it makes use of [...].\"\nAccording to Azar Gat, the \"general message\" of the book was that \"the conduct of war could not be reduced to universal principles [and is] dominated by political decisions and moral forces.\" These basic conclusions are essential to Clausewitz's theory:\nSome of the key ideas (not necessarily original to Clausewitz or even to his mentor, Gerhard von Scharnhorst) discussed in \"On War\" include (in no particular order of importance):\nInfluence and conflicting interpretations.\nModern perceptions of war are based on the concepts that Clausewitz put forth in \"On War\", but they have been diversely interpreted by various leaders (such as Moltke, Vladimir Lenin, Dwight Eisenhower, and Mao Zedong), thinkers, armies, and peoples. Modern military doctrine, organization, and norms are all still based on Napoleonic premises, but whether the premises are necessarily also \"Clausewitzian\" is debatable.\nSome prominent critics have interpreted \"On War\" as an argument for \"total war\".&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[a] The book has been blamed for the level of destruction involved in the First and the Second World Wars, but it seems rather that Clausewitz (who did not actually use the term \"total war\") had merely foreseen the inevitable developments that started with the huge, patriotically motivated armies of the Napoleonic era. These developments resulted (though the evolution of war has not yet ended) in the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, with all the forces and capabilities of the state devoted to destroying forces and capabilities of the enemy state (thus \"total war\"). Conversely, Clausewitz has also been seen as \"The preeminent military and political strategist of limited war in modern times\".\nThe \"dualism\" of Clausewitz's view of war (that wars can vary a great deal between the two \"poles\" that he proposed, based on the political objectives of the opposing sides and the context) seems to be simple enough, but few commentators have been willing to accept that crucial variability. They insist that Clausewitz \"really\" argued for one end of the scale or the other. Clausewitz's use of a dialectical method to construct his argument, led to frequent modern misinterpretation because he allegedly explores various often-opposed ideas before he came to conclusions.\nHowever, according to Gat, the opposing interpretations of Clausewitz are rooted in Clausewitz\u2019s own conceptual journey. The centerpiece of Clausewitz\u2019s theory of war throughout his life was his concept of all-out fighting and energetic conduct leading to the great battle of annihilation. He believed such conduct expressed the very \u201cnature\u201d, or \u201clasting spirit\u201d of war. Accordingly, Clausewitz disparaged the significance of the maneuver, surprise, and cunning in war, as distracting from the centrality of battle, and argued that defense was legitimate only if and as long as one was weaker than the enemy. Nevertheless, in the last years of his life, after the first six out of the eight books of \"On War\" had already been drafted, Clausewitz came to recognize that this concept was not universal and did not even apply to the Napoleonic Wars, the supreme model of his theory of war. This was demonstrated by the Spanish and Russian campaigns and by guerrilla warfare, in all of which battle was systematically avoided. Consequently, from 1827 on, Clausewitz recognized the legitimacy of limited war and explained it by the influence of politics that harnessed the unlimited nature of war to serve its objectives. Clausewitz died in 1831 before he completed the revision he planned along these lines. He incorporated his new ideas only into the end of Book VI, Book VIII and the beginning of Book I of \"On War\". As a result, when published, \"On War\" encompassed both his old and new ideas, at odds with each other.\nThus, against common interpretations of \"On War\", Gat points out that Clausewitz\u2019s transformed views regarding the relationship between politics and war and the admission of limited war into his theory constituted a U-turn against his own life-long fundamental view of the nature of war. Gat further argues the readers\u2019 miscomprehension of the theory in \"On War\" as complete and dialectical, rather than a draft undergoing a radical change of mind, has thus generated a range of reactions. People of each age have found in \"On War\" the Clausewitz who suited their own views on war and its conduct. Between 1870 and 1914, he was celebrated mainly for his insistence on the clash of forces and the decisive battle, and his emphasis on moral forces. By contrast, after 1945, during the nuclear age, his reputation has reached a second pinnacle for his later acceptance of the primacy of politics and the concept of limited war.\nCriticism.\nClausewitz and his proponents have been severely criticized by other military theorists, like Antoine-Henri Jomini in the 19th century, B. H. Liddell Hart in the mid-20th century, and Martin van Creveld and John Keegan more recently. \"On War\" is a work rooted solely in the world of the nation state, states historian Martin van Creveld, who alleges that Clausewitz takes the state \"almost for granted\", as he rarely looks at anything before the 1648 Peace of Westphalia, and mediaeval warfare is effectively ignored in Clausewitz's theory. He alleges that Clausewitz does not address any form of intra/supra-state conflict, such as rebellion and revolution, because he could not theoretically account for warfare before the existence of the state.\nPrevious kinds of conflict were demoted to criminal activities without legitimacy and not worthy of the label \"war\". Van Creveld argues that \"Clausewitzian war\" requires the state to act in conjunction with the people and the army, the state becoming a massive engine built to exert military force against an identical opponent. He supports that statement by pointing to the conventional armies in existence throughout the 20th century. However, revolutionaries like Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels derived some inspiration from Clausewitzian ideas.\nReferring to much of the current interpretation of \"On War\" as the Emperor\u2019s New Clothes syndrome, Gat argues that instead of critically addressing the puzzling contradictions in \"On War,\" Clausewitz has been set in stone and could not be wrong.\n a. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ : For example, writing in his introduction to Sun Tzu's \"Art of War\", B. H. Liddell Hart stated that \"Civilization might have been spared much of the damage suffered in the world wars of this century if the influence of Clausewitz's monumental tome \"On War\", which molded European military thought in the era preceding the First World War, had been blended with and balanced by a knowledge of Sun Tzu's exposition on \"The Art of War.\"\" This comment is tempered by the comment that the \"ill-effects of Clausewitz's teaching arose largely from his disciples' too shallow and too extreme interpretation of it,\" but it remains an influential criticism. Extracted from \"The Art of War\" (UNESCO Collection of Representative Works), Samuel B. Griffith https://web.archive.org/web/20060628174003/http://www.kw.igs.net/~tacit/artofwar/suntzu.htm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22810", "revid": "39721018", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22810", "title": "Orange Alternative", "text": "Polish anti-communist underground movement, started in Wroc\u0142aw\nThe Orange Alternative (Polish: \"Pomara\u0144czowa Alternatywa\") is a Polish anti-communist underground movement, started in Wroc\u0142aw, a city in south-west Poland and led by Waldemar Fydrych (sometimes misspelled as Frydrych), commonly known as \"Major (Commander of Festung Breslau)\". Its main purpose in the 1980s was to offer a wider group of citizens an alternative way of opposition against the authoritarian regime by means of a peaceful protest that used absurd and nonsensical elements.\nBy doing this, members of the Orange Alternative could not be arrested by the police for opposition to the regime without the authorities becoming a laughing stock. The Orange Alternative has been viewed as part of the broader Solidarity movement. Sociology professor Lisa Romanienko has argued it was among the most effective of Solidarity's factions in dismantling anxiety and fear surrounding the dictatorial regime, in order to bring about the labor (and later social and cultural) movement's success.\nInitially they painted ridiculous graffiti of dwarves on paint spots covering up anti-government slogans on city walls. Afterward, beginning in 1985 and continuing through to 1990, the group organized a series of more than sixty happenings in several Polish cities, including Wroc\u0142aw, Warsaw, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, Lublin, and Tomasz\u00f3w Mazowiecki.\nIt suspended activity in 1989, but reactivated in 2001 and has been active on a small scale ever since.\nA statue of a dwarf, dedicated to the memory of the movement, stands today on \u015awidnicka Street in Wroc\u0142aw, in the place where events took place.\nThe Orange Alternative movement inspired several other similar movements in authoritarian countries including Czechoslovakia and Hungary, and it also inspired and influenced the PORA and the so-called Orange Revolution movement in Ukraine, which was in turn supported by Poland.\nSome utterances ascribed to Waldemar Fydrych:\n\"In Poland there are only three places when you can feel free: In churches, but only for prayers; in prisons, but not everyone can go to prison; and on the streets: they are the freest places.\"\n\"The Western World will find out much more about the situation in Poland from hearing that I was sent to jail for handing out sanitary pads to women, than from reading books and articles written by other members of the opposition.\"\n\"Can you treat a police officer seriously, when he is asking you: \"Why did you participate in an illegal meeting of dwarfs?\"\"\nBeginnings.\nThe beginnings of the Orange Alternative are in a student movement called the Movement for New Culture created in 1980 at the University of Wroc\u0142aw. It is in that year that Waldemar \"Major\" Fydrych, one of the movement's founders, proclaims the Socialist Surrealism Manifesto, which becomes the ideological backbone behind a gazette known as \"The Orange Alternative\". Seven out of the total fifteen issues of this gazette appear during student strikes organized in November and December 1980 as part of the Solidarity upheaval. The first number is edited jointly by Major Waldemar Fydrych and Wies\u0142aw Cupa\u0142a (a.k.a. \"Rittmeister\") simply with an idea to have fun. The editors treat the strike and the surrounding reality as forms of Art. For the ensuing numbers, the editorial committee is joined by Piotr Adamcio, known as \"Lieutenant Pablo\", Andrzej Dziewit and Zenon Zegarski, nicknamed \"Lieutenant Zizi Top\". Although its avantgarde character, according to the student strike organizers, was a threat to the \"higher aims of the strike\", and notwithstanding attempts by the strike committee to censor it, the gazette became rapidly very popular among the students.\nDwarves.\nThe first known actions of the Orange Alternative consisted of painting dwarf graffiti on spots created by the police's covering up anti-regime slogans on walls of the Polish cities. The first graffiti was painted by Major Waldemar Fydrych and Wies\u0142aw Cupa\u0142a on the night from 30 to 31 August 1982 on one of the residences in the Wroc\u0142aw district of Biskupin and S\u0119polno.\nAltogether more than one thousand of such graffiti were painted in the major Polish cities such as Wroc\u0142aw, Krak\u00f3w, Warsaw, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, and Gda\u0144sk.\nDwarves appearing in numbers all over Poland aroused the interest of both Polish pedestrians and the militia, whose intervention led to short term arrests of the graffiti artists.\nDuring one of these incidents, Major, a detainee at a police station in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, proclaimed, in reference to the Marxist and Hegelian dialectics, yet another artistic manifesto and referred to his graffiti art as \"dialectic painting\" stating: \"The Thesis is the Anti-Regime Slogan. The Anti-thesis is the Spot and the Synthesis is the Dwarf. Quantity evolves into Quality. The more Dwarves there are, the better it is.\"\nAfter Revolutions of 1989.\nAt the beginning of the 21st century, Wroc\u0142aw's dwarfs began to appear around the city. Over time, they have become a major tourist attraction in Wroc\u0142aw.\nHappenings.\nWhat brought the Orange Alternative the biggest fame were its street happenings which it organized throughout the second half of the 1980s. These actions gained it enormous popularity among the Polish youth, who joined the movement, seeing it an alternative to the opposition style presented by the Solidarity, which they viewed as more stiff and boring.\nThe first modest happening called the \"Burning of Tubes\" was organized as early as 1985 in Wroc\u0142aw by Major Waldemar Fydrych accompanied by a small group of artists to which belonged: Krzysztof Skarbek, Piotr Petyszkowski, Andrzej G\u0142uszek, and S\u0142awomir Monkiewicz.\nThe breakthrough moment came in the fall of 1987, during the Open Theatre Festival in Wroc\u0142aw, when the Village Voice reported the Orange Alternative's action known as \"Distribution of Toilet Paper\" \u2013 a happening that satirized the annoying lack of that consumer product at the time. After the publication of this article, the Orange Alternative became of interest to a number of Polish and foreign media.\nThe biggest happenings however took place in the years 1987 through 1989, with the \"orange\" wave spilling over Poland into cities such as Warsaw, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, Lublin and Tomasz\u00f3w Mazowiecki, following Major Fydrych's arrest on 8 March 1988.\nThe actions of the Orange Alternative \u2013 although its leaders and participants often expressed anarchistic viewpoints \u2013 were not inherently ideological. No serious demands were ever expressed. Rather, the slogans were surrealist in character (such as \"Vivat Sorbovit\", Sorbovit being a popular soft drink at that time) or \"There is no freedom without dwarves\". They often paraphrased slogans used by the Solidarity Union or the communists. Their role was to laugh at absurdities and pompousness of both sides of the system and provoke independent thinking.\nThe open street formula allowed all individuals to take part in the happenings. This openness drew thousands of pedestrians to participate in the group's actions. In such a way, the majority of the happenings could assemble thousands of participants, of whom many were accidental passers-by. The culmination point in the movement's history was the action organized on 1 June 1988, known as the \"Revolution of Dwarves\", during which more than 10 thousand people marched through the center of Wroc\u0142aw wearing orange dwarf hats.\nThe happenings usually terminated with the arrest of hundreds of participants, who did not manage to escape in time from the hands of the militia. At one point, the participants were even able to provoke the Communist militia to arrest 77 Santa Clauses or, on another occasion, anyone wearing anything orange.\nFor each of its actions, the Orange Alternative printed leaflets and posters, featuring slogans like \"Every militiaman is a piece of Art\" or \"Citizen, help the militia, beat yourself up\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22811", "revid": "50197585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22811", "title": "Otto IV, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 1209 to 1218\nOtto IV (1175 \u2013 19 May 1218) was the Holy Roman Emperor from 1209 until his death in 1218.\nOtto spent most of his early life in England and France. He was a follower of his uncle Richard the Lionheart, who made him Count of Poitou in 1196. With Richard's support, he was elected King of Germany by one faction in a disputed election in 1198, sparking ten years of civil war. The death of his rival, Philip of Swabia, in 1208 left him sole king of Germany.\nIn 1209, Otto marched to Italy to be crowned emperor by Pope Innocent III. In 1210, he sought to unite the Kingdom of Sicily with the Empire, breaking with Innocent, who excommunicated him. He allied with England against France and participated in the alliance's defeat at Bouvines in 1214. He was abandoned by most of his supporters in 1215 and lived the rest of his life in retirement on his estates near Brunswick. He was the only German king of the Welf dynasty.\nCareer.\nEarly life.\nOtto was the third son of Henry the Lion, Duke of Bavaria and Duke of Saxony, by his wife Matilda of England. His exact birthplace is not given by any original source. He grew up in England in the care of his maternal grandfather, King Henry II of England. Otto was fluent in French as well as German. He became the foster son of his maternal uncle King Richard I of England. In 1190, after he left England to join the Third Crusade, Richard appointed Otto as Earl of York. This grant's authenticity (or authority) was doubted by the vassals of Yorkshire, who prevented Otto from taking possession of his earldom. Still, he probably visited Yorkshire in 1191, and he continued to claim the revenues of the earldom after becoming king of Germany, although he never secured them. Neither did he succeed in getting the 25,000 silver marks willed to him by his uncle in 1199.\nIn 1195, Richard began negotiations to marry Otto to Margaret, daughter and heir presumptive of King William the Lion of Scotland. Lothian, as Margaret's dowry, would be handed over to Richard for safekeeping and the counties of Northumberland and Cumberland (Carlisle) would be granted to Otto and turned over to the king of Scotland. The negotiations dragged on until August 1198, when the birth of a son and heir to William rendered them unnecessary. Having failed to secure Otto an English earldom or a Scottish kingdom in September 1196, Richard, as duke of Aquitaine, enfeoffed Otto with the county of Poitou. There is some disagreement over whether Otto received Poitou in exchange for or in addition to the earldom of York.\nOtto was in Poitou from September 1196 until mid-1197, when he joined Richard in Normandy to confer over the appointment of bishops to the vacant sees of Poitiers, Limoges and P\u00e9rigueux. He then participated in the war against Philip II of France on the side of Richard. In October, he returned to Poitou. The German historian Jens Ahlers, considering Otto's life before 1198, believes that he might have been the first foreign king of Germany.\nConflict with Philip of Swabia.\nAfter the death of Emperor Henry VI, the majority of the princes of the Empire, situated in the south, elected Henry's brother Philip king in March 1198, after receiving money and promises from Philip in exchange for their support. But those princes opposed to the Hohenstaufen dynasty decided, on the initiative of Richard of England, to elect instead a member of the House of Welf. Otto's elder brother, Henry, was participating in the Crusade of 1197 at the time, and so the choice fell to Otto. Otto, soon recognized throughout the northwest and the lower Rhine region, was elected king by his partisans in Cologne on 9 June 1198.\nOtto took control of Aachen, the place of coronation, and was crowned by Archbishop Adolf of Cologne on 12 July 1198. This was of great symbolic importance, since the archbishop of Cologne alone could crown the king of the Romans. The coronation was done with fake imperial regalia, because the actual materials were in the hands of the Hohenstaufen.\nOtto's election pulled the empire into the conflict between England and France. Philip had allied himself with the French king, Philip II, while Otto was supported at first by Richard I, and after he died in 1199 by his brother John.\nThe papacy meanwhile, under Innocent III, determined to prevent the continued unification of Sicily and the Holy Roman Empire under one monarch seized the opportunity to extend its influence. Therefore, Innocent III favoured Otto, whose family had always opposed the house of Hohenstaufen. Otto also seemed willing to grant any demands that Innocent would make. The confusion in the empire allowed Innocent to drive out the imperial feudal lords from Ancona, Spoleto, and Perugia, who had been installed by Emperor Henry VI.\nAt the same time, Innocent encouraged the cities in Tuscany to form a league, called the League of San Genesio, against imperial interests in Italy. The cities placed themselves under Innocent's protection. In 1201, Innocent announced that he recognized Otto as the only legitimate king. In return, Otto promised to support the pope's interests in Italy. Otto also had the support of Ottokar I of Bohemia, who, although at first siding with Philip of Swabia, eventually threw in his lot with Otto. Otto's cause was further strengthened by the support of Valdemar II of Denmark. Philip achieved a great deal of success in the civil war that followed, allowing him in 1204 to be again crowned king, this time by the archbishop of Cologne.\nIn the following years, Otto's situation worsened because, after England's defeat by France, he lost England's financial support. Many of his allies changed sides to Philip, including his brother Henry. Otto was defeated and wounded in battle by Philip on 27 July 1206, near Wassenberg, and as a consequence, he also lost the support of the pope, who began to favour the apparent winner in the conflict. Otto was forced to retire to his possessions near Brunswick, leaving Philip virtually uncontested as German king.\nInnocent III forced the two warring parties into negotiations at Cologne, and in exchange for renouncing his claim to the throne, Philip promised Otto the hand of his daughter Beatrix in marriage, together with the Duchy of Swabia and an enormous dowry. Otto refused, and as the civil war was again about to recommence, Philip was murdered on 21 June 1208.\nAfter Philip's death, Otto made amends with the Staufen party and became engaged to Philip's daughter Beatrix. In the 1208 imperial election in Frankfurt on 11 November 1208, he gained the support of all the electoral princes, as he promised he would not make hereditary claims to the imperial crown on behalf of any children he might father. Now fully reconciled with Innocent, Otto made preparations to be crowned Holy Roman Emperor. To secure Innocent's support, he promised to restore to the Papal States all territory that it had possessed under Louis the Pious, including the March of Ancona, the Duchy of Spoleto, the former Exarchate of Ravenna, and the Pentapolis.\nTravelling down via Verona, Modena, and Bologna, he eventually arrived at Milan, where he received the Iron Crown of Lombardy and the title of King of Italy in 1208. He was met at Viterbo by Pope Innocent and was taken to St. Peter's Basilica, where he was crowned emperor by Pope Innocent on 4 October 1209, before rioting broke out in Rome, forcing Otto to abandon the city.\nConflict with Innocent III.\nNot content with his successes so far, Innocent also obtained from Otto further written concessions to the Papal See, including allowing all elections of German bishops to be conducted according to Church ordinances and not to prevent any appeals to Rome. He also promised to hand over to the church all income from any vacant sees that had been flowing into the imperial treasury.\nAfter abandoning Rome, Otto marched north, reaching Pisa by 20 November. Here, probably advised by Peter of Celano and Dipold, Count of Acerra, he was convinced to abandon his earlier promises. Otto immediately worked to restore imperial power in Italy. After his consecration by the pope, he promised to restore the lands bequeathed to the church by the countess Matilda of Tuscany nearly a century before and not to move against Frederick, King of Sicily. He quickly broke all his promises.\nHe threw out the papal troops from Ancona and Spoleto, reclaiming the territory as imperial fiefs. He then demanded that Frederick of Sicily do homage for the duchies of Calabria and Apulia, and when Frederick refused to appear, Otto declared those fiefs forfeited. Otto then marched on Rome. He commanded Innocent to annul the Concordat of Worms and to recognise the imperial crown's right to make nominations to all vacant benefices.\nSuch actions infuriated Innocent, who promptly excommunicated Otto on 18 November 1210. Subsequently, he tried to conquer Sicily, which was held by the Staufen king Frederick, under the guardianship of Innocent III. Parallel to this, the German nobility grew increasingly frustrated with Otto. They felt that instead of wasting his time in Italy and playing power politics with the pope, it was his first duty to defend the northern provinces of the empire against Valdemar II of Denmark, who had taken advantage of Otto's distractions by invading the northern provinces of the empire and possessing the whole Baltic coast from Holstein to Livonia. So while Otto was in southern Italy, several princes of the empire, including the archbishops of Mainz and Magdeburg, at the instigation of King Philip II of France and with the consent of the pope, elected Frederick King of the Romans at the Diet of Nuremberg in 1211.\nOtto's ambassadors from Milan appeared before the Fourth Lateran Council, pleading the case for his excommunication to be lifted. Although he claimed he had repented for his offences and declared his willingness to be obedient to the Pope in all things, Innocent III had already recognised Frederick as emperor-elect.\nOtto returned to Germany to deal with the situation, hopeful of salvaging something from the looming disaster. He found most of the German princes and bishops had turned against him and that Frederick, who had made his way up the Italian peninsula, had avoided Otto's men who were guarding the passes through the Alps and had arrived at Constance. Otto soon discovered that after Beatrix died in the summer of 1212 and Frederick arrived in Germany with his army in September 1212, most of his former Staufen supporters deserted him for Frederick, forcing Otto to withdraw to Cologne. On 5 December 1212, Frederick was elected king for a second time by a majority of the princes.\nThe support that Philip II of France gave to Frederick forced King John of England to throw his weight behind his nephew, Otto. The destruction of the French fleet in 1213 by the English saw John begin preparations for an invasion of France; in this, Otto saw a way of both destroying Frederick's French support and bolstering his prestige. He agreed to join John in the invasion, and in February 1214, as John advanced from the Loire, Otto, together with the Count of Flanders, was supposed to make a simultaneous attack from Flanders. Unfortunately, the three armies could not coordinate their efforts effectively. It was not until John, who had been disappointed in his hope for an easy victory after being driven from Roche-au-Moine, had retreated to his transports that the Imperial Army, with Otto at its head, assembled in the Low Countries.\nOn 27 July 1214, the opposing armies suddenly discovered they were close to each other, on the banks of the little river Marque (a tributary of the river De\u00fble), near the Bridge of Bouvines. Philip's army numbered some 15,000, while the allied forces possessed around 25,000 troops; the armies clashed at the Battle of Bouvines. It was a tight battle, but it was lost when Otto was carried off the field by his wounded and terrified horse, causing his forces to abandon the field. It is said that Philip II had sent to Frederick the Imperial Eagle, which Otto had left lying on the battlefield.\nBecause Otto was forced again to withdraw to his private possessions around Brunswick, this defeat allowed Frederick to take Aachen and Cologne, and so Otto was deposed in 1215. His cause of death is disputed, with some claims that he died of disease at Harzburg castle on 19 May 1218, requesting that he be mortally expiated in the atonement of his sins. However, Historian Kantorowicz described the death as \"gruesome\": \"deposed, dethroned, he was flung full length on the ground by the Abbot, confessing his sins, while the reluctant priests beat him bloodily to death with rods. Such was the end of the first and last Welf Emperor.\"\nHe is entombed in Brunswick Cathedral, where his parents are buried.\nFamily.\nOtto was related to every other King of Germany. He married twice:\nNeither marriage produced any children.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22812", "revid": "28398017", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22812", "title": "Octavian (disambiguation)", "text": "Octavian was the name of Augustus (63 BC \u2013 14 AD) before he became Emperor of Rome.\nOctavian or Octavianus may also refer to:\nPeople with the given name.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "22815", "revid": "22569803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22815", "title": "OpenCyc", "text": ""}
{"id": "22816", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22816", "title": "Outcome-based education", "text": "Educational system based on the desired goals\nOutcome-based education or outcomes-based education (OBE) is an educational theory that bases each part of an educational system around goals (outcomes). By the end of the educational experience, each student should have achieved the goal. There is no single specified style of teaching or assessment in OBE; instead, classes, opportunities, and assessments should all help students achieve the specified outcomes. The role of the faculty adapts into instructor, trainer, facilitator, and/or mentor based on the outcomes targeted.\nOutcome-based methods have been adopted in education systems around the world, at multiple levels. \nAustralia and South Africa adopted OBE policies from the 1990s to the mid 2000s, but were abandoned in the face of substantial community opposition. The United States has had an OBE program in place since 1994 that has been adapted over the years. In 2005, Hong Kong adopted an outcome-based approach for its universities. Malaysia implemented OBE in all of their public schools systems in 2008. The European Union has proposed an education shift to focus on outcomes, across the EU. In an international effort to accept OBE, The Washington Accord was created in 1989; it is an agreement to accept undergraduate engineering degrees that were obtained using OBE methods.\nDifferences from traditional education methods.\nOBE can primarily be distinguished from traditional education method by the way it incorporates three elements: theory of education, a systematic structure for education, and a specific approach to instructional practice. It organizes the entire educational system towards what are considered essential for the learners to successfully do at the end of their learning experiences. In this model, the term \"outcome\" is the core concept and sometimes used interchangeably with the terms \"competency\", \"standards\", \"benchmarks\", and \"attainment targets\". OBE also uses the same methodology formally and informally adopted in actual workplace to achieve outcomes. It focuses on the following skills when developing curricula and outcomes:\nIn a regional/local/foundational/electrical education system, students are given grades and rankings compared to each other. Content and performance expectations are based primarily on what was taught in the past to students of a given age of 12-18. The goal of this education was to present the knowledge and skills of an older generation to the new generation of students, and to provide students with an environment in which to learn. The process paid little attention (beyond the classroom teacher) to whether or not students learn any of the material.\nBenefits of OBE.\nClarity.\nThe focus on outcomes creates a clear expectation of what needs to be accomplished by the end of the course. Students will understand what is expected of them and teachers will know what they need to teach during the course. Clarity is important over years of schooling and when team teaching is involved. Each team member, or year in school, will have a clear understanding of what needs to be accomplished in each class, or at each level, allowing students to progress. Those designing and planning the curriculum are expected to work backwards once an outcome has been decided upon; they must determine what knowledge and skills will be required to reach the outcome.\nFlexibility.\nWith a clear sense of what needs to be accomplished, instructors will be able to structure their lessons around the student\u2019s needs. OBE does not specify a specific method of instruction, leaving instructors free to teach their students using any method. Instructors will also be able to recognize diversity among students by using various teaching and assessment techniques during their class. OBE is meant to be a student-centered learning model. Teachers are meant to guide and help the students understand the material in any way necessary, study guides, and group work are some of the methods instructors can use to facilitate students learning.\nComparison.\nOBE can be compared across different institutions. On an individual level, institutions can look at what outcomes a student has achieved to decide what level the student would be at within a new institution. On an institutional level, institutions can compare themselves, by checking to see what outcomes they have in common, and find places where they may need improvement, based on the achievement of outcomes at other institutions. The ability to compare easily across institutions allows students to move between institutions with relative ease. The institutions can compare outcomes to determine what credits to award the student. The clearly articulated outcomes should allow institutions to assess the student\u2019s achievements rapidly, leading to increased movement of students. These outcomes also work for school to work transitions. A potential employer can look at records of the potential employee to determine what outcomes they have achieved. They can then determine if the potential employee has the skills necessary for the job.\nInvolvement.\nStudent involvement in the classroom is a key part of OBE. Students are expected to do their own learning, so that they gain a full understanding of the material. Increased student involvement allows students to feel responsible for their own learning, and they should learn more through this individual learning. Other aspects of involvement are parental and community, through developing curriculum, or making changes to it. OBE outcomes are meant to be decided upon within a school system, or at a local level. Parents and community members are asked to give input in order to uphold the standards of education within a community and to ensure that students will be prepared for life after school.\nDrawbacks of OBE.\nDefinition.\nThe definitions of the outcomes decided upon are subject to interpretation by those implementing them. Across different programs or even different instructors outcomes could be interpreted differently, leading to a difference in education, even though the same outcomes were said to be achieved. By outlining specific outcomes, a holistic approach to learning is lost. Learning can find itself reduced to something that is specific, measurable, and observable. As a result, outcomes are not yet widely recognized as a valid way of conceptualizing what learning is about.\nAssessment problems.\nWhen determining if an outcome has been achieved, assessments may become too mechanical, looking only to see if the student has acquired the knowledge. The ability to use and apply the knowledge in different ways may not be the focus of the assessment. The focus on determining if the outcome has been achieved leads to a loss of understanding and learning for students, who may never be shown how to use the knowledge they have gained. Instructors are faced with a challenge: they must learn to manage an environment that can become fundamentally different from what they are accustomed to. In regards to giving assessments, they must be willing to put in the time required to create a valid, reliable assessment that ideally would allow students to demonstrate their understanding of the information, while remaining objective.\nGenerality.\nEducation outcomes can lead to a constrained nature of teaching and assessment. Assessing liberal outcomes such as creativity, respect for self and others, responsibility, and self-sufficiency, can become problematic. There is not a measurable, observable, or specific way to determine if a student has achieved these outcomes. Due to the nature of specific outcomes, OBE may actually work against its ideals of serving and creating individuals that have achieved many outcomes.\nInvolvement.\nParental involvement, as discussed in the benefits section can also be a drawback, if parents and community members are not willing to express their opinions on the quality of the education system, the system may not see a need for improvement, and not change to meet student\u2019s needs. Parents may also become too involved, requesting too many changes, so that important improvements get lost with other changes that are being suggested. Instructors will also find that their work is increased; they must work to first understand the outcome, then build a curriculum around each outcome they are required to meet. Instructors have found that implementing multiple outcomes is difficult to do equally, especially in primary school. Instructors will also find their work load increased if they chose to use an assessment method that evaluates students holistically.\nAdoption and removal.\nAustralia.\nIn the early 1990s, all states and territories in Australia developed intended curriculum documents largely based on OBE for their primary and secondary schools. Criticism arose shortly after implementation. Critics argued that no evidence existed that OBE could be implemented successfully on a large scale, in either the United States or Australia. An evaluation of Australian schools found that implementing OBE was difficult. Teachers felt overwhelmed by the amount of expected achievement outcomes. Educators believed that the curriculum outcomes did not attend to the needs of the students or teachers. Critics felt that too many expected outcomes left students with shallow understanding of the material. Many of Australia\u2019s current education policies have moved away from OBE and towards a focus on fully understanding the essential content, rather than learning more content with less understanding.\nWestern Australia.\nOfficially, an agenda to implement Outcomes Based Education took place between 1992 and 2008 in Western Australia. Dissatisfaction with OBE escalated from 2004 when the government proposed the implementation of an alternative assessment system using OBE 'levels' for years 11 and 12. With government school teachers not permitted to publicly express dissatisfaction with the new system, a community lobby group called PLATO as formed in June 2004 by high school science teacher Marko Vojkavi. Teachers anonymously expressed their views through the website and online forums, with the website quickly became one of the most widely read educational websites in Australia with more 180,000 hits per month and contained an archive of more than 10,000 articles on the subject of OBE implementation. In 2008 it was officially abandoned by the state government with Minister for Education Mark McGowan remarking that the 1990s fad \"to dispense with syllabus\" was over.\nEuropean Union.\nIn December 2012, the European Commission presented a new strategy to decrease youth unemployment rate, which at the time was close to 23% across the European Union http://. The European Qualifications Framework calls for a shift towards learning outcomes in primary and secondary schools throughout the EU. Students are expected to learn skills that they will need when they complete their education. It also calls for lessons to have a stronger link to employment through work-based learning (WBL). Work-based learning for students should also lead to recognition of vocational training for these students. The program also sets goals for learning foreign languages, and for teachers' continued education. It also highlights the importance of using technology, especially the internet, in learning to make it relevant to students.\nHong Kong.\nHong Kong\u2019s University Grants Committee adopted an outcomes-based approach to teaching and learning in 2005. No specific approach was created leaving universities to design the approach themselves. Universities were also left with a goal of ensuring an education for their students that will contribute to social and economic development, as defined by the community in which the university resides. With little to no direction or feedback from the outside universities will have to determine if their approach is achieving its goals on their own.\nMalaysia.\nOBE has been practiced in Malaysia since the 1950s; however, as of 2008, OBE is being implemented at all levels of education, especially tertiary education. This change is a result of the belief that the education system used prior to OBE inadequately prepared graduates for life outside of school. The Ministry of Higher Education has pushed for this change because of the number of unemployed graduates. Findings in 2006 state that nearly 70% of graduates from public universities were considered unemployed. A further study of those graduates found that they felt they lacked, job experience, communication skills, and qualifications relevant to the current job market. The Malaysian Qualifications Agency (MQA) was created to oversee quality of education and to ensure outcomes were being reached. The MQA created a framework that includes eight levels of qualification within higher education, covering three sectors; skills, vocational and technical, and academic. Along with meeting the standards set by the MQA, universities set and monitor their own outcome expectations for students\nSouth Africa.\nOBE was introduced to South Africa in the late 1990s by the post-apartheid government as part of its Curriculum 2005 program. http://, Initial support for the program derived from anti-apartheid education policies. The policy also gained support from the labor movements that borrowed ideas about competency-based education, and Vocational education from New Zealand and Australia, as well as the labor movement that critiqued the apartheid education system. With no strong alternative proposals, the idea of outcome-based education, and a national qualification framework, became the policy of the African National Congress government. This policy was believed to be a democratization of education, people would have a say in what they wanted the outcomes of education to be. It was also believed to be a way to increase education standards and increase the availability of education. The National Qualifications Framework (NQF) went into effect in 1997. In 2001 people realized that the intended effects were not being seen. By 2006 no proposals to change the system had been accepted by the government, causing a hiatus of the program. The program came to be viewed as a failure and a new curriculum improvement process was announced in 2010, slated to be implemented between 2012 and 2014.\nUnited States.\nIn 1983, a report from the National Commission on Excellence in Education declared that American education standards were eroding, that young people in the United States were not learning enough. In 1989, President Bush and the nation\u2019s governors set national goals to be achieved by the year 2000. Goals 2000: Educate America Act was signed in March 1994. The goal of this new reform was to show that results were being achieved in schools. In 2001, the No Child Left Behind Act took the place of Goals 2000. It mandated certain measurements as a condition of receiving federal education funds. States are free to set their own standards, but the federal law mandates public reporting of math and reading test scores for disadvantaged demographic subgroups, including racial minorities, low-income students, and special education students. Various consequences for schools that do not make \"adequate yearly progress\" are included in the law. In 2010, President Obama proposed improvements for the program. In 2012, the U.S. Department of Education invited states to request flexibility waivers in exchange for rigorous plans designed to improve students' education in the state.\nSri Lanka.\nAlthough it is unclear when the OBE was started in educational practices in Sri Lanka, In 2004, the UGC jointly with the CVCD, established a Quality Assurance and Accreditation (QAA) Unit (which was subsequently renamed as the QAA Council in 2005) started the first cycle of reviews based on the \u201cQuality Assurance Handbook for Sri Lankan Universities 2002\u201d. In the Handbook, emphasis is given on the Intended Learning Outcomes as one of the main measures in evaluating the study programmes, Subsequently, based on the feedback, the manual was revised. In the Revised Manual the Ministry of Higher Education (MoHE) proposed that Outcome-Based Education (OBE) together with the Student-Centred Learning (SCL) concepts be introduced within the higher education study programmes. Subsequently, almost all the manuals developed in this regard included the OBE, and more objective measures were introduced to measure them when reviewing. \nToday, all the teacher training programmes emphasize the training on OBE concepts such as the Certificate of Teaching in Higher Education (CTHE) run by the Universities and Postgraduate degree programme in Medical Education run by the Postgradute Institute of Medicine (PGIM). \nAs the QAC of the UGC has introduced a mechanism to include OBE concepts, and it is being frequently monitored, almost all the degree programmes in Sri Lanka are now adopting the OBE concepts into their curricula. \nIndia.\nIndia has become a permanent signatory member of the Washington Accord on 13 June 2014. India has started implementing OBE in higher technical education like diploma and undergraduate programmes. The National Board of Accreditation, a body for promoting international quality standards for technical education in India has started accrediting only the programmes running with OBE from 2013.\nThe National Board of Accreditation mandates establishing a culture of outcomes-based education in institutions that offer Engineering, Pharmacy, Management programs. Outcomes analysis and using the analytical reports to find gaps and carry out continuous improvement is essential cultural shift from how the above programs are run when OBE culture is not embraced. Outcomes analysis requires huge amount of data to be churned and made available at any time, anywhere. Such an access to scalable, accurate, automated and real-time data analysis is possible only if the institute adopts either excelsheet based measurement system or some kind of home-grown or commercial software system. It is observed that excelsheet based measurement and analysis system doesn't scale when the stakeholders want to analyse longitudinal data.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22817", "revid": "252261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22817", "title": "Olga of Kiev", "text": "Princess of Kiev, Orthodox saint (c. 890\u2013925)\nOlga (; ; c.\u2009890\u2013925 \u2013 11 July 969) was a regent of Kievan Rus' for her son Sviatoslav from 945 until 957. Following her baptism, Olga took the name Elen\u0430. She is known for her subjugation of the Drevlians, a tribe that had killed her husband Igor. Even though it was her grandson Vladimir who adopted Christianity and made it the state religion, she was the first ruler to be baptized.\nOlga is venerated as a saint in the Eastern Orthodox Church with the epithet \"Equal to the Apostles\". Her feast day is 11 July.\nEarly life.\nWhile Olga's birthdate is unknown, it could be as early as 890 AD and as late as 925 AD. According to the \"Primary Chronicle,\" Olga was of Varangian (Viking) origin and was born in Pleskov. Little is known about her life before her marriage to Prince Igor I of Kiev and the birth of their son, Sviatoslav. According to historian Alexey Karpov, Olga was no more than 15 years old at the time of her marriage. Igor was the son and heir of Rurik, founder of the Rurik dynasty. After his father's death, Igor was under the guardianship of Oleg, who had consolidated power in the region, conquering neighboring tribes and establishing a capital in Kiev. This loose tribal federation became known as Kievan Rus', a territory covering what are now parts of Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus.\nThe Drevlians were a neighboring tribe with which the growing Kievan Rus' empire had a complex relationship. The Drevlians had joined Kievan Rus' in military campaigns against the Byzantine Empire and paid tribute to Igor's predecessors. They stopped paying tribute upon Oleg's death and instead gave money to a local warlord. In 945, Igor set out for the Drevlian capital, Iskorosten, to force the tribe to pay tribute to Kievan Rus'. Confronted by Igor's larger army, the Drevlians backed down and paid him. As Igor and his army rode home, however, he decided the payment was not enough and returned, with only a small escort, seeking more tribute.\nUpon his arrival in their territory, the Drevlians murdered Igor. According to the Byzantine chronicler Leo the Deacon, Igor's death was caused by a gruesome act of torture in which he was \"captured by them, tied to tree trunks, and torn in two.\" Historian D. Sullivan has suggested that Leo may have invented this sensationalist version of Igor's death, taking inspiration from Diodorus Siculus' account of a similar killing method used by the robber Sinis, who lived near the Isthmus of Corinth and was killed by Theseus.\nRegency.\nAfter Igor's death in 945, Olga ruled Kievan Rus' as regent on behalf of their son Sviatoslav. She was the first woman to rule Kievan Rus'.\nLittle is known about Olga's tenure as ruler of Kiev, but the \"Primary Chronicle\" does give an account of her accession to the throne and her bloody revenge on the Drevlians for the murder of her husband. It also gives some insight into her role as civil leader of the Kievan people.\nAccording to archeologist Sergei Beletsky, Knyaginya Olga, like all the other rulers before Vladimir the Great, was also using the bident as her personal symbol.\nDrevlian Uprising.\nAfter Igor's death at the hands of the Drevlians, Olga assumed the throne because her three-year-old son Sviatoslav was too young to rule. The Drevlians, emboldened by their success in ambushing and killing the king, sent a messenger to Olga proposing that she marry his murderer, Prince Mal. Twenty Drevlian negotiators boated to Kiev to pass along their king's message and to ensure Olga's compliance. They arrived in her court and told the queen why they were in Kiev: \"to report that they had slain her husband... and that Olga should come and marry their Prince Mal.\" (line 6453). Olga responded:Your proposal is pleasing to me, indeed, my husband cannot rise again from the dead. But I desire to honor you tomorrow in the presence of my people. Return now to your boat, and remain there with an aspect of arrogance. I shall send for you on the morrow, and you shall say, \"We will not ride on horses nor go on foot, carry us in our boat.\" And you shall be carried in your boat.When the Drevlians returned the next day, they waited outside Olga's court to receive the honor she had promised. When they repeated the words she had told them to say, the people of Kiev rose up, carrying the Drevlians in their boat. The ambassadors believed this was a great honor as if they were being carried by palanquin. The people brought them into the court, where they were dropped into a trench that had been dug the day before under Olga's orders, where the ambassadors were buried alive. It is written that Olga bent down to watch them as they were buried and \"inquired whether they found the honor to their taste.\"\nOlga then sent a message to the Drevlians that they should send \"their distinguished men to her in Kiev, so that she might go to their Prince with due honor.\" The Drevlians, unaware of the fate of the first diplomatic party, gathered another party of men to send \"the best men who governed the land of Dereva.\" When they arrived, Olga commanded her people to draw them a bath and invited the men to appear before her after they had bathed. When the Drevlians entered the bathhouse, Olga had it set on fire from the doors, so that all the Drevlians within burned to death.\nOlga sent another message to the Drevlians, this time ordering them to \"prepare great quantities of mead in the city where you killed my husband, that I may weep over his grave and hold a funeral feast for him.\" When Olga and a small group of attendants arrived at Igor's tomb, she did indeed weep and hold a funeral feast. The Drevlians sat down to join them and began to drink heavily. When the Drevlians were drunk, she ordered her followers to kill them, \"and went about herself egging on her retinue to the massacre of the Drevlians.\" According to the \"Primary Chronicle\", five thousand Drevlians were killed on this night, but Olga returned to Kiev to prepare an army to finish off the survivors.\nThe initial conflict between the armies of the two nations went very well for the forces of Kievan Rus', who won the battle handily and drove the survivors back into their cities. Olga then led her army to Iskorosten (what is today Korosten), the city where her husband had been slain, and laid siege to the city. The siege lasted for a year without success, when Olga thought of a plan to trick the Drevlians. She sent them a message: \"Why do you persist in holding out? All your cities have surrendered to me and submitted to tribute, so that the inhabitants now cultivate their fields and their lands in peace. But you had rather die of hunger, without submitting to tribute.\" (line 6454).\nThe Drevlians responded that they would submit to tribute, but that they were afraid she was still intent on avenging her husband. Olga answered that the murder of the messengers sent to Kiev, as well as the events of the feast night, had been enough for her. She then asked them for a small request: \"Give me three pigeons... and three sparrows from each house.\" The Drevlians rejoiced at the prospect of the siege ending for so small a price, and did as she asked.\nOlga then instructed her army to attach a piece of sulphur bound with small pieces of cloth to each bird. At nightfall, Olga told her soldiers to set the pieces aflame and release the birds. They returned to their nests within the city, which subsequently set the city ablaze. As the \"Primary Chronicle\" tells it: \"There was not a house that was not consumed, and it was impossible to extinguish the flames, because all the houses caught fire at once.\" As the people fled the burning city, Olga ordered her soldiers to catch them, killing some of them and giving the others as slaves to her followers. She left the remnant to pay tribute.\nGovernance.\nOlga remained regent ruler of Kievan Rus' with the support of the army and her people. She changed the system of tribute gathering (poliudie) in the first legal reform recorded in Eastern Europe. Tributes were regularised under her rule. She continued to evade proposals of marriage, defended the city during the Siege of Kiev in 968, and saved the power of the throne for her son.\nAfter her dramatic subjugation of the Drevlians, the \"Primary Chronicle\" recounts how Olga \"passed through the land of Dereva, accompanied by her son and her retinue, establishing laws and tribute. Her trading posts and hunting reserves are still there.\" As queen, Olga established trading-posts and collected tribute along the Msta and the Luga rivers. She established hunting grounds, boundary posts, towns, and trading posts across the empire. Olga's work helped to centralize state rule with these trade centers, called \"pogosti\", which served as administrative centers in addition to their mercantile roles. Olga's network of \"pogosti\" would prove important in the ethnic and cultural unification of the Rus' people, and her border posts began the establishment of national boundaries for the kingdom.\nDuring her son's prolonged military campaigns, she remained in charge of Kiev, residing in the castle of Vyshgorod with her grandsons.\nShe set up hunting lodges where birds (probably birds of prey) were caught to be shipped to Byzantium.\nConversion.\nIn the 950s, Olga traveled to Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire, to visit Emperor Constantine VII. There are three primary sources about this event: a prescriptive account of formalities and etiquette in \"De Ceremoniis\" or \"Book of Ceremonies\" (c. 950s, written or commissioned by Byzantine emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogennetos in Greek), a brief passage in the \"Synopsis of Histories\" (written c. 1070s by Byzantine historian John Skylitzes in Greek), and a long adventurous story in the \"Primary Chronicle\" (compiled in Kiev c. 1110s in Old Church Slavonic by an unknown Rus' monk). All three sources disagree on why Olga went to Constantinople, when, what happened there, and how it happened.\nThe \"Book of Ceremonies\" is concerned with etiquette at the Byzantine imperial court, describing all the formalities during ceremonies such as embassies, receptions and dinners, and uses various practical examples to illustrate established protocol. Olga's visit is used as an example of how to receive a Rus' prince(ss), portraying her in a positive manner. Olga's entourage consisted of various representatives of other Rus' princes, as well as 43 merchants, and one priest named Gregory. Olga's ladies-in-waiting and princesses who were her relatives were also present. There is no mention of baptism, nor of her taking on the Christian name 'Helena', in the \"Book of Ceremonies\".\nJohn Skylitzes recorded only a very brief passage in chapter 11, section 6 of his \"Synopsis of Histories\": Olga 'came to Constantinople after her husband died. She was baptized and she demonstrated fervent devotion, then she went back home.' Unlike the \"Book of Ceremonies\", Olga is said to have been baptised in Constantinople and being devout, but not doing anything else.\nOnce in Constantinople, Olga converted to Christianity with the assistance of the Emperor and the Patriarch Polyeuctus. While the \"Primary Chronicle\" does not divulge Olga's motivation for her visit or conversion, it does go into great detail on the conversion process, in which she was baptized and instructed in the ways of Christianity.\nWhile the \"Primary Chronicle\" notes that Olga was christened with the name \"Helena\" after the ancient Saint Helena (the mother of Constantine the Great), Jonathan Shepard argues that Olga's baptismal name comes from the contemporary emperor's wife, Helena. The observation that Olga was \"worthy to reign with him in his city\" suggests that the emperor was interested in marrying her. While the \"Chronicle\" explains Constantine's desire to take Olga as his wife as stemming from the fact that she was \"fair of countenance and wise as well,\" marrying Olga could certainly have helped him gain power over Rus'.\nThe \"Chronicle\" recounts that Olga asked the emperor to baptize her knowing that his baptismal sponsorship, by the rules of spiritual kinship, would make marriage between them a kind of spiritual incest. Though her desire to become Christian may have been genuine, this request was also a way for her to maintain political independence. After the baptism, when Constantine repeated his marriage proposal, Olga answered that she could not marry him since church law forbade a goddaughter to marry her godfather.\nFrancis Butler argues that the story of the proposal was a literary embellishment, describing an event that is highly unlikely to have ever actually occurred. In fact, at the time of her baptism, Constantine already had an empress. In addition to uncertainty over the truth of the \"Chronicle\"'s telling of events in Constantinople, there is controversy over the details of her conversion to Christianity. According to Church Slavonic sources, she was baptized in Constantinople in 957. Byzantine sources, however, indicate that she was a Christian prior to her 957 visit.\nIt seems likely that she was baptized in Kiev around 955 and, following a second christening in Constantinople, took the Christian name Helen. Olga was not the first person from Rus' to convert from her pagan ways\u2014there were Christians in Igor's court who had taken oaths at the St. Elias Church in Kiev for the Rus'\u2013Byzantine Treaty in 945\u2014but she was the most powerful Rus' individual to undergo baptism during her life.\nEfforts to Christianize Kievan Rus'.\n\"The Primary\" \"Chronicle\" reports that Olga received the Patriarch's blessing for her journey home, and that once she arrived, she unsuccessfully attempted to convert her son to Christianity:Now Olga dwelt with her son Sviatoslav, and she urged him to be baptized, but he would not listen to her suggestion, though when any man wished to be baptized, he was not hindered, but only mocked. For to the infidels, the Christian faith is foolishness. They do not comprehend it, because they walk in darkness and do not see the glory of God. Their hearts are hardened, and they can neither hear with their ears nor see with their eyes. For Solomon has said, \"The deeds of the unrighteous are far from wisdom. Inasmuch as I have called you, and ye heard me not, I sharpened my words, and ye understood not. But ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would have none of my reproach. For they have hated knowledge, and the fear of Jehovah they have not chosen. They would none of my counsel, but despised all my reproof.\"This passage highlights the hostility towards Christianity in Kievan Rus' in the tenth century. In the \"Chronicle,\" Sviatoslav declares that his followers would \"laugh\" if he were to accept Christianity. While Olga tried to convince her son that his followers would follow his example if he converted, her efforts were in vain. However, her son agreed not to persecute those in his kingdom who did convert, which marked a crucial turning point for Christianity in the area. Despite the resistance of her people to Christianity, Olga built churches in Kiev, Pskov, and elsewhere.\nRelations with the Holy Roman Emperor.\nSeven Latin sources document Olga's embassy to Holy Roman Emperor Otto I in 959. The continuation of Regino of Pr\u00fcm mentions that the envoys requested the emperor to appoint a bishop and priests for their nation. The chronicler accuses the envoys of lies, commenting that their trick was not exposed until later. Thietmar of Merseburg says that the first archbishop of Magdeburg, Adalbert of Magdeburg, before being promoted to this high rank, was sent by Emperor Otto to the country of the Rus' (\"Rusciae\") as a simple bishop but was expelled by pagan allies of Sviatoslav I. The same data is repeated in the annals of Quedlinburg and Hildesheim.\nIn 2018, Russian historian and writer Boris Akunin pointed out the importance of a 2-year gap between invitation and arrival of bishops: \"The failure of Olga's Byzantine trip has inflicted a severe blow to her party. The Grand Knyaginya made a second attempt to find a Christian patron, now in the West. However, it appears that, between the embassy's dispatch to Emperor Otto in 959 and Adalbert's arrival in Kiev in 961, a bloodless coup occurred. Pagan party prevailed, the young Sviatoslav pushed his mother into the background, and that's why the German bishops had to return empty-handed.\"\nAccording to Russian historian Vladimir Petrukhin, Olga invited the Roman rite bishops because she wanted to motivate Byzantine priests to catechize the Rus' people more enthusiastically, by introducing competition.\nDeath.\nAccording to the \"Primary Chronicle\", Olga died from illness in 969, soon after the Pechenegs' siege of the city. When Sviatoslav announced plans to move his throne to the Danube region, the ailing Olga convinced him to stay with her during her final days. Only three days later, she died and her family and larger parts of Kievan Rus' mourned:Sviatoslav announced to his mother and his boyars, \"I do not care to remain in Kiev, but should prefer to live in Peryaslavets on the Danube, since that is the centre of my realm, where all riches are concentrated; gold, silks, wine, and various fruits from Greece, silver and horses from Hungary and Bohemia, and from Rus' furs, wax, honey, and slaves.\" But Olga made reply, \"You behold me in my weakness. Why do you desire to depart from me?\" For she was already in precarious health. She thus remonstrated with him and begged him first to bury her and then to go wheresoever he would. Three days later Olga died. Her son wept for her with great mourning, as did likewise her grandsons and all the people. They thus carried her out, and buried her in her tomb. Olga had given command not to hold a funeral feast for her, for she had a priest who performed the last rites over the sainted Princess.Although he disapproved of his mother's Christian tradition, Sviatoslav heeded Olga's request that her priest, Gregory, conduct a Christian funeral without the ritual pagan burial feast. Her tomb remained in Kiev for over two centuries, but was destroyed by the Mongolian-Tatar armies of Batu Khan in 1240. The sarcophagus found in 1826 during excavations of Church of the Tithes conducted by architect Nikolai Efimov was attributed as being Olga's and moved first to the Historical Museum and then to St. Sophia Cathedral.\nLegacy.\nSainthood.\nAt the time of her death, it seemed that Olga's attempt to make Kievan Rus' a Christian territory had been a failure. Nonetheless, Olga's Christianizing mission would be brought to fruition by her grandson, Vladimir, who officially adopted Christianity in 988. The \"Primary Chronicle\" highlights Olga's holiness in contrast to the pagans around her during her life as well as the significance of her decision to convert to Christianity:Olga was the precursor of the Christian land, even as the day-spring precedes the sun and as the dawn precedes the day. For she shone like the moon by night, and she was radiant among the infidels like a pearl in the mire, since the people were soiled, and not yet purified of their sin by holy baptism. But she herself was cleansed by this sacred purification... She was the first from Rus' to enter the kingdom of God, and the sons of Rus' thus praise her as their leader, for since her death she has interceded with God in their behalf.\nIt is unclear when Olga was canonized, but John Fennell argued that this was most likely in 1284, together with Vladimir, when Metropolitan Maxim summoned the bishops to a council, and was recorded the next year visiting \"all the Russian land (i.e. Suzdalia, northeast Russia), teaching, instructing and administering,\" and spreading news about their canonization, including in Novgorod and Pskov. A northern Russian manuscript from the 15th century mentions that \"when Vladimir unearthed the body of Olga, his grandmother [and discovered that it was] uncorrupted, [he then] placed it in a wooden coffin in the Church of the Tithe\". In 1547, nearly 600 years after her 969 death, the Russian Orthodox Church officially named Olga a saint, equal-to-the-apostles.\nBecause of her proselytizing influence, the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Ruthenian Greek Catholic Church, and the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church call Olga by the honorific Isap\u00f3stolos, \"Equal to the Apostles\". Olga's feast day is July 11, the date of her death. The Orthodox Church of Ukraine celebrates her memory on 24 July. In keeping with her own biography, she is the patron of widows and converts.\nOlga is venerated as a saint in East Slavic-speaking countries where churches use the Byzantine Rite: Eastern Orthodox Church (especially in the Russian Orthodox Church), Greek Catholic Church (especially in the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church), in churches with Byzantine Rite Lutheranism, and among Western Catholics in Russia.\nModern reception.\nScholarship has traditionally focused on Olga's role in the spread of Christianity to Eastern Europe and Russia as well as her role in advising her son against persecution of Christians in the Kievan Rus'.\nModern publications, on the other hand, reflect a broader interest in Olga beyond her role in expanding Christendom. Detailing her story, a 2018 article claimed she showed her countrymen how \"a woman could rule with strength and decision.\" \"The Russian Primary Chronicle's\" claim that Olga was of Viking descent also received attention for its possible contribution to her \"warrior spirit\".\nRussian historian Boris Akunin argues though she certainly reconquered the Drevlians, only her killing of their first envoy is plausible, since Iskorosten was just two days' ride from Kiev, making it difficult to conceal the first public murder.\nArts and literature.\nIn 1981 a new ballet based on Olga's life was composed to commemorate the 1500th anniversary of the city of Kiev.\nToponyms.\nIn most cities of Ukraine there is Knyagini Olga Street. There is Olhynska Street in the city of Kiev.\nCleveland has Saint Olga Ave. There is also St. Olga Street in the city of Hamilton (Canada).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "22818", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22818", "title": "Olympus Mons", "text": "Martian volcano, highest point on Mars\nOlympus Mons (; ) is a large shield volcano on Mars. It is over high as measured by the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA), about 2.5 times the elevation of Mount Everest above sea level. It is Mars's tallest volcano, its tallest planetary mountain, and is approximately tied with Rheasilvia on Vesta as the tallest mountain currently discovered in the Solar System. It is associated with the volcanic region of Tharsis Montes. It last erupted 25 million years ago.\nOlympus Mons is the youngest of the large volcanoes on Mars, having formed during the Martian Hesperian Period with eruptions continuing well into the Amazonian Period. It has been known to astronomers since the late 19th century as the albedo feature Nix Olympica (Latin for \"Olympic Snow\"), and its mountainous nature was suspected well before space probes confirmed it as a mountain.\nTwo impact craters on Olympus Mons have been assigned provisional names by the International Astronomical Union: the Karzok crater and the Pangboche crater. They are two of several suspected source areas for shergottites, the most abundant class of Martian meteorites.\nDescription.\nAs a shield volcano, Olympus Mons resembles the shape of the large volcanoes making up the Hawaiian Islands. The edifice is about wide. Because the mountain is so large, with complex structure at its edges, allocating a height to it is difficult. Olympus Mons stands nearly above the Martian surface, growing to such heights primarily as a result of prolonged volcanic activity, weaker gravity, and less intense weather systems that cause erosion. Its local relief, from the foot of the cliffs which form its northwest margin to its peak, is over (a little over twice the height of Mauna Kea as measured from its base on the ocean floor). The total elevation change from the plains of Amazonis Planitia, over to the northwest, to the summit approaches . The summit of the mountain has six nested calderas (collapsed craters) forming an irregular depression \u00d7 across and up to deep. The volcano's outer edge consists of an escarpment, or cliff, up to tall (although obscured by lava flows in places), a feature unique among the shield volcanoes of Mars, which may have been created by enormous flank landslides. Olympus Mons covers an area of about , which is approximately the size of Italy or the Philippines, and it is supported by a thick lithosphere. The extraordinary size of Olympus Mons is likely because Mars lacks mobile tectonic plates. Unlike on Earth, the crust of Mars remains fixed over a stationary hotspot, and a volcano can continue to discharge lava until it reaches an enormous height.\nBeing a shield volcano, Olympus Mons has a very gently sloping profile. The average slope on the volcano's flanks is only 5%. Slopes are steepest near the middle part of the flanks and grow shallower toward the base, giving the flanks a concave upward profile. Its flanks are shallower and extend farther from the summit in the northwestern direction than they do to the southeast. The volcano's shape and profile have been likened to a \"circus tent\" held up by a single pole that is shifted off center.\nBecause of the size and shallow slopes of Olympus Mons, an observer standing on the Martian surface would be unable to view the entire profile of the volcano, even from a great distance. The curvature of the planet and the volcano itself would obscure such a synoptic view. Similarly, an observer near the summit would be unaware of standing on a very high mountain, as the slope of the volcano would extend far beyond the horizon, a mere 3 kilometers away.\nThe typical atmospheric pressure at the top of Olympus Mons is 72 pascals, about 12% of the average Martian surface pressure of 600 pascals. Both are exceedingly low by terrestrial standards; by comparison, the atmospheric pressure at the summit of Mount Everest is 32,000 pascals, or about 32% of Earth's sea level pressure. Even so, high-altitude orographic clouds frequently drift over the Olympus Mons summit, and airborne Martian dust is still present. Although the average Martian surface atmospheric pressure is less than one percent of Earth's, the much lower gravity of Mars increases the atmosphere's scale height; in other words, Mars's atmosphere is expansive and does not drop off in density with height as sharply as Earth's.\nThe composition of Olympus Mons is approximately 44% silicates, 17.5% iron oxides (which give the planet its red coloration), 7% aluminium, 6% magnesium, 6% calcium, and particularly high proportions of sulfur dioxide with 7%. These results point to the surface being largely composed of basalts and other mafic rocks, which would have erupted as low viscosity lava flows and hence lead to the low gradients on the surface of the planet.\nGeology.\nOlympus Mons is the result of many thousands of highly fluid, basaltic lava flows that poured from volcanic vents over a long period of time (the Hawaiian Islands exemplify similar shield volcanoes on a smaller scale \u2013 see Mauna Kea). Like the basalt volcanoes on Earth, Martian basaltic volcanoes are capable of erupting enormous quantities of ash. Due to the reduced gravity of Mars compared to Earth, there are lesser buoyant forces on the magma rising out of the crust. In addition, the magma chambers are thought to be much larger and deeper than the ones found on Earth. The flanks of Olympus Mons are made up of innumerable lava flows and channels. Many of the flows have levees along their margins (pictured). The cooler, outer margins of the flow solidify, leaving a central trough of molten, flowing lava. Partially collapsed lava tubes are visible as chains of pit craters, and broad lava fans formed by lava emerging from intact, subsurface tubes are also common. In places along the volcano's base, solidified lava flows can be seen spilling out into the surrounding plains, forming broad aprons, and burying the basal escarpment. Crater counts from high-resolution images taken by the Mars Express orbiter in 2004 indicate that lava flows on the northwestern flank of Olympus Mons range in age from 115 million years old (Mya) to only 2 Mya. These ages are very recent in geological terms, suggesting that the mountain may still be volcanically active, though in a very quiescent and episodic fashion.\nThe caldera complex at the peak of the volcano is made of at least six overlapping calderas and caldera segments (pictured). Calderas are formed by roof collapse following depletion and withdrawal of the subsurface magma chamber after an eruption. Each caldera thus represents a separate pulse of volcanic activity on the mountain. The largest and oldest caldera segment appears to have formed as a single, large lava lake. Using geometric relationships of caldera dimensions from laboratory models, scientists have estimated that the magma chamber associated with the largest caldera on Olympus Mons lies at a depth of about below the caldera floor. Crater size-frequency distributions on the caldera floors indicate the calderas range in age from 350\u00a0Mya to about 150\u00a0Mya. All probably formed within 100 million years of each other. It is possible that the magma chambers within Olympus Mons received new magma from the mantle after the caldera floors formed, leading to the inflation of each chamber and uplift of parts of the volcano summit.\nOlympus Mons is structurally and topographically asymmetrical. The longer, more shallow northwestern flank displays extensional features, such as large slumps and normal faults. In contrast, the volcano's steeper southeastern side has features indicating compression, including step-like terraces in the volcano's mid-flank region (interpreted as thrust faults) and a number of wrinkle ridges located at the basal escarpment. Why opposite sides of the mountain should show different styles of deformation may lie in how large shield volcanoes grow laterally and in how variations within the volcanic substrate have affected the mountain's final shape.\nLarge shield volcanoes grow not only by adding material to their flanks as erupted lava, but also by spreading laterally at their bases. As a volcano grows in size, the stress field underneath the volcano changes from compressional to extensional. A subterranean rift may develop at the base of the volcano, causing the underlying crust to spread apart. If the volcano rests on sediments containing mechanically weak layers (e.g., beds of water-saturated clay), detachment zones (d\u00e9collements) may develop in the weak layers. The extensional stresses in the detachment zones can produce giant landslides and normal faults on the volcano's flanks, leading to the formation of a basal escarpment. Further from the volcano, these detachment zones can express themselves as a succession of overlapping, gravity driven thrust faults. This mechanism has long been cited as an explanation of the Olympus Mons aureole deposits (discussed below).\nOlympus Mons lies at the edge of the Tharsis bulge, an ancient vast volcanic plateau most likely formed by the end of the Noachian Period. During the Hesperian, when Olympus Mons began to form, the volcano was located on a shallow slope that descended from the high in Tharsis into the northern lowland basins. Over time, these basins received large volumes of sediment eroded from Tharsis and the southern highlands. The sediments likely contained abundant Noachian-aged phyllosilicates (clays) formed during an early period on Mars when surface water was abundant, and were thickest in the northwest where basin depth was greatest. As the volcano grew through lateral spreading, low-friction detachment zones preferentially developed in the thicker sediment layers to the northwest, creating the basal escarpment and widespread lobes of aureole material (Lycus Sulci). Spreading also occurred to the southeast; however, it was more constrained in that direction by the Tharsis rise, which presented a higher-friction zone at the volcano's base. Friction was higher in that direction because the sediments were thinner and probably consisted of coarser grained material resistant to sliding. The competent and rugged basement rocks of Tharsis acted as an additional source of friction. This inhibition of southeasterly basal spreading in Olympus Mons could account for the structural and topographic asymmetry of the mountain. Numerical models of particle dynamics involving lateral differences in friction along the base of Olympus Mons have been shown to reproduce the volcano's present shape and asymmetry fairly well.\nIt has been speculated that the detachment along the weak layers was aided by the presence of high-pressure water in the sediment pore spaces, which would have interesting astrobiological implications. If water-saturated zones still exist in sediments under the volcano, they would likely have been kept warm by a high geothermal gradient and residual heat from the volcano's magma chamber. Potential springs or seeps around the volcano would offer many possibilities for detecting microbial life.\nEarly observations and naming.\nOlympus Mons and a few other volcanoes in the Tharsis region stand high enough to reach above the frequent Martian dust-storms recorded by telescopic observers as early as the 19th century. The astronomer Patrick Moore pointed out that Schiaparelli (1835\u20131910) \"had found that his \"Nodus Gordis\" and \"Olympic Snow\" [Nix Olympica] were almost the only features to be seen\" during dust storms, and \"guessed correctly that they must be high\".\nThe Mariner 9 spacecraft arrived in orbit around Mars in 1971 during a global dust-storm. The first objects to become visible as the dust began to settle, the tops of the Tharsis volcanoes, demonstrated that the altitude of these features greatly exceeded that of any mountain found on Earth, as astronomers expected. Observations of the planet from Mariner 9 confirmed that Nix Olympica was a volcano. Ultimately, astronomers adopted the name \"Olympus Mons\" for the albedo feature known as Nix Olympica.\nRegional setting and surrounding features.\nOlympus Mons is located between the northwestern edge of the Tharsis region and the eastern edge of Amazonis Planitia. It stands about from the other three large Martian shield volcanoes, collectively called the Tharsis Montes (Arsia Mons, Pavonis Mons, and Ascraeus Mons). The Tharsis Montes are slightly smaller than Olympus Mons.\nA wide, annular depression or moat about deep surrounds the base of Olympus Mons and is thought to be due to the volcano's immense weight pressing down on the Martian crust. The depth of this depression is greater on the northwest side of the mountain than on the southeast side.\nOlympus Mons is partially surrounded by a region of distinctive grooved or corrugated terrain known as the Olympus Mons aureole. The aureole consists of several large lobes. Northwest of the volcano, the aureole extends a distance of up to and is known as Lycus Sulci (). East of Olympus Mons, the aureole is partially covered by lava flows, but where it is exposed it goes by different names (Gigas Sulci, for example). The origin of the aureole remains debated, but it was likely formed by huge landslides or gravity-driven thrust sheets that sloughed off the edges of the Olympus Mons shield.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22819", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22819", "title": "Object\u2013verb\u2013agent", "text": ""}
{"id": "22820", "revid": "161456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22820", "title": "Odobenidae", "text": "Seal family which includes the walrus\nOdobenidae is a family of pinnipeds, of which the only extant species is the walrus (\"Odobenus rosmarus\"). In the past, however, the group was much more diverse, and includes more than a dozen fossil genera.\nTaxonomy.\nAll genera except \"Odobenus\" are extinct.\nIn re-analyzing \"Pelagiarctos\", Boessenecker et al. (2013) proposed the phylogenetic relationships of Odobenidae as follows (this analysis excluded \"Archaeodobenus, Titanotaria, Nanodobenus,\" and \"Pliopedia;\" and included \"Enaliarctos, Pteronarctos, Allodesmus, Desmatophoca, Callorhinus, Monachus,\" and \"Erignathus\"):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22821", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22821", "title": "Open-source", "text": ""}
{"id": "22822", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22822", "title": "Australian Outback", "text": ""}
{"id": "22823", "revid": "15919640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22823", "title": "Obi-wan error", "text": ""}
{"id": "22825", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22825", "title": "Obi-Wan error", "text": ""}
{"id": "22826", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22826", "title": "Object database", "text": "Database presenting data as objects\nAn object database or object-oriented database is a database management system in which information is represented in the form of objects as used in object-oriented programming. Object databases are different from relational databases which are table-oriented. A third type, object\u2013relational databases, is a hybrid of both approaches.\nObject databases have been considered since the early 1980s.\nOverview.\nObject-oriented database management systems (OODBMSs) also called ODBMS (Object Database Management System) combine database capabilities with object-oriented programming language capabilities.\nOODBMSs allow object-oriented programmers to develop the product, store them as objects, and replicate or modify existing objects to make new objects within the OODBMS. Because the database is integrated with the programming language, the programmer can maintain consistency within one environment, in that both the OODBMS and the programming language will use the same model of representation. Relational DBMS projects, by way of contrast, maintain a clearer division between the database model and the application.\nAs the usage of web-based technology increases with the implementation of Intranets and extranets, companies have a vested interest in OODBMSs to display their complex data. Using a DBMS that has been specifically designed to store data as objects gives an advantage to those companies that are geared towards multimedia presentation or organizations that utilize computer-aided design (CAD).\nSome object-oriented databases are designed to work well with object-oriented programming languages such as Delphi, Ruby, Python, JavaScript, Perl, Java, C#, Visual Basic .NET, C++, Objective-C and Smalltalk; others such as JADE have their own programming languages. OODBMSs use exactly the same model as object-oriented programming languages.\nHistory.\nObject database management systems grew out of research during the early to mid-1970s into having intrinsic database management support for graph-structured objects. The term \"object-oriented database system\" first appeared around 1985. Notable research projects included Encore-Ob/Server (Brown University), EXODUS (University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison), IRIS (Hewlett-Packard), ODE (Bell Labs), ORION (Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation or MCC), Vodak (GMD-IPSI), and Zeitgeist (Texas Instruments). The ORION project had more published papers than any of the other efforts. Won Kim of MCC compiled the best of those papers in a book published by The MIT Press.\nEarly commercial products included Gemstone (Servio Logic, name changed to GemStone Systems), Gbase (Graphael), and Vbase (Ontologic). Additional commercial products entered the market in the late 1980s through the mid 1990s. These included ITASCA (Itasca Systems), Jasmine (Fujitsu, marketed by Computer Associates), Matisse (Matisse Software), Objectivity/DB (Objectivity, Inc.), ObjectStore (Progress Software, acquired from eXcelon which was originally Object Design, Incorporated), ONTOS (Ontos, Inc., name changed from Ontologic), O2 (O2 Technology, merged with several companies, acquired by Informix, which was in turn acquired by IBM), POET (now http:// from Versant which acquired Poet Software), Versant Object Database (http:// Corporation), VOSS (Logic Arts) and JADE (Jade Software Corporation). Some of these products remain on the market and have been joined by new open source and commercial products such as InterSystems Cach\u00e9.\nObject database management systems added the concept of persistence to object programming languages. The early commercial products were integrated with various languages: GemStone (Smalltalk), Gbase (LISP), Vbase (COP) and VOSS (Virtual Object Storage System for Smalltalk). For much of the 1990s, C++ dominated the commercial object database management market. Vendors added Java in the late 1990s and more recently, C#.\nStarting in 2004, object databases have seen a second growth period when open source object databases emerged that were widely affordable and easy to use, because they are entirely written in OOP languages like Smalltalk, Java, or C#, such as Versant's db4o (db4objects), DTS/S1 from Obsidian Dynamics and Perst (McObject), available under dual open source and commercial licensing.\nAdoption of object databases.\nObject databases based on persistent programming acquired a niche in application areas such as\nengineering and spatial databases, telecommunications, and scientific areas such as high energy physics and molecular biology.\nAnother group of object databases focuses on embedded use in devices, packaged software, and real-time systems.\nTechnical features.\nMost object databases also offer some kind of query language, allowing objects to be found using a declarative programming approach. It is in the area of object query languages, and the integration of the query and navigational interfaces, that the biggest differences between products are found. An attempt at standardization was made by the ODMG with the Object Query Language, OQL.\nAccess to data can be faster because an object can be retrieved directly without a search, by following pointers.\nAnother area of variation between products is in the way that the schema of a database is defined. A general characteristic, however, is that the programming language and the database schema use the same type definitions.\nMultimedia applications are facilitated because the class methods associated with the data are responsible for its correct interpretation.\nMany object databases, for example Gemstone or VOSS, offer support for versioning. An object can be viewed as the set of all its versions. Also, object versions can be treated as objects in their own right. Some object databases also provide systematic support for triggers and constraints which are the basis of active databases.\nThe efficiency of such a database is also greatly improved in areas which demand massive amounts of data about one item. For example, a banking institution could get the user's account information and provide them efficiently with extensive information such as transactions, account information entries etc.\nStandards.\nThe Object Data Management Group was a consortium of object database and object\u2013relational mapping vendors, members of the academic community, and interested parties. Its goal was to create a set of specifications that would allow for portable applications that store objects in database management systems. It published several versions of its specification. The last release was ODMG 3.0. By 2001, most of the major object database and object\u2013relational mapping vendors claimed conformance to the ODMG Java Language Binding. Compliance to the other components of the specification was mixed. In 2001, the ODMG Java Language Binding was submitted to the Java Community Process as a basis for the Java Data Objects specification. The ODMG member companies then decided to concentrate their efforts on the Java Data Objects specification. As a result, the ODMG disbanded in 2001.\nMany object database ideas were also absorbed into and have been implemented in varying degrees in object\u2013relational database products.\nIn 2005 Cook, Rai, and Rosenberger proposed to drop all standardization efforts to introduce additional object-oriented query APIs but rather use the OO programming language itself, i.e., Java and .NET, to express queries. As a result, Native Queries emerged. Similarly, Microsoft announced Language Integrated Query (LINQ) and DLINQ, an implementation of LINQ, in September 2005, to provide close, language-integrated database query capabilities with its programming languages C# and VB.NET 9.\nIn February 2006, the Object Management Group (OMG) announced that they had been granted the right to develop new specifications based on the ODMG 3.0 specification and the formation of the Object Database Technology Working Group (ODBT WG). The ODBT WG planned to create a set of standards that would incorporate advances in object database technology (e.g., replication), data management (e.g., spatial indexing), and data formats (e.g., XML) and to include new features into these standards that support domains where object databases are being adopted (e.g., real-time systems). The work of the ODBT WG was suspended in March 2009 when, subsequent to the economic turmoil in late 2008, the ODB vendors involved in this effort decided to focus their resources elsewhere.\nIn January 2007 the World Wide Web Consortium gave final recommendation status to the XQuery language. XQuery uses XML as its data model. Some of the ideas developed originally for object databases found their way into XQuery, but XQuery is not intrinsically object-oriented. Because of the popularity of XML, XQuery engines compete with object databases as a vehicle for storage of data that is too complex or variable to hold conveniently in a relational database. XQuery also allows modules to be written to provide encapsulation features that have been provided by Object-Oriented systems.\nXQuery v1 and XPath v2 and later are powerful and are available in both open source and libre (FOSS) software, as well as in commercial systems. They are easy to learn and use, and very powerful and fast. They are not relational and XQuery is not based on SQL (although one of the people who designed XQuery also co-invented SQL). But they are also not object-oriented, in the programming sense: XQuery does not use encapsulation with hiding, implicit dispatch, and classes and methods. XQuery databases generally use XML and JSON as an interchange format, although other formats are used.\nSince the early 2000s JSON has gained community adoption and popularity in applications where developers are in control of the data format. JSONiq, a query-analog of XQuery for JSON (sharing XQuery's core expressions and operations), demonstrated the functional equivalence of the JSON and XML formats for data-oriented information. In this context, the main strategy of OODBMS maintainers was to retrofit JSON to their databases (by using it as the internal data type).\nIn January 2016, with the PostgreSQL 9.5 release was the first FOSS OODBMS to offer an efficient JSON internal datatype (JSONB) with a complete set of functions and operations, for all basic relational and non-relational manipulations.\nComparison with RDBMSs.\nAn object database stores complex data and relationships between data directly, without mapping to relational rows and columns, and this makes them suitable for applications dealing with very complex data. Objects have a many-to-many relationship and are accessed by the use of pointers. Pointers are linked to objects to establish relationships. Another benefit of an OODBMS is that it can be programmed with small procedural differences without affecting the entire system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22827", "revid": "36777881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22827", "title": "Lacto-ovo vegetarian", "text": ""}
{"id": "22829", "revid": "36449898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22829", "title": "Orgy of the Dead", "text": "Orgy of the Dead is a 1965 American erotic horror film directed by Stephen C. Apostolof (under the alias A. C. Stephen) and written by cult film director Ed Wood, who also adapted the screenplay into a novel. The film belongs to the genre of \"nudie-cuties\", defined as narrative-based films featuring female nudity that originated from earlier films featuring striptease performances and burlesque shows.\n\"Orgy of the Dead\" stars Criswell, Fawn Silver, and Pat Barringer. It was distributed by Crown International Pictures.\nPlot.\nTwo muscle-bound men dressed in loincloths approach a crypt and open the doors, revealing a coffin. They remove the lid and exit the tomb. The coffin's inhabitant, \"The Emperor\", sits up to deliver an opening narration.\nWhile driving down a California desert road, Bob and Shirley argue over the decision to use this night to search for a cemetery. Bob is a horror writer who hopes that the scene of a cemetery at night will bring him inspiration. The conversation ends when Bob accidentally drives the car off the road and over a cliff.\nAt night, in a fog-shrouded cemetery, the Emperor sits on a marble altar and summons his \"Princess of the Night\", the Black Ghoul. She appears and bows before him. If the night's entertainment fails to please him, he will banish the souls of the entertainers to eternal damnation, as he is an all-powerful demonic being.\nThe Black Ghoul summons the first dancer of the night, a Native American woman who loved fire. She and her lovers died in flames. She dances and strips before the flames of the cemetery. The Black Ghoul then introduces the second dancer of the night, a streetwalker in life. While the woman dances, Bob and Shirley make their way to the cemetery and observe from a distance.\nThe Emperor summons the third dancer, a woman who worshiped gold. The Golden Girl dances, and the Emperor instructs his servants to reward her with gold. This is soon revealed to be a punishment, as the servants place her in a cauldron with liquid gold. What emerges from the pot is a golden statue of the woman which is then transported to a crypt.\nA werewolf and a mummy appear and seize the young couple. As ordered by the Emperor, the intruders are tied up and keep watching the dances. Next, the Black Ghoul introduces a \"Cat Woman\". This dancer is dressed in a leopard costume. As she dances, a servant follows her around and thrashes her with a bullwhip.\nNext, the Emperor calls for a Slave Girl to be whipped for his amusement. Following her torture session, she breaks free and becomes the fifth dancer. Later, the Black Ghoul exhibits a fascination with Shirley. Drawing a knife, she is about to kill Shirley when the Emperor stops her. The female Ghoul reluctantly obeys.\nThe Emperor is puzzled when a human skull appears instead of the next dancer. The Black Ghoul explains it symbolizes the sixth dancer, who loved bullfighting and matadors. She used to dance over their demise, and now it is time to dance over her own. The dancer of apparent Spanish/Mexican heritage appears to perform. The seventh dancer is dressed in Polynesian garments. She is a worshiper of snakes, smoke, and flames. A rattlesnake accompanies her dance. The mummy voices his dislike of snakes and recalls the death of Cleopatra.\nNext, the Emperor expresses his boredom and demands \"unusual\" entertainment, while the Black Ghoul notes that the night is almost over, and they will be gone at the first sight of the morning sun. They proceed to argue over Shirley's fate. The argument ends with the introduction of the eighth dancer, a woman who murdered her husband on their wedding night. She dances with the skeleton of her spouse. The argument over Shirley then resumes, as the Ghoul claims her for her own. The Emperor feels the need to assert his own authority over the Black Ghoul.\nThe ninth dancer was a zombie in life and remains zombie-like in death. The tenth and final dancer is introduced as one who died for feathers, fur, and fluff. She starts her dance in clothing matching this style. When the last dance ends, the Emperor finally offers Shirley to the Ghoul. The Ghoul briefly dances herself as she prepares to claim her prize, but dawn arrives. The Emperor and all his undead are reduced to bones. Bob and Shirley then wake up at the accident scene, surrounded by paramedics, suggesting it was all a dream. The Emperor offers parting words to the audience.\nProduction and casting.\n\"Orgy of the Dead\" is an example of a \"nudie-cutie\" film, a genre of narrative-based films featuring female nudity. Such films were an evolution of earlier films, which featured striptease performances and burlesque shows. These predecessors mostly depicted actual stage performances, sometimes attached to a frame story.\nApostolof was attracted to \"Orgy of the Dead\" because the film was \"relatively very inexpensive\" to produce and direct.\nThe film's graveyard prologue is a recreation of the opening scene from Wood's then-unreleased 1958 film \"Night of the Ghouls\". Originally, Wood titled the film's script \"Night of the Ghouls\", as he did not expect the 1958 film to ever be released. The film also had a working title, \"Ghoulies\".\nThe action begins when a young couple, Bob (William Bates) and Shirley (sexploitation actress Pat Barrington, billed as Pat Barringer) survive a car crash only to find themselves tied to posts in a misty cemetery, where they are forced to watch dead spirits dance for the Emperor of the Night played by Criswell (best known for \"Plan 9 from Outer Space\"). Criswell reprises his role from the earlier film. Wood persuaded Apostolof to cast his friend Criswell in the film. His lines were written on cue cards, which he had difficulty reading because he wasn't wearing his glasses.\nTen striptease performances by topless dancers outfitted in various motifs comprise most of this movie. The Wolf Man (wearing a very obvious mask, with the actor's bare neck visible below the bottom of the mask) and the Mummy are also tossed in for comic relief. Barrington doubles as the blond Golden Girl (inspired by Shirley Eaton in \"Goldfinger\") while her red-headed \"Shirley\" character watches her perform. The dancing has been described as awkward and wooden, probably exacerbated by Apostolof firing the dance coordinator during the shooting of the film.\nCriswell's undead consort, Black Ghoul, was allegedly written for Maila Nurmi, a.k.a. Vampira, but was instead played by Fawn Silver, who wore a black bouffant wig. The Black Ghoul appears to have \"pasty white skin\", with red fingernails and lipstick. She wears a black dress, implying the role of a funerary garment. Black, red, and white are the main colors associated with her.\nWood served as writer, production manager, casting agent, and even held up cue cards on the film, although he did not direct. Apostolof paid Wood $400 for the script. Several gaffes typical for Wood-associated projects are present, such as day-for-night issues, poor integration of stock footage, obviously fake props and absurd dialogue (for example, at one point, Criswell declares something to be \"more than a fact\").\nWood allegedly stole money from the film's budget to purchase alcohol for himself. Apostolof remarked later in interviews that Wood was drinking so heavily during the production, at times he was almost unconscious with his eyes rolled up in his head. Bob Caramico the cameraman, described Wood as just \"living from day to day\". He advised Wood's friend John Andrews, \"If I were you, I wouldn't have anything to do with him.\" The incident caused a falling-out between Apostolof and Wood, and the two men would not collaborate again until 1972.\nAn article on the making of this film was published in the June 1998 issue of \"Femme Fatales\".\nAnalysis and reception.\nFilm journalists Andrew J. Rausch and Charles E. Pratt describe the film's attempt at eroticism as juvenile, with a puerile focus on jiggling breasts. They write that the viewer \"just has to sit back in awe and speculate how something like this could come from the mind of a grown man\".\n\"TV Guide\" criticized the film's \"boring\" striptease performances and music, but praised Wood's dialog as \"priceless\".\nAllmovie critic Mark Deming stated that the film \"moves like molasses on a cold morning\", and that \"Orgy of the Dead\" \"is that rare film that would have been improved if Ed Wood had directed it\".\nHome media.\nIn September 2017, the film was restored in 2K and released on DVD and Blu-ray by Vinegar Syndrome.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22830", "revid": "5641591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22830", "title": "Ostwald process", "text": "Chemical process for producing nitric acid\nThe Ostwald process is a chemical process used for making nitric acid (HNO3). The Ostwald process is a mainstay of the modern chemical industry, and it provides the main raw material for the most common type of fertilizer production. Historically and practically, the Ostwald process is closely associated with the Haber process, which provides the requisite raw material, ammonia (NH3). This method is preferred over other methods of nitric acid production because it is less expensive and more efficient.\nReactions.\nAmmonia is converted to nitric acid in 2 stages. \nInitial oxidation of ammonia.\nThe Ostwald process begins with burning ammonia. Ammonia burns in oxygen at temperature about and pressure up to in the presence of a catalyst such as platinum gauze, alloyed with 10% rhodium to increase its strength and nitric oxide yield, platinum metal on fused silica wool, copper or nickel to form nitric oxide (nitrogen(II) oxide) and water (as steam). This reaction is strongly exothermic, making it a useful heat source once initiated:\n (\u0394\"H\" = \u2212905.2 kJ/mol)\nSide reactions.\nA number of side reactions compete with the formation of nitric oxide. Some reactions convert the ammonia to N2, such as:\nThis is a secondary reaction that is minimised by reducing the time the gas mixtures are in contact with the catalyst.\nAnother side reaction produces nitrous oxide:\n (\u0394\"H\" = \u22121105 kJ/mol)\nPlatinum-rhodium catalyst.\nThe platinum and rhodium catalyst is frequently replaced due to decomposition as a result of the extreme conditions which it operates under, leading to a form of degradation called cauliflowering. The exact mechanism of this process is unknown, the main theories being physical degradation by hydrogen atoms penetrating the platinum-rhodium lattice, or by metal atom transport from the centre of the metal to the surface.\nSecondary oxidation.\nThe nitric oxide (NO) formed in the prior catalysed reaction is then cooled down from around 900\u02daC to roughly 250\u02daC to be further oxidised to nitrogen dioxide (NO2) by the reaction:\n (\u0394\"H\" = -114.2 kJ/mol) \nThe reaction:\n (\u0394\"H\" = -57.2 kJ/mol)\nalso occurs once the nitrogen dioxide has formed.\nConversion of nitric oxide.\nStage two encompasses the absorption of nitrous oxides in water and is carried out in an absorption apparatus, a plate column containing water. This gas is then readily absorbed by the water, yielding the desired product (nitric acid in a dilute form), while reducing a portion of it back to nitric oxide:\n (\u0394\"H\" = \u2212117 kJ/mol)\nThe NO is recycled, and the acid is concentrated to the required strength by distillation.\nThis is only one of over 40 absorption reactions of nitrous oxides recorded, with other common reactions including:\nAnd, if the last step is carried out in air:\n (\u0394\"H\" = \u2212348 kJ/mol).\nOverall reaction.\nThe overall reaction is twice that of the first equation, 3 times the second equation, and 2 times the last equation; all divided by 2:\n (\u0394\"H\" = \u2212740.6 kJ/mol)\nAlternatively, if the last step is carried out in the air, the overall reaction is the sum of equation 1, 2 times equation 2, and equation 4; all divided by 2.\nWithout considering the state of the water,\n (\u0394\"H\" = \u2212370.3 kJ/mol)\nHistory.\nWilhelm Ostwald developed the process, and he patented it in 1902.\nThis is so because some of the products are recycled for the next step and after use some are taken out.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22831", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22831", "title": "Oliver Heaviside", "text": "British mathematician and electrical engineer (1850\u20131925)\nOliver Heaviside ( ; 18 May 1850 \u2013 3 February 1925) was a British mathematician and electrical engineer who invented a new technique for solving differential equations (equivalent to the Laplace transform), independently developed vector calculus, and rewrote Maxwell's equations in the form commonly used today. He significantly shaped the way Maxwell's equations were understood and applied in the decades following Maxwell's death. Also, in 1893, he extended them to gravitoelectromagnetism, which was confirmed by Gravity Probe B in 2005. His formulation of the telegrapher's equations became commercially important during his own lifetime, after their significance went unremarked for a long while, as few others were versed at the time in his novel methodology. Although at odds with the scientific establishment for most of his life, Heaviside changed the face of telecommunications, mathematics, and science.\nEarly years.\nOliver Heaviside was born on 18 May 1850 at 55 Kings Street (now Plender Street) in Camden Town, England, the youngest of three children of Thomas Heaviside, a draughtsman and wood engraver, and Rachel Elizabeth West. He was a short and red-headed child, and suffered from scarlet fever when young, which left him with a hearing impairment. A small legacy enabled the family to move to a better part of Camden when he was thirteen and he was sent to Camden House Grammar School. He was a good student, placing fifth out of five hundred pupils in 1865, but his parents could not keep him at school after he was 16, so he continued studying for a year by himself and had no further formal education.\nHeaviside's uncle by marriage was Sir Charles Wheatstone (1802\u20131875), an internationally celebrated expert in telegraphy and electromagnetism, and the original co-inventor of the first commercially successful telegraph in the mid-1830s. Wheatstone took a strong interest in his nephew's education, and in 1867 sent him north to work with his older brother Arthur Wheatstone, who was managing one of Charles' telegraph companies in Newcastle-upon-Tyne.\nTwo years later he took a job as a telegraph operator with the Danish Great Northern Telegraph Company laying a cable from Newcastle to Denmark using British contractors. He soon became an electrician. Heaviside continued to study while working, and by the age of 22 he published an article in the prestigious \"Philosophical Magazine\" on 'The Best Arrangement of Wheatstone's Bridge for measuring a Given Resistance with a Given Galvanometer and Battery' which received positive comments from physicists who had unsuccessfully tried to solve this algebraic problem, including Sir William Thomson, to whom he gave a copy of the paper, and James Clerk Maxwell. When he published an article on the duplex method of using a telegraph cable, he poked fun at R. S. Culley, the engineer in chief of the Post Office telegraph system, who had been dismissing duplex as impractical. Later in 1873 his application to join the Society of Telegraph Engineers was turned down with the comment that \"they didn't want telegraph clerks\". This riled Heaviside, who asked Thomson to sponsor him, and along with support of the society's president he was admitted \"despite the P.O. snobs\".\nIn 1873, Heaviside had encountered Maxwell's newly published, and later famous, two-volume \"Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism\". In his old age Heaviside recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I remember my first look at the great treatise of Maxwell's when I was a young man... I saw that it was great, greater and greatest, with prodigious possibilities in its power... I was determined to master the book and set to work. I was very ignorant. I had no knowledge of mathematical analysis (having learned only school algebra and trigonometry which I had largely forgotten) and thus my work was laid out for me. It took me several years before I could understand as much as I possibly could. Then I set Maxwell aside and followed my own course. And I progressed much more quickly... It will be understood that I preach the gospel according to my interpretation of Maxwell.\nUndertaking research from home, he helped develop transmission line theory (also known as the \"telegrapher's equations\"). Heaviside showed mathematically that uniformly distributed inductance in a telegraph line would diminish both attenuation and distortion, and that, if the inductance were great enough and the insulation resistance not too high, the circuit would be distortionless in that currents of all frequencies would have equal speeds of propagation. Heaviside's equations helped further the implementation of the telegraph.\nMiddle years.\nFrom 1882 to 1902, except for three years, Heaviside contributed regular articles to the trade paper \"The Electrician\", which wished to improve its standing, for which he was paid \u00a340 per year. This was hardly enough to live on, but his demands were very small and he was doing what he most wanted to. Between 1883 and 1887 he averaged 2\u20133 articles per month and these articles later formed the bulk of his \"Electromagnetic Theory\" and \"Electrical Papers\".\nIn 1880, Heaviside researched the skin effect in telegraph transmission lines. That same year he patented, in England, the coaxial cable. In 1884 he recast Maxwell's mathematical analysis from its original cumbersome form (they had already been recast as quaternions) to its modern vector terminology, thereby reducing twelve of the original twenty equations in twenty unknowns down to the four differential equations in two unknowns we now know as Maxwell's equations. These four re-formulated equations describe the nature of electric charges (both static and moving), magnetic fields, and the relationship between the two, namely electromagnetic fields.\nBetween 1880 and 1887, Heaviside developed the operational calculus using formula_1 for the differential operator, (which Boole had previously denoted by formula_2\"\"), giving a method of solving differential equations by direct solution as algebraic equations. This later caused a great deal of controversy, owing to its lack of rigour. He famously said, \"Mathematics is an experimental science, and definitions do not come first, but later on. They make themselves, when the nature of the subject has developed itself.\" On another occasion he asked, \"Shall I refuse my dinner because I do not fully understand the process of digestion?\"\nIn 1887, Heaviside worked with his brother Arthur on a paper entitled \"The Bridge System of Telephony\". However the paper was blocked by Arthur's superior, William Henry Preece of the Post Office, because part of the proposal was that loading coils (inductors) should be added to telephone and telegraph lines to increase their self-induction and correct the distortion which they suffered. Preece had recently declared self-inductance to be the great enemy of clear transmission. Heaviside was also convinced that Preece was behind the sacking of the editor of \"The Electrician\" which brought his long-running series of articles to a halt (until 1891). There was a long history of animosity between Preece and Heaviside. Heaviside considered Preece to be mathematically incompetent, an assessment supported by the biographer Paul J. Nahin: \"Preece was a powerful government official, enormously ambitious, and in some remarkable ways, an utter blockhead.\" Preece's motivations in suppressing Heaviside's work were more to do with protecting Preece's own reputation and avoiding having to admit error than any perceived faults in Heaviside's work.\nThe importance of Heaviside's work remained undiscovered for some time after publication in \"The Electrician\". In 1897, AT&amp;T employed one of its own scientists, George A. Campbell, and an external investigator Michael I. Pupin to find some respect in which Heaviside's work was incomplete or incorrect. Campbell and Pupin extended Heaviside's work, and AT&amp;T filed for patents covering not only their research, but also the technical method of constructing the coils previously invented by Heaviside. AT&amp;T later offered Heaviside money in exchange for his rights; it is possible that the Bell engineers' respect for Heaviside influenced this offer. However, Heaviside refused the offer, declining to accept any money unless the company were to give him full recognition. Heaviside was chronically poor, making his refusal of the offer even more striking. In 1959, Norbert Wiener published his fiction \"The Tempter\" and accused AT&amp;T (named \"Williams Controls Company\") and Michael I. Pupin (named \"Diego Dominguez\") of having usurped Heaviside's inventions.\nBut this setback turned Heaviside's attention towards electromagnetic radiation, and in two papers of 1888 and 1889, he calculated the deformations of electric and magnetic fields surrounding a moving charge, as well as the effects of it entering a denser medium. This included a prediction of what is now known as Cherenkov radiation, and inspired his friend George FitzGerald to suggest what now is known as the Lorentz\u2013FitzGerald contraction.\nIn 1889, Heaviside first published a correct derivation of the magnetic force on a moving charged particle, which is the magnetic component of what is now called the Lorentz force.\nIn the late 1880s and early 1890s, Heaviside worked on the concept of electromagnetic mass. Heaviside treated this as material mass, capable of producing the same effects. Wilhelm Wien later verified Heaviside's expression (for low velocities).\nIn 1891 the British Royal Society recognized Heaviside's contributions to the mathematical description of electromagnetic phenomena by naming him a Fellow of the Royal Society, and the following year devoting more than fifty pages of the \"Philosophical Transactions\" of the Society to his vector methods and electromagnetic theory. He was elected to honorary membership of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society in 1894. In 1905 Heaviside was given an honorary doctorate by the University of G\u00f6ttingen.\nLater years and views.\nIn 1896, FitzGerald and John Perry obtained a civil list pension of \u00a3120\u00a0per year for Heaviside, who was now living in Devon, and persuaded him to accept it, after he had rejected other charitable offers from the Royal Society.\nIn 1902, Heaviside proposed the existence of what is now known as the Kennelly\u2013Heaviside layer of the ionosphere. Heaviside's proposal included means by which radio signals are transmitted around the Earth's curvature. The existence of the ionosphere was confirmed in 1923. The predictions by Heaviside, combined with Planck's radiation theory, probably discouraged further attempts to detect radio waves from the Sun and other astronomical objects. For whatever reason, there seem to have been no attempts for 30\u00a0years, until Jansky's development of radio astronomy in 1932.\nHeaviside was an opponent of Albert Einstein's theory of relativity. Mathematician Howard Eves has commented that Heaviside \"was the only first-rate physicist at the time to impugn Einstein, and his invectives against relativity theory often bordered on the absurd\".\nIn later years his behavior became quite eccentric. According to associate B.A. Behrend, he became a recluse who was so averse to meeting people that he delivered the manuscripts of his \"Electrician\" papers to a grocery store, where the editors picked them up.\nThough he had been an active cyclist in his youth, his health seriously declined in his sixth decade. During this time Heaviside would sign letters with the initials \"W.O.R.M.\" after his name. Heaviside also reportedly started painting his fingernails pink and had granite blocks moved into his house for furniture.xx In 1922, he became the first recipient of the Faraday Medal, which was established that year.\nOn Heaviside's religious views, he was a Unitarian, but not religious. He was even said to have made fun of people who put their faith in a supreme being.\nHeaviside died on 3 February 1925 in Torquay at the age of 74, after falling from a ladder. He is buried just behind and to the right of the building near the southeast corner of Paignton cemetery. He is buried with his father, Thomas, and his mother, Rachel. The gravestone was cleaned thanks to an anonymous donor sometime in 2005. He was always held in high regard by most electrical engineers, particularly after his correction to Kelvin's transmission line analysis was vindicated, but most of his wider recognition was gained posthumously.\nHeaviside Memorial Project.\nIn July 2014, academics at Newcastle University, UK and the Newcastle Electromagnetics Interest Group founded the Heaviside Memorial Project in a bid to fully restore the monument through public subscription. The restored memorial was ceremonially unveiled on 30 August 2014 by Alan Heather, a distant relative of Heaviside. The unveiling was attended by the Mayor of Torbay, the Member of Parliament (MP) for Torbay, an ex-curator of the Science Museum (representing the Institution of Engineering and Technology), the Chairman of the Torbay Civic Society, and delegates from Newcastle University.\nInstitution of Engineering and Technology.\nA collection of Heaviside's papers is held at the Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET) Archive Centre. The collection consists of notebooks containing mathematical equations and calculations, annotated pamphlets mainly relating to telegraphy, manuscript notes, drafts of papers, correspondence, drafts of articles for \u2018Electromagnetic Theory\u2019.\nAn audio tribute from 1950 to Oliver Heaviside by Oliver E Buckley, President of Bell Telephone Labs, has been digitised and accessible on the IET Archives biography of Oliver Heaviside.\nIn 1908, Heaviside was made an Honorary Member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (IEE). His entry reads as: \u201c1908 Oliver Heaviside FRS\u201d in the IEE Roll of Honorary Members and Faraday Medallists 1871-1921\nIn 1922, he became the first recipient of the Faraday Medal, which was established that year. Later on, in 1950 the Institution of Electrical Engineers Council established the Heaviside Premium Award \u201cThe Committee have considered the establishment of some form of permanent memorial to Oliver Heaviside and as a result recommend that a Heaviside Premium to the value of \u00a310 be awarded each year for the best mathematical paper accepted.\u201d\nInnovations and discoveries.\nHeaviside did much to develop and advocate vector methods and vector calculus. Maxwell's formulation of electromagnetism consisted of 20 equations in 20 variables. Heaviside employed the curl and divergence operators of the vector calculus to reformulate 12 of these 20 equations into four equations in four variables (formula_3), the form by which they have been known ever since (see Maxwell's equations). Less well known is that Heaviside's equations and Maxwell's are not exactly the same, and in fact it is easier to modify the former to make them compatible with quantum physics. The possibility of gravitational waves was also discussed by Heaviside using the analogy between the inverse-square law in gravitation and electricity. With quaternion multiplication, the square of a vector is a negative quantity, much to Heaviside's displeasure. As he advocated abolishing this negativity, he has been credited by C. J. Joly with developing hyperbolic quaternions, though in fact that mathematical structure was largely the work of Alexander Macfarlane.\nHe invented the Heaviside step function, using it to calculate the current when an electric circuit is switched on. He was the first to use the unit impulse function now usually known as the Dirac delta function. He invented his operational calculus method for solving linear differential equations. This resembles the currently used Laplace transform method based on the \"Bromwich integral\" named after Bromwich who devised a rigorous mathematical justification for Heaviside's operator method using contour integration. Heaviside was familiar with the Laplace transform method but considered his own method more direct.\nHeaviside developed the transmission line theory (also known as the \"telegrapher's equations\"), which increased the transmission rate over transatlantic cables by a factor of ten. It originally took ten minutes to transmit each character, and this immediately improved to one character per minute. Closely related to this was his discovery that telephone transmission could be greatly improved by placing electrical inductance in series with the cable. Heaviside also independently discovered the Poynting vector.\nHeaviside advanced the idea that the Earth's uppermost atmosphere contained an ionised layer known as the ionosphere; in this regard, he predicted the existence of what later was dubbed the Kennelly\u2013Heaviside layer. In 1947, Edward Appleton received the Nobel Prize in Physics for proving that this layer really existed.\nElectromagnetic terms.\nHeaviside coined the following terms of art in electromagnetic theory:\nHeaviside is sometimes incorrectly credited with coining \"susceptance\" (the imaginary part of admittance) and \"reactance\" (the imaginary part of impedance). The former was coined by Charles Proteus Steinmetz (1894). The latter was coined by \u00c9douard Hospitalier (1893).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "22832", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22832", "title": "Book of Omni", "text": "Sixth book in the Book of Mormon\nThe Book of Omni () is one of the books that make up the Book of Mormon, a text that the Latter Day Saint movement regards as scripture. The book is written as the combined composition of several authors, the first of whom, Omni, provides the name of the book. According to the narrative, the book covers more than two centuries of Nephite history within one chapter of text. It refers to wars between the Nephites and Lamanites, the reign of Kings Mosiah and Benjamin, and their participation in the wars and journeys through the wilderness.\nNarrative.\nThe Book of Omni is narrated as a combined composition by five different authors, each of which contribute a varying amount of content. The first author, Omni, fought in wars against the Lamanites, but calls himself a wicked man, stating that he has not followed God's commandments. He narrates his section of the book after possessing the small plates for 38 years and is succeeded in the narrative by Amaron. Amaron says that many of the wicked Nephites were killed in war. but also mentions that the \"righteous\" Nephites were protected from their enemies. The next author is Chemish, who explains that he received the plates from his brother Amoron and saw him write his last words. Next, Abinadom, the son of Chemish, recounts wars between the Nephites and the Lamanites and says he killed some Lamanites. He states that he does not know of any additional spiritual teachings that were presented during his life.\nThe next narrator is Amaleki, the son of Abinadom. He speaks of Mosiah, who was king at the time of his birth. Mosiah, he explains, led a number of Nephites out of the land of Nephi and into the wilderness, where they discovered the land of Zarahemla inhabited by the Mulekites. Mosiah became king over both peoples and taught the Nephite language to the Mulekites. According to Amaleki, because Mosiah was a seer, the Mulekites asked him to interpret a stone their people found that tells the story of a Jaredite named Coriantumr. An early LDS scholar of the Book of Mormon, Sidney Sperry, identifies Coriantumr as the last Jaredite king, whose account is found in the Book of Ether. He also speculates that Mosiah translated the stone with a Urim and Thummim.\nAmaleki proceeds to say that when Mosiah died his son, Benjamin, became king. There was a war between the Nephites and the Lamanites in which the Nephites were led by Benjamin.\nAmaleki further describes how some of the Nephites wished to return to the land of Nephi, apparently in an attempt to reclaim it. Two different companies set out in search of Nephi. The first attempt was unsuccessful because the participants fought among themselves. After that, a second group set out. At the time Amaleki stops writing, he says that the second group has never been heard of again. Later, in the Book of Mosiah, it is revealed that the second group was led by a man named Zeniff.\nAmaleki closes with some words about Christ, asserting that his words are true and that it is his intent to help others come unto Christ. He states at the close of the book that, having no descendants to carry on the record-keeping, he will give the records to King Benjamin.\nInterpretation.\nAccording to authors Fatimah Salleh and Margaret Hemming, Omni wrote in order to maintain a record of the genealogical line. His son Chemish, on the other hand, wrote out of obligation. Additionally, Grant Hardy suggests that the contributors to the Book of Omni treated record-keeping as \"a genealogical responsibility rather than an opportunity for preaching or testifying.\" Sharon Harris noticed a genealogical theme throughout Omni and identified three of its purposes. She suggests that the purposes of keeping the genealogy in allows the plates to be passed down, preserves teachings of the prophets, and demonstrates the larger influence of genealogy. Terryl Givens claims that Omni wrote in a manner that suggests he believed the Nephites would eventually die out. Adopting Robyn Warhol's term, professor of English at Vermont University Elizabeth Fenton calls the style of the Book of Omni \"unnarration\" due to a large lack of events while maintaining a \"narrative voice\". Out of all the narrators, Amoron is the only one who does not finish his account with \"And I make an end.\" \nThroughout the Book of Omni, its narrators claim that God causes the righteous among their people to win wars and punishes the wicked by letting them die in war. Salleh and Hemming take issue with this idea, saying that whether or not someone dies in war does not determine personal righteousness. Sharon Harris points out that the points of contention mentioned by Abinadom and Amaleki lead to bodily injury; from this she concludes that the usage of \"contention\" here (and in other parts of the Book of Mormon) carries a more intense connotation than what modern readers think of.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
