{"id": "29186", "revid": "50997682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29186", "title": "Strategic Defense Initiative", "text": "U.S. military defense program (1984\u20131993)\nThe Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), derisively nicknamed the \"Star Wars program\", was a proposed missile defense system intended to protect the United States from attack by ballistic nuclear missiles. The program was announced in 1983 by President Ronald Reagan, a vocal critic of the doctrine of mutual assured destruction (MAD), which he described as a \"suicide pact\". Reagan called for a system that would end \"MAD\" and render nuclear weapons obsolete. Elements of the program reemerged in 2019 under the Space Development Agency (SDA).\nThe Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO) was set up in 1984 within the US Department of Defense to oversee development. Advanced weapon concepts, including lasers, particle-beam weapons, and ground and space-based missile systems were studied, along with sensor, command and control, and computer systems needed to control a system consisting of hundreds of combat centers and satellites spanning the globe. The US held a significant advantage in advanced missile defense systems through decades of extensive research and testing. Several concepts, technologies and insights obtained were transferred to subsequent programs. Under SDIO's Innovative Sciences and Technology Office, investment was made in basic research at national laboratories, universities, and in industry. These programs have continued to be key sources of funding for research scientists in particle physics, supercomputing/computation, advanced materials, and other critical science and engineering disciplines.\n\"SDI\" was heavily criticized for threatening to destabilize \"MAD\" and re-ignite \"an offensive arms race\". Senator Ted Kennedy derided the program as \"reckless \"Star Wars\" schemes\", a reference to the space opera film series \"Star Wars\", leading to the popularisation of the monicker. In a 1986 speech, Senator Joe Biden argued that, \"\"Star Wars\" represents a fundamental assault on the concepts, alliances, and arms-control agreements that have buttressed American security for several decades, and the president's continued adherence to it constitutes one of the most reckless and irresponsible acts in the history of modern statecraft.\" In 1987, the American Physical Society concluded that the technologies were decades away from readiness, and at least another decade of research was required to know whether such a system was even possible. After the publication of the APS report, SDI's budget was cut. By the late 1980s, the effort had re-focused on the \"Brilliant Pebbles\" concept using small orbiting missiles.\nDeclassified intelligence material revealed that through the potential neutralization of its arsenal and resulting loss of a balancing power factor, SDI was a cause of grave concern for the Soviet Union and its successor state Russia. Following the Cold War when nuclear arsenals were shrinking, political support for SDI collapsed. SDI ended in 1993, when the Clinton administration redirected the efforts towards theatre ballistic missiles and renamed the agency the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO).\nIn 2019, elements, specifically the observation portions, of the program re-emerged with President Trump's signing of the National Defense Authorization Act. The program is managed by the Space Development Agency (SDA) as part of the new National Defense Space Architecture (NDSA). CIA director Mike Pompeo called for additional funding to achieve a full-fledged \"Strategic Defense Initiative for our time, the SDI II.\" On May 20 2025, Donald Trump announced the Golden Dome, a project broadly similar to SDI, which he referenced in the announcement.\nHistory.\nNational BMD.\nThe US Army considered the issue of ballistic missile defense (BMD) after World War II. Studies suggested that attacking a V-2 rocket would be difficult because the flight time was so short that it would leave little time to forward information through command and control networks to missile batteries. Bell Labs noted that longer-range missiles, though faster, had longer flight times that eased the timing issue. Their high altitudes also made them easier to detect with long-range radar.\nThis led to successive programs\u2014Nike Zeus, Nike-X, Sentinel, and ultimately Safeguard\u2014each seeking to defend against Soviet ICBMs. The programs proliferated because of the changing threat; the Soviets claimed to be producing missiles \"like sausages\", and ever-more missiles would be needed to defend against their fleet. Low-cost countermeasures such as radar decoys required additional interceptors. An early estimate suggested $20 spent on defense would be required for every $1 the Soviets spent on offense. The addition of MIRV in the late 1960s further moved the balance in favor of offensive systems. This massively skewed cost-exchange ratio prompted observers to propose that an arms race was inevitable.\nPresident Dwight D. Eisenhower asked ARPA to consider alternative concepts. Their Project Defender studied many approaches before concentrating on Project BAMBI. BAMBI used satellites carrying interceptors that would attack the Soviet ICBMs upon launch. This boost phase intercept rendered MIRV impotent; a successful attack would destroy all of the warheads. The projected operational costs were prohibitive, and the U.S. Air Force ultimately rejected the concept. Development was cancelled in 1963.\nBy the late 1960s, ballistic missile defense had become highly controversial. Public meetings on the Sentinel system drew thousands of protesters, reflecting growing opposition to its deployment. After thirty years of effort, only one such system was built; a single base of the original Safeguard system became operational in April 1975, but was closed in February 1976.\nA Soviet military A-35 anti-ballistic missile system was deployed around Moscow to intercept enemy ballistic missiles targeting the city or its surrounding areas. The A-35 was the only Soviet ABM system allowed under the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. In development since the 1960s and in operation from 1971 until the 1990s, it featured the nuclear-tipped A350 exoatmospheric interceptor missile.\nLead up to SDI.\nGeorge Shultz, Reagan's secretary of state, suggested that a 1967 lecture by physicist Edward Teller was an important precursor to SDI. In the lecture, Teller talked about the idea of defending against nuclear missiles using nuclear weapons, principally the W65 and W71, with the latter an enhanced thermal/X-ray device used on the Spartan missile in 1975. Held at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), the 1967 lecture was attended by Reagan shortly after he became governor of California.\nDevelopment of laser weapons in the Soviet Union began in 1964\u20131965. Though classified at the time, a detailed study on a Soviet space-based laser system began no later than 1976 with the Polyus, a 1 MW Carbon dioxide laser-based orbital weapons platform prototype. Development was also started on the anti-satellite \"Kaskad\" in-orbit missile platform.\nA revolver cannon (Rikhter R-23) was mounted on the 1974 Soviet Salyut 3 space station, a satellite that successfully test-fired its cannon in orbit.\nIn 1979, Teller contributed to a Hoover Institution publication where he claimed that the US would be facing an emboldened USSR due to their work on civil defense. Two years later at a conference in Italy, he made the same claims about their ambitions, now emboldened by new space-based weapons. According to popular opinion, shared by author Frances FitzGerald, no evidence validated that such research was carried out. Instead, Teller was promoting his latest weapon, the X-ray laser that was finding only limited funding, his speech in Italy was a new attempt to synthesize a missile gap.\nIn 1979, Reagan visited the NORAD command base, Cheyenne Mountain Complex, where he was introduced to the extensive tracking and detection systems extending throughout the world and into space. He was struck by their comments that while they could track the attack down to the individual targets, they could not stop it. Reagan felt that in the event of an attack, this would place the president in a terrible position, having to choose between immediate counterattack or absorbing the attack while maintaining offensive dominance. Shultz suggested that this feeling of helplessness, coupled with Teller's defensive ideas combined to motivate SDI.\nIn the fall of 1979, at Reagan's request, Lieutenant General Daniel O. Graham, the former head of the DIA, briefed Reagan on an updated BAMBI he called \"High Frontier\", a missile shield composed of multi-layered ground- and space-based weapons that could track, intercept, and destroy ballistic missiles, theoretically enabled by emerging technologies. It was designed to replace the MAD doctrine. \nIn September 1981, Graham formed a small, Virginia-based think tank called High Frontier to continue research on the missile shield. The Heritage Foundation provided High Frontier with research space, and Graham published a 1982 report (entitled \"High Frontier: A New National Strategy\") that examined in greater detail how the system would function.\nSince the late 1970s, another group had been pushing for the development of a high-powered orbital chemical laser attack ICBMs, the \"Space Based Laser\" (SBL). New developments under Project Excalibur by Teller's \"O-Group\" at LLNL suggested that a single X-ray laser could shoot down dozens of missiles with a single shot. The groups began to meet in order to prepare their plans for the incoming US president Reagan.\nThe group met with Reagan several times during 1981 and 1982, apparently with little effect, while the buildup of new offensive weaponry like the B-1 Lancer and MX missile continued. However, in early 1983, the Joint Chiefs of Staff met with Reagan and outlined the reasons why they might consider shifting some of the funding from the offensive side to new defensive systems.\nAccording to a 1983 US Interagency Intelligence Assessment, good evidence indicated that in the late 1960s the Soviets were devoting serious thought to both explosive and non-explosive nuclear power sources for lasers.\nProject and proposals.\nAnnouncement.\nOn March 23, 1983, Reagan announced SDI in a nationally televised speech, stating \"I call upon the scientific community in this country, those who gave us nuclear weapons, to turn their great talents to the cause of mankind and world peace, to give us the means of rendering these nuclear weapons impotent and obsolete.\"\nStrategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO).\nIn 1984, the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO) was established to oversee the program, which was headed by Lt. General James Alan Abrahamson USAF, a past Director of the Space Shuttle program.\nIn addition to original Heritage ideas, other concepts were considered. Notable among these were particle-beam weapons, updated versions of nuclear shaped charges, and various plasma weapons. SDIO invested in computer systems, component miniaturization, and sensors.\nInitially, the program focused on large-scale systems designed to defeat a massive Soviet offensive strike. For this mission, SDIO concentrated almost entirely on \"high tech\" solutions like lasers. Graham's proposal was repeatedly rejected by members of the Heritage group as well as within SDIO; when asked about it in 1985, Abrahamson suggested that the concept was underdeveloped and was not considered.\nBy 1986, many of the promising ideas were failing. Teller's X-ray laser, run under Project Excalibur, failed several key tests in 1986 and was targeted to the anti-satellite role. The particle beam concept was demonstrated to basically not work, as was the case with several other concepts. Only the Space-Based Laser seemed to have any hope of developing in the short term, but it was growing in size due to its fuel consumption.\nAPS report.\nThe American Physical Society (APS) had been asked by SDIO to provide a review of the various concepts. They put together an all-star panel including many of the inventors of the laser, including a Nobel laureate. Their initial report was presented in 1986, but was released to the public (in redacted form) in early 1987.\nThe report considered all of the systems then under development and concluded none of them were anywhere near ready for deployment. Specifically, they noted that all of the systems had to improve their energy output by at least 100 times, and in some cases by as much as a million. In other cases, like Excalibur, they dismissed the concept entirely. Their summary stated simply:\nWe estimate that all existing candidates for directed energy weapons (DEWs) require two or more orders of magnitude, (powers of 10) improvements in power output and beam quality before they may be seriously considered for application in ballistic missile defense systems.\nThey concluded that none of the systems could be deployed as an anti-missile system until the next century.\nStrategic Defense System.\nFaced with this report and accompanying negative press, SDIO changed direction. Beginning in late 1986, Abrahamson proposed that SDI would be based on the system he had previously dismissed, a version of High Frontier now named the \"Strategic Defense System, Phase I Architecture\". The name implied that the concept would be replaced by more advanced systems in future phases.\nStrategic Defense System (SDS) was the low-earth orbit (LEO) Smart Rocks concept with an added layer of ground-based missiles sited in the US. These missiles were intended to attack warheads that the Smart Rocks missed. In order to track them below the radar horizon, SDS added more LEO satellites that would feed tracking information to both the space-based \"garages\" as well as the ground-based missiles. Later ground-based systems trace derived from this concept.\nLLNL then introduced the Brilliant Pebbles concept. This was essentially the combination of the sensors on the garage satellites and the tracking stations. Advancements in sensors and microprocessors allowed this to be packaged in a small missile nose cone. Subsequent studies suggested that this approach would be cheaper, easier to launch and more resistant to counterattack, and in 1990 Brilliant Pebbles was selected as the baseline model for SDS Phase 1.\nGlobal Protection Against Limited Strikes.\nWhile SDIO pursued SDS, the Warsaw Pact was rapidly disintegrating, culminating in the destruction of the Berlin Wall in 1989. One of the many reports on SDS considered these events and suggested that a massive defense against a Soviet launch would become unnecessary. However, short and medium range missile technology would likely proliferate as the Soviet Union disintegrated and sold off its hardware. One of the core ideas behind Global Protection Against Limited Strikes (GPALS) was that the Soviet Union would not always be the aggressor and the United States would not always be the target.\nInstead of a heavy defense aimed at ICBMs, this report suggested realigning GPALS deployment. Against novel threats the Brilliant Pebbles would have limited utility, largely because the missiles fired for only a short period and the warheads did not rise high enough for them to be easily tracked by a satellite above them. GPALS thus added a mobile ground-based missile and more low-orbit satellites known as Brilliant Eyes to feed the Pebbles.\nGPALS was approved by President George H.W. Bush in 1991. The system would cut the proposed costs of the SDI system from $53\u00a0billion to $41\u00a0billion over a decade. Instead of attempting to protect against thousands of incoming missiles, GPALS sought to provide protection from up to two hundred nuclear missiles. GPALS was tasked to protect the United States from attacks coming from all different parts of the world.\nBallistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO).\nIn 1993, the Clinton administration further shifted the focus to ground-based interceptor missiles and theater-scale systems, renaming the SDIO to the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO).\nIn 2002, the George W. Bush administration in turn renamed the BMDO to the Missile Defense Agency (MDA), indicating plans for a layered missile defence system that integrates different types of defences, including sea- and ground-based defences.\nGround-based programs.\nExtended Range Interceptor (ERINT).\nThe Extended Range Interceptor (ERINT) program was part of SDI's Theater Missile Defense Program and was an extension of the Flexible Lightweight Agile Guided Experiment (FLAGE), which included developing hit-to-kill technology and demonstrating the guidance accuracy of a small, agile, radar-homing vehicle.\nFLAGE scored a direct hit against a MGM-52 Lance missile in flight, at White Sands Missile Range in 1987. ERINT was a prototype missile similar to the FLAGE, but it used a new solid-propellant rocket motor that allowed it to fly faster and higher than FLAGE.\nERINT was later chosen as the MIM-104 Patriot (Patriot Advanced Capability-3, PAC-3) missile.\nHoming Overlay Experiment (HOE).\nGiven concerns about previous programs' nuclear-tipped interceptors, in the 1980s the US Army began studies about the feasibility of kinetic hit-to-kill vehicles, i.e. interceptors that would destroy incoming ballistic missiles by colliding with them.\nThe Homing Overlay Experiment (HOE) was the first such system tested by the Army, and the first successful hit-to-kill intercept of a mock ballistic missile warhead outside the Earth's atmosphere.\nHOE used a kinetic kill vehicle (KKV). The KKV was equipped with an infrared seeker, guidance electronics and a propulsion system. Once in space, the KKV could extend a folded structure similar to an umbrella skeleton of diameter to enhance its effective cross section. This device was intended to destroy an ICBM reentry vehicle on collision.\nFour test launches were conducted in 1983 and 1984 at Kwajalein Missile Range in the Marshall Islands using first two stages of Minuteman missile, M55E1 and M56A1. For each test a Minuteman missile was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California carrying a single mock re-entry vehicle targeted for Kwajalein lagoon more than away.\nAfter test failures with the first three flight tests because of guidance and sensor problems, the DOD reported that the fourth and final test on June 10, 1984, was successful, intercepting the Minuteman RV with a closing speed of about at an altitude of more than .\nAlthough the fourth test was described as a success, the \"New York Times\" in August 1993 reported that the HOE4 test was rigged to increase the likelihood of success. At the urging of Senator David Pryor, the General Accounting Office investigated the claims and concluded that though steps were taken to make it easier for the interceptor to find its target (including some of those alleged by the \"New York Times\"), the available data indicated that the interceptor had been successfully guided by its onboard infrared sensors in the collision, and not by an onboard radar guidance system as alleged. Per the GAO report, the net effect of the DOD enhancements increased the infrared signature of the target vessel by 110% over the realistic missile signature initially proposed for the HOE program, but nonetheless the GAO concluded the enhancements to the target vessel were reasonable given the objectives of the program and the geopolitical consequences of its failure. Further, the report concluded that the DOD's subsequent statements before Congress about the HOE program \"fairly characterize[d]\" the success of HOE4, but confirmed that the DOD never disclosed to Congress the enhancements made to the target vessel.\nHOE technology was later expanded into the Exoatmospheric Reentry-vehicle Interception System program.\nERIS and HEDI.\nDeveloped by Lockheed as part of the ground-based interceptor portion of SDI, the Exoatmospheric Reentry-vehicle Interceptor Subsystem (ERIS) began in 1985, with at least two tests occurring in the early 1990s. This system was never deployed, but its technology was used in the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system and the Ground-Based Interceptor currently deployed as part of the Ground-Based Midcourse Defense (GMD) system.\nDirected-energy weapon (DEW) programs.\nX-ray laser.\nAn early SDI focus was an X-ray laser powered by nuclear explosions. Nuclear explosions give off a burst of X-rays, which the Excalibur concept intended to focus using a lasing medium consisting of metal rods. Many such rods would be placed around a warhead, each aimed at a different ICBM, thus destroying many ICBMs in a single attack. It would cost much less for the US to build another Excalibur than the Soviets would need to build enough new ICBMs to counter it. The idea was first based on satellites, but when it was pointed out that these could be attacked in space, the concept moved to a \"pop-up\" concept, with the device launched from a submarine off the northern Soviet coast.\nHowever, on March 26, 1983, the first test (known as the Cabra event), was performed in an underground shaft and resulted in marginally positive readings possibly caused by a faulty detector. Since a nuclear explosion was used as the power source, the detector was destroyed during the experiment, and the results therefore could not be confirmed. Technical criticism based upon unclassified calculations suggested that the X-ray laser would be of at best marginal use. Critics often cite the X-ray laser system as SDI's primary focus, with its apparent failure warranting opposition to the program.\nDespite the apparent failure, the legacy of the X-ray laser program is the knowledge gained from the research. A parallel development program advanced laboratory X-ray lasers for biological imaging such as 3D holograms of living organisms. Other spin-offs include research on advanced materials like SEAgel and Aerogel, the Electron-Beam Ion Trap facility for physics research, and techniques for early detection of breast cancer.\nChemical laser.\nBeginning in 1985, the Air Force tested an SDIO-funded deuterium fluoride laser known as Mid-Infrared Advanced Chemical Laser (MIRACL) at White Sands Missile Range. During a simulation, the laser successfully destroyed a Titan missile booster in 1985. However, the test setup had the booster shell pressurized and under considerable compression loads. These test conditions were used to simulate the loads a booster would be under during launch. The system was later tested for the US Navy on target drones simulating cruise missiles, with some success. After SDIO closed, MIRACL was tested on an old Air Force satellite for potential use as an anti-satellite weapon, with mixed results. The technology was also used to develop the Tactical High Energy Laser (THEL) that was tested against in-flight artillery shells.\nDuring the mid-to-late 1980s panel discussions took place at various laser conferences. Proceedings include papers on the status of chemical and other high-power lasers.\nThe Missile Defense Agency's Airborne Laser program used a chemical laser that intercepted a missile taking off, so an offshoot of SDI could be said to have successfully implemented one of the key goals of the program.\nNeutral particle beam.\nIn July 1989, the Beam Experiments Aboard a Rocket (BEAR) program launched a sounding rocket containing a neutral particle beam (NPB) accelerator. The experiment successfully demonstrated that a particle beam would operate and propagate as predicted outside the atmosphere and that no unexpected side-effects emerged when firing the beam in space. After the rocket was recovered, the particle beam was still operational. According to BMDO, the research on neutral particle beam accelerators, originally funded by SDIO, could eventually be used to reduce the half-life of nuclear waste products using accelerator-driven transmutation technology.\nLaser and mirror experiments.\nThe High Precision Tracking Experiment (HPTE), launched with the Space Shuttle Discovery on STS-51-G, was tested on June 21, 1985, when a Hawaii-based low-power laser successfully tracked the experiment and bounced the laser off of the HPTE mirror.\nThe Relay mirror experiment (RME), launched in February 1990, demonstrated critical technologies for space-based relay mirrors that would be used with an SDI directed-energy weapon system. The experiment validated stabilization, tracking, and pointing concepts and proved that a laser could be relayed from the ground to a mirror on an orbiting satellite and back to another ground station with a high degree of accuracy and for extended durations.\nLaunched on the same rocket as the RME, the Low-power Atmospheric Compensation Experiment (LACE) satellite was built by the United States Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) to explore atmospheric distortion of lasers and real-time adaptive compensation. The LACE satellite included several other experiments to help develop and improve SDI sensors, including target discrimination using background radiation and tracking ballistic missiles using Ultraviolet Plume Imaging (UVPI). LACE was also used to evaluate ground-based adaptive optics, a technique now used in civilian telescopes to remove atmospheric distortions.\nHypervelocity Railgun (CHECMATE).\nResearch on hypervelocity railgun technology was conducted to build an information base about railguns. The SDI railgun investigation, called the Compact High Energy Capacitor Module Advanced Technology Experiment, was able to fire two projectiles per day during the initiative. This represented a significant improvement over previous efforts, which were only able to achieve about one shot per month. Hypervelocity railguns are, at least conceptually, an attractive alternative to a space-based defense system because of their envisioned ability to quickly shoot at many targets. Also, since only the projectile leaves the gun, a railgun system can potentially fire many times before needing to be resupplied.\nA hypervelocity railgun works like a particle accelerator, converting electrical potential energy into kinetic energy for the projectile. A conductive pellet (the projectile) is attracted down the rails by electric current flowing through a rail. Through magnetic forces, a force is exerted on the projectile moving it down the rail. Railguns can generate muzzle-velocities in excess of .\nRailguns face a host of technical challenges to be ready for battlefield deployment. First, the rails guiding the projectile must carry sufficient power. Each firing of the railgun sends tremendous current flow (almost half a million amperes) through the rails, causing rapid erosion of the rail's surfaces (through ohmic heating), and even vaporization of the rail surface. Early prototypes were essentially single-use weapons, requiring complete rail replacement after each firing. Another challenge is projectile survivability. The projectiles experience acceleration force in excess of 100,000\u00a0g. To be effective, the fired projectile must first survive the mechanical stress of firing and the thermal effects of a trip through the atmosphere at many times the speed of sound before hitting its target. Any on-board guidance would require the onboard navigation system to be built to the same level of sturdiness as the main mass of the projectile.\nIn addition to destroying ballistic missile threats, railguns were also planned for service in space platform (sensor and battle station) defense. This potential role reflected defense planner expectations that future railguns would be capable of rapid fire and on the order of tens to hundreds of shots.\nSpace-based programs.\nSpace-Based Interceptor.\nThe Space-Based Interceptor (SBI) concept involved groups of interceptors housed in orbital modules. Hover testing was completed in 1988 and demonstrated integration of the sensor and propulsion systems. It demonstrated the ability of the seeker to shift its aiming point from a rocket's hot plume to its cool body, a first for infrared ABM seekers. Final hover testing occurred in 1992 using miniaturized components similar to those that would have been used in an operational interceptor. These prototypes eventually evolved into Brilliant Pebbles.\nBrilliant Pebbles.\nBrilliant Pebbles was a non-nuclear system of numerous small satellites with heat-seeking missiles to intercept ICBMs. It was designed to operate in conjunction with the Brilliant Eyes sensor system. The project was conceived in 1986 by Lowell Wood and Edward Teller. Detailed studies were undertaken by several advisory boards, including the Defense Science Board and JASON, in 1989.\nThe Pebbles were designed so that autonomous operation was possible without external guidance from planned SDI sensor systems. This was attractive as a cost saving measure, as it would allow scaling back of those systems, and was estimated to save $7 to $13\u00a0billion versus the standard Phase I Architecture. Brilliant Pebbles later became the centerpiece under the Bush Administration.\nJohn H. Nuckolls, LLNL director from 1988 to 1994, described the system as \"The crowning achievement of the Strategic Defense Initiative\". The sensors and cameras developed for Brilliant Pebbles systems became components of the Clementine mission.\nThough regarded as one of the most capable SDI systems, Brilliant Pebbles was canceled in 1994 by BMDO.\nSensor programs.\nSDIO sensor research encompassed visible light, ultraviolet, infrared, and radar technologies, and eventually led to the Clementine mission though that mission occurred just after the program transitioned to the BMDO. Like other parts of SDI, the sensor system initially was very large-scale, but after the Soviet threat diminished it was cut back.\nBoost Surveillance and Tracking System.\nBoost Surveillance and Tracking System (BSTS) was part of SDIO in the late 1980s, and was designed to detect missile launches, especially during the boost phase; however, once the SDI program shifted toward theater missile defense in the early 1990s, the system left SDIO control and was transferred to the Air Force.\nSpace Surveillance and Tracking System.\nSpace Surveillance and Tracking System (SSTS) was a system originally designed for tracking mid-course ballistic missiles. It was designed to work in conjunction with BSTS but was later scaled down in favor of Brilliant Eyes.\nBrilliant Eyes.\nBrilliant Eyes was a simpler derivative of SSTS that focused on theater ballistic missiles rather than ICBMs and was meant to operate in conjunction with Brilliant Pebbles.\nBrilliant Eyes was renamed Space and Missile Tracking System (SMTS) and scaled back further under BMDO, and in the late 1990s it became the low earth orbit component of the Air Force's Space Based Infrared System (SBIRS).\nOther sensor experiments.\nThe Delta 183 program used a satellite known as Delta Star to test sensor-related technologies. Delta Star carried a thermographic camera, a long-wave infrared imager, an ensemble of imagers and photometers covering several visible and ultraviolet bands as well as a laser detector and ranging device. The satellite observed several ballistic missile launches including some releasing liquid propellant as a detection countermeasure.\nCountermeasures.\nIn war-fighting, countermeasures encompass multiple meanings:\nCountermeasures have long been a key part of warfighting strategy; however, with SDI they attained a special prominence due to the system cost, scenario of a massive sophisticated attack, strategic consequences of a less-than-perfect defense, basing many proposed weapons systems in space, and political debate.\nWhereas the United States national missile defense system targets a relatively limited and unsophisticated attack, SDI planned for a massive attack by a sophisticated opponent. This raised significant issues about economic and technical costs associated with defending against anti-ballistic missile defense countermeasures used by the attacking side.\nFor example, if it had been much cheaper to add attacking warheads than to add defenses, an attacker of similar economic power could have simply outproduced the defender. The \"cost effective at the margin\" requirement was first formulated by Paul Nitze in November 1985.\nIn addition, SDI envisioned many space-based systems in fixed orbits, ground-based sensors, command, control and communications facilities, etc. In theory, an advanced opponent could have targeted those, in turn requiring self-defense capability or increased numbers to compensate for attrition.\nA sophisticated attacker having the technology to use decoys, shielding, maneuvering warheads, defense suppression, or other countermeasures would have multiplied the difficulty and cost of intercepting the real warheads. SDI design and operational planning had to factor in these countermeasures and the associated cost.\nResponse from the Soviet Union.\nSDI failed to dissuade the USSR from investing in development of ballistic missiles. The Soviet response to SDI from March 1983 through November 1985 provided indications of their view of the program both as a threat and as an opportunity to weaken NATO. SDI was likely seen not only as a threat to the physical security of the Soviet Union, but also as part of a larger effort by the United States to seize the strategic initiative in arms control by neutralizing the military component of Soviet strategy. The Kremlin expressed concerns that space-based missile defenses would make nuclear war inevitable.\nA major objective of that strategy was the political separation of Western Europe from the United States, which the Soviets sought to facilitate by aggravating allied concern over the SDI's potential implications for European security and economic interests. The Soviet predisposition to see deception behind SDI was reinforced by their assessment of US intentions and capabilities and the utility of military deception in furthering the achievement of political goals.\nIn 1986 Carl Sagan summarized what he heard Soviet commentators saying about SDI. They commonly expressed the notion that SDI was equivalent to starting an economic war through a defensive arms race to further cripple the Soviet economy with extra military spending. Another common Soviet perception suggested that SDI served as a disguise for a US desire to initiate a first strike on the Soviet Union.\nThough classified at the time, a detailed study on a Soviet space-based LASER system began no later than 1976 as the \"Skif\", a 1 MW carbon dioxide laser along with the anti-satellite \"Kaskad\", an in-orbit missile platform. The devices were reportedly designed to pre-emptively destroy US satellites that might be launched in the future that could otherwise aid US missile defense.\nTerra-3 was a Soviet laser testing centre, located on the Sary Shagan anti-ballistic missile (ABM) testing range in the Karaganda Region of Kazakhstan. It was originally built to test missile defense concepts. In 1984, officials within the United States Department of Defense (DoD) suggested it was the site of a prototypical anti-satellite weapon system.\nIn 1987 a disguised Mir space station module was lifted on the inaugural flight of the Energia booster as the Polyus. It was later revealed that this craft housed a number of Skif lasers, intended to be clandestinely tested in orbit. However, the spacecraft's attitude control system malfunctioned upon separation from the booster, and it failed to reach orbit. More tentatively, it is also suggested that the Zarya module of the International Space Station, capable of station keeping and providing sizable battery power, was initially developed to power the Skif laser system.\nThe Polyus was a prototype of the Skif orbital weapons platform designed to destroy satellites with a megawatt carbon-dioxide laser. Soviet motivations behind attempting to launch components of the Skif laser in the form of Polyus were, according to interviews conducted years later, more for propaganda purposes in the prevailing climate of focus on US SDI, than as an effective defense technology, as the phrase \"Space based laser\" has political capital.\nPost-Soviet.\nIn 2014, a declassified CIA paper stated that \"In response to SDI, Moscow threatened a variety of military countermeasures in lieu of developing a parallel missile defense system\".\nIn January 2025 President Donald Trump ordered the building of a national \"Iron Dome\" missile defense shield.\nControversy and criticism.\nJessica Savitch reported on the technology in episode No.111 of \"Frontline\", \"Space: The Race for High Ground\", on November 4, 1983. The opening sequence shows Jessica Savitch seated next to a laser that she used to destroy a model of a communication satellite. The demonstration was perhaps the first televised use of a weapons-grade laser. No theatrical effects were used. The model was actually destroyed by the heat from the laser. The model and the laser were realized by Marc Palumbo, a High Tech Romantic artist from the Center for Advanced Visual Studies at MIT.\nAshton Carter, then a board member at MIT, assessed SDI for Congress in 1984, noting difficulties in creating an adequate missile defense shield, with or without lasers. Carter said X-rays had a limited scope because they become diffused by the atmosphere, much like the beam of a flashlight spreading outward in all directions. This means the X-ray sources needed to be close to the Soviet Union, especially during the boost phase, for the Soviet missiles to be both detectable to radar and targeted by the lasers. Opponents disagreed, saying advances in technology, such as using stronger beams, and by \"bleaching\" the column of air surrounding the laser beam, could increase the distance that the X-ray could travel to successfully hit its target.\nPhysicists Hans Bethe and Richard Garwin, who worked with Teller on both the atomic bomb and hydrogen bomb at Los Alamos, claimed a laser defense shield was unfeasible. They said that a defensive system was costly and difficult to build yet simple to destroy and claimed that the Soviets could easily use thousands of decoys to overwhelm it during a nuclear attack. They dismissed the idea of a technical solution to the Cold War, saying that a defense shield could be viewed as threatening because it would inhibit Soviet offensive capabilities while leaving America's offense intact. In March 1984, Bethe coauthored a 106-page report for the Union of Concerned Scientists that concluded \"the X-ray laser offers no prospect of being a useful component in a system for ballistic missile defense.\"\nIn response, when Teller testified before Congress he stated that \"instead of [Bethe] objecting on scientific and technical grounds, which he thoroughly understands, he now objects on the grounds of politics, on grounds of military feasibility of military deployment, on other grounds of difficult issues which are quite outside the range of his professional cognizance or mine.\"\nOn June 28, 1985, David Lorge Parnas resigned from SDIO's Panel on Computing in Support of Battle Management, arguing in eight short papers that the SDI software could never be made trustworthy and that such a system would inevitably be unreliable and menace humanity in its own right. Parnas said he joined the panel with the desire to make nuclear weapons \"impotent and obsolete\" but soon concluded that the concept was \"a fraud\".\nThe nickname \"Star Wars\".\nHistorians from the Missile Defense Agency attribute the term \"Star Wars\" to a \"Washington Post\" article published March 24, 1983. It quoted a speech delivered by Democratic Senator Ted Kennedy the previous day, describing the proposal as \"reckless \"Star Wars\" schemes\", a reference to the space opera film series \"Star Wars\". Some critics used the term derisively, implying it was an impractical science fiction. In addition, the American media's liberal use of the moniker (despite President Reagan's request) did much to damage the program's credibility. In comments to the media on March 7, 1986, SDIO Acting Deputy Director Dr. Gerold Yonas described \"Star Wars\" as an important tool for Soviet disinformation and asserted that the nickname gave an entirely wrong impression of SDI.\nSupporters of the SDI program eventually began to use the nickname as well. George Lucas, the creator of the \"Star Wars\" franchise, sued public interest groups High Frontier (a liberal organization that supported the program) and Committee for a Strong, Peaceful America (a conservative organization) in 1985 for trademark infringement. The lawsuit was dismissed by Judge Gerhard Gesell, who ruled that political application of the term was a non-commercial usage outside of the scope of trademark.\nTreaty obligations.\nAnother criticism of SDI argued that it would be inconsistent with existing treaties. The Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and its subsequent protocol, which limited missile defenses to one location per country at 100 missiles each (which the USSR had and the US did not), would have been violated by SDI ground-based interceptors. The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty requires that \"Each of the Parties to the Treaty undertakes to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament, and on a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control.\" Many viewed deployment of ABM systems as an escalation, and therefore a violation of this clause, although this view was not universal.\nThe Outer Space Treaty of 1967 required \"States Party to the Treaty undertake not to place in orbit around the Earth any objects carrying nuclear weapons or any other kinds of weapons of mass destruction, install such weapons on celestial bodies, or station such weapons in outer space in any other manner.\" This clause forbade the US from pre-positioning in Earth orbit any devices powered by nuclear weapons and any devices capable of \"mass destruction\". A space-stationed nuclear-pumped X-ray laser would have violated this treaty, since other SDI systems did not require the pre-positioning of nuclear explosives in space.\nMutual assured destruction.\nSDI threatened to disrupt the strategic equilibrium ensured by the doctrine of mutual assured destruction (MAD). This doctrine postulated that neither the U.S. nor the USSR could attack the other without considering the strong probability that both sides would be annihilated. A defensive weapon system that could neutralize much of an adversary's nuclear counter-strike force would potentially embolden the possessor to strike first.\nDuring the Reykjav\u00edk talks with Mikhail Gorbachev in 1986, Reagan addressed Gorbachev's concerns about imbalance by stating that SDI technology could be provided to the entire world \u2013 including the Soviet Union \u2013 to prevent the imbalance from occurring. Gorbachev answered dismissively. When Reagan proposed technology sharing again, Gorbachev stated \"we cannot assume an obligation relative to such a transition\", referring to the cost of implementing such a program.\nWhistleblower.\nIn 1992, scientist Aldric Saucier was given whistleblower protection after he was fired and complained about \"wasteful spending on research and development\" at SDI. Saucier lost his security clearance.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29187", "revid": "1307365378", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29187", "title": "SDI", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSDI may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29189", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29189", "title": "Super Nintendo Entertainment System games", "text": ""}
{"id": "29190", "revid": "1320089227", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29190", "title": "Solomon Northup", "text": "Free-born African American kidnapped by slave-traders\nSolomon Northup (July 10, c.\u20091807/1808 \u2014 unknown; after 1857) was an American abolitionist and the primary author of the memoir \"Twelve Years a Slave\". A free-born American of mixed race from New York, he was the son of a freed slave and a free woman of color. Northup was a professional violinist, farmer, and landowner in Washington County, New York. In 1841, he was offered a traveling musician's job and went to Washington, D.C. (where slavery was legal); there, he was drugged and kidnapped into slavery. He was shipped to New Orleans on April 24, 1841 by James H. Birch aboard the Brig Orleans from Richmond, VA. Northup was purchased by a planter and held as a slave for nearly twelve years in the Red River region of Louisiana; mostly in Avoyelles Parish. He remained enslaved until he met Samuel Bass, a Canadian working on his plantation who helped get word to New York, where state law provided aid to free New York citizens who had been kidnapped and sold into slavery. His family and friends enlisted the aid of the Governor of New York, Washington Hunt, and Northup regained his freedom on January 3, 1853.\nThe slave trader in Washington, D.C., James H. Birch, was arrested and tried, but acquitted because District of Columbia law at the time prohibited Northup as a black man from testifying against white people. Later, in New York State, his northern kidnappers were located and charged, but the case was tied up in court for two years because of jurisdictional challenges and finally dropped when Washington, D.C. was found to have jurisdiction. The D.C. government did not pursue the case. Those who had kidnapped and enslaved Northup received no punishment.\nIn his first year of freedom, Northup wrote and published a memoir, \"Twelve Years a Slave\" (1853). He lectured on behalf of the abolitionist movement, giving more than two dozen speeches throughout the Northeast about his experiences, to build momentum against slavery. He largely disappeared from the historical record after 1857, although a letter later reported him alive in early 1863; some commentators thought he had been kidnapped again, but historians believe it unlikely, as he would have been considered too old to bring a good price. The details of his death have never been documented.\nNorthup's memoir was adapted and produced as the 1984 television film \"Solomon Northup's Odyssey\" and the 2013 feature film \"12 Years a Slave\". The latter won three Academy Awards, including Best Picture, at the 86th Academy Awards.\nEarly life.\nSolomon Northup was born in the town of Minerva in Essex County, New York on July 10, 1807 or July 10, 1808. His mother was a free woman of color, which meant that her sons, Solomon and his older brother Joseph, were born free according to the principle of \"partus sequitur ventrem\". Solomon described his mother as a quadroon, meaning that she was one-quarter African, and three-quarters European.\nHis father, Mintus, was a freedman who had been enslaved in his early life by the Northup family. Born in Rhode Island, he was taken with the Northups when they moved to Hoosick, New York, in Rensselaer County. His master, Henry Northrop, manumitted Mintus in his will, after which Mintus adopted the surname Northup. His surname was sometimes spelled Northrup in records. Upon attaining his freedom, Mintus married and moved to Minerva with his wife.\nNorthup said his father was \"a man respected for his industry and integrity\". A farmer, Mintus was successful enough to own land and thus meet the state's property requirements for the right to vote. His sons received what was considered to be a good education for free black people at that time. Northup and his brother worked on the family farm as boys. He spent his leisure time playing the violin and reading books.\nMintus moved his family to Washington County, New York, and worked on several farms owned by the Northups. From Minerva, they moved to the farm of Clark Northup near Slyborough (Slyboro) in Granville, Washington County, for several years. The family of four then lived at Alden Farm, a short distance north of Sandy Hill (now called Hudson Falls). They later moved to an area east of Fort Edward on the road from Fort Edward to Argyle, where Mintus lived until his death. Mintus died at Fort Edward on November 22, 1829, and was interred at the Hudson Falls Baker Cemetery. His mother died during Northup's enslavement (1841 to 1852). According to her daughter-in-law Anne and Nicholas C. Northup, she died around 1846 or 1847 in Oswego County, New York.\nMarriage and family.\nSolomon Northup married Anne Hampton on December 25, 1829, one month after the death of his father, or on November 22, 1829, according to sworn depositions by Anne Northup, Josiah Hand, and Timothy Eddy, the last of whom was the justice of the peace who performed the wedding. They were married in Fort Edward. Anne, the daughter of William Hampton, was born March 14, 1808. She grew up in Sandy Hill. A \"woman of color\", she was of African, European, and Native American descent. They had three children: Elizabeth (born c. 1831), Margaret (born c. 1833), and Alonzo (born c. 1835).\nAt the start of their marriage, the couple lived at Fort House, \"the old yellow house\", at the southern end of Fort Edward. In 1830, they moved to Kingsbury, both of which were small communities in Washington County. After selling their farm in 1834, the Northups moved to Saratoga Springs, New York, for its employment opportunities.\nAnne was known for her culinary expertise. She worked for local taverns that served food and drink, at the United States Hotel and elite hotels such as the Pavilion Hotel. When court was in session at the county seat of Fort Edward, she worked at Sherrill's Coffee House in Sandy Hill.\nAfter Northup was kidnapped, Anne and her oldest daughter, Elizabeth, went to work as domestic servants in New York City at Madame Jumel's Mansion on the East River in the summer of 1841. Alonzo was with them. Margaret, their youngest daughter, went to Hoboken, New Jersey, to live with a friend of Madame Jumel, who also had a young daughter.\nAfter about two years, Anne brought the family back together in Saratoga, where she worked as a hotel cook, including at Carpenter's Hotel in Glens Falls. In 1852, she learned of her husband's fate and asked for Henry B. Northup's help to free him. A letter was prepared to the Governor of New York, Washington Hunt, based upon a deposition given by Anne Northup to Justice of the Peace Charles Hughes on November 19, 1852. He gathered the information to prove that Northup was free and went to Louisiana to bring him back to New York.\nNorthup returned to Sandy Hill on January 21, 1853, and reunited with his wife and children. By 1855, he was living with his daughter Margaret Stanton and her family in Queensbury, Warren County, New York. He purchased land in Glens Falls near his daughter. In his memoir, Northup described his love for his wife as \"sincere and unabated\" since the time of their marriage, and his children as \"beloved\".\nWhile Northup gave talks about his book around the country, Anne worked in Bolton Landing on Lake George at the hotel Mohican House. Author David Fiske states that Northup seems to have had a difficult time overcoming the years in which he was enslaved. He was said to have drunk a lot and did not seem to spend a lot of time with his wife. By the late 1850s, it was unknown what had become of Northup, and he was not listed with his family in the 1860 census.\nAfter selling their land in Glens Falls, Anne Northup moved to the household of her daughter and son-in-law, Margaret and Philip Stanton, in Moreau, Saratoga County, where she again was recorded as married. However, Solomon was not with the family. Anne did laundry, cooking and chores for a Moreau man. In 1870, she worked as a cook in the household of Burton C. Dennis, who kept the Middleworth House hotel in Sandy Hill. Anne Northup lived in Kingsbury in Washington County, New York, in 1875. By that time, she was identified as a widow. She died in 1876 while performing her chores in Moreau. One obituary, while praising Anne, says of Solomon Northup that \"after exhibiting himself through the country [he] became a worthless vagabond\".\nLife.\nCanal worker, farmer, and violin player.\nIn the winter of the year that he married, Northup worked as a laborer repairing the Champlain Canal. He then bought two horses and contracted to tow lumber on rafts to Troy from Lake Champlain beginning the following spring. He employed two workers. He worked on other waterways in upstate New York and he traveled to northern New York and Montreal, Canada. When the canal was closed down, he cut lumber during the winter of 1831\u20131832. He worked as a farm laborer in the Sandy Hill area.\nHe arranged to farm corn and oats on part of the Alden farm where his father lived in Kingsbury. He built a fine reputation as a fiddler and was in high demand to play for dances in surrounding villages. The couple had become prosperous due to the income Anne received as a cook and that Northup made farming and playing the violin.\nThe couple moved to Saratoga Springs in March 1834, where he drove a horse-drawn taxi for a businessman. During the tourist season, he worked for the United States Hotel, where he was employed by Judge James M. Marvin, a part-owner of the hotel. He played his violin at several well-known hotels in Saratoga Springs. He also worked on the construction of the Troy and Saratoga Railroad. He had become a regular customer and friend of William Perry and Cephus Parker, who owned several shops in town. Over the seven years that the Northups lived in Saratoga Springs, they had made ends meet and dressed their children in fine clothes, but they had been unable to prosper as hoped.\nIn March 1841, Anne went 20 miles to Sandy Hill, where she ran the kitchen at Sherrill's Coffee House during the court session. She may have taken their oldest daughter, Elizabeth, with her. Their two youngest children went to stay with their aunt. Northup stayed in Saratoga Springs to look for employment until the tourist season.\nKidnapped and sold into slavery.\nIn 1841, at age 32, Northup met two men who introduced themselves as Merrill Brown and Abram Hamilton. Saying they were entertainers, members of a circus company, they offered him a job as a fiddler for several performances in New York City. Expecting the trip to be brief, Northup did not notify Anne, who was working in Sandy Hill. When they reached New York City, the men persuaded Northup to continue with them for a gig with their circus in Washington, D.C., offering him a generous wage and the cost of his return trip home. They stopped so that he could get a copy of his \"free papers\", which documented his status as a free man.\nThe city had one of the nation's largest slave markets, and slave catchers were not above kidnapping free black people. At this time, 20 years before the Civil War, the expansion of cotton cultivation in the Deep South had led to a continuing high demand for healthy slaves. Kidnappers used a variety of means, from forced abduction to deceit, and frequently abducted children, who were easier to control.\nIt is possible that \"Brown\" and \"Hamilton\" incapacitated Northup\u00a0\u2013 his symptoms suggest that he was drugged with belladonna or laudanum, or with a mixture of both\u00a0\u2013 and sold him to Washington slave trader James H. Birch for $650, and lied that he was a fugitive slave. However, Northup stated in his account of the ordeal in \"Twelve Years a Slave\" in Chapter II, \"[w]hether they were accessory to my misfortunes \u2013 subtle and inhuman monsters in the shape of men \u2013 designedly luring me away from home and family, and liberty, for the sake of gold \u2013 those who read these pages will have the same means of determining as myself.\" Northup told Birch that he was a free man from the state of New York, but Birch and Ebenezer Radburn, his jailer, severely and cruelly tortured and beat up Northup to prevent him from saying he was a free man. Birch then lied and falsely presented Northup as an enslaved man from the state of Georgia. Northup was held in the Yellow House, the slave pen of trader William Williams, close to the United States Capitol. Birch shipped Northup and other slaves by sea to New Orleans, in what was called the coastwise slave trade, where Birch's partner Theophilus Freeman would sell them. During the voyage, Northup and the other slaves caught smallpox.\nNorthup persuaded John Manning, an English sailor, to send to Henry B. Northup, upon reaching New Orleans, a letter that told of his kidnapping and illegal enslavement. Henry was a lawyer, a relative of Henry Northrop who had held and freed Solomon's father, and a childhood friend of Solomon's. The letter was delivered to Governor Seward by Henry, but it was not actionable because Northup's location was unknown.\nThe New York State Legislature had passed a law in 1840 that made it illegal to entice or kidnap an African-American out of North and sell them into slavery. It provided legal and financial assistance to aid the recovery of any who were kidnapped, taken out of state, and illegally enslaved.\nAt the New Orleans slave market, Birch's partner Theophilus Freeman sold Northup (who had been renamed Platt) along with two other individuals, Harry and Eliza (renamed Dradey) to William Prince Ford, a preacher who engaged in small farming on Bayou Boeuf of the Red River in northern Louisiana. Ford was then a Baptist preacher. (In 1843, he led his congregation in converting to the closely related Churches of Christ after they were influenced by the writings of Alexander Campbell.) In his memoir, Northup characterized Ford as a good man who was considerate of the people he enslaved. Despite his situation, Northup wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAt Ford's place in Pine Woods, Northup assessed the problem of getting timber off Ford's farm to market. He proposed and then made a log raft to move lumber down the narrow Indian Creek, in order to transport the logs more easily. Northup built weaving looms so that fabric could be woven for clothing.\nFord came into financial difficulties and had to sell 18 enslaved people to settle his debts. In the winter of 1842, Ford sold Northup to John M. Tibaut, a carpenter who had been working for Ford on the mills. Tibaut also had helped construct a weaving house and corn mill on Ford's Bayou Boeuf plantation. Ford owed Tibaut money for the work. Since Ford owed Tibaut less than the purchase price agreed upon for Northup, Ford held a chattel mortgage on Northup for $400, the difference between the two amounts.\nUnder Tibaut, Northup suffered cruel and capricious treatment. Tibaut used him to help complete construction at Ford's plantation. At one point, Tibaut whipped Northup because he did not like the nails Northup was using. But Northup fought back, beating Tibaut severely. Enraged, Tibaut recruited two friends to lynch and hang Northup, which an enslaver was legally entitled to do. Ford's overseer Chapin interrupted and prevented the men from killing Northup, reminding Tibaut of his debt to Ford, and chasing them off at gunpoint. Northup was left bound and noosed for hours until Ford returned home to cut him down. Northup believed that Tibaut's debt to Ford saved his life. Historian Walter Johnson suggests that Northup may well have been the first person Tibaut ever enslaved, marking his transition from itinerant employee to property-owning enslaver.\nTibaut hired Northup out to a planter named Eldret, who lived about 38 miles south on the Red River. At what he called \"The Big Cane Brake\", Eldret had Northup and other enslaved people clear cane, trees, and undergrowth in the bottomlands in order to develop cotton fields for cultivation. With the work unfinished, after about five weeks, Tibaut sold Northup to Edwin Epps.\nEpps held Northup for almost 10 years, until 1853, in Avoyelles Parish. He was a cruel enslaver who frequently and indiscriminately punished enslaved people and drove them hard. His policy was to whip slaves if they did not meet daily work quotas he set for pounds of cotton to be picked, among other goals.\nIn 1852, itinerant Canadian carpenter Samuel Bass came to do some work for Epps. Hearing Bass express abolitionist views, Northup eventually decided to confide his secret to him. Bass was the first person he told of his true name and origins as a free man since he was first kidnapped and enslaved. Along with mailing a letter written by Northup, Bass wrote several letters at his request to Northup's friends, providing general details of his location at Bayou Boeuf, in hopes of gaining his rescue.\nBass did this at great personal risk, as the local people would not take kindly to a person helping an enslaved person to the detriment of an enslaver. In addition, Bass's help came after the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, which increased federal penalties against people assisting enslaved people to escape.\nRestoration of freedom.\nBass wrote several letters to people Northup knew in Saratoga Springs: one went to his former employer Judge James M. Marvin and another reached Cephas Parker and William Perry, storekeepers in Saratoga. Parker and Perry forwarded the letter to Northup's wife, Anne, who contacted attorney Henry B. Northup, the son of Solomon's father's former master. Henry B. Northup contacted New York Governor Washington Hunt, who took up the case, appointing the attorney general as his legal agent. In 1840, the New York State Legislature had passed a law committing the state to help any African American residents kidnapped into slavery, as well as guaranteeing a jury trial to alleged fugitive slaves. Once Northup's family was notified, his rescuers still had to do detective work to find the enslaved man, as he had partially tried to hide his location for protection in case the letters fell into the wrong hands, and Bass had not used his real name. They had to find documentation of his free status as a citizen and New York resident; Henry B. Northup also collected sworn affidavits from people who knew Solomon Northup. Northup did not know if Bass had reached anyone with the letters during this time. There was no means of communicating because of the secrecy they needed to maintain and the necessity of preventing Northup's owner from knowing their plans. Bass did not reveal his own name in the letter.\nHenry gathered documentation and depositions and stopped off in Washington, D.C. to meet with Pierre Soule, a legislator from Louisiana, and the Secretary of War in preparation for his rescue effort in Louisiana. Although he did not have Bass's name, Henry still managed to find him in Marksville (the postmark on the letters), and Bass revealed that Edwin Epps held Solomon Northup on his plantation. Henry prepared legal paperwork based on the documentation proving Northup was free. The sheriff went with Henry to give the news to Epps and take Northup off the farm.\nNorthup later wrote, \"He [Epps] thought of nothing but his loss, and cursed me for having been born free.\" Attorney Henry B. Northup convinced Epps that it would be futile to contest the free papers in a court of law, so the planter conceded the case. He signed papers giving up all claims to Northup. Finally, on January 4, 1853, four months after meeting Bass, Northup regained his freedom.\n\"Twelve Years a Slave\".\nAfter he made it back to New York, Solomon Northup wrote and published his memoir, \"Twelve Years a Slave\" (1853). The book was written in three months with the help of David Wilson, a local lawyer and writer.\nNorthup told the story of his kidnapping and enslavement with many verifiable details. Northup told the cruelty, treatment as chattel, and the appreciated acts of kindness he received. \"Its tone is much milder than we expected to see exhibited,\" according to the \"Rome Citizen\" of New York. The detail that he provided helped illuminate the depth of his experiences, and allowed for verification of what life was like on a plantation. Sue Eakin and Joseph Logsdon researched the facts from Northup's book and were able to verify many of the events and people and published their annotated version of the book in 1968. Edwin Epps, his slaveholder, stated that a greater part of the book was the truth to soldiers from the 114th New York Infantry Regiment that Epps met during the Civil War. Northup was literate and provided the facts without hyperbole in \"plain and candid language\", while Wilson corrected style, grammar, and inconsistencies.\nIt was published by Derby &amp; Miller of Auburn, New York. In the period when questions of slavery generated debate and the novel \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\" (1852) by Harriet Beecher Stowe was a bestseller, Northup's book sold 30,000 copies within three years, also becoming a bestseller. Northup traveled and went on a lecture tour in Northeastern states to tell his story and sell books. The book became the backbone of other books about him, such as \"Solomon Northup: The Complete Story of the Author of Twelve Years a Slave.\"\nCourt cases.\nNorthup was one of the few kidnapped free black people to regain freedom after being sold into slavery. Represented by attorneys Senator Salmon P. Chase of Ohio, General Orville Clark, and Henry B. Northup, Solomon Northup sued Birch and other men involved in selling him into slavery in Washington, DC. The historian Carol Wilson documented 300 kidnapping cases in her 1994 book, and believes that it is likely that thousands more were kidnapped who were never documented.\nAs Solomon Northup and Henry Northup made their way back to New York, they first stopped in Washington, D.C., to file a legal complaint with the police magistrate against James H. Birch, the man who had first enslaved him. Birch was immediately arrested and tried on criminal charges. However, Northup could not testify at the trial due to laws in Washington, D.C., against black men testifying in court. Birch and several others who were also in the slave trade testified that Northup had approached them, saying he was an enslaved person from Georgia and was for sale. However, Birch's accounting ledger made no note of his purchase. The prosecution consisted of Henry B. Northup and another white man asserting that they had known Northup for many years, and he was born and lived a free man in New York until his abduction. With no one legally able to testify against Birch's tale, Birch was found not guilty. However, the sensational case immediately attracted national attention, and \"The New York Times\" published an article about the trial on January 20, 1853, just days after its conclusion and only two weeks after Northup's rescue.\nThe New York trial opened on October 4, 1854. Both Northup and St. John testified against the two men. The case brought widespread illegal practices in the domestic slave trade to light. Testimony during the court case confirmed various details of Northup's account of his experience. The respective counsels argued over whether the crime had been committed in New York (where Northup could testify), or in Washington, DC, outside the jurisdiction of New York courts. After more than two years of appeals, a new district attorney in New York failed to continue with the case and dropped it in May 1857.\nLast years.\nNorthup worked again as a carpenter after he moved back to New York. He became active in the abolitionist movement and lectured on slavery in the years before the American Civil War. In the summer of 1857, he traveled to Canada to deliver a series of lectures; however, in Streetsville, Ontario, a hostile crowd prevented him from speaking.\nAfter 1857, he was not living with family and there was speculation by family, friends, and others that he was reenslaved. The 21st-century historians Clifford Brown and Carol Wilson believe it is likely that he died of natural causes, because he was too old to be of interest to slave catchers.\nAccording to John R. Smith, in letters written in the 1930s, his father Rev. John L. Smith, a Methodist minister in Vermont, had worked with Northup and former slave Tabbs Gross in the early 1860s, during the Civil War, aiding fugitive slaves on the Underground Railroad. Northup was said to have visited Rev. Smith after Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation, which was made in January 1863.\nThere is no contemporaneous documentation of his death. Historians believe that he died in 1863 or 1864.\nHistoriography.\nAlthough the memoir is often classified among the genre of slave narratives, the scholar Sam Worley says that it does not fit the genre's standard format. Northup was assisted in the writing by David Wilson, a white man, and, according to Worley, some believed he would have biased the material. Worley discounted concerns that Wilson was pursuing his own interests in the book. He writes of the memoir:\n\"Twelve Years\" is convincingly Northup's tale and no one else's because of its amazing attention to empirical detail and unwillingness to reduce the complexity of Northup's experience to a stark moral allegory.\nNorthup's biographer, David Fiske, has investigated Northup's role in the book's writing and asserts the authenticity of authorship. Northup's complete and descriptive account has been used by numerous historians researching slavery. His description of the \"Yellow House\" (also known as \"The Williams Slave Pen\"), in view of the Capitol, has helped researchers document the history of slavery in the District of Columbia.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29191", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29191", "title": "Sixth sense", "text": ""}
{"id": "29192", "revid": "50599730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29192", "title": "Space elevator", "text": "Proposed type of space transportation system\nA space elevator, also referred to as a space bridge, star ladder, and orbital lift, is a proposed type of planet-to-space transportation system, often depicted in science fiction. The main component would be a cable (also called a tether) anchored to the surface and extending into space. An Earth-based space elevator would consist of a cable with one end attached to the surface near the equator and the other end attached to a counterweight in space beyond geostationary orbit (35,786\u00a0km altitude). The competing forces of gravity, which is stronger at the lower end, and the upward centrifugal pseudo-force (it is actually the inertia of the counterweight that creates the tension on the space side), which is stronger at the upper end, would result in the cable being held up, under tension, and stationary over a single position on Earth. With the tether deployed, climbers (crawlers) could repeatedly climb up and down the tether by mechanical means, releasing their cargo to and from orbit. The design would permit vehicles to travel directly between a planetary surface, such as the Earth's, and orbit, without the use of large rockets.\nHistory.\nEarly concept.\nThe idea of the space elevator appears to have developed independently in different times and places. The earliest models originated with two Russian scientists in the late nineteenth century. In his 1895 collection \"Dreams of Earth and Sky\", Konstantin Tsiolkovsky envisioned a massive sky ladder to reach the stars as a way to overcome gravity. Decades later, in 1960, Yuri Artsutanov independently developed the concept of a \"Cosmic Railway\", a space elevator tethered from an orbiting satellite to an anchor on the equator, aiming to provide a safer and more efficient alternative to rockets. In 1966, John O. Isaacs and his colleagues introduced the concept of the 'Sky-Hook', proposing a satellite in geostationary orbit with a cable extending to Earth.\nInnovations and designs.\nThe space elevator concept reached America in 1975 when Jerome Pearson began researching the idea, inspired by Arthur C. Clarke's 1969 speech before Congress. After working as an engineer for NASA and the Air Force Research Laboratory, he developed a design for an \"Orbital Tower\", intended to harness Earth's rotational energy to transport supplies into low Earth orbit. In his publication in \"Acta Astronautica,\" the cable would be thickest at geostationary orbital altitude, where tension is greatest, and narrowest at the tips to minimize weight. He proposed extending a counterweight to 144,000 kilometers (89,000 miles), as without a large counterweight, the upper cable would need to be longer due to the way gravitational and centrifugal forces change with distance from Earth. His analysis included the Moon's gravity, wind, and movable payloads as factors. Building the elevator would have required thousands of Space Shuttle trips, though material could be transported once a minimum strength strand reached the ground or could be manufactured in space from asteroidal or lunar ore. Pearson's findings, published in \"Acta Astronautica\", caught Clarke's attention and led to technical consultations for Clarke's science fiction novel \"The Fountains of Paradise\" (1979), which features a space elevator.\nThe first gathering of multiple experts who wanted to investigate this alternative to space flight took place at the 1999 NASA conference 'Advanced Space Infrastructure Workshop on Geostationary Orbiting Tether Space Elevator Concepts' in Huntsville, Alabama. In August 2000, D.V. Smitherman, Jr., published the findings under the title \"Space Elevators: An Advanced Earth-Space Infrastructure for the New Millennium\", concluding that the space elevator could not be built for at least another 50 years due to concerns about the cable's material, deployment, and upkeep.\nB.\u00a0C. Edwards suggested that a paper-thin ribbon of a carbon nanotube composite material could solve the tether issue, due to its high tensile strength and low weight. The proposed wide-thin ribbon-like cross-section shape, instead of earlier circular cross-section concepts, would increase survivability against meteoroid impacts. With support from the NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts (NIAC), his work involved more than 20 institutions and 50 participants. The Space Elevator NIAC Phase II Final Report, in combination with the book \"The Space Elevator\": \"A Revolutionary Earth-to-Space Transportation System\" (Edwards and Westling, 2003) summarized all effort to design a space elevator including deployment scenario, climber design, power delivery system, orbital debris avoidance, anchor system, surviving atomic oxygen, avoiding lightning and hurricanes by locating the anchor in the western equatorial Pacific, construction costs, construction schedule, and environmental hazards. Additionally, he researched the structural integrity and load-bearing capabilities of space elevator cables, emphasizing their need for high tensile strength and resilience. His space elevator concept never reached NIAC's third phase, which he attributed to submitting his final proposal during the week of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster.\n21st-century advancements.\nTo speed space elevator development, proponents have organized several competitions, similar to the Ansari X Prize, for relevant technologies. Among them are , which organized annual competitions for climbers, ribbons and power-beaming systems from 2005 to 2009, the Robogames Space Elevator Ribbon Climbing competition, as well as NASA's Centennial Challenges program, which, in March 2005, announced a partnership with the Spaceward Foundation (the operator of Elevator:2010), raising the total value of prizes to US$400,000.\nThe first European Space Elevator Challenge (EuSEC) to establish a climber structure took place in August 2011.\nIn 2005, \"the LiftPort Group of space elevator companies announced that it will be building a carbon nanotube manufacturing plant in Millville, New Jersey, to supply various glass, plastic, and metal companies with these strong materials. Although LiftPort hopes to eventually use carbon nanotubes in the construction of a space elevator, this move will allow it to make money in the short term and conduct research and development into new production methods.\" Their announced goal was a space elevator launch in 2010. On 13 February 2006, the LiftPort Group announced that, earlier the same month, they had tested a mile of \"space-elevator tether\" made of carbon-fiber composite strings and fiberglass tape measuring wide and (approx. 13 sheets of paper) thick, lifted with balloons. In April 2019, Liftport CEO Michael Laine admitted little progress had been made on the company's lofty space elevator ambitions, even after receiving more than $200,000 in seed funding. The carbon nanotube manufacturing facility that Liftport announced in 2005 was never built.\nIn 2007, held the 2007 Space Elevator games, which featured US$500,000 awards for each of the two competitions ($1,000,000 total), as well as an additional $4,000,000 to be awarded over the next five years for space elevator-related technologies. No teams won the competition, but a team from MIT entered the first 2-gram (0.07\u00a0oz), 100-percent carbon nanotube entry into the competition. Japan held an international conference in November 2008 to draw up a timetable for building the elevator.\nIn 2012, the Obayashi Corporation announced that it could build a space elevator by 2050 using carbon nanotube technology. The design's passenger climber would be able to reach the level of geosynchronous equatorial orbit (GEO) after an 8-day trip. Further details were published in 2016.\nIn 2013, the International Academy of Astronautics published a technological feasibility assessment, which concluded that the critical capability improvement needed was the tether material, which was projected to achieve the necessary specific strength within 20 years. The four-year-long study examined multiple facets of space elevator development, including missions, development schedules, financial investments, revenue flow, and benefits. It was reported that it would be possible to operationally survive smaller impacts and avoid larger impacts, with meteors and space debris, and that the estimated cost of lifting a kilogram of payload to GEO and beyond would be $500.\nIn 2014, Google X's Rapid Evaluation R&amp;D team began designing a Space Elevator, eventually finding that no one had yet manufactured a perfectly formed carbon nanotube strand longer than a meter. They thus put the project in \"deep freeze\" and also keep tabs on any advances in the carbon nanotube field.\nIn 2018, researchers at Japan's Shizuoka University launched STARS-Me, two CubeSats connected by a tether, on which a mini-elevator will travel. The experiment was launched as a test bed for a larger structure.\nIn 2019, the International Academy of Astronautics published \"Road to the Space Elevator Era\", a study report summarizing the assessment of the space elevator as of summer 2018. The essence is that a broad group of space professionals gathered and assessed the status of the space elevator development, each contributing their expertise and coming to similar conclusions: (a) Earth Space Elevators seem feasible, reinforcing the IAA 2013 study conclusion (b) Space Elevator development initiation is nearer than most think. This last conclusion is based on a potential process for manufacturing macro-scale single crystal graphene with higher specific strength than carbon nanotubes.\nMaterials.\nOne of the most significant challenges in manufacturing a space elevator for Earth is the strength of the materials utilized for its construction. Considering the structure must be designed to be sufficiently strong to hold up not only its own weight but also the payload it may carry, the strength-to-weight ratio, or specific strength, of the elevator's construction material needs to be extremely high.\nSince 1959, most ideas for space elevators have focused on purely tensile structures, with the weight of the system held up from above by centrifugal forces. In the tensile concepts, a space tether reaches from a large mass (the counterweight) beyond geostationary orbit to the ground. This structure is held in tension between Earth and the counterweight like an upside-down plumb bob. The cable thickness is tapered based on tension; it has its maximum at a geostationary orbit and the minimum on the ground.\nThe concept is applicable to other planets and celestial bodies. For locations in the Solar System with weaker gravity than Earth's (such as the Moon or Mars), the strength-to-density requirements for tether materials are not as problematic. Currently available materials (such as Kevlar) are strong and light enough that they could be practical as the tether material for elevators there.\nCurrently available materials are not sufficiently strong and light enough to make the construction of an Earth space elevator practically feasible in the near future. Some sources expect that future advances in carbon nanotubes (CNTs) could lead to a practical design. Other sources believe that CNTs will never be strong enough. Possible future alternatives to carbon nanotubes include materials like boron nitride nanotubes, diamond nanothreads, and macro-scale single-crystal graphene.\nIn fiction.\nIn 1979, space elevators were introduced to a broader audience with the simultaneous publication of Arthur C. Clarke's novel, \"The Fountains of Paradise\", in which engineers construct a space elevator on top of a mountain peak in the fictional island country of \"Taprobane\" (loosely based on Sri Lanka, albeit moved south to the Equator), and Charles Sheffield's first novel, \"The Web Between the Worlds\", also featuring the building of a space elevator. Three years later, in Robert A. Heinlein's 1982 novel \"Friday\", the principal character mentions a disaster at the \u201cQuito Sky Hook\u201d and makes use of the \"Nairobi Beanstalk\" in the course of her travels. \nIn Kim Stanley Robinson's 1993 novel \"Red Mars\", colonists build a space elevator on Mars that allows both for more colonists to arrive and also for natural resources mined there to be able to leave for Earth. Larry Niven's book \"Rainbow Mars\" describes a space elevator built on Mars. In David Gerrold's 2000 novel, \"Jumping Off The Planet\", a family excursion up the Ecuador \"beanstalk\" is actually a child-custody kidnapping. Gerrold's book also examines some of the industrial applications of a mature elevator technology. \nThe concept of a space elevator, called the Beanstalk, is also depicted in John Scalzi's 2005 novel \"Old Man's War.\" In a biological version, Joan Slonczewski's 2011 novel \"The Highest Frontier\" depicts a college student ascending a space elevator constructed of self-healing cables of anthrax bacilli. The engineered bacteria can regrow the cables when severed by space debris.\nIn the 2021 science fiction show \"Foundation\", the Galactic Empire has constructed a space elevator called the \"Star Bridge\" on their home world of Trantor.\nThe 2023 science fiction film \"The Wandering Earth 2\" features scenes where a functioning space elevator is attacked by terrorists.\nPhysics.\nApparent gravitational field.\nAn Earth space elevator cable rotates along with the rotation of the Earth. Therefore, the cable, and objects attached to it, would experience upward centrifugal force in the direction opposing the downward gravitational force. The higher up the cable the object is located, the less the gravitational pull of the Earth, and the stronger the upward centrifugal force due to the rotation, so that more centrifugal force opposes less gravity. The centrifugal force and the gravity are balanced at geosynchronous equatorial orbit (GEO). Above GEO, the centrifugal force is stronger than gravity, causing objects attached to the cable there to pull \"upward\" on it. Because the counterweight, above GEO, is rotating about the Earth faster than the natural orbital speed for that altitude, it exerts a centrifugal pull on the cable and thus holds the whole system aloft.\nThe net force for objects attached to the cable is called the \"apparent gravitational field\". The apparent gravitational field for attached objects is the (downward) gravity minus the (upward) centrifugal force. The apparent gravity experienced by an object on the cable is zero at GEO, downward below GEO, and upward above GEO.\nThe apparent gravitational field can be represented this way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;The downward force of actual gravity \"decreases\" with height: formula_1\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;The upward centrifugal force due to the planet's rotation \"increases\" with height: formula_2\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nwhere\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"g\" is the acceleration of \"apparent\" gravity, pointing down (negative) or up (positive) along the vertical cable (m s\u22122),\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"gr\" is the gravitational acceleration due to Earth's pull, pointing down (negative)(m s\u22122),\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"a\" is the centrifugal acceleration, pointing up (positive) along the vertical cable (m s\u22122),\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"G\" is the gravitational constant (m3 s\u22122 kg\u22121)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"M\" is the mass of the Earth (kg)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"r\" is the distance from that point to Earth's center (m),\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"\u03c9\" is Earth's rotation speed (radian/s).\nAt some point up the cable, the two terms (downward gravity and upward centrifugal force) are equal and opposite. Objects fixed to the cable at that point put no weight on the cable. This altitude (r1) depends on the mass of the planet and its rotation rate. Setting actual gravity equal to centrifugal acceleration gives:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThis is above Earth's surface, the altitude of geostationary orbit.\nOn the cable \"below\" geostationary orbit, downward gravity would be greater than the upward centrifugal force, so the apparent gravity would pull objects attached to the cable downward. Any object released from the cable below that level would initially accelerate downward along the cable. Then gradually it would deflect eastward from the cable. On the cable \"above\" the level of stationary orbit, upward centrifugal force would be greater than downward gravity, so the apparent gravity would pull objects attached to the cable \"upward\". Any object released from the cable \"above\" the geosynchronous level would initially accelerate \"upward\" along the cable. Then gradually it would deflect westward from the cable.\nCable section.\nHistorically, the main technical problem has been considered the ability of the cable to hold up, with tension, the weight of itself below any given point. The greatest tension on a space elevator cable is at the point of geostationary orbit, above the Earth's equator. This means that the cable material, combined with its design, must be strong enough to hold up its own weight from the surface up to . A cable which is thicker in cross section area at that height than at the surface could better hold up its own weight over a longer length. How the cross section area tapers from the maximum at to the minimum at the surface is therefore an important design factor for a space elevator cable.\nSeveral taper profiles with different material parameters\nTo maximize the usable excess strength for a given amount of cable material, the cable's cross section area would need to be designed for the most part in such a way that the stress (i.e., the tension per unit of cross sectional area) is constant along the length of the cable. The constant-stress criterion is a starting point in the design of the cable cross section area as it changes with altitude. Other factors considered in more detailed designs include thickening at altitudes where more space junk is present, consideration of the point stresses imposed by climbers, and the use of varied materials. To account for these and other factors, modern detailed designs seek to achieve the largest \"safety margin\" possible, with as little variation over altitude and time as possible. In simple starting-point designs, that equates to constant-stress.\nFor a constant-stress cable with no safety margin, the cross-section-area as a function of distance from Earth's center is given by the following equation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nwhere\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_3 is the gravitational acceleration at Earth's surface (m\u00b7s\u22122),\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_4 is the cross-section area of the cable at Earth's surface (m2),\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_5 is the density of the material used for the cable (kg\u00b7m\u22123),\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_6 is the Earth's equatorial radius,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_7 is the radius of geosynchronous orbit,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_8 is the stress the cross-section area can bear without yielding (N\u00b7m\u22122), its elastic limit.\nSafety margin can be accounted for by dividing T by the desired safety factor.\nCable materials.\nUsing the above formula, the ratio between the cross-section at geostationary orbit and the cross-section at Earth's surface, known as taper ratio, can be calculated:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe taper ratio becomes very large unless the specific strength of the material used approaches 48 (MPa)/(kg/m3). Low specific strength materials require very large taper ratios which equates to large (or astronomical) total mass of the cable with associated large or impossible costs.\nCable strength.\nSpecific strength is of fundamental importance in the description of cable materials. The International Space Elevator Consortium has proposed a unit called the \"Yuri\", named after Yuri Artsutanov, to describe yield stress (or breaking stress) per unit of density of a material under tension. One Yuri equals 1\u00a0Pa\u22c5m3/kg or 1\u00a0N\u22c5m/kg, which is the breaking/yielding \"force\" per \"linear\" density of the cable under tension. A functional Earth space elevator would require a tether of 30\u201380\u00a0megaYuri (corresponding to 3100\u20138200\u00a0km of breaking length).\nStructure.\nThere are a variety of space elevator designs proposed for many planetary bodies. Almost every design includes a base station, a cable, climbers, and a counterweight. For an Earth Space Elevator the Earth's rotation creates upward centrifugal force on the counterweight. The counterweight is held down by the cable while the cable is held up and taut by the counterweight. The base station anchors the whole system to the surface of the Earth. Climbers climb up and down the cable with cargo.\nBase station.\nModern concepts for the base station/anchor are typically mobile stations, large oceangoing vessels or other mobile platforms. Mobile base stations would have the advantage over the earlier stationary concepts (with land-based anchors) by being able to maneuver to avoid high winds, storms, and space debris. Oceanic anchor points are also typically in international waters, simplifying and reducing the cost of negotiating territory use for the base station.\nStationary land-based platforms would have simpler and less costly logistical access to the base. They also would have the advantage of being able to be at high altitudes, such as on top of mountains. In an alternate concept, the base station could be a tower, forming a space elevator which comprises both a compression tower close to the surface, and a tether structure at higher altitudes. Combining a compression structure with a tension structure would reduce loads from the atmosphere at the Earth end of the tether, and reduce the distance into the Earth's gravity field that the cable needs to extend, and thus reduce the critical strength-to-density requirements for the cable material, all other design factors being equal.\nCable.\nA space elevator cable would need to carry its own weight as well as the additional weight of climbers. The required strength of the cable would vary along its length. This is because at various points it would have to carry the weight of the cable below, or provide a downward force to retain the cable and counterweight above. Maximum tension on a space elevator cable would be at geosynchronous altitude so the cable would have to be thickest there and taper as it approaches Earth. Any potential cable design may be characterized by the taper factor \u2013 the ratio between the cable's radius at geosynchronous altitude and at the Earth's surface.\nThe cable would need to be made of a material with a high tensile strength/density ratio. For example, the Edwards space elevator design assumes a cable material with a tensile strength of at least 100 gigapascals. Since Edwards consistently assumed the density of his carbon nanotube cable to be 1300\u00a0kg/m3, that implies a specific strength of 77 megapascal/(kg/m3). This value takes into consideration the entire weight of the space elevator. An untapered space elevator cable would need a material capable of sustaining a length of of its own weight \"at sea level\" to reach a geostationary altitude of without yielding. Therefore, a material with very high strength and lightness is needed.\nFor comparison, metals like titanium, steel or aluminium alloys have breaking lengths of only 20\u201330\u00a0km (0.2\u20130.3 MPa/(kg/m3)). Modern fiber materials such as kevlar, fiberglass and carbon/graphite fiber have breaking lengths of 100\u2013400\u00a0km (1.0\u20134.0 MPa/(kg/m3)). Nanoengineered materials such as carbon nanotubes and, more recently discovered, graphene ribbons (perfect two-dimensional sheets of carbon) are expected to have breaking lengths of 5000\u20136000\u00a0km (50\u201360 MPa/(kg/m3)), and also are able to conduct electrical power.\nFor a space elevator on Earth, with its comparatively high gravity, the cable material would need to be stronger and lighter than currently available materials. For this reason, there has been a focus on the development of new materials that meet the demanding specific strength requirement. For high specific strength, carbon has advantages because it is only the sixth element in the periodic table. Carbon has comparatively few of the protons and neutrons which contribute most of the dead weight of any material. Most of the interatomic bonding forces of any element are contributed by only the outer few electrons. For carbon, the strength and stability of those bonds is high compared to the mass of the atom. The challenge in using carbon nanotubes remains to extend to macroscopic sizes the production of such material that are still perfect on the microscopic scale (as microscopic defects are most responsible for material weakness). As of 2014, carbon nanotube technology allowed growing tubes up to a few tenths of meters.\nIn 2014, diamond nanothreads were first synthesized. Since they have strength properties similar to carbon nanotubes, diamond nanothreads were quickly seen as candidate cable material as well.\nClimbers.\nA space elevator cannot be an elevator in the typical sense (with moving cables) due to the need for the cable to be significantly wider at the center than at the tips. While various designs employing moving cables have been proposed, most cable designs call for the \"elevator\" to climb up a stationary cable.\nClimbers cover a wide range of designs. On elevator designs whose cables are planar ribbons, most propose to use pairs of rollers to hold the cable with friction.\nClimbers would need to be paced at optimal timings so as to minimize cable stress and oscillations and to maximize throughput. Lighter climbers could be sent up more often, with several going up at the same time. This would increase throughput somewhat, but would lower the mass of each individual payload.\nThe horizontal speed, i.e. due to orbital rotation, of each part of the cable increases with altitude, proportional to distance from the center of the Earth, reaching low orbital speed at a point approximately 66 percent of the height between the surface and geostationary orbit, or a height of about 23,400\u00a0km. A payload released at this point would go into a highly eccentric elliptical orbit, staying just barely clear from atmospheric reentry, with the periapsis at the same altitude as low earth orbit (LEO) and the apoapsis at the release height. With increasing release height the orbit would become less eccentric as both periapsis and apoapsis increase, becoming circular at geostationary level.\nWhen the payload has reached GEO, the horizontal speed is exactly the speed of a circular orbit at that level, so that if released, it would remain adjacent to that point on the cable. The payload can also continue climbing further up the cable beyond GEO, allowing it to obtain higher speed at jettison. If released from 100,000\u00a0km, the payload would have enough speed to reach the asteroid belt.\nAs a payload is lifted up a space elevator, it would gain not only altitude, but horizontal speed (angular momentum) as well. The angular momentum is taken from the Earth's rotation. As the climber ascends, it is initially moving slower than each successive part of cable it is moving on to. This is the Coriolis force: the climber \"drags\" (westward) on the cable, as it climbs, and slightly decreases the Earth's rotation speed. The opposite process would occur for descending payloads: the cable is tilted eastward, thus slightly increasing Earth's rotation speed.\nThe overall effect of the centrifugal force acting on the cable would cause it to constantly try to return to the energetically favorable vertical orientation, so after an object has been lifted on the cable, the counterweight would swing back toward the vertical, a bit like a pendulum. Space elevators and their loads would be designed so that the center of mass is always well-enough above the level of geostationary orbit to hold up the whole system. Lift and descent operations would need to be carefully planned so as to keep the pendulum-like motion of the counterweight around the tether point under control.\nClimber speed would be limited by the Coriolis force, available power, and by the need to ensure the climber's accelerating force does not break the cable. Climbers would also need to maintain a minimum average speed in order to move material up and down economically and expeditiously. At the speed of a very fast car or train of it will take about 5 days to climb to geosynchronous orbit.\nPowering climbers.\nBoth power and energy are significant issues for climbers \u2013 the climbers would need to gain a large amount of potential energy as quickly as possible to clear the cable for the next payload.\nVarious methods have been proposed to provide energy to the climber:\nWireless energy transfer such as laser power beaming is currently considered the most likely method, using megawatt-powered free electron or solid state lasers in combination with adaptive mirrors approximately wide and a photovoltaic array on the climber tuned to the laser frequency for efficiency. For climber designs powered by power beaming, this efficiency is an important design goal. Unused energy would need to be re-radiated away with heat-dissipation systems, which add to weight.\nYoshio Aoki, a professor of precision machinery engineering at Nihon University and director of the Japan Space Elevator Association, suggested including a second cable and using the conductivity of carbon nanotubes to provide power.\nCounterweight.\nSeveral solutions have been proposed to act as a counterweight:\nExtending the cable has the advantage of some simplicity of the task and the fact that a payload that went to the end of the counterweight-cable would acquire considerable velocity relative to the Earth, allowing it to be launched into interplanetary space. Its disadvantage is the need to produce greater amounts of cable material as opposed to using just anything available that has mass.\nApplications.\nLaunching into deep space.\nAn object attached to a space elevator at a radius of approximately 53,100\u00a0km would be at escape velocity when released. Transfer orbits to the L1 and L2 Lagrangian points could be attained by release at 50,630 and 51,240\u00a0km, respectively, and transfer to lunar orbit from 50,960\u00a0km.\nAt the end of Pearson's cable, the tangential velocity is 10.93 kilometers per second (6.79\u00a0mi/s). That is more than enough to escape Earth's gravitational field and send probes at least as far out as Jupiter. Once at Jupiter, a gravitational assist maneuver could permit solar escape velocity to be reached.\nExtraterrestrial elevators.\nA space elevator could also be constructed on other planets, asteroids and moons.\nA Martian tether could be much shorter than one on Earth. Mars' surface gravity is 38 percent of Earth's, while it rotates around its axis in about the same time as Earth. Because of this, Martian stationary orbit is much closer to the surface, and hence the elevator could be much shorter. Current materials are already sufficiently strong to construct such an elevator. Building a Martian elevator would be complicated by the Martian moon Phobos, which is in a low orbit and intersects the Equator regularly (twice every orbital period of 11\u00a0h 6\u00a0min). Phobos and Deimos may get in the way of an areostationary space elevator; on the other hand, they may contribute useful resources to the project. Phobos is projected to contain high amounts of carbon. If carbon nanotubes become feasible for a tether material, there will be an abundance of carbon near Mars. This could provide readily available resources for future colonization on Mars.\nPhobos is tide-locked: one side always faces its primary, Mars. An elevator extending 6,000\u00a0km from that inward side would end about 28 kilometers above the Martian surface, just out of the denser parts of the atmosphere of Mars. A similar cable extending 6,000\u00a0km in the opposite direction would counterbalance the first, so the center of mass of this system remains in Phobos. In total the space elevator would extend out over 12,000\u00a0km which would be below areostationary orbit of Mars (17,032\u00a0km). A rocket launch would still be needed to get the rocket and cargo to the beginning of the space elevator 28\u00a0km above the surface. The surface of Mars is rotating at 0.25 km/s at the equator and the bottom of the space elevator would be rotating around Mars at 0.77\u00a0km/s, so only 0.52\u00a0km/s (1872\u00a0km/h) of Delta-v would be needed to get to the space elevator. Phobos orbits at 2.15\u00a0km/s and the outermost part of the space elevator would rotate around Mars at 3.52\u00a0km/s.\nThe Earth's Moon is a potential location for a Lunar space elevator, especially as the specific strength required for the tether is low enough to use currently available materials. The Moon does not rotate fast enough for an elevator to be supported by centrifugal force (the proximity of the Earth means there is no effective lunar-stationary orbit), but differential gravity forces means that an elevator could be constructed through Lagrangian points. A near-side elevator would extend through the Earth-Moon L1 point from an anchor point near the center of the visible part of Earth's Moon: the length of such an elevator must exceed the maximum L1 altitude of 59,548\u00a0km, and would be considerably longer to reduce the mass of the required apex counterweight. A far-side lunar elevator would pass through the L2 Lagrangian point and would need to be longer than on the near-side; again, the tether length depends on the chosen apex anchor mass, but it could also be made of existing engineering materials.\nRapidly spinning asteroids or moons could use cables to eject materials to convenient points, such as Earth orbits; or conversely, to eject materials to send a portion of the mass of the asteroid or moon to Earth orbit or a Lagrangian point. Freeman Dyson, a physicist and mathematician, suggested using such smaller systems as power generators at points distant from the Sun where solar power is uneconomical.\nA space elevator using presently available engineering materials could be constructed between mutually tidally locked worlds, such as Pluto and Charon or the components of binary asteroid 90 Antiope, with no terminus disconnect, according to Francis Graham of Kent State University. However, spooled variable lengths of cable must be used due to ellipticity of the orbits.\nConstruction.\nThe construction of a space elevator would need reduction of some technical risk. Some advances in engineering, manufacturing and physical technology are required. Once a first space elevator is built, the second one and all others would have the use of the previous ones to assist in construction, making their costs considerably lower. Such follow-on space elevators would also benefit from the great reduction in technical risk achieved by the construction of the first space elevator.\nPrior to the work of Edwards in 2000, most concepts for constructing a space elevator had the cable manufactured in space. That was thought to be necessary for such a large and long object and for such a large counterweight. Manufacturing the cable in space would be done in principle by using an asteroid or Near-Earth object for source material. These earlier concepts for construction require a large preexisting space-faring infrastructure to maneuver an asteroid into its needed orbit around Earth. They also required the development of technologies for manufacture in space of large quantities of exacting materials.\nSince 2001, most work has focused on simpler methods of construction requiring much smaller space infrastructures. They conceive the launch of a long cable on a large spool, followed by deployment of it in space. The spool would be initially parked in a geostationary orbit above the planned anchor point. A long cable would be dropped \"downward\" (toward Earth) and would be balanced by a mass being dropped \"upward\" (away from Earth) for the whole system to remain on the geosynchronous orbit. Earlier designs imagined the balancing mass to be another cable (with counterweight) extending upward, with the main spool remaining at the original geosynchronous orbit level. Most current designs elevate the spool itself as the main cable is payed out, a simpler process. When the lower end of the cable is long enough to reach the surface of the Earth (at the equator), it would be anchored. Once anchored, the center of mass would be elevated more (by adding mass at the upper end or by paying out more cable). This would add more tension to the whole cable, which could then be used as an elevator cable.\nOne plan for construction uses conventional rockets to place a \"minimum size\" initial seed cable of only 19,800\u00a0kg. This first very small ribbon would be adequate to support the first 619\u00a0kg climber. The first 207 climbers would carry up and attach more cable to the original, increasing its cross section area and widening the initial ribbon to about 160\u00a0mm wide at its widest point. The result would be a 750-ton cable with a lift capacity of 20 tons per climber.\nSafety issues and construction challenges.\nFor early systems, transit times from the surface to the level of geosynchronous orbit would be about five days. On these early systems, the time spent moving through the Van Allen radiation belts would be enough that passengers would need to be protected from radiation by shielding, which would add mass to the climber and decrease payload.\nA space elevator would present a navigational hazard, both to aircraft and spacecraft. Aircraft could be diverted by air-traffic control restrictions. All objects in stable orbits that have perigee below the maximum altitude of the cable that are not synchronous with the cable would impact the cable eventually, unless avoiding action is taken. One potential solution proposed by Edwards is to use a movable anchor (a sea anchor) to allow the tether to \"dodge\" any space debris large enough to track.\nImpacts by space objects such as meteoroids, micrometeorites and orbiting man-made debris pose another design constraint on the cable. A cable would need to be designed to maneuver out of the way of debris, or absorb impacts of small debris without breaking.\nEconomics.\nWith a space elevator, materials might be sent into orbit at a fraction of the current cost. As of 2022, conventional rocket designs cost about US$12,125 per kilogram (US$5,500 per pound) for transfer to geostationary orbit. Current space elevator proposals envision payload prices starting as low as $220 per kilogram ($100 per pound), similar to the $5\u2013$300/kg estimates of the Launch loop, but higher than the $310/ton to 500\u00a0km orbit quoted to Dr. Jerry Pournelle for an orbital airship system.\nPhilip Ragan, co-author of the book \"Leaving the Planet by Space Elevator\", states that \"The first country to deploy a space elevator will have a 95 percent cost advantage and could potentially control all space activities.\"\nInternational Space Elevator Consortium (ISEC).\nThe International Space Elevator Consortium (ISEC) is a US Non-Profit 501(c)(3) Corporation formed to promote the development, construction, and operation of a space elevator as \"a revolutionary and efficient way to space for all humanity\". It was formed after the Space Elevator Conference in Redmond, Washington in July 2008 and became an affiliate organization with the National Space Society in August 2013. ISEC hosts an annual Space Elevator conference at the Seattle Museum of Flight.\nISEC coordinates with the two other major societies focusing on space elevators: the Japanese Space Elevator Association and EuroSpaceward. ISEC supports symposia and presentations at the International Academy of Astronautics and the International Astronautical Federation Congress each year.\nRelated concepts.\nThe conventional current concept of a \"Space Elevator\" has evolved from a static compressive structure reaching to the level of GEO, to the modern baseline idea of a static tensile structure anchored to the ground and extending to well above the level of GEO. In the current usage by practitioners (and in this article), a \"Space Elevator\" means the Tsiolkovsky-Artsutanov-Pearson type as considered by the International Space Elevator Consortium. This conventional type is a static structure fixed to the ground and extending into space high enough that cargo can climb the structure up from the ground to a level where simple release will put the cargo into an orbit.\nSome concepts related to this modern baseline are not usually termed a \"Space Elevator\", but are similar in some way and are sometimes termed \"Space Elevator\" by their proponents. For example, Hans Moravec published an article in 1977 called \"A Non-Synchronous Orbital Skyhook\" describing a concept using a rotating cable. The rotation speed would exactly match the orbital speed in such a way that the tip velocity at the lowest point was zero compared to the object to be \"elevated\". It would dynamically grapple and then \"elevate\" high flying objects to orbit or low orbiting objects to higher orbit.\nThe original concept envisioned by Tsiolkovsky was a compression structure, a concept similar to an aerial mast. While such structures might reach space (100\u00a0km, 62\u00a0mi), they are unlikely to reach geostationary orbit. The concept of a Tsiolkovsky tower combined with a classic space elevator cable (reaching above the level of GEO) has been suggested. Other ideas use very tall compressive towers to reduce the demands on launch vehicles. The vehicle is \"elevated\" up the tower, which may extend as high as above the atmosphere, and is launched from the top. Such a tall tower to access near-space altitudes of has been proposed by various researchers.\nThe aerovator is a concept invented by a Yahoo Group discussing space elevators, and included in a 2009 book about space elevators. It would consist of a &gt;1000 km long ribbon extending diagonally upwards from a ground-level hub and then levelling out to become horizontal. Aircraft would pull on the ribbon while flying in a circle, causing the ribbon to rotate around the hub once every 13 minutes with its tip travelling at 8 km/s. The ribbon would stay in the air through a mix of aerodynamic lift and centrifugal force. Payloads would climb up the ribbon and then be launched from the fast-moving tip into orbit.\nOther concepts for non-rocket spacelaunch related to a space elevator (or parts of a space elevator) include an orbital ring, a space fountain, a launch loop, a skyhook, a space tether, and a buoyant \"SpaceShaft\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29193", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29193", "title": "Spawn (character)", "text": "Image Comics superhero\nAlbert Francis \"Al\" Simmons, better known as Spawn, is a fictional antihero appearing in a monthly comic book of the same name published by American company Image Comics, as well as in a number of films, television series, and video game adaptations set in the Image Universe. Created by Todd McFarlane, Spawn first appeared in \"Spawn\" #1 (May 1992).\nSimmons is a government assassin who died and went to Hell for his crimes against humanity. Following a deal with Malebolgia, Simmons is given new life as a hellspawn and the chance to see his wife Wanda once again. The deal is revealed to be a trick, as Simmons is brought back to life five years after his death, unrecognizable to his wife and missing many of his memories. With little other choice, Simmons adopts his new hell-inspired identity as Spawn in an effort to atone for his past sins and use his newfound powers for good.\nThe series has spun off several other comic books, including \"Angela\", \"Curse of the Spawn\", \"Sam &amp; Twitch\", and the Japanese manga \"Shadows of Spawn.\" Spawn was adapted into a 1997 feature film and portrayed by Michael Jai White, an HBO animated series lasting from 1997 until 1999, a series of action figures from McFarlane Toys, and an upcoming reboot film starring Jamie Foxx and Jeremy Renner. The character appears in annual compilations, mini-series specials written by guest authors and artists, and numerous crossover storylines in other comic books, including \"Savage Dragon\", \"Invincible\", and three DC Comics crossovers with Batman.\nPublication history.\nTodd McFarlane's hobby of drawing began at an early age, and he created the character Spawn when he was 16, spending \"countless hours\" perfecting the appearance of each component of the character's visual design.\n\"Spawn\" saw a decent amount of popularity upon its initial release in the early 1990s. Comic book collecting was growing exponentially at the time of \u2018\u2019Spawn\u2019s\u2019\u2019 release, fueled by the speculator boom looking for the next hot book that would jump in value after its release. McFarlane had enjoyed superstar status among comic fans with his work on \"Spider-Man\", which had featured McFarlane's name prominently as both writer and artist. McFarlane's subsequent break with Marvel Comics and the formation of Image Comics was seen by many as a sea-change event, changing the way in which comics were produced. \"Wizard\", in May 2008, rated \"The Launch of Image Comics\" as #1 in the list of events that rocked the comic industry from 1991 to 2008.\nThe first issue of \"Spawn\" was very popular, selling 1.7 million copies. During \"Spawn\"'s second year of publication, \"Wizard\" noted that \"The top dog at Image is undoubtedly Todd McFarlane's \"Spawn\", which, without the added marketing push of fancy covers, poly bagged issues, or card inserts has become the best-selling comic on a consistent basis that is currently being published.\" Sales slumped around the time of \"Spawn\" #25, but by \"Spawn\" #45 it was again a consistently strong seller.\nThe popularity of the franchise peaked with the 1997 \"Spawn\" feature film, the pre-release publicity for which helped make \"Spawn\" the top-selling comic book for May 1997; in addition, the spin-off \"Curse of the Spawn\" #9 came in at fifth best-selling in that same month. However, the film was only a mild commercial success and failed to start a film franchise based on the character. A 2008 issue, \"Spawn\" #174, ranked 99th best-selling comic of the month with retail orders of 22,667. In October 2008, issue #185, which marked both a new creative direction and Todd McFarlane's return to the book, sold out at the distribution level and received a second printing. By issue #191 in May 2009, with estimated sales of 19,803 copies, \"Spawn\" had dropped below Top 100 titles sold monthly to comic shops as reported by Diamond Comic Distributors. As of September 2010, Spawn was ranked at #115 in the top 300 sales figures chart reported by Diamond Comic Distributors. On the day of its release in 2011, issue #200 sold out. This issue featured work by Greg Capullo, David Finch, Michael Golden, Jim Lee, Rob Liefeld, Marc Silvestri, Danny Miki, and Ashley Wood. A second printing was released the next month. It received a negative review from \"IGN\". \"Spawn\"'s sales continued to decline despite a series of homage covers designed to renew interest, ultimately hitting its lowest sales number of under 12,000 retail orders in \"Spawn\" #243.\n\"Spawn\" began a resurgence in popularity as the title approached its 300th issue, with the title once again becoming a fixture in Diamond's Top 100. The 300th issue made Spawn the longest-running independent comic book series of all time.\nIn 2021, McFarlane expanded his Spawn Universe with 3 new ongoing titles and a one-shot titled \"Spawn Universe No. 1\" which sold 211,000 copies. The first spinoff, titled \"King Spawn\", was released in August 2021 having pre-order sales of 497,000 copies and total sales of 520,000 copies. The next title, released in October 2021, \"Gunslinger Spawn\" sold 385,000 copies, which made it the biggest launch for a new ongoing superhero title in 25 years. The final new series, \"The Scorched\", was released in January 2022 and sold more than 270,000 copies.\nMcFarlane also stated in an interview that he wants Spawn to outlive him the same way characters like Spider-Man, Batman, Superman, and even Disney have endured past their creators.\nFictional character biography.\nOrigin.\nBorn in Detroit, Michigan, Albert Francis \"Al\" Simmons is the second of three siblings. His father, Bernard Simmons, is a traveling salesman, and his mother, Esther Simmons, is a devil worshipper. Al Simmons eventually becomes a highly decorated officer in the U.S. Marine Corps, attaining the rank of Lieutenant Colonel while serving with Force Recon. He later joins the Secret Service, becomes a high-ranking official, and is recruited by the Central Intelligence Agency. Simmons later joins the U.S. Security Group, an umbrella agency encompassing the CIA, NSA, and NSC, commanded by Director Jason Wynn, and becomes a formidable assassin.\nDuring a mission in Botswana, Wynn grows tired of Simmons' increasing sense of morality. As a result of this, Simmons' friend and partner Bruce Stinson (codename Chapel) is secretly hired to kill him. Simmons is burned to death and sent to Hell. Making a deal with the devil Malebolgia, Simmons agrees to become a Hellspawn. After swearing to serve Malebolgia, he is allowed to see his wife Wanda one last time. Malebolgia returns Simmons to the living realm with a severely burned body, and a demonic guardian named the Violator.\nSimmons, now a Hellspawn, returns to Earth with a lack of understanding of his previous identity. He wanders in a state of confusion with only vague memories of his former life, including his own name, his marriage to Wanda and the fact that he was once deceased. Spawn occasionally experiences painful flashbacks and eventually remembers his deal with Malebolgia. Using CIA files, he tracks down his wife and finds her married to his former best friend Terry, with whom she has a daughter named Cyan. He realizes five years have passed since his death.\nSpawn runs into a fellow Hellspawn, who informs him that his powers are fueled by Necroplasm and that once they are depleted, he will return to Hell. Not wanting to return to Hell, Spawn attempts to find a new purpose in life while using as little power as possible. Spawn is thrust into several antihero adventures, taking down street gangs and organized crime in New York City. Battling against various criminals, Spawn finds a new purpose in stopping evil.\nEarly history.\nIn his early battles, Spawn faces street thugs and gangs, becoming a dark, sadistic antihero, and brutally murders the pedophile and child murderer Billy Kincaid. Spawn gains the attention of police detectives Sam Burke and Twitch Williams, and becomes \"King of Rat City\", a gathering of alleys populated by the city's homeless. There he meets Cogliostro, who knows much about Spawn and becomes his mentor.\nSpawn is hunted by the warrior angel Angela, who hunts Hellspawns for sport, and battles the cyborg mob enforcer Overt-Kill. He fights the angelic warrior Anti-Spawn, also known as the Redeemer, who is really Jason Wynn.\nFirst metamorphosis.\nFollowing a conflict with the Redeemer, Spawn's costume undergoes a significant upgrade. The upgraded suit features a new cape and chains, which are able to change shape. Additionally, the boots and gloves are replaced with spikes. After this transformation, the suit starts feeding off souls.\nAfter this, Tony Twist sends a reprogrammed Overt-Kill after Terry, and Spawn is forced to reveal his identity while saving his friend. A well-placed shot from Twitch Williams brings down Overt-Kill. Spawn is part of Angela's trial and later travels to the South and encounters the KKK and an abusive father of two boys. After returning to New York, he is attacked by a new Redeemer, causing his costume to evolve once more. After another encounter with the Curse, the suit sends him to Hell. Malebolgia later sends him back with full control of the suit.\nSpawn wears a living symbiotic costume, Leetha of the 7th House of K (also known as K7-Leetha). While wearing it, the host assumes a dominant role over the suit. His shroud, spikes, chains and skulls are all part of an organism bonded to his central nervous system that protects Spawn even if he is unconscious.\nWar of Heaven and Hell.\nBattle for life.\nAs Spawn struggles to find a way to regain control, he notices that the attacks are coming from both Heaven and Hell. Due to increasing attacks, Spawn begins to lose himself to evil. With help from the Heap, an emissary of the Greenworld, Spawn manages to regain his goal. Greenworld, a dimension whose power is equal to both Heaven and Hell, gives new powers to Spawn to better understand the world and its people. These powers seem to give him control of all of the elements in the world.\nSpawn is later attacked by Urizen. After recovering, Spawn learns the Greenworld has imbued him with a gift, which he uses to contain Urizen by splitting the ground and imprisoning him inside the earth.\nAfter his battle, Spawn learns Malebolgia had caused Urizen's release in an attempt to start Armageddon and conquer the forces of Heaven. Spawn and Angela journey to Hell to stop him. During the battle, Angela mortally wounds Malebolgia, who kills her in retaliation. Consumed with anger, Spawn takes Malebolgia's head.\nKing of Hell.\nUpon killing Malebolgia, Spawn learns Hell's throne is rightfully his when it is offered to him by the demon Mammon. After initially refusing, Spawn deliberates with Cogliostro and decides to turn Hell into a new paradise. During this act, Cogliostrio reveals he is Cain, who was the first person to go to Hell, having murdered his brother in envy. His true goal had always been to take over Hell using a Hellspawn. Having betrayed Spawn, Cogliostrio takes the throne but restores his former student's human form as a parting gift.\nOn Earth, Spawn meets Nyx, a young Wiccan that helps him regain his suit. Using trickery, Mammon usurps Nyx's control over Spawn's union with his suit and removing all of Al's memories. Amnesiac, Spawn wanders the Earth. He releases a group of angels called the Forgotten and stays neutral in the war between Heaven and Hell. He discovers Mammon is a member of the Fallen who was sent to Hell.\nSpawn in Armageddon.\nSpawn regains his memories thanks to the power of the Greenworld. His suit evolves once more and seems one with his body. However, as time progresses, he begins to hate himself. Having been rejected by Heaven and Hell, he now lives in an abandoned warehouse as maggots and other insects crawl inside his body. He returns to the Dead Zone, although a Hellspawn would not be welcomed there. Upon entering, Spawn is confronted by the Disciple, who tears his brain out, throws his heart into the Greenworld, and his body into Hell. Mammon captures and tortures Spawn to learn his secrets.\nWhen Spawn's heart falls to the Greenworld, a soul is freed. Chris meets with his mother and travels to Hell along with Sam Burke and Twitch Williams to rescue Spawn from Mammon. Spawn escapes and returns to Earth, where signs of Armageddon begin to appear. Looking for a way to stop it, Spawn discovers Wanda's twin children are responsible. He stops them from killing their entire family but cannot destroy them. Zera reveals Jake is God and Katie is Satan.\nDue to their hatred of each other and constant fighting, the Mother removed their powers and positions and sent them to Earth. She tells him he cannot stop Armageddon. However, he has the potential to gain the power of a god and preserve the human race.\nHe has to eat a piece of Forbidden Fruit from the Garden of Eden to gain such power. She tells Spawn he must fight against The Disciple. It is revealed there are 12 Disciples, each one representing one of Jesus. Spawn's power is also weakened because demons cannot enter the Garden. However, with guidance from Cyan, he defeats every Disciple but Judas, who Cyan tells Spawn not to kill. Judas then stabs Spawn in the heart but the Mother gives Spawn a piece of the fruit and resurrects him. He gains an angelic form and greater power.\nSpawn returns to Earth, which has been destroyed by Four Horsemen; angels and demons are waiting to fight their final battle. After defeating Zera, Spawn finds dead warriors of Heaven, one of whom is Granny Blake, who is betrayed by her faith. Spawn battles the forces of Satan and God, destroying the forces of Heaven, Hell and humanity. He is then killed by the two, who then fight alone on Earth.\nSpawn comes back and resurrects everyone with the knowledge of what happened. He leaves God and Satan to fight in their own little world and closes the doors to Heaven, Hell, and Earth. He asks to be turned into a human by the Mother but later asks to once again become a Hellspawn after remembering that, prior to his first death as Al Simmons, he had beaten Wanda and caused her to miscarry their child. This causes him to conclude he has always been a monster and does not deserve to be human again.\nBack in the mortal world.\nNew Clown.\nAfter a series of odd murders, Spawn finds the Clown has come back, possessing the body of mortal Barney Saunders, who is having an affair with a woman named Wilma Barbara. Spawn destroys and remakes the world. Saunders is rescued by the Clown so he can use his body. He then brings out the dark urges inside the tenants of an apartment building and uses this to form a doorway to Hell and bring back his brothers. However, before he can form a portal, Wilma shows up and his love for her allows Saunders to take back control. Intending to close the portal, he goes through it, and takes Wilma with him due to being angry over her leaving him in the chute.\nZera reappears as a head in a jar. Spawn is summoned by a voodoo priestess named Mambo Suzanne. Zera attempts to take over Nyx's body and fights Spawn. However, she is killed when Suzanne throws Zera's head into the street. Nyx is freed and she and Spawn become friends again.\nAb and Zab create a hell where visitors are forced to view their deepest fears, which are eaten by demons called sin-eaters. While confronting Ab and Zab, Spawn is faced with his own sin against Wanda and his unborn child. Unable to break free from the guilt, Spawn is parasitized by a sin eater. When Nyx interferes, he breaks the sin eater's illusion. Spawn breaks all the other's illusions and comes across Al Simmons' brother Richard.\nSpawn decides to allow Richard to feel his sins. Mammon, as Mr. Malefick, had put an influence on Al and Richard Simmons. Only Marc Simmons saved himself from Mammon but was unable to help the others. Richard calls his brothers to help him save the drug dealer's life. Al, instead of calling an ambulance, pulls the knife from Weasel's body and kills him with it. Mammon appears, sending the brothers home while he hides the drug dealer's body.\nNyx and Spawn kill the last sin eater and Spawn discovers Richard cannot remember their parents due to a spell placed by Mammon. Wanting to know more about them, Spawn finds their home under a spell placed by Mammon. His mother planned with Mammon to create the strongest Hellspawn. Al is then given a journal by his father that reveals his ancestor came across a Hellspawn in the past known as the Gunslinger Spawn.\nMorana.\nThere, Spawn speaks with Wanda, who cannot forgive Al for the death of their child. However, she still loves the man inside Spawn. Trying to take out Cyan's knife, Spawn somehow suppresses the suit. Cyan and Nyx appear, and K7-Leetha appears and takes over Nyx. Now controlled by the K7, Nyx tries to kill Cyan and Wanda but is halted by Mammon. The entire group goes to a castle, where Mammon explains his plan to make a perfect Hellspawn. He wants the Rapture to occur so Satan, God, and Malebolgia will be gone. He reveals his perfect Hellspawn is Al and Wanda's miscarried child, Morana.\nAfter washing herself in virgin's blood, Morana bonds with the uniform and gets ready to consume her parents' souls. Cyan taps into her powers and goes to the future. She talks with an old woman who gives her a message for Al. Returning, she has Spawn summon the last twelve members of the Legion, who are beaten by Morana. Mammon insults Al and disowns Morana. Cyan tells Nyx a spell to trap Mammon and Morana. It works, both demons are sealed away, and the others return home. Al jumps into another dimension to be reborn as a weapon against both heaven and hell.\nEndgame.\nSpawn is soon ready to enter the human dimension. Making his way to the alleys, he blows his head off. Meanwhile, Jim Downing, an amnesiac man healing at a hospital, wakes up. He seems to know Spawn. A janitor tries to make money off Jim's story and calls a lawyer, who later commits suicide. A thug is paid to capture Jim and attacks him with a flaming skull. In the ensuing fight, the hospital is set on fire and Jim transforms into Spawn. After killing his attacker, Jim escapes the burning building in human form, eventually being taken in by firefighters.\nAfter being taken to another hospital, he leaves, reunites with his previous nurse Sara, and begins to transform. He calls Sara but leaves before she can see him. Meanwhile, a reporter begins to ask questions about the incident at the hospital. Wandering the city, Jim is attacked and kills his assailants. This draws the attention of Sam and Twitch, who recognize the chaos as Spawn's doings.\nAfter reuniting with Sara and telling him about his transformation, Jim wanders off again and meets Wanda Blake, Al Simmons' ex-wife. She recognizes Jim as the form Al took when he originally returned to earth.\nOn Wanda's advice, Jim travels to Rat City and finds Spawn's throne and is met by an angel. Jim beats the angel in a fight and leaves. He finds out that a man working for Gilbert Sanchez has been asking questions about him.\nThe angel Spawn beat is later attacked by Clown, who removes her wings. When Spawn returns, she is powerless and insane and finds Freak and Violator. Despite Freak's warnings, Clown begins to deceive Jim and informs him his suit is a living being and then vanishes. Clown is arrested by Sam and Twitch and meets the leader of a vampire group to attempt to form a unity between the leader, Clown, and Spawn.\nMob members kill Gilbert Sanchez for his information on the new Spawn. Spawn attempts to learn more about Jim but is assaulted and uses his powers on his attacker. Jim later finds the man who had been asking Sara questions. He tracks him to his family's home, which is bombed, killing everyone inside but Spawn. Spawn finds more mob members, questions them further and kills them.\nResurrection.\nIn Resurrection, Spawn is revived and is later told by God in dog form that Wanda has died and is now trapped in Hell, where Al must rescue her. He fights Satan and saves his wife. God and Satan are no longer twins because McFarlane lost the right to use the Man of Miracles character due to a copyright dispute with Marvel. Man of Miracles is retconned out of existence, and God and Satan are based on the Abrahamic story of Creation. After saving Wanda from Satan, she goes to Heaven and Spawn continues to protect the people in Wanda's memory from the forces of both Heaven and Hell, as well as any supernatural threats.\nPowers and Abilities.\nSpawn has superhuman strength, speed, stamina, and durability. He can heal and feed off the sins of people, stop time, and teleport. He also has a limit when using necroplasm and exceeding it would cause him to return to hell.\nIn life, Spawn, as Al, was a trained martial artist and weapon master.\nNecroplasm.\nNecroplasm is a substance from hell and fuel for hellspawns\nLeetha.\nA symbiote parasite with the ablity to adapt.\nList of comics, spin-offs and crossovers.\nOriginal Spin-offs &amp; Crossovers (1994\u20132021).\n\"Violator\" (1994)\nA three-issue miniseries written by Alan Moore with art by Bart Sears. The series focused on the conflict between Violator/Clown and Tony Twist and also featured Spawn.\n\"Angela\" (1994\u20131995)\nFrom 1994 to 1995, a three-issue \"Angela\" limited series was published, written by Neil Gaiman and illustrated by Greg Capullo. The series along with Angela's one-shot were later reprinted in a trade paperback (), which, as of 2005, is out-of-print.\nAngela &amp; Aria\nA crossover between Angela and Aria.\nAngela &amp; Glory\nA crossover between Angela and Glory.\nCelestine\nAbout Celestine. the angel from the Violator vs Badrock series in a two-shot series.\n\"Violator vs Badrock\" (1995)\nA four-issue miniseries released in 1995 written by Alan Moore. Drawn by Brian Denham. Ink by Jonathan Sibal and Danny Miki.\n\"Spawn: Blood Feud\" (1995)\nA four-issue miniseries released in 1995 written by Alan Moore. Drawn by Tony Daniel. Inked by Kevin Conrad.\n\"Spawn the Impaler\" (1996)\nA three-issue miniseries released in October 1996, inspired by the story of the Wallachian voivode Vlad \u021aepe\u0219. Written by Mike Grell with art by Rob Prior.\n\"Medieval Spawn / Witchblade\" (1996)\nA three-issue miniseries was written by Garth Ennis. Medieval Spawn and the wielder of the Witchblade team up against Lord Cardinale, wielder of the Darkness.\n\"Curse of the Spawn\" (1996\u20131999)\nThe first long-term monthly spinoff series. Consisted of a number of story arcs centered on supporting characters from the main series, such as a future Hellspawn during the Apocalypse or Sam &amp; Twitch. Aimed at an older demographic than the main series and is significantly darker in tone, with more disturbing visuals and themes. 29 issues.\n\"Spawn: The Dark Ages\" (Vol. 1, 1999\u20132001)\nThis series focused on Lord Covenant, a 12th-century knight killed in a holy crusade far from his homeland, who returns to Earth as a Hellspawn. As a plague of violence and turmoil cover the English countryside, the Dark Knight must choose whether to align himself with the innocent inhabitants of the once-thriving kingdom or with the malevolent forces of evil and corruption. The series ran for 28 issues. Issues 15\u201328 featured writer Steve Niles and artist Nat Jones.\nSpawn: Fan Edition\nA three issue mini-series centered around the Norse hellspawn Nordik.\n\"Spawn: Blood and Shadows\" (1999)\nA Spawn prestige-format one-shot released in 1999. Written by Paul Jenkins with art by Ashley Wood.\n\"Cy-Gor\" (1999)\nA six-issue spinoff miniseries.\n\"Spawn: The Undead\" (1999\u20132000)\nThis series concentrates on Al Simmons. Unlike the original Spawn series, it was a self-contained, single-issue story. Written by Paul Jenkins it lasted 9 issues.\n\"Sam &amp; Twitch\" (1999\u20132004)\nA spin-off series following the criminal investigations of detectives Sam Burke and Twitch Williams. 26 issues.\n\"Case Files: Sam &amp; Twitch\" (2003\u20132006)\nContinuation of Sam &amp; Twitch. 25 issues.\n\"Sam &amp; Twitch: The Writer\" (2010)\nA four-issue miniseries.\n\"Haunt\" (2009)\nA story of two brothers (one a ghost, the other a human) who fuse together to become Haunt, a character that appears in other Spawn stories.\n\"Hellspawn\" (2000\u20132003)\nA relatively avant-garde spin-off comic inspired by \"Spawn\". Darker and more atmospheric than \"Spawn\", \"Hellspawn\" frequently dealt with the disturbing subject matter. It originally featured writer Brian Michael Bendis and artist Ashley Wood. It ran 16 issues.\n\"Spawn: Simony\" (2003)\nOne-shot. Published in 2003 by Semic, McFarlane allowed the creators (Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Porchero and Alex Nikolavitch) to create an original Spawn tale without using Image comics. This has Spawn fight against Necro Cop.\n\"Shadows of Spawn\" (2005\u20132006)\nThree graphic novel compilations of the Spawn manga.\nSpawn Toys\nA nine-issue series of one-shots packed in with early \"Spawn\" toys.\n\"Spawn: Architects of Fear\" (2011)\nA prestige format one-shot released in February 2008. Written by Arthur Claire with artwork by Aleksi Briclot.\nSpawn: Blood and Salvation\nA prestige-format one-shot that concludes the story of Daniel Llanso, the Hellspawn featured in the first four issues of \"Curse of the Spawn\".\n\"Spawn/Batman\" (1994)\nIntercompany crossover was written by Frank Miller with the art of Todd McFarlane. Considered part of Spawn and Miller's Dark Knight universe canon.\nContinuation of \"Spawn/Batman\" crossover, written by Doug Moench, Chuck Dixon, and Alan Grant and drawn by Klaus Janson.\nThe Adventures of Spawn\nAt the 2006 San Diego Comic-Con, it was announced that a new take on the Spawn mythos was in the works. This new Spawn story is known as \"The Adventures of Spawn\" and as stated by Jon Goff, a moderator on the Spawn.com Message Board and McFarlane employee, it is a re-imagining of the Spawn story that is essentially a \"What if?\" universe that hearkens back to classic kid-friendly Saturday morning cartoons. The story takes place in a webcomic format and has been tied into the action figure world through McFarlane Toys' Spawn Series 30.\nMisery\nA future series announced by McFarlane about Cyan Fitzgerald and her titular alter-ego.\nIt was later released as a mini series.\nSpawn/Witchblade\nA four-issue mini-series centered in medieval times focusing on the Medieval Spawn and the wielder of the Witchblade of that time. A sequel to the 1993 series.\nSam and Twitch True Detectives\nAn eight-part mini-series focusing on Sam and Twitch which would tie in with the upcoming film.\nHowever this did not happen and became the ongoing seres Sam and Twitch case files.\nSpawn: Resurrection\nA one-shot that takes place around the same time as Spawn 250 explaining how Al returned.\nSpawn Kills Everyone\nA one-shot focusing on a chibi Spawn killing everyone.\nSpawn Kills Everyone Too!\nA four-part mini-series sequel to the one-shot \"Spawn Kills Everyone\".\nSpawn's Universe (2021\u20132024).\nStarting in June 2021, a one-shot titled Spawn's Universe #1 was released. With it came the announcements and introductions to three new Spawn monthly titles. With the release of this one-shot, lead to three new titles being released that same year; \"King Spawn, Gunslinger Spawn\" and \"The Scorched.\" The first issue for each of these four titles had a positive reception, with each title selling well over 200,000 units each.\nSpawn's Universe (2021)\nIn June 2021 an oversized one-shot special, written by Todd McFarlane and features art by Stephen Segovia, Jim Cheung and Marcio Takara. This special sets up three other ongoing monthly titles which followed.\nKing Spawn (2021 \u2013 present)\n\"King Spawn\" was the first ongoing story from the Spawn universe, since the mainline series was released in 1992. Starting in August 2021, the series first 24 issues were written by Sean Lewis with art primarily by Javier Fern\u00e1ndez. McFarlane took over primary writing duties from 25 to 39 where he was then joined by co-writer Rory McConville and new series artist, Y\u0131ld\u0131ray \u00c7\u0131nar. The story follows Spawn as he faces old and new foes while becoming king.\nGunslinger Spawn (2021 \u2013 present)\n\"Gunslinger Spawn\" was the second new-ongoing series was released in October 2021, written by Todd McFarlane and illustrated by Brett Booth. This series focuses on the adventures of Gunslinger Spawn's after becoming trapped in modern times. Following the events of Spawn #350, Gunslinger Spawn artist, Brett Booth, and main-line Spawn series artist, Carlo Barberi, switched art duties, with Barberi becoming the primary artist on Gunslinger Spawn following #29 and Booth taking over Spawn art duties with Spawn #350.\nThe Scorched (2022 \u2013 present)\nThe third ongoing series launched as a part of the Spawn Universe is \"The Scorched\". The series was released in January 2022, and was written by Sean Lewis with art by Stephen Segovia. Beginning with #23, John Layman became the new writer of the series. The story focuses on a team of rotating roster of heroes, with the core group consisting of She-Spawn, Gunslinger Spawn, Medieval Spawn, and Redeemer. \nBatman/Spawn (2022)\nIn December 2022, a third intercompany crossover between Batman and Spawn. Though the series could have been released as a mini-series it was ultimately released as a one-shot special. The one-shot was written by Todd McFarlane and artist Greg Capullo.\nSpawn: Unwanted Violence (2023)\nA two issue miniseries released in January\u2013February 2023, was written by McFarlane and illustrated by Mike del Mundo. The story focused on a conflict between Spawn and The Freak.\nThe New U (2024 \u2013 present).\nFollowing the events of Spawn #350, a new line-up of titles was announced in February 2024. \"The New U\" is set to build up on the foundations of Spawn's Universe and launch a new era of Spawn titles. Each title in The New U will have drastically different tones and genres. Ranging from Horror, Drama, Crime, Science-Fiction and Comedy. Each title in The New U retains a price point of $2.99 or $3.99 for first issues, with the rest in the series continuing to be $2.99.\nThe first title to be released in the New U is the miniseries \"Sam and Twitch: Case Files\", a crime/noir detective series following the titular characters Sam &amp; Twitch. Next under the label is \"Rat City\", a sci-fi ongoing series set 100 years in the future releases in April 2024. \"Monolith\" a three part mini-series, releases in May the same year. More titles in the New U are set to be released in 2024. In June and July, three four-issue miniseries; \"Misery, Medieval Spawn\", and \"Spawn Kills every Spawn\". In August, a six-issue \"Violater\" mini-series and a Knights vs. Samurai are set to be released. In September \"Deadly Tales\", a new ongoing title will launch, and in October, a bi-monthly series \"No Home Here\" launches. Other titles announced that are miniseries include\"Focus, Spawn: The Dark Ages, She-Spawn, Bloodletter\", and \"Spawn 77\".\nSam and Twitch: Case Files (2024 \u2013 present)\nIn March 2024, an ongoing series title focusing on Sam and Twitch came out, created by McFarlane and co-plotted by Jon Goff, with art by Syzmon Kudranski for the first 8 issues. For issues 9\u201316, it was co-plotted by Jordan Barel, with series art by &amp; Thomas Nachlik\nSam and Twitch: Gangland\nA two-issue mini-series focusing on Sam and Twitch.\nRat City (2024 \u2013 present)\nA new ongoing series, \"Rat City\", written by Erica Schultz and illustrated by Ze Carlos, was released April 2024. The series follows Peter Cairn, known as 'The devient' set a hundred years in the future. Peter Cairn is the cybernetic Spawn of the future, who was transformed through the actions of Al Simmons in Spawn #350.\nMonolith (2024)\n\"Monolith\" is a three-issue mini-series about the origins of the hell Spawn Monolith. Starting in May 2024, the series was written by Sean Lewis featuring art by Valerio Giangiordano, . \nMisery (2024)\nA four-issue mini-series focusing on the title character helping innocents who've been victimized by evil. Written by McFarlane and illustrated by Kudranski, the series starting in June 2024 &amp; ending in September 2024. \nMedieval Spawn (2025)\nA four-issue mini-series focusing on Medieval Spawn's origins and how he ended up in the current times.\nSpawn Kills Every Spawn (2024)\nA series about Spawn killing other versions of himself. Written and drawn by John Layman and Rob Duenes.\nViolator: Origin (2024\u20132025)\nA series focusing on the origin story of the titular character, Violator. The series is drawn by six different artists covering six different points in the Violators history. Written by Marc Andreyko, featuring art by (in issue order), Piotr Kowalski, Kyle Hotz, Jonathan Wayshak, Gianenrico Bonacorsi, Kevin Maguire, and Von Randal. The series lasted from September 2024 to March 2025.\nKnights vs. Samurai (2024 - present)\nAn ongoing series centered around knights against Samurai.\nDeadly Tales of The Gunslinger (2024 - present)\nA Gunslinger series about his days in the American Civil War. Written by Jimmy Palmiotti and illustrated by Patric Reynolds.\nThe Curse of Sherlee Johnson (2025 - present)\nOriginally titled \"No Home Here\", the story follows Kincaid's final victim from issue 5 of Spawn, Sherlee Johnson. The series was written and drawn by Jonathan Glapion.\nFocus\nA series focusing on the young speedster who gained his abilities from being experimented on and first appeared in Gunslinger Spawn. Written by McFarlane and illustrated by Marco Failla.\nI Saw Santa (2025)\nA two-issue mini-series focusing on Spawn, Sam and Twitch trying to stop a homicidal child from killing Santa.\nSpawn: The Dark Ages (vol. 2, 2025)\nA six-issue mini-series focusing on Devil Spawn from 700 years in the past, this is a 5th-century, post-Roman, rugged melodrama, with the last gasp of the old Celtic beliefs, and Britain being attacked from all sides. Written and drawn by Liam Sharp. The comic will be released in October 2025.\nShe-Spawn\nAn upcoming mini-series about Jessica Priest as She-Spawn.\nSpawn '77\nAn upcoming mini-series about adventures of 1977's Spawn before Al Simmons that inspired from Todd Mcfarlane's original design.\nBloodletter (2025)\nA five-issue mini-series centered around Bloodletter.\nThe Freak\nAn upcoming mini-series centered around the Freak.\nBlack Ritual: The Book of NYX (2025)\nOriginally called Cultus Noctis: The Book of Nyx it is a seven-issue mini-series about Nyx between the time she took on the She-Spawn mantle and becoming the Queen of Hell In an interview video Thomas said two more 7 issue mini series will come after the first is over.\nLegal disputes.\nDispute with Neil Gaiman.\nIn 1993, McFarlane contracted Neil Gaiman to write \"Spawn\" #9. While doing so, Gaiman introduced the characters Cogliostro, Angela, and Medieval Spawn. All three characters were designed and co-created by Todd McFarlane and continued to be featured in the series after Gaiman's involvement, and some had tie-ins with McFarlane's toy company. Cogliostro had a prominent role in the live-action movie in 1997. McFarlane had agreed that Gaiman was a co-creator of the characters and paid him royalties for reprints, graphic novels, and action figures. After a few years, he ceased the payment of royalties and gave Gaiman notice that he owned all rights to the characters, citing the copyright notice from #9 and claimed that Gaiman's work had been work-for-hire and that McFarlane was the sole owner.\nIn 2002, Gaiman filed suit against McFarlane and, in response, McFarlane counter-sued. Gaiman had partnered with Marvel Comics to form Marvels and Miracles, LLC, which bankrolled the lawsuit. The main goal was to determine the issue of ownership for another character Gaiman felt he had a stake in, Miracleman, which at the time McFarlane was believed to hold a sizable stake in after his buyout of the assets of Eclipse Comics. This issue was thrown out. Instead, the court chose to rule on the breach of contract issue, the rights of ownership and the copyrightability of the characters from \"Spawn\" #9. Several arguments were presented by McFarlane and all were rejected, leading to a sizable judgment against McFarlane and Image Comics. The matter went to appeal and the judgment was upheld in a 2004 decision.\nGaiman's rights as co-creator and co-owner of Cogliostro, Angela, and Medieval Spawn were acknowledged. The court's view was that Gaiman and McFarlane's collaboration led to each contributing half of the work. Gaiman wrote the story while McFarlane illustrated the character; because of this, each held a 50% stake in the characters. Issue 9 was reprinted for the first time since the lawsuit was filed in the hardcover edition of \"Spawn Origins: Volume 1\". In a reprint collection of the first twelve issues of \"Spawn\", the contentious issue (along with Dave Sim's #10, featuring copyrighted character Cerebus) was excluded, but both issues have been reprinted in the hardcover and deluxe editions of \"Spawn Origins Collection: Volume 1\", and the black and white 2012 (and the later 2021 color edition) softcover omnibus \"Spawn Compendium\" 1, collecting \"Spawn\" issues #1\u201350. In 2012, McFarlane and Gaiman settled their dispute, and Gaiman was given full ownership of the character Angela. Gaiman, in turn, sold all rights to the character to Marvel Comics.\nTony Twist lawsuit.\nTodd McFarlane created a mob enforcer character named \"Antonio 'Tony Twist' Twistelli\", who McFarlane acknowledged was named after hockey player Tony Twist. Twist won a $15 million verdict in 2004 when a jury found Todd McFarlane Productions had profited from Twist's likeness. The verdict was upheld after two appeals in June 2006, but the two later settled out of court for $5 million.\nCreative teams.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCollected editions.\nMany issues of \"Spawn\" have been gathered together in various trade paperbacks collections since the mid-nineties. The original US and UK trade releases contain issue 9, but not 10 (Cerebus' appearance).\nEach containing four to five issues, the original \"Spawn\" trade paperbacks started in 1995 under a different trade cover design, going up to three volumes only. After the live-action 1997 movie, a new trade cover design was created, with Brent Ashe providing new covers for Books 1\u20137, and Ashley Wood for Books 8\u201312. These reissues were retitled with subtitles. The sequential trades stopped after Book 12, but several new volumes appeared in 2006\u20132008, collecting various story arcs. Beginning in 2009, a new series of volumes was released, collecting the \"Endgame\" storyline. From 2015 to 2020, with \"Resurrection\", \"Satan Saga Wars\", \"Hell on Earth\", \"Dark Horror\", \"Enemy of the State\", and \"Vengeance\" volumes, the trade paperbacks have started in sequential order again collecting issues #251\u2013297.\nAfter a two-year gap, the line resumed with three volumes released in 2022: \"Spawn: Record Breaker\" (May 2022), \"Spawn: Aftermath\" (July 2022) and \"Spawn: Omega\" (September 2022), between them collecting \"Spawn\" issues #298-314.\n\"Spawn Collection\".\nIn 2005, the entire \"Spawn\" series began to appear in massive trade paperback releases under the title \"Spawn Collection\" \u2013 each volume containing approximately twenty issues, except for the first one, which contains ten. Released after the Gaiman lawsuit, these editions do not contain either Issue 9 (featuring the first appearance of Angela and Cogliostro, both created by Neil Gaiman) or Issue 10 (featuring Dave Sim's Cerebus).\n\"Spawn Collection\" Volumes 1 and 2 were published in both hardcover and trade paperback formats, while Volume 3 onward were only released as trade paperbacks. As of 2009, \"Spawn Collection Volume 1\" is currently out of print, with its fourth printing released in June 2007. In 2009 it was announced that the \"Spawn Collection\" would end with Volume 6, to be replaced by a new TBP format that includes soft- and hardcover versions, reprinting the entire \"Spawn\" series from the early issues once again (\"Spawn Origins Collection\", see below).\n\"Spawn Collection Volume 1\" was ranked 17 in the top 100 graphic novels for December 2005 period, with pre-order sales of 3,227.\n\"Spawn Compendium\".\nIn 2012, in celebration of Image Comics' then 20 years as a publisher and \"Spawn\" being one of their longest running titles, \"Spawn Compendium\" was released, reprinting \"Spawn\" issues #1\u201350 at 1136 pages in black and white, though this volume does not collect the individual issues' covers. The book went to a second printing in March 2016.\nA new edition of this volume, collected now in full color, was released in February 2021 with a different front cover art (from \"Spawn\" #95, and back cover art from \"Spawn\" #70). As with the previous edition, this book does not collect the individual issues' covers. Subsequent volumes have been released since collecting every 50 issues per tome.\n\"Spawn Origins Collection\".\nIn 2009, a line of newly redesigned and reformatted trade paperbacks was announced, replacing the \"Spawn Collection\" line (see above) and once again collecting the early issues of \"Spawn\". These new trades feature new cover art by Greg Capullo, recreating classic \"Spawn\" covers. In addition to the 6 issue trade paperbacks, this line features three oversized 12\u201313 issue hardcovers, and two large 25-issue limited slipcased deluxe editions (which come in both a standard edition and a signed and numbered edition limited to 500 copies). The 12-issue hardcover edition of Volume One was the first to reprint both Issues 9 and 10, and the 25-issue deluxe editions did as well. \"Spawn Origins Collection\" Volume 20 trade paperback was the final volume released in 2014, collecting issues #117\u2013122.\nIn May 2019, a new edition of \"Spawn Origins Collection\" Volume 1 TPB (6th printing) was published at the low cover price of US$9.99. The book went back to press again for a seventh printing a few months later in September 2019.\nAfter an eight-year gap, the line resumed in April 2022 with \"Spawn Origins Collection Volume 21\" collecting issues #123\u2013128. \"Spawn Origins Collection Volume 22\" collecting issues #129\u2013134 was published in September 2022.\nHardcover edition.\nThe Spawn: Origins Hardcover collections are the same size as US standard comic book deluxe editions, and typically collect 12 issues of Spawn.\nDeluxe edition.\nThe Spawn Origins Collection: Deluxe Editions are wider and taller than normal deluxe editions. Each book comes with a slipcase for the book. \nUK releases.\nThese releases were originally published in fifteen 5\u20136-issue volumes in the UK by Titan Books, with titles named by religious themes. The following books contained original series issues 1\u201382, with the exception of the previously mentioned Issue 10.\n\"Spawn Universe\" and related collections.\nKing Spawn.\n\"King Spawn\" is the first ongoing spin-off of Spawn, written by Sean Lewis then Rory McConville with art by Javier Fern\u00e1ndez and Y\u0131ld\u0131ray \u00c7\u0131nar.\nTrade Paperbacks\nKing Spawn Origins\nJust like the \"Spawn: Origins\" hardcover collections, the \"King Spawn Origins\" are the same size as US standard comic book deluxe editions, and typically collect 12 issues of King Spawn. Starting in October 2025, the series started to be collected in oversized hardcovers.\nSpin-off trade paperback collections.\nSeveral \"Spawn\"-related mini-series has been collected in trade paperback editions.\nSpin-off hardcover collection.\nA few \"Spawn\"-related mini-series have been collected in HC editions.\n\"Curse of the Spawn\".\nMost of the \"Curse of the Spawn\"\u00a0\u2013 spin-off series has been collected in trade paperback editions.\nIn other media.\nVideo games.\nSpawn has starred in several video games:\nMusic.\n\"The Dark Saga\" by Iced Earth is a concept album based upon the \"Spawn\" story. The cover of the album, by Greg Capullo and Todd McFarlane, depicts Spawn himself, though due to legal issues, Iced Earth could not use the names of the characters in the songs.\nReception.\nSpawn was ranked 60th on \"Wizard\" magazine's list of the Top 200 Comic Book Characters of All Time, 50th on \"Empire\" magazine's list of The 50 Greatest Comic Book Characters, and 36th on \"IGN\"'s 2011 Top 100 Comic Book Heroes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29194", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29194", "title": "Southamptonshire", "text": ""}
{"id": "29196", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29196", "title": "SDL", "text": "SDL may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29197", "revid": "95378075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29197", "title": "Specification and Design Language", "text": ""}
{"id": "29198", "revid": "50153389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29198", "title": "Samba (software)", "text": "Free software re-implementation of the SMB networking protocol\nSamba is a free software re-implementation of the SMB networking protocol, and was originally developed by Andrew Tridgell. Samba provides file and print services for various Microsoft Windows clients and can integrate with a Microsoft Windows Server domain, either as a Domain Controller (DC) or as a domain member. As of version 4, it supports Active Directory and Microsoft Windows NT domains.\nSamba runs on most Unix-like systems, such as Linux, Solaris, AIX and the BSD variants, including Apple macOS (Mac OS X 10.2 and greater) and macOS Server. Samba also runs on a number of other operating systems such as OpenVMS and IBM i. Samba is standard on nearly all distributions of Linux and is commonly included as a basic system service on other Unix-based operating systems as well. Samba is released under the terms of the GNU General Public License. The name \"Samba\" comes from SMB (Server Message Block), the name of the proprietary protocol used by the Microsoft Windows network file system.\nEarly history.\nAndrew Tridgell developed the first version of Samba Unix in December 1991 and January 1992, as a PhD student at the Australian National University, using a packet sniffer to do of the protocol used by DEC Pathworks server software. It did not have a formal name at the time of the first releases, versions 0.1, 0.5, and 1.0, all from the first half of January 1992; Tridgell simply referred to it as \"a Unix file server for Dos Pathworks.\" He understood that he had \"in fact implemented the netbios protocol\" at the time of version 1.0 and that \"this software could be used with other PC clients.\"\nWith a focus on interoperability with Microsoft's LAN Manager, Tridgell released \"netbios for unix\", observer, version 1.5 in December 1993. This release was the first to include client-software as well as a server. Also, at this time GPL2 was chosen as license.\nMidway through the 1.5-series, the name was changed to \"smbserver\". However, Tridgell got a trademark notice from the company \"Syntax\", who sold a product named \"TotalNet Advanced Server\" and owned the trademark for \"SMBserver\". The name \"Samba\" was derived by running the Unix command grep through the system dictionary looking for words that contained the letters S, M, and B, in that order (i.e. ).\nVersions 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, and 1.9 followed relatively quickly, with the latter being released in January 1995. Tridgell considers the adoption of CVS in May 1996 to mark the birth of the Samba Team, though there had been contributions from other people, especially Jeremy Allison, previously.\nVersion 2.0.0, released in January 1999, was a major release, including support for authentication from Windows NT Primary Domain Controller, 64 bit filesystem support for very large files, and exposure of OPLOCKS to unix systems. Version 2.2.0 released in April 2001.\nVersion history.\nLegend:UnsupportedSupportedLatest versionPreview versionFuture version&lt;templatestyles src=\"Version/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecurity.\nSome versions of Samba 3.6.3 and lower suffer serious security issues which can allow anonymous users to gain root access to a system from an anonymous connection, through the exploitation of an error in Samba's remote procedure call.\nOn 12 April 2016, Badlock, a crucial security bug in Windows and Samba, was disclosed. Badlock for Samba is referenced by CVE-2016-2118 (SAMR and LSA man in the middle attacks possible).\nOn 24 May 2017, it was announced that a remote code execution vulnerability had been found in Samba named \"EternalRed\" or \"SambaCry\", affecting all versions since 3.5.0. This vulnerability was assigned identifier CVE-2017-7494.\nOn 14 September 2020, a proof-of-concept exploit for the netlogon vulnerability called \"Zerologon\" (CVE-2020-1472) for which a patch exists since August was published. Some federal agencies using the software have been ordered to install the patch.\nFeatures.\nSamba allows file and print sharing between computers running Microsoft Windows and computers running Unix. It is an implementation of dozens of services and a dozen protocols, including:\nAll these services and protocols are frequently incorrectly referred to as just NetBIOS or SMB. The NBT (NetBIOS over TCP/IP) and WINS protocols, and their underlying SMB version 1 protocol, are deprecated on Windows. Since Windows Vista the WS-Discovery protocol has been included along with SMB2 and its successors, which supersede these. (WS-Discovery is implemented on Unix-like platforms by third party daemons which allow Samba shares to be discovered when the deprecated protocols are disabled).\nSamba sets up network shares for chosen Unix directories (including all contained subdirectories). These appear to Microsoft Windows users as normal Windows folders accessible via the network. Unix users can either mount the shares directly as part of their file structure using the codice_1 command or, alternatively, can use a utility, codice_2 (libsmb) installed with Samba to read the shares with a similar interface to a standard command line FTP program. Each directory can have different access privileges overlaid on top of the normal Unix file protections. For example: home directories would have read/write access for all known users, allowing each to access their own files. However they would still not have access to the files of others unless that permission would normally exist. Note that the netlogon share, typically distributed as a read only share from codice_3, is the logon directory for user logon scripts.\nSamba services are implemented as two daemons:\nSamba configuration is achieved by editing a single file (typically installed as codice_4 or codice_5). Samba can also provide user logon scripts and group policy implementation through codice_6.\nSamba is included in most Linux distributions and is started during the boot process. On Red Hat, for instance, the codice_7 script runs at boot time, and starts both daemons. Samba is not included in Solaris 8, but a Solaris 8-compatible version is available from the Samba website. The OS/2-based ArcaOS includes Samba to replace the old IBM LAN Server software.\nEarlier versions of Samba included a web administration tool called \"Samba Web Administration Tool\" (SWAT),\nwhich was removed starting with version 4.1.\nSamba TNG.\nSamba TNG (The Next Generation) was forked in late 1999, after disagreements between the Samba Team leaders and Luke Leighton about the directions of the Samba project. They failed to come to an agreement on a development transition path which allowed the research version of Samba he was developing (known at the time as Samba-NTDOM) to slowly be integrated into Samba. Development was minimal, due to a lack of developers. The Samba TNG team frequently directed potential users towards Samba because of its better support and development.\nA key goal of the Samba TNG project was to rewrite all of the NT Domains services as FreeDCE projects. This was made difficult as the services were developed manually through network reverse-engineering, with limited or no reference to DCE/RPC documentation.\nA key difference from Samba was in the implementation of the NT Domains suite of protocols and MSRPC services. Samba makes all the NT Domains services available from a single place, whereas Samba TNG separated each service into its own program.\nReactOS started using Samba TNG services for its SMB implementation. The developers of both projects were interested in seeing the Samba TNG design used to help get ReactOS talking to Windows networks. They worked together to adapt the network code and build system. The multi-layered and modular approach made it easy to port each service to ReactOS. \nSamba TNG now seems to be abandoned and unmaintained. Their website is offline with the functional archive from 2016. The last release for ReactOS was in 2009.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29199", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29199", "title": "Simple DirectMedia Layer", "text": "Free software multimedia library\nSimple DirectMedia Layer (SDL) is a cross-platform software development library designed to provide a hardware abstraction layer for computer multimedia hardware components. Software developers can use it to write high-performance computer games and other multimedia applications that can run on many operating systems such as AmigaOS, Android, iOS, Linux, MorphOS, macOS, and Windows.\nSDL manages video, audio, input devices, threads, shared object loading, computer networking and timers. For 3D graphics, it can handle an OpenGL, Vulkan, Metal, or Direct3D11 (older Direct3D version 9 is also supported) context. A common misconception is that SDL is a game engine. However, the library is suited to building games directly, or is usable indirectly by engines built on top of it.\nThe library is internally written in C and possibly, depending on the target platform, C++ or Objective-C, and provides the application programming interface in C, with bindings to other languages available. It is free and open-source software subject to the requirements of the zlib License since version 2.0, and with prior versions subject to the GNU Lesser General Public License. Under the zlib License, SDL 2.0 is freely available for static linking in closed-source projects, unlike SDL 1.2, although it is possible for the user to override the statically linked library with one provided by them. SDL 2.0, released in 2013, was a major departure from previous versions, offering more opportunity for 3D hardware acceleration, but breaking backwards-compatibility; a wrapper library made to translate 1.2 calls to 2.0 was later made available.\nSDL is extensively used in the industry in both large and small projects. By 2010, over 700 games, 180 applications, and 120 demos had been posted on the library website.\nSDL supports Emscripten (i.e. programs that run on a web page).\nSDL 3 was released, as a stable version, in January 2025. It has a migration guide, and Coccinelle tool support to help migrate to the new major version. SDL 3 has a new way to control the entry point of your program, and you can optionally control execution in a non-framework way.\nHistory.\nSam Lantinga created the library, first releasing it in early 1998, while working for Loki Software. He got the idea while porting a Windows application to Macintosh. He then used SDL to port \"Doom\" to BeOS (see Doom source ports). Around the time of its creation, SDL was regarded as a simple alternative to DirectX. Several other free libraries were developed to work alongside SDL, such as SMPEG and . He also founded Galaxy Gameworks in 2008 to help commercially support SDL, although the company plans are currently on hold due to time constraints.\nSoon after putting Galaxy Gameworks on hold, Lantinga announced that SDL 1.3 (which would then later become SDL 2.0) would be licensed under the zlib License. Lantinga announced SDL 2.0 on 14 July 2012, at the same time announcing that he was joining Valve, the first version of which was announced the same day he joined the company. Lantinga announced the stable release of SDL 2.0.0 on 13 August 2013.\nSDL 2.0 is a major update to the SDL 1.2 codebase with a different, not backwards-compatible API. It replaces several parts of the 1.2 API with more general support for multiple input and output options. Some feature additions include multiple window support, hardware-accelerated 2D graphics, and better Unicode support.\nSupport for Mir and Wayland was added in SDL 2.0.2 and enabled by default in SDL 2.0.4. Version 2.0.4 also provided better support for Android.\nIn 2024, the stable preview of SDL 3.1.3 was released (and in January 2025 3.2.0 was released as stable). It makes the API more consistent and allows access to more parts of the device, along with other features.\nSoftware architecture.\nSDL is a wrapper around the operating-system-specific functions that the program needs to access. The only purpose of SDL is to provide a common framework for accessing these functions for multiple operating systems (cross-platform). SDL provides support for 2D pixel operations, sound, file access, event handling, timing and threading. It is often used to complement OpenGL by setting up the graphical output and providing mouse and keyboard input, since OpenGL comprises only rendering.\nA game using the Simple DirectMedia Layer will \"not\" automatically run on every operating system; further adaptations must be applied. These are reduced to a minimum, since SDL also contains a few abstraction APIs for frequent functions offered by an operating system.\nThe syntax of SDL is function-based: all operations done in SDL are done by passing parameters to subroutines (functions). Special structures are also used to store the specific information SDL needs to handle. SDL functions are categorized under several different subsystems.\nSubsystems.\nSDL is divided into several subsystems:\nBesides this basic, low-level support, there also are a few separate official libraries that provide some more functions. These comprise the \"standard library\", and are provided on the official website and included in the official documentation:\nOther, non-standard libraries also exist. For example: SDL_Collide on SourceForge created by Amir Taaki.\nLanguage bindings.\nThe SDL 2.0 library has language bindings for:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSupported back-ends.\nBecause of the way SDL is designed, much of its source code is split into separate modules for each operating system, to make calls to the underlying system. When SDL is compiled, the appropriate modules are selected for the target system. The following back-ends are available:\nAn unofficial Sixel back-end is available for SDL 1.2.\nThe Rockbox MP3 player firmware also distributes a version of SDL 1.2, which is used to run games such as Quake.\nReception and adoption.\nOver the years SDL was used for many commercial and non-commercial video game projects. For instance, MobyGames listed 120 games using SDL in 2013, and the SDL website itself listed around 700 games in 2012. Important commercial examples are \"Angry Birds\", \"Unreal Tournament\", and games developed using Valve's Source Engine, which uses SDL extensively for cross-platform compatibility; ones from the open-source domain are \"OpenTTD\", \"The Battle for Wesnoth\" or \"Freeciv\".\nThe cross-platform game releases of the popular Humble Indie Bundles for Linux, Mac and Android are often SDL-based.\nSDL is also often used for later ports on new platforms with legacy code. For instance, the PC game Homeworld was ported to the Pandora handheld and Jagged Alliance 2 for Android via SDL.\nAlso, several non video game programs use SDL; examples are the emulators, such as DOSBox, FUSE ZX Spectrum emulator and VisualBoyAdvance.\nThere were several books written for development with SDL (see further reading).\nSDL is used in university courses teaching multimedia and computer science, for instance, in a workshop about game programming using libSDL at the University of Cadiz in 2010, or a Game Design discipline at UTFPR (Ponta Grossa campus) in 2015.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Allegro\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29200", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29200", "title": "Seattle University", "text": "Jesuit university in Seattle, Washington, US\nSeattle University (Seattle U or SU) is a private Jesuit university in Seattle, Washington, United States. It is the largest independent university in the Northwestern United States, with over 7,500 students enrolled in undergraduate and graduate programs within seven schools.\nHistory.\nIn 1891, Adrian Sweere, S.J., took over a small parish school near downtown Seattle at Broadway and Madison. At first, the school was named after the surrounding Immaculate Conception parish and did not offer higher education. In 1898, the school was renamed after the city it was located in as \"Seattle College\", which itself was named after Chief Seattle.\nSeattle College granted its first bachelor's degrees 11 years later. Initially, the school served as both a high school and a college. From 1919 to 1931, the college moved to Interlaken Boulevard but in 1931 it returned to First Hill permanently. When the college moved back to First Hill, it split off the High School portion of the school, which remained on Interlaken, as Seattle Preparatory High School. They remained connected through the Matteo Ricci program, which ended in 2017, and the many Seattle Prep Students who go to Seattle University for undergrad.\nIn 1931, Seattle College created a night school for women, though admitting women was highly controversial at the time. The night school classes actually began at noon, and were spearheaded by James McGoldrick, who stood up to Seattle's bishop when he complained. In 1934 a Superior General in Rome investigated the night school, but the president of Seattle College was able to keep it open for the reason that its numbers were needed to maintain the college's accreditation. The college was one of the first coeducational Jesuit colleges in the U.S., and these institutions were only sanctioned two decades later.\nThe college's School of Nursing opened in 1935, and many women from the college joined the Army Base Hospital 50 unit in 1942 for World War II. The first Black students at Seattle University enrolled after World War II ended. Sam Smith was the first to enroll and Millie Bown Russell the second, although Russell graduated first in 1948.\nIn 1948, Seattle College renamed itself to its current name of Seattle University under president Albert A. Lemieux. In 1993, the Seattle University School of Law was established through the purchase of the Law School of the University of Puget Sound in Tacoma, and the School of Law moved to the Seattle campus in 1999.\nIn 2009, Seattle University completed its largest capital campaign, raising almost $169 million. This led to investment in the scholarship fund, academic programs and professorships, a fitness complex, an arts center, and the $56 million Lemieux Library and McGoldrick Learning Commons, completed in fall 2010.\nIn 2024, Seattle real estate developer Richard Hedreen donated his $300 million art collection to the university in honor of his late wife, alumna Betty Hedreen, marking one of the largest single gifts to a university ever made.\nIn December 2024, the university announced that it would acquire Cornish College of the Arts. This transaction became official in 2025 with the establishment of Cornish College of the Arts at Seattle University, which became SU's seventh college.\nCampus.\nSeattle University occupies two campuses covering about 55 acres. The main campus is located in the city's First Hill neighborhood, east of downtown Seattle and immediately adjacent to the Capitol Hill neighborhood and is known as the First Hill Campus. The second campus, located about 1.5 miles west of the First Hill Campus, is the South Lake Union campus and is home to Cornish College of the Arts at Seattle University. Seattle University's campus has been recognized by the city of Seattle and EPA for its commitment to sustainability through pesticide-free grounds, a food waste compost facility, recycling, and energy conservation program.\nThe campus includes numerous works by well-known artists: the Centennial Fountain by Seattle artist George Tsutakawa; a large glass sculpture in the PACCAR Atrium of Pigott Hall by Tacoma artist Dale Chihuly; and works by Chuck Close, Jacob Lawrence, Gwendolyn Knight, William Morris, and David Mach.\nUndergraduate enrollment in 2024 was composed of 50.0% White, 33.7% Asian, 14.4% Hispanic, 8.4% Black, 3.5% Pacific Islander, 1.9% Native American, and 2.0% Other/Unknown; approximately 14% of the student body identifies with more than one ethnicity. 9.0% of the student body are made up of international students. The gender makeup of the undergraduate student body is 61% Female and 39% Male.\nCasey Building.\nHome to the College of Arts and Sciences, the Casey Building is a five-story building housing the college's administrative offices and a majority of the undergraduate and graduate departments. It features multiple meeting and conference rooms, the office of the Dean, and a five-floor glass atrium overlooking the gardens hidden behind the building.\nChapel of St. Ignatius.\nThe Chapel of St. Ignatius on campus, designed by Washington born, New York based architect Steven Holl, won a national Honor Award from the American Institute of Architects in 1998. At night the chapel sends beacons of multi-colored lights out onto the campus.\nFine Arts Building.\nOverlooking the largest open lawn on the Seattle University campus, the Fine Arts Building houses the classrooms, administrative offices of the Art and Art History Department and the Performing Arts and Arts Leadership Department, as well as the department's Vachon Room: an open performance space used for rehearsals, exhibits, live theater and other events of artistic expression. Adjacent to the Fine Arts Building, the recently remodeled Hunthaussen Hall also contains several learning spaces, a design studio and digital art lab.\nJeanne Marie &amp; Rhoady Lee Center for the Arts.\nSeattle University opened The Jeanne Marie &amp; Rhoady Lee Center on February 14, 2006. A performance and exhibition space on the corner of 12th Avenue and East Marion Street, the facility was designed for use by Seattle University students, Seattle artists, and the wider community.\nThe Center for the Arts houses a 150-seat flexible theater designed for drama, dance, and ensemble music. It also houses The Hedreen Gallery, a lobby art gallery for the public display of visual art by students and visiting artists visible through over of plate glass windows along Twelfth Avenue. The Center also includes a scene shop, costume shop, prop room, green room, dressing room, and ticket booth.\nDesigned in conjunction with the managing and artistic directors of local theater and dance companies as well as with Seattle University faculty, the performance space is usable by a wide variety of visiting artists and resident companies. Both stage and seating are mobile and removable. The theater is equipped with lighting and sound technology operated from an elevated control booth. The exterior decor coordinates with the surrounding campus, while the lobby art gallery along 12th Avenue is another feature.\nThe site of the Lee Center is currently under consideration to be the home of the new Seattle University Museum of Art which was designed by architecture firm Olson Kundig. The plan to redevelop the building and remove the Lee Center has drawn backlash from faculty and students who have advocated for developing the new museum on the site while preserving the Lee Center as the highest quality performing arts education space on Seattle U's First Hill campus.\nLemieux Library.\nThe Lemieux Library was founded in 1991. As of 2011[ [update]] it contained 216,677 books and subscribed to 1,604 periodicals. It is a member of the American Theological Library Association. It also contains a large bank of the school's computer labs and a school-run caf\u00e9.\nResidence Halls.\nStudents at Seattle U are required to live on campus for the first two years of their undergraduate degree unless they live within 20 miles of campus. \nBellarmine Hall.\nBellarmine Hall (often referred to as Bell) is primarily for first-year and some sophomore students. It is the most centrally located dorm on campus and houses around 400 students in dormitory-style housing with most rooms having two beds and some sleeping three. It is attached to the Pigott Pavilion which provides some student services including career counselling and the print shop SUperCopy.\nCampion Hall.\nCampion Hall (often referred to as Camp) is primarily for first-year and some sophomore students. It is the tallest building on campus at 12 stories tall and the largest dormitory on campus housing around 650 residents. It has a ballroom on the first floor which hosts many types of events such as the annual L\u016b\u02bbau.\nThe basement has a school-run convenience store called The Cave, often open late, and used to be home to KXSU before the completion of the Sinegal Center. The top floor of Campion Hall is split in half with a dormitory on the northern wing of the building with the study rooms and computer lab overlooking downtown Seattle on the southern wing. It is also adjacent to Seattle U's Japanese Garden.\nChardin Hall.\nChardin Hall was originally operated by Seattle U as the Bessie Burton Sullivan Skilled Nursing Residence from 1990-March 2007. The building was converted into classrooms and dorms for the following academic year. As a result of the building's past use, it is distinct from the other three residence halls with wider halls, greater wheelchair accessibility, and larger rooms. It houses the fewest students of the four residence halls with around 140 residents. It is also distinct from the other residence halls in that it is only open to second-year students.\nXavier Global House.\nXavier Global House (often referred to as Xav) houses around 200 students and is primarily for first and second year international students. It is the only residence hall on the North end of campus.\nJim and Janet Sinegal Center for Science and Innovation.\nThe Sinegal Center is the newest building on Seattle U's campus opening for the 2021 academic year. It is the fifth LEED Gold Certified building on campus and had a reported budget of $100 Million. It was built to house Seattle U's growing STEM program and as a new home for the Student run radio station KXSU. \nSports Facilities.\nThe Redhawk Center is home to the school's largest arena and indoor court and hosts Basketball and Volleyball games and large events such as some Quadstock acts. It was renamed from the Connolly Center in May, 2018 following the news that the namesake, Archbishop Thomas Connolly had been involved in helping cover up the sex crimes of Father Michael Cody. The Redhawk Center also contains the fitness center, a gym open to all students. It is located on 14th Avenue on the edge of campus next to Championship Field and the school's Tennis Courts. \nThe other main sports facility is Seattle University Park &amp; Logan Field, a small track and field stadium with a baseball diamond which is used as a multi-purpose venue for mostly small events such as intramural sports. It has a turf field with soccer markings painted on. The field is located along 12th Avenue near many of the student dormitories and is often used by students outside of structed activities.\nSouth Lake Union Campus.\nSeattle U's South Lake Union campus is the home of Cornish College of the Arts. The campus is home to the William Volker Building which is on the National Register of Historic Places, the Raisbeck Performance Hall which is a Seattle City Landmark, and Cornish's residence hall and Library.\nTransportation.\nSeattle U's First Hill campus is adjacent to the First Hill Streetcar and several King County Metro bus routes, including the RapidRide G Line. It is also near Capitol Hill station, which is served by the 1 Line of the Link light rail system. Bicycle lanes running along Broadway, Union, and 12th connect campus to Seattle's broader cycling network. Seattle U has four parking garages and lots on its campus.\nThe South Lake Union campus is served by the South Lake Union Streetcar and King County Metro buses. It is near Westlake station on the 1 Line, which is also served by the Seattle Center Monorail.\nIn 2025, Seattle U announced their intention to operate a shuttle bus service connecting the First Hill and South Lake Union campuses when Cornish and Seattle U merged.\nAcademics.\nSeattle University offers 70 bachelor's degree programs, 42 graduate degree programs, and 24 certificate programs, plus law school, a doctoral program in education, and a doctoral program in nursing practice (DNP). The university consists of seven schools and colleges: the College of Arts and Sciences, Cornish College of the Arts, the Albers School of Business and Economics, the College of Education, the School of Law, the College of Nursing, and the College of Science and Engineering. A Seattle University education is estimated to cost $150,000.\nAlbers School of Business and Economics.\nSeattle University's Albers School of Business and Economics, started in 1945, was named after the Albers family. George and Eva Albers were frequent donors including Eva's bequest of $3 million to the school in 1971. Their daughter, alumna Genevieve Albers, has also made several bequests including a sponsored professorship. In 1967, the business school added an MBA program. The Albers School is accredited with the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB).\nCollege of Arts and Sciences.\nSeattle University College of Arts and Sciences in Seattle, Washington, is the oldest undergraduate and graduate college affiliated with Seattle University. The College offers 33 undergraduates majors, 28 undergraduates minors, 10 graduate degrees, and 4 post-graduate certificates to more than 2,000 students. Its graduate program in psychology is one of the few schools in the country to focus on existential phenomenology as a therapeutic method.\nDr. David V. Powers was the Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences for 15 years; he left in the summer of 2024 to take a sabbatical, planning to return afterward as a standard faculty member in the psychology department. Dr. Monica J. Casper replaced Powers as Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences on August 1, 2024, coming from San Diego State University, where she served the roles of Special Assistant to the President on Gender-Based Violence and Professor of Sociology.\nCornish College of the Arts.\nCornish College of the Arts was founded as a private art college in 1914 and operated independently until it was acquired by Seattle University in May 2025. It continues to operate primarily on its South Lake Union campus and offers 12 undergraduate majors and 46 concentrations in various studies of the fine arts.\nSchool of Law.\nSeattle University School of Law was founded in 1972 as part of the University of Puget Sound (UPS) in Tacoma, Washington. In 1993 the University of Puget Sound and Seattle University agreed on a transfer of the law school to Seattle University; in August 1994 the transfer was completed and the school physically moved to Sullivan Hall on the Seattle University campus in 1999. The 2019 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Law School rankings list the school at number 122 in the nation overall, adding that the school has the number one legal writing program in the nation as well as top-20 rankings for its part-time program and its clinical programs.\nCollege of Nursing.\nSeattle University's College of Nursing was founded in 1935. It is housed in the renovated Garrand Hall, the site of the original Seattle College and the oldest building on campus. The \"state of the art\" Clinical Performance Lab is located in the James Tower of Swedish on Cherry Hill, a few blocks away from the main campus. Undergraduate and graduate students use this lab to practice skills necessary for clinical nursing. The BSN and BS in Diagnostic Ultrasound programs accept transfer students from community colleges and other universities. The DNP program welcomes registered nurses with bachelor's degrees. The Advanced Practice Nursing Immersion program (APNI to DNP) offers an accelerated program for those with a bachelor's degree in another field.\nCollege of Education.\nThe College of Education was founded in 1935. It is accredited by the National Council of Accreditation of Teacher Education and the National Association of School Psychologists and approved by the National Association of School Psychologists.\nCollege of Science &amp; Engineering.\nThe College of Science and Engineering focuses on basic sciences, mathematics, and their applications. Students can major in basic science disciplines, computer science, or one of the engineering courses \u2013 civil and environmental engineering, mechanical engineering, or computer and electrical engineering. Students may also obtain an interdisciplinary general science degree, or prepare for graduate work in the health professions.\nEnvironmental sustainability.\nAmong Seattle University's many environmental undertakings are projects ranging from composting initiatives to water conservation. There are also solar panels on buildings and a central recycling yard with an extensive recycling program. The university has been composting since 1995, and in 2003 it built the first composting facility in the state on an urban campus. The campus is home to 5 LEED Gold Certified buildings.\nSeattle University received the Sustainability Innovator Award in 2007 from the Sustainable Endowments Institute for its pre-consumer food waste composting program and the Green Washington Award in 2008 from \"Washington CEO Magazine\" for its sustainable landscape practices and pre-consumer food waste composting program. \"The Princeton Review\"'s 2018 Green Rating rated the school as the #12 Green College in the country.\nSeattle U's move to a pesticide-free campus began in the early 1980s when Ciscoe Morris, now a local gardening personage, was head of the grounds department. He put a halt to chemical spraying and in its place released more than 20,000 beneficial insects called lacewings to eat the aphids that had infested trees on campus. The success of this led to other pesticide-free gardening practices.\nIn 2023, Seattle University became the first university in Washington state and the first Jesuit university to fully divest its endowment portfolio from fossil fuels.\nAthletics.\nBetween 1950 and 1971, Seattle University competed as a Division I independent school. In the 1950s, the basketball team was a powerhouse with brothers Johnny and Eddie O'Brien, who led the team to a rare victory over the Harlem Globetrotters. In 1958, future Basketball Hall of Famer Elgin Baylor paced a men's basketball team that advanced to the Final Four and defeated top-ranked Kansas State University before losing to the University of Kentucky. Seattle University was also a leader in the area of racial diversity, with an integrated squad known as \"the United Nations team.\"\nThe success of men's basketball, in addition to men's golf and baseball, continued into the 1960s with players Eddie Miles, Clint Richardson, and Tom Workman who went on to successful careers in the NBA. The 1966 basketball squad gave Texas Western University its only defeat in a championship season celebrated in the film \"Glory Road\".\nDuring that time women's tennis star Janet Hopps Adkisson was the first female to be the top-ranked player for both the men and women nationally. In women's golf, Pat Lesser was twice named to the Curtis Cup in the mid-1950s and was later inducted into the State of Washington Sports Hall of Fame.\nBefore 1980, more than 25 Seattle University baseball players went on to play professionally in both the major and minor leagues. Men's golf and a Tom Gorman-led tennis team were also rated nationally. Gorman went on to lead the US Davis Cup team, where he captained a record 18 match wins and one Davis Cup title (1972) as a player and two more Davis Cup championships as a coach (1990 and 1992).\nSeattle University joined the West Coast Conference in 1971. In 1980, it left the West Coast Conference and Division I membership and entered the NAIA, where it remained for nearly 20 years. In the late 1990s, President Fr. Sundborg started restoring the university's NCAA membership. The athletic program moved into Division II in the fall of 2002.\nThe school moved from Division II to Division I in 2009. Also in that year, the university hired men's basketball coach Cameron Dollar, a former assistant at the University of Washington, and women's coach Joan Bonvicini, former University of Arizona coach and one of the winningest women's college basketball coaches. In 2013, Coach Bonvicini led the Redhawks to the regular season Western Athletic Conference championship. In 2016, Suzy Barcomb was hired as the new coach for women's basketball after Coach Bonvicini resigned in March 2016. In her first season with Seattle U, Coach Barcomb led the Redhawks to a WAC tournament title and was the 15th seed in the NCAA Tournament where Seattle University faced the second seed, Oregon Ducks.\nIn 1938, the mascot switched from the Maroons to the Chieftains. The name was selected to honor the school's city's namesake, Chief Seattle. In 2000, the university changed its mascot to the Redhawks.\nOn June 14, 2011, Seattle University accepted an invitation to join the Western Athletic Conference, becoming a full member for the 2012\u20132013 season.\nIn May 2024, Seattle University announced its intention to rejoin the West Coast Conference for the 2025-26 season after a 45 year absence. When the announcement was made, it was expected that they would be joining the conference along with rival Grand Canyon University from the WAC while also having the opportunity to reignite a rivalry with Gonzaga, the other Jesuit University in Washington State. However, spurred on by the collapse of the PAC-12 and the resulting conference realignment, Gonzaga announced their intention to leave the WCC for the PAC-12 and GCU declined the invitation to join the WCC and instead announced their intention to move to the Mountain West Conference.\nKXSU-LP student-run radio.\nKXSU-LP (102.1 FM) is a low-power student-run radio station based on the Seattle University campus. Licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in 2016, the station began broadcasting as a campus-only operation in 1994 using the call sign KSUB and later it added internet service. Though it has an effective radiated power of just 7 watts, KXSU's primary and secondary coverage areas include the entire city and its immediate suburbs.\nKXSU's air staff consists primarily of students but also includes faculty and alumni. According to the university, the station gives students the opportunity to gain hands-on experience in writing, reporting, and broadcasting.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29201", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29201", "title": "Seattle Colleges District", "text": "Group of colleges in Seattle, Washington, U.S.\nThe Seattle Colleges District (previously Seattle Community Colleges District; also known simply as Seattle Colleges) is a group of public colleges in Seattle, Washington. It nowadays consists of three colleges\u2014North Seattle College, Seattle Central College, and South Seattle College. Together the colleges form the second largest institution of higher education in the state, behind the University of Washington, to which many of their graduates transfer.\nThe district's origins can be traced to 1902, with the opening of Broadway High School on Capitol Hill. It operated as a traditional high school until the end of World War II, when it was converted to a vocational and adult education institution for the benefit of veterans who wanted to finish high school but no longer fit in at regular schools. As a result, in 1946, Broadway High School was renamed Edison Technical School. Edison started offering college-level courses 21 years later, and it was reconstituted as Seattle Community College in September 1966.\nNorth Seattle Community College and South Seattle Community College opened their doors in 1970, whereupon Seattle Community College was renamed Seattle Central Community College.\nSeattle Central Community College was named Time magazine's Community College of the Year in 2001.\nIn March 2014, the board of trustees voted unanimously to change the name from \"Seattle Community Colleges District\" to \"Seattle Colleges District\" and to change the names of the colleges to \"Seattle Central College\", \"North Seattle College\" and \"South Seattle College\".\nIn 2018 Seattle Colleges partnered with the city of Seattle and Seattle Public Schools to launch Seattle Promise, a tuition covering program that aims to expand college access, success, and completion. Seattle Promise was part of the Families and Education Levy passed by citizens of Seattle during the local election of November 2018. Seattle Promise offers graduating seniors of Seattle public schools paid tuition for up to two years or 90 credits as well as academic support and advising when they attend Seattle Colleges.\nLeadership and Governance.\nThe chief executive officer of Seattle Colleges District is the chancellor. Presidents of each of the three colleges comprising Seattle Colleges\u2014North Seattle College, Seattle Central College, South Seattle College\u2014report to the chancellor. Seattle Colleges is governed by a board of trustees appointed by the governor and approved by the state Senate.\nPrograms of Study.\nSeattle Colleges offers more than 130 career and technical education programs and academic transfer programs organized by eight areas of study. These programs culminate in certificates and associate degrees, as well as a number of Bachelor of Applied Science degrees and college transfer options. The colleges also offer continuing education programs; concurrent high school enrollment and high school completion programs; and Adult Basic Education/English as a Second Language programs, and corporate and customized training.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29204", "revid": "47773670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29204", "title": "Summer of Love", "text": "1967 social phenomenon in San Francisco\nThe Summer of Love was a major social phenomenon that occurred in San Francisco during the summer of 1967. As many as 100,000 people, mostly young people, hippies, beatniks, and 1960s counterculture figures, converged in San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury district and Golden Gate Park. \nMore broadly, the Summer of Love encompassed hippie culture, spiritual awakening, hallucinogenic drugs, anti-war sentiment, and free love throughout the West Coast of the United States, and as far away as New York City. An episode of the PBS documentary series \"American Experience\" referred to the Summer of Love as \"the largest migration of young people in the history of America\".\nHippies, sometimes called flower children, were an eclectic group. Many opposed the Vietnam War, were suspicious of government, and rejected consumerist values. In the United States, counterculture groups rejected suburbia and the American way and instead opted for a communal lifestyle. Some hippies were active in political organization, whereas others were passive and more concerned with art (music, painting, poetry in particular) or spiritual and meditative practices. Many hippies took interest in ancient Indian religions, such as Hinduism and Buddhism.\nBackground.\nCulture of San Francisco.\nInspired by Jack Kerouac's \"On the Road\" (1957) and the Beat Generation of authors of the 1950s, who had flourished in the North Beach area of San Francisco, those who gathered in Haight-Ashbury during 1967 allegedly rejected the conformist and materialist values of modern life and adhered to the psychedelic movement; there was an emphasis on sharing and community. The Diggers established a Free Store, and Haight Ashbury Free Clinics was founded on June 7, 1967, where medical treatment was provided.\nHuman Be-In and inspiration.\nThe prelude to the Summer of Love was a celebration known as the Human Be-In at Golden Gate Park on January 14, 1967, which was produced and organized by artist Michael Bowen.\nIt was at this event that Timothy Leary voiced his phrase, \"turn on, tune in, drop out\". This phrase helped shape the entire hippie counterculture, as it voiced the key ideas of 1960s rebellion. These ideas included experimenting with psychedelics, communal living, political decentralization, and dropping out of society. The term \"dropping out\" became popular among many high school and college students, many of whom would abandon their conventional education for a summer or more of hippie culture.\nThe event was announced by the Haight-Ashbury's hippie newspaper, the \"San Francisco Oracle\":\nA new concept of celebration beneath the human underground must emerge, become conscious, and be shared, so a revolution can be formed with a renaissance of compassion, awareness, and love, and the revelation of unity for all mankind.\nThe gathering of approximately 30,000 at the Human Be-In helped publicize hippie fashions.\nPlanning.\nThe term \"Summer of Love\" originated with the formation of the \"Council for the Summer of Love\" during the spring of 1967 as a response to the convergence of young people on the Haight-Ashbury district. The council was composed of the Family Dog hippie commune, The Straight Theatre, The Diggers, \"The San Francisco Oracle\", and approximately 25 other people, who sought to alleviate some of the problems anticipated from the influx of young people expected during the summer. The council also assisted the Free Clinic and organized housing, food, sanitation, music and arts, along with maintaining coordination with local churches and other social groups. Psychedelic poster artist Bob Schnepf was commissioned by Chet Helms to create the official Summer of Love poster, which became a lasting icon of the era.\nBeginning.\nYouth arrivals.\nCollege students, high school students, and runaways began streaming into the Haight during the spring break of 1967. John F. Shelley, the then-Mayor of San Francisco and the San Francisco Board of Supervisors, determined to stop the influx of young people once schools ended for the summer, unwittingly brought additional attention to the scene, and a series of articles in the \"San Francisco Examiner\" and \"San Francisco Chronicle\" alerted the national media to the hippies' growing numbers. By spring, some Haight-Ashbury organizations including Diggers theater and about 25 residents responded by forming the \"Council of the Summer of Love\", giving the event a name.\n\"You only had to walk out your door to join the fun\"\u2014Mike Lafavore\nPopularization.\nThe media's coverage of hippie afflux in the Haight-Ashbury drew the attention of youth from all over America. Hunter S. Thompson termed the district \"Hashbury\" in \"The New York Times Magazine\".\nOn February 6, 1967, Newsweek printed a four-page four-color article titled \"Dropouts on a Mission\".\nOn March 17, 1967, \"Time\" magazine printed an article \"Love on Haight\".\nOn June 6, 1967, \"Newsweek\" printed \"The Hippies are Coming\".\nThe activities in the area were reported almost daily.\nThe event was also reported by the counterculture's own media, particularly the \"San Francisco Oracle\", the pass-around readership of which is thought to have exceeded a half-million people that summer, and the \"Berkeley Barb\".\nThe media's reportage of the \"counterculture\" included other events in California, such as the Fantasy Fair and Magic Mountain Music Festival in Marin County and the Monterey Pop Festival, both during June 1967. As many as 40,000 people may have attended the Magic Mountain festival. At Monterey, approximately 30,000 people gathered for the first day of the music festival, with the number increasing to 60,000 on the final day. Additionally, media coverage of the Monterey Pop Festival facilitated the Summer of Love as large numbers of hippies traveled to California to hear favorite bands such as the Who, Grateful Dead, the Animals, Jefferson Airplane, Quicksilver Messenger Service, the Jimi Hendrix Experience, Otis Redding, the Byrds, and Big Brother and the Holding Company featuring Janis Joplin.\nIn August of 1967, George Harrison visited San Francisco to visit the group of Haight-Ashbury hippies. He walked around the area strumming his guitar and interacted with the group. Many of the hippies asked him questions and were very excited to meet him as well as feeling that they had a kinship to him. He later described this experience in not the best light, as to him this environment was horrible and filled with bums.\n\"San Francisco (Be Sure to Wear Flowers in Your Hair)\".\nThe musician John Phillips of the band the Mamas &amp; the Papas wrote the song \"San Francisco (Be Sure to Wear Flowers in Your Hair)\" for his friend Scott McKenzie. It served to promote both the Monterey Pop Festival that Phillips was helping to organize, and to popularize the flower children of San Francisco. Released on May 13, 1967, the song was an instant success. By the week ending July 1, 1967, it reached number four on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in the United States, where it remained for four consecutive weeks. Meanwhile, the song charted at number one in the United Kingdom and much of Europe. The single is purported to have sold more than 7 million copies worldwide.\nThe Diggers.\nThe radical activist group called The Diggers embedded themselves in San Francisco in 1966. This group were anarchists that wanted to help other youth find liberation in this city. In addition to their free store, this group created a free publication called \"The Digger Papers,\" where they spread their message further. In \"The Digger Papers,\" the group provided information on resources for food, shelter, drug use, and human rights information. Their crucial message in San Francisco is to define a free society, everything they created or endorsed was free, and to further their messages about life and how to live it.\nEvents.\nNew York City.\nIn Manhattan, near the Greenwich Village neighborhood, during a concert in Tompkins Square Park on Memorial Day of 1967, some police officers asked for the music's volume to be reduced. In response, some people in the crowd threw various objects, and 38 arrests ensued. A debate about the \"threat of the hippie\" ensued between Mayor John Lindsay and Police Commissioner Howard R. Leary. After this event, Allan Katzman, the editor of the \"East Village Other\", predicted that 50,000 hippies would enter the area for the summer. \nCalifornia.\nDouble in size of the Tompkins Square Park concert, as many as 100,000 young people from around the world flocked to San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury district, as well as to nearby Berkeley and to other San Francisco Bay Area cities, to join in a popularized version of the hippie culture. A Free Clinic was established for free medical treatment, and a Free Store gave away basic necessities without charge to anyone who needed them.\nThe Summer of Love attracted a wide range of people of various ages: teenagers and college students drawn by their peers and the allure of joining an alleged cultural utopia; middle-class vacationers; and even partying military personnel from bases within driving distance. The Haight-Ashbury could not accommodate this influx of people, and the neighborhood scene quickly deteriorated, with overcrowding, homelessness, hunger, drug problems, and crime afflicting the neighborhood.\nDenver.\nChet Helms, Barry Fey and others who were constructing The Family Dog Denver in the summer of 1967 also held a Human Be-In, in Denver's City Park, with the goal of harnessing the Summer of Love vibe to promote Helm's new Family Dog Productions venture, which opened in September, 1967. 5,000 people attended the Be-In, with performances by bands like the Grateful Dead, Odetta and Captain Beefheart. Ken Kesey and Timothy Leary were also reportedly in attendance. As Denver native Bruce Bond states in the 2021 documentary \"The Tale of the Dog,\" \"It's not like the Summer of Love ended in Frisco. It just moved east, to Denver.\"\nUse of drugs.\nPsychedelic drug use became common. Grateful Dead guitarist Bob Weir commented:\nHaight Ashbury was a ghetto of bohemians who wanted to do anything\u2014and we did but I don't think it has happened since. Yes there was LSD. But Haight Ashbury was not about drugs. It was about exploration, finding new ways of expression, being aware of one's existence.\nAfter losing his untenured position as an instructor on the Psychology faculty at Harvard University, Timothy Leary became a major advocate for the recreational use of psychedelic drugs. After starting taking psilocybin in the late fifties, a psychoactive chemical produced by certain mushrooms that causes effects similar to those of LSD, Leary endorsed the use of all psychedelics for personal development. He often invited friends as well as an occasional graduate student to consume such drugs along with him and colleague Richard Alpert.\nOn the West Coast, author Ken Kesey, a prior volunteer for a CIA-started LSD experiment in 1959, advocated the use of LSD. Soon after participating, he was inspired to write the bestselling novel \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\". Subsequently, after buying an old school bus, painting it with psychedelic graffiti and attracting a group of similarly minded individuals he dubbed the Merry Pranksters, Kesey and his group traveled across the country, hosting \"acid tests\" where they would fill a large container with a diluted low dose form of the drug and give out diplomas to those who passed their test.\nAlong with LSD, cannabis started to be much used during this period. However, new laws were subsequently enacted to control the use of both drugs. The users thereof often had sessions to oppose the laws, including The Human Be-In referenced above as well as various \"smoke-ins\" during July and August; however, their efforts at repeal were unsuccessful.\nFuneral and aftermath.\nBy the end of summer, many participants had left the scene to join the back-to-the-land movement of the late 1960s, to resume school studies, or simply to \"get a job\". Those remaining in the Haight wanted to commemorate the conclusion of the event. A mock funeral entitled \"The Death of the Hippie\" ceremony was staged on October 6, 1967, and organizer Mary Kasper explained the intended message:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We wanted to signal that this was the end of it, to stay where you are, bring the revolution to where you live and don't come here because it's over and done with.\nIn New York, the rock musical drama \"Hair\", which told the story of the hippie counterculture and sexual revolution of the 1960s, began Off-Broadway on October 17, 1967.\nLegacy.\nSecond Summer of Love.\nThe \"Second Summer of Love\" (a term which generally refers to the summers of both 1988 and 1989) was a renaissance of acid house music and rave parties in Britain. The culture supported MDMA use and some LSD use. The art had a generally psychedelic emotion reminiscent of the 1960s.\nSoviet \"Flower Children\".\nBehind the Iron Curtain, hippies inspired a counter-cultural movement, \"Flower Children\", nicknamed for the flowers typically in their hair. The hippies' boho fashion style, anti-war, and even expressions, such as \"Make love, not war,\" were used by the Flower Children. While they took inspiration from hippies in fashion, beliefs and protest, they used it to protest the particular repression they faced under a pre-Perestroika Soviet Union. \n40th anniversary.\nDuring the summer of 2007, San Francisco celebrated the 40th anniversary of the Summer of Love by holding numerous events around the region, culminating on September 2, 2007, when over 150,000 people attended the 40th anniversary of the Summer of Love concert, held in Golden Gate Park in Speedway Meadows. It was produced by 2b1 Multimedia and the Council of Light.\n50th anniversary.\nIn 2016, 2b1 Multimedia and The Council of Light, once again, began the planning for the 50th Anniversary of the Summer of Love in Golden Gate Park in San Francisco. By the beginning of 2017, the council had gathered about 25 poster artists, about 10 of whom submitted their finished art, but it was never printed. The council was also contacted by many bands and musicians who wanted to be part of this historic event, all were waiting for the date to be determined before a final commitment. New rules enforced by the San Francisco Parks and Recreational Department (PRD) prohibited the council from holding a free event of the proposed size. There were many events planned for San Francisco in 2017, many of which were 50th Anniversary-themed. However, there was no free concert. The PRD later hosted an event originally called \"Summer Solstice Party,\" but it was later renamed \"50th Anniversary of the Summer of Love\" two weeks before commencement. The event had fewer than 20,000 attendees from the local Bay Area.\nIn frustration, producer Boots Hughston put the proposal of what was by then to be a 52nd anniversary free concert into the form of an initiative intended for the November 6, 2018, ballot. The issue did not make the ballot; however, a more generic Proposition E provides for directing hotel tax fees to a $32 million budget for \"arts and cultural organizations and projects in the city.\"\nDuring the summer of 2017, San Francisco celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Summer of Love by holding numerous events and art exhibitions.\nIn Liverpool, the city has staged a 50 Summers of Love festival based on the 50th anniversary of the June 1, 1967, release of the album \"Sgt Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\", by the Beatles.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29205", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29205", "title": "Schrodinger's cat", "text": ""}
{"id": "29207", "revid": "913893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29207", "title": "Skyhooks (band)", "text": "Australian rock band\nSkyhooks were an Australian rock band formed in Melbourne in 1973. Their classic lineup (1974\u20131977) comprised Graeme \"Shirley\" Strachan (vocals), Greg Macainsh (bass and backing vocals), Red Symons (guitar, vocals, keyboards), Bob \"Bongo\" Starkie (guitar and backing vocals), and Imants \"Freddie\" Strauks (drums).\nKnown for their flamboyant costumes and makeup, their music addressed a variety of issues including drugs, sex, and the gay scene while frequently referencing Australian places and culture. Evolving from a series of groups with Macainsh and Strauks in the late 1960s and early 1970s, they rose to national prominence when their debut album \"Living in the 70's\" (1974), which was initially a moderate success upon release, gained unprecedented popularity the following year, aided by the nascent ABC music show \"Countdown\"; the album topped the Australian Kent Music Report chart for a record-breaking 16 weeks and sold over 200,000 copies, becoming the best-selling Australian album at the time. Their second album \"Ego Is Not a Dirty Word\" (1975) topped the Kent Music Report for 11 weeks.\nSymons and Strachan left in 1977 and 1978 respectively and became media personalities; Symons was replaced with Bob Spencer and Strachan was replaced with Tony Williams, before they disbanded in 1980. The classic lineup reunited four times in the ensuing years, with reunions in 1990 and 1994 producing new material, including the number-one song \"Jukebox in Siberia\" in 1990. Strachan died in a helicopter crash in 2001; original lead singer Steve Hill, who left and was replaced by Strachan, died in 2005, and original guitarist Peter Starkie died in 2020.\nMusic historian Ian McFarlane stated that the band \"made an enormous impact on Australian social life\". In 1992, the group was inducted into the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) Hall of Fame. In 2011, the Skyhooks album \"Living in the 70's\" was added to the National Film and Sound Archive of Australia's Sounds of Australia registry.\nHistory.\n1966\u20131974: Early years and formation.\nGreg Macainsh and Imants \"Freddie\" Strauks both attended Norwood High School in the Melbourne suburb of Ringwood and formed Spare Parts in 1966 with Macainsh on bass guitar and Strauks on lead vocals. Spare Parts was followed by Sound Pump in 1968, Macainsh formed Reuben Tice in Eltham, with Tony Williams on vocals. By 1970 Macainsh was back with Strauks, now on drums, first in Claptrap and by 1971 in Frame which had Graeme \"Shirley\" Strachan as lead vocalist. Frame also included Pat O'Brien on guitar and Cynthio Ooms on guitar. Strachan had befriended Strauks earlier\u2014he sang with Strauks on the way to parties\u2014and was asked to join Claptrap which was renamed as Frame. Strachan stayed in Frame for about 18 months but left for a career in carpentry and a hobby of surfing in Phillip Island.\nSkyhooks formed in March 1973 in Melbourne with Steve Hill on vocals (ex-Lillee), Peter Inglis on guitar (The Captain Matchbox Whoopee Band), Macainsh on bass guitar and backing vocals, Peter Starkie on guitar and backing vocals (Lipp &amp; the Double Dekker Brothers) and Strauks on drums and backing vocals. The name, Skyhooks, came from a fictional organisation in the 1956 film \"Earth vs. the Flying Saucers\". Their first gig was on 16 April 1973 at St Jude's Church hall in Carlton. At a later gig, former Daddy Cool frontman, Ross Wilson was playing in his group Mighty Kong with Skyhooks as a support act. Wilson was impressed with the fledgling band and signed Macainsh to a publishing deal. In August, Bob \"Bongo\" Starkie (Mary Jane Union) on guitar replaced his older brother Peter (later in Jo Jo Zep &amp; The Falcons) and Inglis was replaced by Red Symons on guitar, vocals and keyboards. The two new members added a touch of theatre and humour to the band's visual presence. By late 1973, Wilson had convinced Michael Gudinski to sign the band to his booking agency, Australian Entertainment Exchange, and eventually to Gudinski's label, Mushroom Records.\nSkyhooks gained a cult following around Melbourne including university intelligentsia and pub rockers, but a poorly received show at the January 1974 Sunbury Pop Festival saw the group booed off stage. Two tracks from their live set, \"Hey What's the Matter?\" and \"Love on the Radio\" appeared on Mushroom's \"Highlights of Sunbury '74\". After seeing his performance on TV, Hill phoned Macainsh and resigned. To replace Hill, in March, Macainsh recruited occasional singer, surfer and carpenter Strachan from his Frame era. Strachan had been dubbed \"Shirley\" by fellow surfers due to his curly blond hair \"a la\" Shirley Temple.\n1974\u20131975: \"Living in the 70's\".\nFor Skyhooks, the replacement of Hill by Strachan was a pivotal moment, as Strachan had remarkable vocal skills, and a magnetic stage and screen presence. Alongside Macainsh's lyrics, another facet of the group was the twin-guitar sound of Starkie and Symons. Adopting elements of glam rock in their presentation, and lyrics that presented frank depictions of the social life of young Australia in the 1970s, the band shocked conservative middle Australia with their outrageous (for the time) costumes, make-up, lyrics, and on-stage activities. A 1.2-metre (4\u00a0ft) high mushroom-shaped phallus was confiscated by Adelaide police after a performance. Six of the ten tracks on their debut album, \"Living in the 70's\", were banned by the Federation of Australian Commercial Broadcasters for their sex and drug references: \"Toorak Cowboy\", \"Whatever Happened to the Revolution?\", \"You Just Like Me Cos I'm Good in Bed\", \"Hey What's the Matter\", \"Motorcycle Bitch\" and \"Smut\". Much of the group's success derived from its distinctive repertoire, mostly penned by bass guitarist Macainsh, with an occasional additional song from Symons\u2014who wrote \"Smut\" and performed its lead vocals. Although Skyhooks were not the first Australian rock band to write songs in a local setting\u2014rather than ditties about love or songs about New York City or other foreign lands\u2014they were the first to become commercially successful doing so. Skyhooks songs addressed teenage issues including buying drugs (\"Carlton (Lygon Street Limbo)\"), suburban sex (\"Balwyn Calling\"), the gay scene (\"Toorak Cowboy\") and loss of girlfriends (\"Somewhere in Sydney\") by namechecking Australian locales. Radio personality, Billy Pinnell described the importance of their lyrics in tackling Australia's cultural cringe:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Macainsh] broke down all the barriers [...] opening the door for Australian rock 'n' roll songwriters to write about local places and events. He legitimised Australian songwriting and it meant that Australians became themselves.\u2014\u200a\nThe first Skyhooks single, \"Living in the 70's\", was released in August 1974, ahead of the album, and peaked at No. 28 on the Australian Kent Music Report Singles Charts. The album, \"Living in the 70's\" initially charted only in Melbourne upon its release on 7 October 1974. It went on to spend 16 weeks at the top of the Australian Kent Music Report Albums Charts from February to June 1975. The album was produced by Wilson, and became the best selling Australian album, to that time, with 226,000 copies sold in Australia.\nSkyhooks returned to the Sunbury Pop Festival in January 1975. They were declared the best performers by \"Rolling Stone Australia\" and \"The Age\" reviewers, and Gudinski now took over their management. The second single, \"Horror Movie\", reached No. 1 for two weeks in March. The band's success was credited by Gudinski with saving his struggling Mushroom Records and enabled it to develop into the most successful Australian label of its time.\nThe success of the album was also due to support by a new pop music television show \"Countdown\" on national public broadcaster ABC Television, rather than promotion by commercial radio. \"Horror Movie\" was the first song played on the first colour transmission of \"Countdown\" in early 1975. Despite the radio ban, the ABC's newly established 24-hour rock music station Double Jay chose the album's fifth track, the provocatively titled \"You Just Like Me Cos I'm Good in Bed\", as its first ever broadcast on 19 January.\n1975\u20131976: \"Ego Is Not a Dirty Word\".\nSkyhooks' 1975 national tour promoting \"Living in the 70's\" finished at Melbourne's Festival Hall with their ANZAC Day (25 April) performance. They were supported by comedy singer Bob Hudson, heavy rockers AC/DC and New Zealand band Split Enz. Strachan then took two weeks off and considered leaving the band, but he returned \u2013 newly married \u2013 and they continued recording the follow-up album, \"Ego Is Not a Dirty Word\". Initially, they were locked out of the recording studio until their manager, Gudinski, sent down the money still owed for recording the first album. \"Ego Is Not a Dirty Word\" spent 11 weeks at the top of the Australian album chart from 21 July 1975, and sold 210,000 copies. with the single, \"Ego Is Not a Dirty Word\" issued in April ahead of the album, peaking at No. 2. The next single, \"All My Friends Are Getting Married\" reached No. 2 in July, and was followed by \"Million Dollar Riff\" at No. 6 in October. Macainsh's then girlfriend, Jenny Brown, described the band in her 1975 book, \"Skyhooks : Million Dollar Riff\". A live version of Chuck Berry's \"Let It Rock\" from a December performance was released as a single in March 1976 and reached No. 26.\nWith Australian commercial success achieved, Skyhooks turned to the US market. Gudinski announced a $1.5\u00a0million deal with Mercury Records/Phonogram Records, which released a modified international version of \"Ego Is Not a Dirty Word\" with \"Horror Movie\" and \"You Just Like Me Cos I'm Good in Bed\" from their first Australian album replacing two tracks. A US tour followed in March\u2013April 1976, but critics described them as imitators of Kiss due to the similarity of Symons' make-up and stage act to that of Gene Simmons, and despite limited success in Boston, Massachusetts and Jacksonville, Florida they failed to make inroads into the general US market.\nAfter completing their 1976 US tour, the band remained in San Francisco and recorded their third album with Wilson producing, \"Straight in a Gay Gay World\", which was released in August 1976 and peaked at No. 3 on the Australian album charts. In July, upon return to Australia they launched The Brats Are Back Tour with a single, \"This Is My City\", which peaked at number 32. \"Blue Jeans\" followed in August and peaked at No. 12 on the singles chart. By October, Strachan provided his debut solo single, \"Every Little Bit Hurts\" (a cover of Brenda Holloway's 1964 hit).\n1977\u20131981: Later years to break-up.\nIn February 1977, Symons left the band and was replaced on guitar by Bob Spencer from the band Finch. With Symons' departure the band dropped the glam rock look and used a more straight forward hard rock approach. During that year Skyhooks toured nationally three times, while their first single with Spencer, \"Party to End All Parties\", entered the top 30 in May. Strachan released his second solo single, a cover of Smokey Robinson's \"Tracks of My Tears\", which reached the top 20 in July. Meanwhile, Mushroom released a singles anthology, \"The Skyhooks Tapes\", which entered the top 50 in September. The band's mass popularity had declined although they still kept their live performances exciting and irreverent.\nIn January 1978 they toured New Zealand and performed at the Nambassa festival. In February their next single, \"Women in Uniform\", was issued and peaked at No. 8, while its album \"Guilty Until Proven Insane\" followed in March and reached No. 7. The album was produced by Americans Eddie Leonetti and Jack Douglas. The second single from the album, \"Meglomania\" released in May, peaked at number 93. Strachan told band members he intended to leave\u2014but it was not officially announced for six months\u2014he continued regular shows until his final gig with Skyhooks on 29 July 1978. Strachan released further solo singles, \"Mr Summer\" in October and \"Nothing but the Best\" in January 1979, but neither charted in the top 50. Strachan's replacement in Skyhooks, on lead vocals, was Tony Williams (ex-Reuben Tice with Macainsh).\nWilliams' first single for Skyhooks, \"Over the Border\", a political song about the state of the Queensland Police Force at the time, reached the top 40 in April 1979, and their fifth studio album, \"Hot for the Orient\", was released in May 1980, but failed to enter the top 50.\nFrom 1975 to 1977, Skyhooks were\u2014alongside Sherbet\u2014the most commercially successful group in Australia, but over the next few years, Skyhooks rapidly faded from the public eye with the departure of key members, and in 1980 the band announced its break-up in controversial circumstances. Ian \"Molly\" Meldrum, usually a supporter of Skyhooks, savaged \"Hot for the Orient\" on his \"Humdrum\" segment of \"Countdown\"\u2014viewers demanded that the band appear on a following show to defend it. Poor reception of the album both by the public and reviewers led the band to take out a page-sized ad in the local music press declaring \"Why Don't You All Get Fu**ed\" (title of one of their songs) and they played their last performance on 8 June, not in their hometown of Melbourne, but in the mining town of Kalgoorlie in Western Australia.\n1982\u20131999: Reformations and later releases.\nIn December 1982, Mushroom released a medley of Skyhooks songs as \"Hooked on Hooks\" which peaked at No. 21. Demands for the \"classic\" line-up of the band\u2014Macainsh, Bob Starkie, Strachan, Strauks and Symons\u2014to reform were successful and on 23 April 1983, they started the Living in the 80's Tour. Support acts for the first concert included The Church, Mental as Anything, The Party Boys, The Sunnyboys, and Midnight Oil\u2014who acknowledged, \"Hooks were the only Australian band they would let top the bill above them\". This tour was released on LP as \"Live in the 80's\".\nA one-off reunion concert took place in October 1984, and in 1990 the band finally recorded new material, including \"Jukebox in Siberia\", released in September, which peaked at the top of the ARIA Singles Charts for two weeks. In November, \"The Latest and Greatest\", a compilation album, was released, which peaked at No. 4 on the ARIA Albums Charts. The tracks were taken from Skyhooks' first four studio albums along with two recent singles, \"Jukebox In Siberia\" and the uncharted \"Tall Timber\".\nIn 1992, Skyhooks were inducted into the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) Hall of Fame, while their manager, Gudunski, and record label, Mushroom Records, received a 'Special Achievement Award'. Producer of their first three albums, Wilson, had been inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1989 as an individual and again as a member of Daddy Cool in 2006.\nThe final release of new Skyhooks material came in June 1999 when a twin-CD, \"Skyhooks: The Collection\", was issued. Disc one contained a greatest hits package, very similar to \"The Latest and Greatest\", with additional tracks. Disc two is referred to by fans as \"The Lost Album\", with previously unreleased songs from their 1990 and 1994 recording sessions.\nAfter Skyhooks.\nStrachan and Symons each went on to successful careers in Australian media including radio and television. Symons worked as a breakfast presenter on ABC radio and wrote humorous newspaper columns after being on the TV show \"Hey Hey It's Saturday\" as a house band member and judge of the Red Faces segment. Starkie played locally with different bands including Ol' Skydaddys, and Ram Band. Strauks was drummer for Melbourne rock band The Sports, Jo Jo Zep &amp; The Falcons, folk band The Bushwackers and the Ol' Skydaddys. Macainsh played with John Farnham on his Whispering Jack Tour and with Dave Warner's from the Suburbs, in 1988 he put together and managed a successful AC/DC tribute band called Back in Black who went on to support Skyhooks on their comeback tour. He was a board member of Australasian Performing Right Association (APRA) (1997\u20132000) and Phonographic Performance Company of Australia (PPCA) (2001\u20132006), and is an intellectual property lawyer.\nStrachan was killed in an air crash on 29 August 2001, when the helicopter he was learning to fly solo crashed into Mount Archer near Kilcoy, northwest of Brisbane. A memorial concert was held on 11 September 2001 at the Palais Theatre, tributes were paid and some remaining members\u2014Strauks, Macainsh, Starkie, Symons and Spencer\u2014performed with guest vocalists Daryl Braithwaite and Wilson. It is the only time Symons and his replacement, Spencer performed together on stage. Braithwaite performed \"All My Friends Are Getting Married\" with the band while Wilson sang the rare Skyhooks track \"Warm Wind in the City\".\nThe 30th anniversary of the release of the \"Living in the 70's\" album was commemorated in 2004, with different incarnations of the band performing. Absent were Strachan, Hill and Inglis. Vocals were performed by Wilson, Williams and Bob Starkie. The original line-up of Skyhooks, including Hill, reformed in 2005 at the Annandale Hotel in Sydney for a one-off gig, a benefit for Hill, who had been diagnosed with liver cancer. The line-up of Inglis, Peter Starkie, Strauks and Macainsh joined him onstage. Hill died six weeks later. In November 2009, the \"Skyhooks Tour Archive\", displayed on the band's website, listed 925 live shows.\nMacainsh, Starkie and Strauks appeared as Skyhooks at the 2009 Helpmann Awards in Sydney. They performed \"Women in Uniform\" with Australian rock singer, Jimmy Barnes. Symons was also slated to perform with the band, but was replaced by Diesel on guitar after withdrawing a few days before the show.\nOriginal guitarist Peter Starkie died of complications after a fall, in mid-September 2020, at the age of 72. Guitarist Bob Starkie died from leukaemia on 29 November 2025, at the age of 73.\nDiscography.\nKing of Pop Awards.\n were voted by the readers of TV Week. The King of Pop award started in 1967 and ran through to 1978.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29208", "revid": "7920814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29208", "title": "Square root", "text": "Number whose square is a given number\nIn mathematics, a square root of a number x is a number y such that formula_1; in other words, a number y whose \"square\" (the result of multiplying the number by itself, or formula_2) is x. For example, 4 and \u22124 are square roots of 16 because formula_3.\nEvery nonnegative real number x has a unique nonnegative square root, called the \"principal square root\" or simply \"the square root\" (with a definite article, see below), which is denoted by formula_4 where the symbol \"formula_5\" is called the \"radical sign\" or \"radix\". For example, to express the fact that the principal square root of 9 is 3, we write formula_6. The term (or number) whose square root is being considered is known as the \"radicand\". The radicand is the number or expression underneath the radical sign, in this case, 9. For non-negative x, the principal square root can also be written in exponent notation, as formula_7.\nEvery positive number x has two square roots: formula_8 (which is positive) and formula_9 (which is negative). The two roots can be written more concisely using the \u00b1\u00a0sign as formula_10. Although the principal square root of a positive number is only one of its two square roots, the designation \"\"the\" square root\" is often used to refer to the principal square root.\nSquare roots of negative numbers can be discussed within the framework of complex numbers. More generally, square roots can be considered in any context in which a notion of the \"square\" of a mathematical object is defined. These include function spaces and square matrices, among other mathematical structures.\nHistory.\nThe Yale Babylonian Collection clay tablet YBC 7289 was created between 1800\u00a0BC and 1600\u00a0BC, showing formula_11 and formula_12 respectively as 1;24,51,10 and 0;42,25,35 base 60 numbers on a square crossed by two diagonals. (1;24,51,10) base 60 corresponds to 1.41421296, which is correct to 5 decimal places (1.41421356...).\nThe Rhind Mathematical Papyrus is a copy from 1650\u00a0BC of an earlier Berlin Papyrus and other texts\u00a0\u2013 possibly the Kahun Papyrus\u00a0\u2013 that shows how the Egyptians extracted square roots by an inverse proportion method.\nIn Ancient India, the knowledge of theoretical and applied aspects of square and square root was at least as old as the \"Sulba Sutras\", dated around 800\u2013500\u00a0BC (possibly much earlier). A method for finding very good approximations to the square roots of 2 and 3 are given in the \"Baudhayana Sulba Sutra\". Apastamba who was dated around 600 BCE has given a strikingly accurate value for formula_11 which is correct up to five decimal places as formula_14.\n Aryabhata, in the \"Aryabhatiya\" (section 2.4), has given a method for finding the square root of numbers having many digits.\nIt was known to the ancient Greeks that square roots of positive integers that are not perfect squares are always irrational numbers: numbers not expressible as a ratio of two integers (that is, they cannot be written exactly as formula_15, where m and n are integers). This is the theorem \"Euclid X, 9\", almost certainly due to Theaetetus dating back to c.\u2009380\u00a0BC.\nThe discovery of irrational numbers, including the particular case of the square root of 2, is widely associated with the Pythagorean school. Although some accounts attribute the discovery to Hippasus, the specific contributor remains uncertain due to the scarcity of primary sources and the secretive nature of the brotherhood. It is exactly the length of the diagonal of a square with side length 1.\nIn the Chinese mathematical work \"Writings on Reckoning\", written between 202\u00a0BC and 186\u00a0BC during the early Han dynasty, the square root is approximated by using an \"excess and deficiency\" method, which says to \"...combine the excess and deficiency as the divisor; (taking) the deficiency numerator multiplied by the excess denominator and the excess numerator times the deficiency denominator, combine them as the dividend.\"\nA symbol for square roots, written as an elaborate R, was invented by Regiomontanus (1436\u20131476). An R was also used for radix to indicate square roots in Gerolamo Cardano's \"Ars Magna\".\nAccording to historian of mathematics D.E. Smith, Aryabhata's method for finding the square root was first introduced in Europe by Cataneo\u2014in 1546.\nAccording to Jeffrey A. Oaks, Arabs used the letter \"j\u012bm/\u011d\u012bm\" (), the first letter of the word \"\" (variously transliterated as \"ja\u1e0fr\", \"ji\u1e0fr\", \"\u01e7a\u1e0fr\" or \"\u01e7i\u1e0fr\", \"root\"), placed in its initial form () over a number to indicate its square root. The letter \"j\u012bm\" resembles the present square root shape. Its usage goes as far as the end of the twelfth century in the works of the Moroccan mathematician Ibn al-Yasamin.\nThe symbol \"\u221a\" for the square root was first used in print in 1525, in Christoph Rudolff's \"Coss\".\nProperties and uses.\nThe principal square root function formula_16 (usually just referred to as the \"square root function\") is a function that maps the set of nonnegative real numbers onto itself. In geometrical terms, the square root function maps the area of a square to its side length.\nThe square root of x is rational if and only if x is a rational number that can be represented as a ratio of two perfect squares. (See square root of 2 for proofs that this is an irrational number, and quadratic irrational for a proof for all non-square natural numbers.) The square root function maps rational numbers into algebraic numbers, the latter being a superset of the rational numbers).\nFor all real numbers x,formula_17 (see absolute value).\nFor all nonnegative real numbers x and y,formula_18\nand\nformula_19\nThe square root function is continuous for all nonnegative x, and differentiable for all positive x. If \"f\" denotes the square root function, whose derivative is given by:formula_20\nThe Taylor series of formula_21 about \"x\" = 0 converges for , and is given by\nformula_22\nThe square root of a nonnegative number is used in the definition of Euclidean norm (and distance), as well as in generalizations such as Hilbert spaces. It defines an important concept of standard deviation used in probability theory and statistics. It has a major use in the formula for solutions of a quadratic equation. Quadratic fields and rings of quadratic integers, which are based on square roots, are important in algebra and have uses in geometry. Square roots frequently appear in mathematical formulas elsewhere, as well as in many physical laws.\nSquare roots of positive integers.\nA positive number has two square roots, one positive, and one negative, which are opposite to each other. When talking of \"the\" square root of a positive integer, it is usually the positive square root that is meant.\nThe square roots of an integer are algebraic integers\u2014more specifically quadratic integers.\nThe square root of a positive integer is the product of the roots of its prime factors, because the square root of a product is the product of the square roots of the factors. Since formula_23 only roots of those primes having an odd power in the factorization are necessary. More precisely, the square root of a prime factorization isformula_24 \nAs decimal expansions.\nThe square roots of the perfect squares (e.g., 0, 1, 4, 9, 16) are integers. In all other cases, the square roots of positive integers are irrational numbers, and hence have non-repeating decimals in their decimal representations. Decimal approximations of the square roots of the first few natural numbers are given in the following table.\nAs expansions in other numeral systems.\nAs with before, the square roots of the perfect squares (e.g., 0, 1, 4, 9, 16) are integers. In all other cases, the square roots of positive integers are irrational numbers, and therefore have non-repeating digits in any standard positional notation system.\nThe square roots of small integers are used in both the SHA-1 and SHA-2 hash function designs to provide nothing up my sleeve numbers.\nAs periodic continued fractions.\nA result from the study of irrational numbers as simple continued fractions was obtained by Joseph Louis Lagrange c.\u20091780. Lagrange found that the representation of the square root of any non-square positive integer as a continued fraction is periodic. That is, a certain pattern of partial denominators repeats indefinitely in the continued fraction. In a sense these square roots are the very simplest irrational numbers, because they can be represented with a simple repeating pattern of integers.\nThe square bracket notation used above is a short form for a continued fraction. Written in the more suggestive algebraic form, the simple continued fraction for the square root of 11, [3; 3, 6, 3, 6, ...], looks like this:formula_25\nwhere the two-digit pattern {3, 6} repeats over and over again in the partial denominators. Since 11 = 32 + 2, the above is also identical to the following generalized continued fractions:\nformula_26\nComputation.\nSquare roots of positive numbers are not in general rational numbers, and so cannot be written as a terminating or recurring decimal expression. Therefore in general any attempt to compute a square root expressed in decimal form can only yield an approximation, though a sequence of increasingly accurate approximations can be obtained.\nMost pocket calculators have a square root key. Computer spreadsheets and other software are also frequently used to calculate square roots. Pocket calculators typically implement efficient routines, such as the Newton's method (frequently with an initial guess of 1), to compute the square root of a positive real number. When computing square roots with logarithm tables or slide rules, one can exploit the identitiesformula_27\nwhere ln and log10 are the natural and base-10 logarithms.\nBy trial-and-error, one can square an estimate for formula_28 and raise or lower the estimate until it agrees to sufficient accuracy. For this technique it is prudent to use the identityformula_29\nas it allows one to adjust the estimate x by some amount c and measure the square of the adjustment in terms of the original estimate and its square.\nThe most common iterative method of square root calculation by hand is known as the \"Babylonian method\" or \"Heron's method\" after the first-century Greek philosopher Heron of Alexandria, who first described it. The method uses the same iterative scheme as the Newton\u2013Raphson method yields when applied to the function \"y\" = \"f\"(\"x\") = \"x\"2 \u2212 \"a\", using the fact that its slope at any point is \"dy\"/\"dx\" = \"f\u2032\"(\"x\") = 2\"x\", but predates it by many centuries. The algorithm is to repeat a simple calculation that results in a number closer to the actual square root each time it is repeated with its result as the new input. The motivation is that if x is an overestimate to the square root of a nonnegative real number a then \"a\"/\"x\" will be an underestimate and so the average of these two numbers is a better approximation than either of them. However, the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means shows this average is always an overestimate of the square root (as noted below), and so it can serve as a new overestimate with which to repeat the process, which converges as a consequence of the successive overestimates and underestimates being closer to each other after each iteration. To find x:\nThat is, if an arbitrary guess for formula_28 is \"x\"0, and \"x\"\"n\" + 1 = (\"xn\" + \"a\"/\"xn\") / 2, then each \"x\"\"n\" is an approximation of formula_28 which is better for large n than for small n. If a is positive, the convergence is quadratic, which means that in approaching the limit, the number of correct digits roughly doubles in each next iteration. If \"a\" = 0, the convergence is only linear; however, formula_32 so in this case no iteration is needed.\nUsing the identityformula_33\nthe computation of the square root of a positive number can be reduced to that of a number in the range [1, 4). This simplifies finding a start value for the iterative method that is close to the square root, for which a polynomial or piecewise-linear approximation can be used.\nThe time complexity for computing a square root with n digits of precision is equivalent to that of multiplying two n-digit numbers.\nAnother useful method for calculating the square root is the shifting nth root algorithm, applied for \"n\" = 2.\nThe name of the square root function varies from programming language to programming language, with codice_1 (often pronounced \"squirt\") being common, used in C and derived languages such as C++, JavaScript, PHP, and Python.\nSquare roots of negative and complex numbers.\nThe square of any positive or negative number is positive, and the square of 0 is 0. Therefore, no negative number can have a real square root. However, it is possible to work with a more inclusive set of numbers, called the complex numbers, that does contain solutions to the square root of a negative number. This is done by introducing a new number, denoted by \"i\" (sometimes by \"j\", especially in the context of electricity where \"i\" traditionally represents electric current) and called the imaginary unit, which is \"defined\" such that \"i\"2 = \u22121. Using this notation, we can think of \"i\" as the square root of \u22121, but we also have (\u2212\"i\")2 = \"i\"2 = \u22121 and so \u2212\"i\" is also a square root of \u22121. By convention, the principal square root of \u22121 is \"i\", or more generally, if \"x\" is any nonnegative number, then the principal square root of \u2212\"x\" is\nformula_34\nThe right side (as well as its negative) is indeed a square root of \u2212\"x\", sinceformula_35\nFor every non-zero complex number z there exist precisely two numbers w such that \"w\"2 = \"z\": the principal square root of z (defined below), and its negative.\nPrincipal square root of a complex number.\nTo find a definition for the square root that allows us to consistently choose a single value, called the principal value, we start by observing that any complex number formula_36 can be viewed as a point in the plane, formula_37 expressed using Cartesian coordinates. The same point may be reinterpreted using polar coordinates as the pair formula_38 where formula_39 is the distance of the point from the origin, and formula_40 is the angle that the line from the origin to the point makes with the positive real (formula_41) axis. In complex analysis, the location of this point is conventionally written formula_42 Ifformula_43\nthen the of formula_44 is defined to be the following:formula_45 \nThe principal square root function is thus defined using the non-positive real axis as a branch cut. If formula_44 is a non-negative real number (which happens if and only if formula_47) then the principal square root of formula_44 is formula_49 in other words, the principal square root of a non-negative real number is just the usual non-negative square root. It is important that formula_50 because if, for example, formula_51 (so formula_52) then the principal square root isformula_53\nbut using formula_54 would instead produce the other square root formula_55 \nThe principal square root function is holomorphic everywhere except on the set of non-positive real numbers (on strictly negative reals it is not even continuous). The above Taylor series for formula_21 remains valid for complex numbers formula_41 with formula_58\nThe above can also be expressed in terms of trigonometric functions:formula_59\nAlgebraic formula.\nWhen the number is expressed using its real and imaginary parts, the following formula can be used for the principal square root:\nformula_60\nwhere sgn(\"y\") = 1 if \"y\" \u2265 0 and sgn(\"y\") = \u22121 otherwise. In particular, the imaginary parts of the original number and the principal value of its square root have the same sign. The real part of the principal value of the square root is always nonnegative.\nFor example, the principal square roots of \u00b1\"i\" are given by:\nformula_61\nNotes.\nIn the following, the complex z and w may be expressed as:\nwhere formula_64 and formula_65.\nBecause of the discontinuous nature of the square root function in the complex plane, the following laws are not true in general.\nA similar problem appears with other complex functions with branch cuts, e.g., the complex logarithm and the relations log\"z\" + log\"w\" = log(\"zw\") or log(\"z\"*) = log(\"z\")* which are not true in general.\nWrongly assuming one of these laws underlies several faulty \"proofs\", for instance the following one showing that \u22121 = 1:\nformula_72\nThe third equality cannot be justified (see invalid proof).Chapter VI, Section I, Subsection 2 \"The fallacy that +1 = \u22121\" It can be made to hold by changing the meaning of \u221a so that this no longer represents the principal square root (see above) but selects a branch for the square root that contains formula_73 The left-hand side becomes eitherformula_74\nif the branch includes +\"i\" orformula_75\nif the branch includes \u2212\"i\", while the right-hand side becomesformula_76\nwhere the last equality, formula_77 is a consequence of the choice of branch in the redefinition of \u221a.\nnth roots and polynomial roots.\nThe definition of a square root of formula_41 as a number formula_79 such that formula_1 has been generalized in the following way.\nA cube root of formula_41 is a number formula_79 such that formula_83; it is denoted formula_84\nIf n is an integer greater than two, a n-th root of formula_41 is a number formula_79 such that formula_87; it is denoted formula_88\nGiven any polynomial \"p\", a root of \"p\" is a number y such that \"p\"(\"y\") = 0. For example, the nth roots of x are the roots of the polynomial (in y) formula_89\nAbel\u2013Ruffini theorem states that, in general, the roots of a polynomial of degree five or higher cannot be expressed in terms of nth roots.\nSquare roots of matrices and operators.\nIf \"A\" is a positive-definite matrix or operator, then there exists precisely one positive definite matrix or operator \"B\" with \"B\"2 = \"A\"; we then define \"A\"1/2 = \"B\". In general matrices may have multiple square roots or even an infinitude of them. For example, the 2 \u00d7 2 identity matrix has an infinity of square roots, though only one of them is positive definite.\nIn integral domains, including fields.\nEach element of an integral domain has no more than 2 square roots. The difference of two squares identity \"u\"2 \u2212 \"v\"2 = (\"u\" \u2212 \"v\")(\"u\" + \"v\") is proved using the commutativity of multiplication. If u and v are square roots of the same element, then \"u\"2 \u2212 \"v\"2 = 0. Because there are no zero divisors this implies \"u\" = \"v\" or \"u\" + \"v\" = 0, where the latter means that two roots are additive inverses of each other. In other words if an element a square root u of an element a exists, then the only square roots of a are u and \u2212u. The only square root of 0 in an integral domain is 0 itself.\nIn a field of characteristic\u00a02, an element either has one square root or does not have any at all, because each element is its own additive inverse, so that \u2212\"u\" = \"u\". If the field is finite of characteristic\u00a02 then every element has a unique square root. In a field of any other characteristic, any non-zero element either has two square roots, as explained above, or does not have any.\nGiven an odd prime number p, let \"q\" = \"p\"\"e\" for some positive integer e. A non-zero element of the field F\"q\" with q elements is a quadratic residue if it has a square root in F\"q\". Otherwise, it is a quadratic non-residue. There are (\"q\" \u2212 1)/2 quadratic residues and (\"q\" \u2212 1)/2 quadratic non-residues; zero is not counted in either class. The quadratic residues form a group under multiplication. The properties of quadratic residues are widely used in number theory.\nIn rings in general.\nUnlike in an integral domain, a square root in an arbitrary (unital) ring need not be unique up to sign. For example, in the ring formula_90 of integers modulo 8 (which is commutative, but has zero divisors), the element 1 has four distinct square roots: \u00b11 and \u00b13.\nAnother example is provided by the ring of quaternions formula_91 which has no zero divisors, but is not commutative. Here, the element \u22121 has infinitely many square roots, including \u00b1\"i\", \u00b1\"j\", and \u00b1\"k\". In fact, the set of square roots of \u22121 is exactlyformula_92\nA square root of 0 is either 0 or a zero divisor. Thus in rings where zero divisors do not exist, it is uniquely 0. However, rings with zero divisors may have multiple square roots of 0. For example, in formula_93 any multiple of n is a square root of 0.\nGeometric construction of the square root.\nThe square root of a positive number is usually defined as the side length of a square with the area equal to the given number. But the square shape is not necessary for it: if one of two similar planar Euclidean objects has the area \"a\" times greater than another, then the ratio of their linear sizes is formula_28.\nA square root can be constructed with a compass and straightedge. In his Elements, Euclid (fl. 300\u00a0BC) gave the construction of the geometric mean of two quantities in two different places: http:// and http://. Since the geometric mean of \"a\" and \"b\" is formula_95, one can construct formula_28 simply by taking \"b\" = 1.\nThe construction is also given by Descartes in his \"La G\u00e9om\u00e9trie\", see figure 2 on https://. However, Descartes made no claim to originality and his audience would have been quite familiar with Euclid.\nEuclid's second proof in Book VI depends on the theory of similar triangles. Let AHB be a line segment of length \"a\" + \"b\" with AH = \"a\" and HB = \"b\". Construct the circle with AB as diameter and let C be one of the two intersections of the perpendicular chord at H with the circle and denote the length CH as \"h\". Then, using Thales' theorem and, as in the proof of Pythagoras' theorem by similar triangles, triangle AHC is similar to triangle CHB (as indeed both are to triangle ACB, though we don't need that, but it is the essence of the proof of Pythagoras' theorem) so that AH:CH is as HC:HB, i.e. \"a\"/\"h\" = \"h\"/\"b\", from which we conclude by cross-multiplication that \"h\"2 = \"ab\", and finally that formula_97. When marking the midpoint O of the line segment AB and drawing the radius OC of length (\"a\" + \"b\")/2, then clearly OC &gt; CH, i.e. formula_98 (with equality if and only if \"a\" = \"b\"), which is the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean inequality for two variables and, as noted above, is the basis of the Ancient Greek understanding of \"Heron's method\".\nAnother method of geometric construction uses right triangles and induction: formula_99 can be constructed, and once formula_8 has been constructed, the right triangle with legs 1 and formula_8 has a hypotenuse of formula_102. Constructing successive square roots in this manner yields the Spiral of Theodorus depicted above.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29209", "revid": "41923736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29209", "title": "SS Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse", "text": "German ocean liner\nKaiser Wilhelm der Grosse (\"Emperor William the Great\") was a German transatlantic ocean liner in service from 1897 to 1914, when she was scuttled in battle. She was the largest ship in the world for a time, and held the Blue Riband for the fastest passenger liner crossing of the Atlantic Ocean, until Cunard Line\u2019s entered service in 1907. The vessel\u2019s career was relatively uneventful, despite a refit in 1913.\nThe liner was built in Stettin for Norddeutscher Lloyd, and entered service in 1897. She was the first liner to be a Four funnel liner and is considered to be the first \"super liner.\" The first of four sister ships built between 1903 and 1907 for Norddeutscher Lloyd (the others being , and ), she marked the beginning of a change in the way maritime supremacy was demonstrated in Europe at the beginning of the 20th century.\nThe ship began a new era in ocean travel and the novelty of having four funnels was quickly associated with size, strength, speed and above all luxury. Quickly established on the Atlantic, she gained the Blue Riband for Germany, a notable prize for the fastest trip from Europe to America which had been previously dominated by the British.\nIn 1900, she was damaged in a massive and lethal multi-ship fire in the port of New York. She was also in a collision in the French port of Cherbourg in 1906. With the advent of her sister ships, she was modified to an all-third-class ship to take advantage of the lucrative immigrant market travelling to the United States.\nConverted into an auxiliary cruiser at the outbreak of World War I, she was given orders to capture and destroy enemy ships. She destroyed several before being defeated in the Battle of R\u00edo de Oro by the British cruiser and scuttled by her crew, just three weeks after the outbreak of war. Her wreck was discovered in 1952 and partly dismantled.\nOrigin, concept and construction.\nAt the end of the 19th century, the United Kingdom dominated maritime trade with the ocean liners of the principal maritime companies such as the Cunard and the White Star Line. Having gained more influence in Europe after William I, German Emperor, his grandfather, had created the German Empire in 1871, Emperor Wilhelm II wished to consolidate German influence on the sea and thus decrease that of the British. In 1889, the Emperor himself had attended a naval review in honour of the jubilee of his grandmother Queen Victoria. There he saw the strength and size of these British ships, notably the latest and then-largest liner owned by White Star, . He particularly admired the fact that these ships could easily be converted to auxiliary cruisers in time of conflict. Leaving a lasting impression, the emperor was heard to say that \"We must have some of these...\"\n\"Norddeutscher Lloyd\", commonly called NDL, or in English, North German Lloyd, was one of only two German maritime companies which had any influence in the hugely profitable North Atlantic shipping market. Neither of these lines had shown any interest in operating large liners. NDL, however, was the first company to name any of their liners in honour of members of the Imperial family, purely to flatter the emperor. The company also had important links with the naval architects AG Vulkan of Stettin. NDL then approached Vulkan and commissioned them to build a new \"superliner\", which was to be named \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\". The new ship would set a new style for ocean liners. She was the largest and longest liner afloat and would have been the largest ever had it not been for of 1860. She was the first liner to have suites with sleeping quarters including a private parlor and bath. She was built with decks strengthened to mount eight guns, four guns, and fourteen machine guns; although fewer and smaller guns were actually mounted in her ultimate wartime conversion.\nThe launching of the ship took place on 4 May 1897 in the presence of the Imperial family; it was the emperor who baptised the ship whose name honoured his grandfather Emperor William I, \"the Great\". The liner was completed and internally decorated at Bremerhaven. Her maiden voyage was scheduled for September the same year. \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" was the first ship to have four funnels. For the next two decades they were a symbol of size and safety.\nCharacteristics.\nTechnical aspects.\n\"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\"'s registered length was , her beam was and her depth was . Her tonnages were \u00a0GRT, \u00a0NRT and displacement. Her dimensions were similar to those of the 1860 \"Great Eastern\", which was the largest ship of its time. As already noted, her four funnels were her most unusual feature. People associated the safety of an ocean liner with the number of \"stacks\" or funnels they had. Some passengers would in fact refuse to board ships if they did not have four funnels. In an age when ocean travel was not as safe as today, it was important to ensure that passengers felt at ease.\nThe special improvement in the arrangement of this steamer, as compared with other express steamers previously built by the NDL or other companies, consisted in the entire upper deck. Like many four-funnelled liners, \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" did not actually require that many. She had only two uptake shafts from the boiler rooms, which each branched into two to connect to the four funnels\u2014this design is the reason for the funnels being unequally spaced.\n\"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" became the first liner to have a commercial wireless telegraphy system when the Marconi Company installed one in February 1900. Communications were demonstrated with systems installed at the Borkum Island lighthouse and Borkum Riff lightship northwest of the island, as well as with British stations, and the first ship-to-shore message was sent on 7 March. By 1911 her call sign was DKW.\nThe ship was propelled by two propellers, each powered by a four-cylinder triple expansion engine. Between them her two engines were rated at 3,094 NHP and gave her a speed of more than . The engines were noted for their stability. The engines were balanced on the Schlick system, which prevented movement being transferred to the body of the ship, thus reducing vibration.\nInteriors.\n\"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" was built to carry a maximum of 1,506 passengers: 206 first class; 226 second class; 1,074 third class. When she was completed, her crew numbered 488. However, after her refit in 1913, her crew space was increased to 800. The d\u00e9cor of ship was in the style of Baroque revival, overseen by Johann Poppe, who carried out all of the interior decoration. This was unique as usually a ship would have several interior designers.\nThe interiors were graced with statues, mirrors, tapestries, gilding, and various portraits of the Imperial family. The interiors of her sister ships were also placed in the hands of Poppe. The first class salon was noted for its tapestries and its blue seating. The smoking room, a traditionally male preserve, was made to look like a typical German inn. The dining room, capable of holding all passengers in one sitting, rose several decks and was crowned with a dome. The room also had columns and had its chairs fixed to the deck, a typical feature of ocean liners of the era.\nCareer.\n\"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" set out on her maiden voyage on 19 September 1897, travelling from Bremerhaven to Southampton and thence to New York. With a capacity of 800 third-class passengers, the NDL had ensured that they would profit greatly from migrants from Europe to the United States. From her maiden voyage, she was the only superliner to cross the Atlantic with such speed and such media attention. In March 1898, she successfully gained the Blue Riband with an average crossing speed of , thus establishing the new German competitiveness. The Blue Riband, an award given for the fastest crossing of the North Atlantic, east and westbound, had previously been held by the Cunard liner . This turn of events was closely watched by the maritime world of the era, who were eager to see how the British would retaliate. However, the NDL soon lost the riband in 1900 to the new German superliner, of the Hamburg America Line. This change in events was acceptable to Germans, who were able to relax in the knowledge that they were still the owners of the fastest liner; however, NDL promptly ordered that \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" undergo a refit to ensure that they were the dominant German company. This refit included the installation of wireless telegraphy, then new technology which allowed \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" to transmit telegraphic messages to a port, emphasising her image of security.\nThe NDL took the competition even further. 1901 saw the addition to their fleet of another four-funnel liner, named in honour of Crown Prince William, heir to the German throne, and they subsequently commissioned another two superliners, and of 1903 and 1907 respectively. From 1904 to 1907 the east-bound speed rekord was held by SS \"Kaiser Wilhelm II\". The company stated that the four liners were of the renowned Kaiser class and decided to market them as the \"Four Flyers\", a reference to their speed and associations with the Blue Riband.\nIn June 1900 at her quay in Hoboken, New Jersey, \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" was the victim of a fire which killed one hundred staff who were trying to remove the threat as the ship was towed to safety in the Hudson River. Six years later, on 21 November 1906, she was in collision with the Royal Mail Steam Packet Company liner in Cherbourg Harbour. Five passengers aboard \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" and three crewmen aboard \"Orinoco\" were killed, and \"Orinoco\"'s clipper bow made a tear in the starboard side of \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\"'s hull. A court of inquiry found \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" wholly responsible for the collision. New York City mayor William Jay Gaynor was embarking on a European vacation when he was shot aboard the ship on 9 August 1910.\nA technological evolution of steamships soon made NDL's express steamers outdated. Cunard's and outmatched their German rivals in all fields, and when the future White Star's entered service in 1911, luxury on the high seas was taken one step further. As a result, \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" was rebuilt in 1913 to carry third-class passengers only. It seemed that her glory was fading regardless of her career as the first \"four stacker\". From 26 January 1907, she was charged with carrying passengers between the Mediterranean Sea and New York, effectively ending the public career of the first of the \"four flyers\".\nWorld War I.\nFrom 1908, German naval captains had been receiving orders to make preparations in the event of a sudden war. In fact, \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" was soon fitted with cannons and thus transformed into an auxiliary cruiser. Across the world, supply ships carrying weapons and provisions were ready to convert merchant vessels into armed auxiliary cruisers. On 4 August 1914, Great Britain declared war on Germany after the Germans invaded Belgium and Luxembourg. \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" was requisitioned and turned into an armed cruiser, painted in grey and black. Her commander at the time, Captain Reymann, operated not only under the rules of war, but also the rules of mercy.\nReymann soon sank three ships, \"Tubal Cain\", \"Kaipara\", and \"Nyanza\", but only after taking their occupants on board. Further south in the Atlantic, \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" encountered two passenger liners: \"Galician\" and . Reymann's first intention was to sink both vessels, but, discovering that they had many women and children on board, he let them go. In this early stage of the war, it was thought that it could be fought in a chivalrous fashion. However, soon it was to become a total war and ships would no longer be warned before being fired upon. As \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" approached the west coast of Africa, her coal bunkers were almost empty and needed refilling. She stopped at R\u00edo de Oro, (Villa Cisneros, former Spanish Sahara) where German and Austrian colliers started the task of refuelling her.\nThe task of coaling was still going on on 26 August, when the British cruiser appeared. Reymann quickly prepared his ship and crew for battle and steamed out to engage the enemy after disembarking his prisoners of war. A fierce battle took place, but came to a dramatic end when \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" ran out of ammunition. According to the Germans, rather than let the enemy capture the onetime pride of Germany, Reymann ordered the ship to be scuttled using dynamite, which was already in position should this situation ever arise. On detonation, the explosives tore a massive hole in the ship, causing her to capsize. This version of events was disputed by the British, who stated that \"Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse\" had been badly damaged and sinking when Reymann ordered it to be abandoned. The British firmly believed that it was gunfire from HMS \"Highflyer\" which sank the German ship. Reymann managed to swim to shore, and he made his way back to Germany by working as a stoker on a neutral vessel. Most of the crew were taken prisoner and held in the Amherst Internment Camp in Nova Scotia for the remainder of the war.\nThe downfall of such great liners in the event of war was their huge fuel consumption. Most liners were subsequently converted from cruisers to hospital ships or troopships.\nWreck.\nOn 6 September 2013, the https:// for the Protection of the Environment and Sustainable Development in Morocco captured https:// of what was left of the wreck, whose identification was possible due to the ship's name on the hull visible. This was confirmed by the Moroccan Ministry of Culture on 8 October 2013.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "29210", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29210", "title": "Sydney Swans", "text": "Australian rules football club\nThe Sydney Swans are an Australian rules football club based in Sydney, New South Wales. The men's team competes in the Australian Football League (AFL), and the women's team in the AFL Women's (AFLW). The Swans also field a reserves men's team in the Victorian Football League (VFL). The Sydney Swans Academy, consisting of the club's best junior development signings, contests Division 2 of the men's and women's underage national championships and the Talent League.\nThe club's origins trace back to 21 March 1873, when a meeting was held at the Clarendon Hotel in South Melbourne to establish a junior football club, to be called the South Melbourne Football Club. The club commenced playing in 1874 at its home ground, Lakeside Oval in Albert Park. Playing as South Melbourne, it participated in the Victorian Football Association (VFA) competition from 1878 before joining the breakaway Victorian Football League (VFL) as a founding member in 1897. Originally known as the \"Bloods\" in reference to the red colour used on players' guernseys, the Swan emblem was adopted in 1933 after a journalist at the time referred to them using the moniker following a large influx of Western Australian players. In 1982, it became the first professional Australian football club to permanently relocate interstate (from Victoria to New South Wales). Initially playing in Sydney as \"The Swans\", it was given its current name in 1983.\nThe club has a rivalry with the Greater Western Sydney Giants, with whom they contest the Sydney Derby. Their headquarters and training facilities are located in the Moore Park sporting precinct, with offices and indoor training at the Royal Hall of Industries and outdoor sessions conducted on the adjacent Tramway Oval and Sydney Cricket Ground, the latter being the site of the club's senior men's team home matches since 1982. The Swans have won five VFL/AFL premierships including 1909, 1918, and 1933, before experiencing a 72-year premiership drought\u2014the longest of any team in the competition's history. This premiership drought ended with the 2005 premiership, which was later followed by another title in 2012. Their five premierships are supplemented by fourteen grand final defeats, the most recent of which came in 2024.\nAccording to Roy Morgan statistics, the Swans are one of the most supported clubs in the AFL with more than a million fans in 2021; it has also been the most supported club in the league for the past nineteen years consecutively, dating back to 2006.\nHistory.\nOrigins: 1873\u20131876.\nThe club's origins trace back to 21 March 1873, when a meeting was held at the Clarendon Hotel in South Melbourne for the purpose of establishing a junior football club, to be called the South Melbourne Football Club.\nAccording to club historians, it was incorporated at the Temperance Hall, Napier Street at Emerald Hill 19 June 1874. It was first known as \"Cecil Football Club\" (after Cecil Street, South Melbourne, one of the early thoroughfares), but adopted the name \"South Melbourne Football Club\" four weeks later on 15 July. The club was based at Lake Oval alongside the lake in Albert Park, also home of the South Melbourne Cricket Club.\nWhile one of the early favourites to win, South Melbourne were a notable exclusion from the Challenge Cup competitions of the 1870s with entry to this competition strictly limited to clubs playing under the Melbourne Football Club's rules. The club's lack of adherence to the Victorian Rules (and insistence on playing by its own rules) resulted in some controversial early wins. This, along with ability to regularly field a full senior team, may have contributed to its absence during the football season competition begun in the 1870s. Throughout this period South Melbourne, along with neighbouring Cup member club Albert Park, had experimented with rugby football rules which in May 1874 had advocated strongly for their widespread adoption in Victoria; however, this did not meet favour with the more powerful clubs in the colony.\nDespite not being part of the big league of clubs, South Melbourne by the mid-1870s is recorded to have enough senior players to field two teams of twenty and played matches against non-Cup clubs during this time against nearby clubs including Fawkner Park, Elwood, West Melbourne, Southern Rifles in 1875 and Sandridge Alma, St Kilda Alma, Victoria Parade, and Williamstown in 1876 among others. Many of this group of clubs most of which had primarily juniors had also begun to discuss starting their own cup competition.\nSouth was one of Victoria's most prolific touring clubs. Seeking more regular senior competition in 1876 South Melbourne also went on one of its first regional tours playing against newly formed clubs at Beechworth, Blackwood, Taradale and Ballarat.\nVFA era: 1877\u20131896.\nSouth Melbourne was a junior foundation club of the Victorian Football Association in 1877, and attained senior status in 1879.\nAmalgamation with Albert Park.\nIn 1880, South Melbourne amalgamated with the nearby Albert-park Football Club, which had a senior football history dating back to May 1867 (Albert-park had, in fact, been known as South Melbourne during its first year of existence). Following the amalgamation, the club retained the name South Melbourne, and adopted the club's now familiar red and white colours from Albert-park. Nicknamed the \"Southerners\", the team was more colourfully known as the \"Bloods\", in reference to the bright red diagonal sash on their white jumpers The colourful epithet the \"Bloodstained Angels\" was also in use. Following the 1880 amalgamation it became the strongest in metropolitan Melbourne.\nVFA success.\nOver its first decade as an amalgamated club, South Melbourne won five VFA premierships \u2013 in 1881, 1885 (undefeated) and three-in-a-row in 1888, 1889 and 1890 \u2013 and was runner-up to the provincial Geelong Football Club in 1880, 1883 and 1886. The 1886 season was notable for its 4 September match against Geelong, which generated unprecedented public interest as both clubs had entered the match undefeated.\nThe club was the second Victorian club to visit New South Wales in 1883 travelling to Newcastle where it also defeated the Northern Districts League by a goal before travelling to Sydney where it defeated Sydney by just a single goal in front of a large crowd at the Sydney Cricket Ground and East Sydney Football Club by a goal in front of 600 spectators.\nIn May 1889, the Swans lost narrowly to a touring Maori team from New Zealand.\nAt the end of the 1896 season, Collingwood and South Melbourne finished equal at the top of the VFA's premiership ladder with records of 14\u20133\u20131, requiring a playoff match to determine the season's premiership; this was the first time this had occurred in VFA history. The match took place on 3 October 1896 at the East Melbourne Cricket Ground. Collingwood won the match, six goals to five, in front of an estimated crowd of 12,000.\nThis grand final would be the last match South Melbourne would play in the VFA, as the following season they would be one of eight founding clubs forming the breakaway Victorian Football League joining St Kilda, Essendon, Fitzroy, Melbourne, Geelong, Carlton and Collingwood.\nVFL entry: 1897\u20131909.\nSouth Melbourne was one of the original founding clubs of the Victorian Football League that was formed in 1897.\nPremiership success: 1909\u20131945.\nThe club had early success and won three VFL premierships in 1909, 1918 and 1933. However, they were the subject of some off-field difficulties, and the late 1920s, the South Melbourne Districts Football Club donated 40 guineas to South Melbourne to stop them from folding. The Districts also often provided assistance payments to players when needed.\nIn 1932, the red sash on the guernsey was replaced with a red \"V\". \nThe club was at its most successful in the 1930s, when key recruits from both Victoria and interstate led to a string of appearances in the finals, including four successive grand final appearances from 1933 to 1936, albeit with only one premiership in 1933. The collection of players recruited from interstate in 1932/1933 became known as South Melbourne's \"Foreign Legion\".\nOn grand final eve, 1935, as the Swans prepared to take on Collingwood, star full-forward Bob Pratt was clipped by a truck moments after stepping off a tram and subsequently missed the match for South. Ironically, the truck driver was a South Melbourne supporter.\nIt was during this period that the team became known as the Swans. The nickname, which was suggested by a \"Herald and Weekly Times\" artist in 1933, was inspired by the number of Western Australians in the team (the black swan being the state emblem of Western Australia), and was formally adopted by the club before the following season 1934. The name stuck, in part due to the club's association with nearby Albert Park and Lake, also known for its swans (although there are no longer any non-native white swans and only black, indigenous swans in the lake).\nAfter several years with only limited success, South Melbourne next reached the grand final in 1945. The match, played against Carlton, was to become known colloquially as \"the Bloodbath\", due to the player brawl that overshadowed the match, with a total of 9 players being reported by the umpires. Carlton won the match by 28 points, and from then on, South Melbourne struggled for many years.\nStruggling times: 1946\u20131981.\nFollowing the end of the second world war, South Melbourne consistently struggled, as their traditional inner-city recruiting district largely emptied as a result of demographic shifts. The club missed the finals in 1946 and continued to fall such that by 1950 they were second-last on the ladder. They narrowly missed the finals in 1952, but from 1953 to 1969, they never finished any higher than eighth on the ladder. By the 1960s it was clear that South Melbourne's financial resources would not be capable of allowing them to compete in the growing market for country and interstate players, and their own local zone was never strong enough to compensate for this. The introduction of country zoning failed to help, as the Riverina Football League proved to be one of the least profitable zones.\nBetween 1945 and 1981, South Melbourne made the finals only twice: under legendary coach Norm Smith, South Melbourne finished fourth in 1970, but lost the first semi-final; and, in 1977, the club finished fifth under coach Ian Stewart, but lost the elimination final. In that time, they \"won\" three wooden spoons. Between Round 7, 1972 and Round 13, 1973, the team lost 29 consecutive games. By the end of the 1970s, South Melbourne were saddled with massive debts after struggling for such a long period of time.\nA VFL club for Sydney.\nThe VFL had been actively seeking an audience in Sydney since its first exhibition match in 1903 drew 20,000 people. For more than three quarters of a century, it had strategically scheduled matches in Sydney and through the Australian National Football Council \u2013 had allocated a significant share of its marketing budget to developing the code in Sydney, showcasing interstate tournaments and encouraging its clubs to play against the state representative side. At one point, it even attempted to negotiate a hybrid code with rugby league. However interest in the code in Sydney remained the poorest in the country (where it was behind three other football codes). In the late 1970s, however, with increasing professionalism of the sport there was an overall increase in national interest in the VFL competition.\nIn 1976, Melbourne journalist Jim Main began to break a story that a leading Melbourne businessman who had relocated to Sydney, Mannie Bongornio, had been meeting with Allen Aylett about luring a VFL club to Sydney. The idea began to gain traction and in 1977, Ron Barassi proposed the VFL setting up a club in Sydney, which he offered to coach believing that it would help spread the code in the state. Upon becoming league president, Aylett had the league investigated playing Sunday matches at the SCG. The VFL scheduled 2 premiership matches for the Sydney Cricket Ground in 1979. One of them, between the previous year's grand finalists North Melbourne and Hawthorn drew a record 31,395 to the gates. In 1979 the financially struggling Fitzroy Lions conducted a feasibility into the possibility of moving to North Sydney and a proposal was put forward, but was voted down by its board in 1980. To test the market further, the VFL scheduled 4 matches for the SCG in 1980 with an average attendance of 19,000. In April 1980, the VFL stated that its market study showed there was sufficient support for a Sydney team, finding that there was an increase in television ratings in Sydney and sustained attendance at matches and that it intended to have a team in Sydney, possibly as soon as 1982. A 1981 report by Graham Huggins concluded that there was an \"untapped market in Sydney which represented an excellent opportunity for the league.\" The report claimed that 60,000 people in Sydney had stated that they would regularly support the new club and 90% of these supporters would watch VFL on television from Sydney and 80% of these supporters had not attended rugby and 92% believed that Australian rules could become popular in Sydney.\nIn 1981 the VFL had decided that it would establish an entirely new 13th VFL club in Sydney along with a possible 14th team. The VFL was under strong pressure from interests in Adelaide to admit a South Australian club and from the ACT for a new Canberra license, however VFL president Allan Aylett was convinced that Sydney was the most viable option. By 1981, Canberra's ACTAFL had edged out rugby league in popularity with an increase in participation it had become the number one sport. Under significant pressure from a rugby league junior development push and fearing the impact on its strong local competition of entry of a Sydney team made a formal bid for licence to enter a Canberra team into the VFL. With corporate backing and strong public support including local legend Alex Jesaulenko, the Canberra bid was confident it would be a successful expansion club. Aylett however, determined to pursue the entry of a Sydney team, dismissed the Canberra bid publishing a scathing report on the development of football in the ACT, stating that the VFL might consider Canberra for a licence in another 10 years. Aylett's view was that Sydney offered a much bigger television audience and the most potential to add to the league's lucrative television rights. The league had also estimated that the club could initially draw support from an estimated 300,000 ex-Victorians living in and around Sydney.\nWith the possibility of another club making Sydney a viable move, in 1981, the South Melbourne board, recognising the structural difficulties it faced with long-term viability and financial stability in Melbourne, decided not to miss what it saw as a strategic opportunity to capture an untapped market and save its club. The board made the decision to play all 1982 home games in Sydney. The club had been operating at a loss of at least $150,000 for the previous five years. News of the proposal broke on 2 July 1981, after which a letter was sent to members justifying the board's reasons for making the proposal and noting that the coach and current players were in favour of the move. On 29 July 1981, the VFL formally accepted the proposal, and paved the way for the Swans to shift to Sydney in 1982.\nInevitably, the move caused very great internal difficulties as a large supporters' group known as Keep South at South campaigned against the move throughout the rest of 1981; and, at an extraordinary general meeting on 22 September, the group democratically won control of the club's board. However, the new board did not have the power to unilaterally stop the move to Sydney: under the VFL constitution, to rescind the decision that had been made on 29 July required a three-quarters majority in a vote of all twelve clubs, and at a meeting on 14 October it failed to obtain this majority. The new board, whilst representative of most fans, lacked the support of the players, many of whom were in favour of a long-term move to Sydney; in early November, after the board promised that it would try to bring the club back to Melbourne in 1983, the players went on strike, seeking to force the new board to commit to Sydney in the long term as well as seeking payments that the cash-strapped club owed them from the previous season. The board ended up undermining its own position when it accepted a $400,000 loan from the VFL in late November in order to stay solvent, under the condition that it commit to Sydney for at least two years. Finally, in early December, the Keep South at South board resigned and a board in favour of the move to Sydney was installed.\nSwans move to Sydney: 1982\u20131984.\nIn 1982, the club was still technically a Melbourne-based club which played all of its home games at the Sydney Cricket Ground. Its physical \"home club\" was the \"Southern Cross Social Club\" at 120a Clovelly Road, Randwick In response to the move, the club's sponsors, Bond Corporation pulled out and the club was left without a major backer. At a major launch in Sydney, Aylett vindicated the league's decision, announcing it had signed a new sponsor, Ward Transport, and that on-field success for the Swans would soon follow. The Swans experienced success in the 1982 Escort Championships with 1,000 supporters packing out the Chevron Hotel ballroom in King Cross in response to the win, however Channel Seven did not broadcast the match in Sydney. \nThe club won their first official Sydney home game against Melbourne in front of 15,764.\nIn June 1982, it dropped the name \"South Melbourne\", officially becoming \"the Swans\" for the rest of the season. The name change, however, did not endear either the Sydney media or the Sydney public, and after successive games at home, began to draw as few as 10,000. Despite just missing the finals, and some good wins at home and respectable home crowds against league leaders Carlton and Richmond, the lack of success and cold reception in Sydney led to the lustre quickly leaving the league's glamour team. It was officially renamed the \"Sydney Swans\" in 1983.\nIn 1983 average crowds in Sydney continued to plummet to 12,000 and Swans supporter packages dropped to as low as 100 members (well short of the 20,000 average crowds predicted by the VFL's 1980 Hennessy Report). Television ratings and sponsorship revenue in Sydney were also far below the league's expectations.\nOperating at a loss well short of the VFL's predicted $750,000 a year profit poor financial performance continued to drown the club in 1984, with the club flagging pay cuts to its players in order to survive. Coach Ricky Quade resigned and caretaker coach Bob Hammond, despite showing some promise, was unable to turn the club's poor performance around. In order to keep the club solvent during this time, the VFL began to write loans to the Swans that the club would have been unable to pay off on its own. The Swans were the league's most reliant on sponsorship and subsidies from the VFL to stay solvent and meet player payments due to its continued poor crowds, public apathy and poor TV ratings.\nPublic support for the Swans in Sydney was so bad that by the start of the 1985 season, the VFL began to backflip and the league's administrators, having sunk large amounts of money into the club began looking to offload it.\nEdelsten era and privatisation: 1985\u20131987.\nOn 31 July 1985, for what was thought to be $6.3\u00a0million, Geoffrey Edelsten \"bought\" the Swans; in reality it was $2.9\u00a0million in cash with funding and other payments spread over five years. Edelsten resigned as chairman in less than twelve months, but had already made his mark. He immediately recruited former Geelong coach Tom Hafey. Hafey, in turn, used his knowledge of Geelong's contracts to recruit David Bolton, Bernard Toohey and Greg Williams, who would all form a key part of the Sydney side, at a league-determined total fee of $240,000 (less than the $500,000 Geelong demanded and even the $300,000 Sydney offered). The likes of Gerard Healy, Merv Neagle and Paul Morwood were also poached from other clubs, and failed approaches were made to Simon Madden, Terry Daniher, Andrew Bews and Maurice Rioli.\nDuring the Edelsten years, the Swans were seen by the Sydney public as a flamboyant, flashy club, typified by the style of its spearhead, Warwick Capper, his long bright blond mullet and bright pink boots made him unmissable on the field and his pink Lamborghini, penchant for girlfriends who were fashion models and his general showy eccentricity made him notorious off the field \u2013 all somewhat fashionable in the 1980s. During Capper's peak years, the Swans had made successive finals appearances for the first time since relocating. His consistently spectacular aerial exploits earned him the Mark of the Year award in 1987 while his goalkicking efforts (amassing 103 goals in 1987) made him runner up in the Coleman Medal two years running. The Swans' successive finals appearances saw crowds during this time peak at an average of around 25,000 per game. Edelsten also introduced the \"Swanettes\", becoming the sole such American-style cheerleading group among VFL teams following the disbandment of Carlton's Blue Birds in 1986. The Swanettes did not get much performance time, owing to the short intervals between quarters of play in the VFL and the lack of space in which they might perform while other activities take place on the field. The Swanettes were rapidly discontinued. During the Edelsten era, the club's owner and the private company Westec are reported to have sunk more than $10 million in additional private capital to keep the club afloat.\nWhen the Southern Cross club went bankrupt in 1987, the club relocated to the newly built Sydney Football Stadium.\nIn 1987, the Swans scored 201 points against the West Coast Eagles and the following week scored 236 points against the Essendon Football Club. Both games were at the SCG. The Swans remain one of only two clubs to have scored consecutive team tallies above 200 points, the only other being Geelong in 1992. However, this was followed by several heavy losses, including defeat by Hawthorn by 99 points in the Qualifying Final and by 76 points against Melbourne in the First Semi-final.\nDark times: 1988\u20131994.\nThe club's form was to slump in the following year. Losses were in the millions. It was obvious to most that the Swans were struggling financially, though the owners, Sydney Rules Pty Ltd a subsidiary of Powerplay International Ltd were not selling. In early 1988 the company advised the Australian Securities Exchange to cease trading its shares as it could not continue to trade until it had offloaded the Swans. A Canberra consortium including the ACTAFL initially proposed to buy the failed club and shift it to Canberra, however the VFL claimed this was too extreme a move. The league compromised and along with Aylett, who had denied Canberra a licence in 1981, proposed that the Swans play away games in the ACT with a dual aim of giving the club a sustainable supporter base and helping resurrect the code in the ACT which had lost enormous ground to rugby league since the introduction of the Canberra Raiders. However the VFL blocked the move feeling that the club would lose its identity if it were to play matches in Canberra.\nBy mid year the VFL had revoked the Swans licence and took over ownership of the club, after an investigation under VFL CEO Ross Oakley determined that it was unable to continue operating. However, there were no buyers. On 6 May 1988 the VFL paid Powerplay just $10 to transfer ownership of the club in an attempt to keep it afloat until a buyer could be found. The VFL would wait months for the club to regain financial security. The VFL had reported that it needed to find a buyer willing to pay at least $4 million in order to make the club financially viable in the medium to long term. In the meantime, the league had secured a sponsor which helped underwrite the club until the sale.\nAt the end of 1988 the VFL re-tendered the Swans licence and a group of financial backers including Mike Willesee, Basil Sellers, Peter Weinert and Craig Kimberley, purchased the licence and bankrolled the club.\nMorale at the side plummeted as players were asked to take pay cuts. Coach Tom Hafey was sacked by the club in 1988 after a player-led rebellion at his tough training methods (unusual in the semi-professional days of that era). The Willesee consortia appointed Col Kinnear as the new coach.\nCapper was sold to the Brisbane Bears for AUD$400,000 in a desperate attempt to improve the club's finances. Instead, it only led to disastrous on-field performances. Instead of a 100-goal-a-season forward, Sydney's goalkicking was led by Bernard Toohey (usually a defender) with 29 in 1989, then Jim West with 34 in 1990. Players left the club in droves, including Brownlow Medalist Greg Williams, Bernard Toohey and Barry Mitchell. The careers of stars such as Dennis Carroll, David Bolton, Ian Roberts, Tony Morwood and David Murphy wound down, while promising young players like Jamie Lawson, Robert Teal and Paul Bryce had their careers cut short by injury.\nAttendances consistently dropped below 10,000 when the team performed poorly between 1990 and 1994. Kinnear in 1990 urged his players rally to support the club's loyal fans and stem their mass exodus however he was ultimately stood down in August 1991. The nadir came with three consecutive wooden spoons in 1992, 1993 and 1994.\nIn October 1992, members from the 15 AFL clubs voted on axing the struggling Swans. To fill the void left by the Swans, the league floated a radical proposal for Carlton or Collingwood to play all of their away games in Sydney, however it was felt that even the leagues most popular clubs wouldn't be able to draw a sufficient audience in Sydney to cover for the loss of the Swans. The AFL extended an offer for a Tasmanian licence which was declined, and received an offer from the ACTAFL to relocate the club to Canberra, however the AFL rejected this. There were also strong rumours that the AFL intended to merge the club with the Brisbane Bears to form a combined New South Wales/Queensland team, fold altogether, or even move back to South Melbourne. Without adequate alternatives the AFL Commission instead decided to step in and save the club, offering substantial monetary and management support, with the 15 clubs asked to cover the club's AUD$1.2 million annual expenses including licence fee and hire of the SCG. With draft and salary cap concessions in the early 1990s and a series of notable recruits, the team became competitive after the early part of the decade.\nDuring this time, the side was largely held together by two inspirational skippers, both from the Wagga Wagga region of country New South Wales, Dennis Carroll and later the courageous captain Paul Kelly. However coach Gary Buckenara was sacked after 18 straight losses, managing to register just 2 wins and a draw during his term.\nDesperate to hang on, the club was keen to enlist the biggest names and identities in the AFL, and recruited Ron Barassi as coach who helped save the club from extinction while serving them as coach from Round 7, 1993 to 1995. At roughly the same time, Dermott Brereton was also recruited from Hawthorn on a three-year contract becoming one of the swans highest paid players, and was considered to replace Paul Kelly as club captain. However Brereton's time in Sydney was marred by multiple tribunal appearances including 6 and 7 week bans and while he starred in some upset wins he spent more time off the field than on it; resulting in Barassi labelling the experiment as a disappointment, and not offering a contract extension.\nTony Lockett and grand final return: 1995\u20132001.\nA big coup for the club was recruitment of St Kilda Football Club champion Tony \"Plugger\" Lockett in 1995. Lockett became a cult figure in Sydney, with an instant impact and along with the Super League war in the dominant rival rugby league football code in Australia, helped the Swans to become a powerhouse Sydney icon.\n1995 would be Barassi's last year in charge. The Swans won eight games \u2013 as many as they did in the previous three seasons combined \u2013 and finished with a percentage of over 100. They were also one of only two teams to defeat the all-conquering Carlton side of that year. Captain Paul Kelly won the League's highest individual honour, the Brownlow Medal. Barassi left an improving team, a club in a much better state than he found them.\nFormer Hawthorn player Rodney Eade took over the reins in 1996 and after a slow start (they lost their first two games of the season), turned the club around into powerful force. The Swans ended the minor round on top of the premiership table with 16 wins, 5 losses and 1 draw. In the finals, the Swans won one of the most thrilling AFL preliminary finals in history after Plugger Lockett kicked a behind after the siren to win the game. The Swans lost the grand final to North Melbourne, which had been their first appearance in a grand final since 1945. The game was played in front of 93,102 at the MCG.\nThe Swans then made the finals for four of the next five full years that Rodney Eade was in charge. In 1998 they finished 3rd on the AFL ladder; despite beating St Kilda in their first final the Swans were then beaten by eventual premiers Adelaide in the semi-final at the SCG.\nThe 1999 season was a largely uneventful year for the club, the only real highlight being Tony Lockett kicking his record-breaking 1300th goal against Collingwood in Round 10. The 1999 season ended with a 69-point mauling at the hands of minor premiers Essendon.\nAfter missing the finals in 2000, the Swans rebounded to finish 7th in 2001, but were beaten by Hawthorn by 55 points in their elimination final at Colonial Stadium.\nRebuilding and finals return: 2002\u20132004.\nFormer Swans favourite son Paul Roos was appointed caretaker coach midway through the 2002 season, replacing Rodney Eade who was removed after Round 12. Roos won six of the remaining 10 games that year (including the last four of the season) and was installed as the permanent coach from the 2003 season onwards, despite rumours that Sydney had nearly concluded a deal with Terry Wallace.\nRoos continued a record as a successful coach with the Swans for the eight full seasons that would follow.\nA new home ground at Stadium Australia provided increased capacity over the SCG. The Swans' first game played at the stadium in Round 9, 2002 against Essendon attracted 54,169 spectators. The Sydney Swans v Collingwood match on 23 August 2003 set an attendance record for the largest crowd to watch an AFL game outside of Victoria with an official attendance of 72,393 and was the largest home and away AFL crowd at any stadium for 2003. A preliminary final against the Brisbane Lions in 2003 attracted 71,019 people. The Swans lost all three of those significant matches.\n2004 saw an average year for Sydney, however one highlight was when they ended St Kilda's undefeated start to the season in Round 11. The match was notable for Leo Barry's effort in nullifying the impact of St Kilda full-forward and eventual Coleman Medallist Fraser Gehrig, whom Barry restricted to only two possessions for the entire match.\nSydney was able to recruit another St Kilda export in the Lockett mould, Barry Hall. There were obvious parallels to the signing of Lockett (a powerful, tough forward from St Kilda with questions over his discipline and attitude), which left Hall with much to live up to. He flourished in his new surroundings and eventually became a cult figure and club leader in his own right.\nAs the new century dawned, Sydney implemented a policy of giving up high order draft picks in exchange for players who struggled at other clubs. It was during this era that the Swans picked up the likes of Paul Williams, Barry Hall, Craig Bolton, Darren Jolly, Ted Richards, Peter Everitt, Martin Mattner, Rhyce Shaw, Shane Mumford, Ben McGlynn and Mitch Morton, amongst others, and giving up higher order draft picks meant the Swans missed out on the likes of Daniel Motlop, Nick Dal Santo, James Kelly, Courtenay Dempsey and Sam Lonergan who went to Port Adelaide, St Kilda, Geelong and the latter two to Essendon respectively. This policy is said to have paid off in the Roos era, as they implemented a strict culture of discipline at the club.\nPremiership glory: 2005.\nIn 2005, the Swans came under enormous public scrutiny, even from AFL CEO Andrew Demetriou, for their unorthodox, \"boring\" defense-oriented tactics that included tightly controlling the tempo of the game and starving the opposition of possession (in fact, seven teams that season had their lowest possession total while playing against the Swans). Swans coach Paul Roos maintained that playing contested football was the style used by all recent Premiership-winning teams, and felt that it was ironic that the much criticised strategy proved ultimately successful.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNick Davis! Nick Davis! I don't believe it! I see it, but I don't believe it!\nAnthony Hudson's TV call of Nick Davis' fourth and match-winning goal in the semi-final against Geelong on Network Ten\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29212", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29212", "title": "Supersessionism", "text": " Christian opinion concerning biblical covenants\nSupersessionism, also called fulfillment theology by its proponents, and replacement theology by its detractors, is the Christian doctrine that the Christian Church has superseded the Jewish people, assuming their role as God's covenanted people, thus asserting that the New Covenant through Jesus Christ has superseded or replaced the Mosaic covenant. Supersessionists hold that the universal Church has become God's \"New Israel\" and thus Christians are the people of God.\nOften claimed by later Christians to have originated with Paul the Apostle in the New Testament, supersessionism has formed a core tenet of many Eastern Orthodox churches, Roman Catholic and Lutheran churches for the majority of their history. Many early Church Fathers\u2014including Justin Martyr and Augustine of Hippo\u2014were supersessionist.\nMost historic Christian churches, including the Roman Catholic Church, Lutheran Churches, some Reformed Churches and Methodist Churches, hold that the Old Covenant has three components: ceremonial, moral, and civil (cf. covenant theology). They teach that while the ceremonial and civil (judicial) laws have been fulfilled, the moral law of the Ten Commandments continues to bind Christian believers. Since the 19th century, certain Christian communities, such as the Plymouth Brethren, have espoused dispensationalist theology as contrasted to supersessionism and covenant theology. Additionally, as part of Christian\u2013Jewish reconciliation, the Roman Catholic Church has placed an increased emphasis on the shared history between the Christian and modern Jewish religions.\nRabbinic Judaism rejects supersessionism as offensive to Jewish history. Islam teaches that it is the final and most authentic expression of Abrahamic monotheism, superseding both Judaism and Christianity.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"supersessionism\" comes from the English verb \"to supersede\", from the Latin verb , \"to sit\", plus \"super\", \"upon\". It thus signifies one thing being replaced or supplanted by another.\nThroughout Church history, many Christian theologians saw the New Covenant in Christ as a replacement for the Mosaic Covenant and the Church as the new people of God. The word \"supersession\" is used by Sydney Thelwall in the title of chapter three of his 1870 translation of Tertullian's \"An Answer to the Jews\".\nEarly Church.\nNew Testament.\nIn the New Testament, Jesus and others repeatedly give Jews priority in their mission, as in Jesus's expression of him coming to the Jews rather than to gentiles and in Paul the Apostle's formula \"to the Jew first and also to the Greek\". Yet after the death of Jesus, the inclusion of the gentiles as equals in this burgeoning sect of Judaism also caused problems, particularly when it came to gentiles keeping the Mosaic law, which was both a major issue at the Council of Jerusalem and a theme of Paul's Epistle to the Galatians, though the relationship of Paul and Judaism is still disputed today.\nPaul's views on the Jews are complex, but he is generally regarded as the first person to make the claim that by not accepting claims of Jesus's divinity, non-believing Jews disqualified themselves from salvation. Paul himself was a Jew. After a conversion experience he came to accept Jesus's claim to be the Messiah later in his life. In the opinion of Roman Catholic ex-priest James Carroll, accepting Jesus's divinity, for Paul, was dichotomous with being a Jew. His personal conversion and his understanding of the dichotomy between being Jewish and accepting Jesus's divinity, was the religious philosophy he wanted to see adopted among other Jews of his time. However, New Testament scholar N.T. Wright argues that Paul saw his faith in Jesus as precisely the fulfillment of his Judaism, not that there was any tension between being Jewish and Christian. Christians quickly adopted Paul's views.\nFor most of Christian history, supersessionism has been the mainstream interpretation of the New Testament of all three major historical traditions within Christianity \u2013 Orthodox, Roman Catholic and Protestant. The text most often evident in favor of the supersessionist view is Hebrews 8:13: \"In speaking of 'a new covenant' [Jer. 31.31\u201332] he has made the first one obsolete.\" Other statements by Jesus have also been used, namely Matthew 21:43, \"Therefore I tell you, the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a people producing its fruits.\"\nChurch Fathers.\nMany early Christian commentators taught that the Old Covenant was fulfilled and superseded by the New Covenant in Christ, for instance, Justin Martyr wrote that the \"true spiritual Israel\" referred to those who had \"been led to God through this crucified Christ\". Irenaeus taught that, while the New Covenant had superseded the old, the moral law underlying the Law of Moses continued to stand in the New Covenant. Whereas, Tertullian believed that the New Covenant brought with it a new law, writing: \"Who else, therefore, are understood but we, who, fully taught by the new law, observe these practices, the old law being obliterated, the coming of whose abolition the action itself demonstrates. ...Therefore, as we have shown above that the coming cessation of the old law and of the carnal circumcision was declared, so, too, the observance of the new law and the spiritual circumcision has shone out into the voluntary observances of peace.\"\nAugustine of Hippo followed the views of the earlier Church Fathers but emphasized the importance to Christianity of the continued existence of the separate Rabbinic Jewish faith: \"The Jews ... are thus by their own Scriptures a testimony to us that we have not forged the prophecies about Christ.\" The Catholic church built its system of eschatology on his theology, where Christ rules the earth spiritually through his triumphant church. Augustine, however, also mentioned to \"love\" the Jews as a means to convert them to Christianity. Jeremy Cohen, followed by John Y. B. Hood and James Carroll, sees this as having had decisive social consequences, with Carroll saying, \"It is not too much to say that, at this juncture, Christianity 'permitted' Judaism to endure because of Augustine.\"\nContemporary views.\nEastern Orthodox.\nIn the early days, there were different views within the Orthodox Church regarding replacement theology, although the Orthodox Church did not use this term to describe this theological thought. However, more recently, replacement theology was reconsidered, and some churches have explicitly rejected it.\nRoman Catholic.\nSupersessionism is not the name of any official Roman Catholic Church teaching and the word appears in no Church documents, but official Catholic teaching has reflected varying levels of supersessionist thought throughout its history, especially prior to the mid-twentieth century. The theology that religious Jews dissent by continuing to exist outside the Church is extensive in Catholic liturgy and literature. The Second Vatican Council (1962\u20131965) marked a shift in emphasis of official Catholic teaching about Judaism, a shift which may be described as a move from \"hard\" to \"soft\" supersessionism, to use the terminology of David Novak.\nPrior to Vatican II, Catholic teaching on the matter was characterized by \"displacement\" or \"substitution\" theologies, according to which the Church and its New Covenant took the place of Judaism and its \"Old Covenant\", the latter being rendered void by the coming of Jesus. The nullification of the Old Covenant was often explained in terms of the \"deicide charge\" that Jews forfeited their covenantal relationship with God by executing the divine Christ. As recently as 1943, Pope Pius XII stated in his encyclical :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAt the Second Vatican Council, which was convened two decades after the Holocaust, a different framework emerged on how Catholics should think about the status of the Jewish covenant. The declaration , which was promulgated in 1965, made several statements which signaled a shift away from \"hard supersessionist\" replacement thinking which posited that the Jews' covenant was no longer acknowledged by God. Retrieving Paul's language in chapter 11 of his Epistle to the Romans, the declaration states, \"God holds the Jews most dear for the sake of their Fathers; He does not repent of the gifts He makes or of the calls He issues.[...] Although the Church is the new people of God, the Jews should not be presented as rejected or accursed by God, as if this followed from the Holy Scriptures.\" A draft of the declaration contained a passage which originally called for \"the entry of that [Jewish] people into the fullness of the people of God established by Christ\"; however, at the suggestion of Catholic priest (and convert from Judaism) John M. Oesterreicher, it was replaced in the final promulgated version with the following language: \"the Church awaits that day, known to God alone, on which all peoples will address the Lord in a single voice and 'serve him shoulder to shoulder' (Zeph 3:9).\"\nFurther developments in Catholic thinking on the covenantal status of ethnic Jews were led by Pope John Paul II. Among his most noteworthy statements on the matter is that which occurred during his historic visit to the synagogue in Mainz (1980), where he called Jews the \"people of God of the Old Covenant, which has never been abrogated by God (cf. Romans 11:29, \"for the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable\" [NRSV]).\" In 1997, John Paul II again affirmed the Jews' covenantal status: \"This people continues in spite of everything to be the people of the covenant and, despite human infidelity, the Lord is faithful to his covenant.\"\nCardinal Joseph Ratzinger, who later became Pope Benedict XVI, wrote in his 1999 work \"Many Religions \u2013 One Covenant\" that \"the Sinai [Mosaic] Covenant is indeed superseded.\"\nThe post\u2013Vatican II shift toward acknowledging the ethnic Jews as a covenanted people has led to heated discussions in the Catholic Church over the issue of missionary activity directed toward Jews, with some Catholics theologians with Cardinal Avery Dulles reasoning that \"if Christ is the redeemer of the world, every tongue should confess him\", while others vehemently oppose \"targeting Jews for conversion\". Weighing in on this matter, Cardinal Walter Kasper, then president of the Pontifical Commission for Religious Relations with the Jews, reaffirmed the validity of the Jews' covenant and then continued: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[B]ecause as Christians we know that God's covenant with Israel by God's faithfulness is not broken (Rom 11,29; cf. 3,4), mission understood as call to conversion from idolatry to the living and true God (1 Thes 1,9) does not apply and cannot be applied to Jews.[...] This is not a merely abstract theological affirmation, but an affirmation that has concrete and tangible consequences; namely, that there is no organised Catholic missionary activity towards Jews as there is for all other non-Christian religions.\u2014\u200a\nIn his apostolic exhortation (2013), Pope Francis emphasized communal heritage and mutual respect for each other, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We hold the Jewish people in special regard because their covenant with God has never been revoked, for \"the gifts and the call of God are irrevocable\" (Rom 11:29). The Church, which shares with Jews an important part of the sacred Scriptures, looks upon the people of the covenant and their faith as one of the sacred roots of her own Christian identity (cf. Rom 11:16\u201318). As Christians, we cannot consider Judaism as a foreign religion; nor do we include the Jews among those called to turn from idols and to serve the true God (cf. 1 Thes 1:9). With them, we believe in the one God who acts in history, and with them we accept his revealed word.\u2014\u200a\nSimilarly, the words of Cardinal Kasper, \"God's grace, which is the grace of Jesus Christ according to our faith, is available to all. Therefore, the Church believes that Judaism, [as] the faithful response of the Jewish people to God's irrevocable covenant, is salvific for them, because God is faithful to his promises,\" highlight the covenantal relationship of God with the Jewish people, but differ from Pope Francis in calling the Jewish faith \"salvific\". In 2011, Kasper specifically repudiated the notion of \"displacement\" theology, clarifying that the \"New Covenant for Christians is not the replacement (substitution), but the fulfillment of the Old Covenant.\"\nThese statements by Catholic officials signal a remaining point of debate, wherein some adhere to a movement away from supersessionism, and others remain with a \"soft\" notion of supersessionism. Traditionalist Catholic groups, such as the canonically irregular Society of St. Pius X, strongly oppose the theological developments concerning Judaism made at Vatican II and retain \"hard\" supersessionist views. Even among mainstream Catholic groups and official Catholic teaching, elements of \"soft\" supersessionism remain. The \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" refers to a future corporate repentance on the part of Jews:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The glorious Messiah's coming is suspended at every moment of history until his recognition by 'all Israel,' for 'a hardening has come upon part of Israel' in their 'unbelief' toward Jesus [Rom 11:20-26; cf. Mt 23:39].[...] The 'full inclusion' of the Jews in the Messiah's salvation, in the wake of 'the full number of the Gentiles' [Rom 11:12, 25; cf. Lk 21:24], will enable the People of God to achieve 'the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ,' in which 'God may be all in all.' The Church teaches that there is an integral continuity between the covenants rather than a rupture.\nIn the Second Vatican Council's (1964), the Church stated that God \"chose the race of Israel as a people\" and \"set up a covenant\" with them, instructing them and making them holy. However, \"all these things.[...] were done by way of preparation and as a figure of that new and perfect covenant\" instituted by and ratified in Christ (No. 9). Vatican II also affirmed, \"the Church is the new people of God\" without being \"Israel according to the flesh\", the Jewish people.\nIn \"Notes on the Correct Way to Present the Jews and Judaism\" (1985), the Church stated that the \"Church and Judaism cannot then be seen as two parallel ways of salvation and the Church must witness to Christ as the Redeemer of all.\"\nProtestant.\nModern Protestants hold a range of positions on supersessionism and the relationship between the Church and the Jewish people. These differences arise from dissimilar literal versus figurative approaches to understanding the relationships between the covenants of the Bible, particularly the relationship between the covenants of the Old Testament and the New Covenant.\nAfter the establishment of the political state of Israel in the wake of the Holocaust, mainstream Christian theologians and denominations began to re-examine supersessionism and some communities came to outright reject the teaching. Protestant hermeneutical frameworks tend to guide views on the subject, with covenant theology generally associated with supersessionism and dispensationalism generally opposed to supersessionism. Christian Zionism is also associated with a rejection of supersessionism; dual-covenant theology contrasts with supersessionism by holding that the Mosaic covenant remains valid for Talmudic Jews.\nDiffering approaches influence how the land promise in Genesis 12, 15 and 17 is understood, whether it is interpreted literally or figuratively, both with regard to the land and the identity of people who inherit it.\nAdherents to these various views are not restricted to a single denomination though some traditions teach a certain view. Classical covenant theology is taught within the Presbyterian and Continental Reformed traditions. Methodist hermeneutics traditionally use a variation of this, known as Wesleyan covenant theology, which is consistent with Arminian soteriology. Certain mainline American denominations (e.g. TEC, ELCA, UMC) have released non-supersessionist statements. Liberal Protestant opponents to supersessionism associate the doctrine with racist motivations.\nPaul van Buren developed a thoroughly nonsupersessionist position, in contrast to Karl Barth, his mentor. He wrote, \"The reality of the Jewish people, fixed in history by the reality of their election, in their faithfulness in spite of their unfaithfulness, is as solid and sure as that of the gentile church.\"\nLutheranism.\nThe Lutheran Churches have historically taught the doctrine of supersessionism. This continues to be taught in Confessional Lutheran denominations, such as the Lutheran Church \u2013 Missouri Synod, which have rejected a Christian theological basis for Zionism.\nReformed.\nThe Reformed (Continental Reformed, Presbyterian, Congregationalist and Reformed Anglican) tradition adheres to covenant theology and historically has taught that \"Christ fulfills the expectations of Jewish covenant life and renews the people of God rooted in the Old Testament and Judaism\" and that \"Jesus is the new temple, the new Israel.\"\nLatter-day Saints.\nMormonism professes to be the restoration of the original Christian faith and that the ancient Hebrew religion was a form of proto-Christianity. Nevertheless, Latter-day Saints believe that the modern day descendants of Israel are still God's covenant people, but they have nonetheless apostatized from the proto-Christian faith that God anciently revealed through the ancient patriarchs and Israel's prophets. For example, the Book of Moses narrates that the biblical patriarch Enoch was shown a vision of Jesus as the Messiah who should be crucified and resurrected. The Book of Abraham narrates that God revealed to the titular biblical patriarch a vision of the Son of Man (a common title for Jesus Christ) being chosen in a premortal council to serve as the Redeemer of mankind.\nHistorically, Latter-day Saint leaders and church instructional materials have promoted the idea that those who accept baptism into the church are literal descendants of the scattered Israelites, primarily the tribe of Ephraim. However, those teachings have been de-emphasized since the latter 20th century in favor of a competing narrative regarding members being adopted or \"grafted\" into the House of Israel.\nThe title page of the Book of Mormon\u2014which adherents believe is among content translated by Joseph Smith from the gold plates\u2014states that one of its primary purposes is \"to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God.\" The Nephites\u2014whom the Book of Mormon presents as ancient Israelites who escaped Jerusalem just before the Babylonian captivity\u2014are said to have kept the Law of Moses with an understanding that it presaged Christ's messianic mission. The Book of Mormon further teaches that because the Jews rejected and crucified Christ, they will be scattered among the nations of the earth and scourged across generations until they accept Christ as the true Messiah. According to the Doctrine and Covenants, after Jesus reveals himself to the Jews, they will weep because of their iniquities.\nIn 1982, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, published a book titled \"The Millennial Messiah\", which devotes an entire chapter to \"The Jews and the Second Coming\". It states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSome Jews consider the Latter-day Saint practice of posthumous baptism a particularly disrespectful enactment of supersessionist beliefs, and although the Church implemented guidelines restricting proxy baptism of Jewish Holocaust victims, the practice of baptizing deceased Jews has continued.\nJewish.\nRabbinic Judaism rejects supersessionism, only discussing the topic as an idea upheld by Christian and Muslim theologians. Some modern Jews are offended by the traditional Christian belief in supersessionism, as they believe it undermines the history of their religion.\nSupersessionism may be viewed as fundamentally antisemitic.\nMuslim.\nThe Islamic teaching of \"tahrif\" teaches that earlier monotheistic scriptures or earlier interpretations of them have been corrupted by later interpretations of them, while the Quran presents a pure and unaltered version of their divine message.\nIn its canonical form, the Islamic idea of teaches that Jewish and Christian scriptures or their interpretations have been corrupted, which has obscured the divine message that they originally contained. According to this teaching, the Quran both points out and corrects these supposed errors introduced by previous corruption of monotheistic scriptures, which makes it the final and most pure divine revelation.\nSandra Toenis Keiting argues that Islam was supersessionist from its inception, advocating the view that the Quranic revelations would \"replace the corrupted scriptures possessed by other communities\", and that early Islamic scriptures display a \"clear theology of revelation that is concerned with establishing the credibility of the nascent community\" vis-\u00e0-vis other religions. In contrast, Abdulaziz Sachedina has argued that Islamic supersessionism stems not from the Quran or hadith, but rather from the work of Muslim jurists who reinterpreted the Quranic message about \"islam\" (in its literal meaning of 'submission') being \"the only true religion with God [...] in the context of the political and social position of the community\", thereby providing theoretical justification for Muslim political dominance and a wider interpretation of the notion of jihad, leading Muslim jurists to claim that Islam is superior to other religions.\nIn Islamic legal exegesis (), abrogation () is the theory developed to resolve contradictory Quranic revelation by amending the earlier revelation. Only uses a form of the word (specifically meaning 'we abrogate'). indicates of two varieties of abrogation: \"supersession\" \u2013 the \"suspension\" and replacement of the old verse without its elimination \u2013 or \"suppression\" \u2013 the nullification of the old verse from the written Quran ().\nTypes.\nBoth Christian and Jewish theologians have identified different types of supersessionism in the Christian reading of the Bible.\nR. Kendall Soulen notes three categories of supersessionism identified by Christian theologians: punitive, economic, and structural:\nThese three views are neither mutually exclusive, nor logically dependent, and it is possible to hold all of them or any one with or without the others. The work of Matthew Tapie attempts a further clarification of the language of supersessionism in modern theology that Peter Ochs has called \"the clearest teaching on supersessionism in modern scholarship.\" Tapie argued that Soulen's view of economic supersessionism shares important similarities with those of Jules Isaac's thought (the French-Jewish historian well known for his identification of \"the teaching of contempt\" in the Christian tradition) and can ultimately be traced to the medieval concept of the \"cessation of the law\" \u2013 the idea that Jewish observance of the ceremonial law (Sabbath, circumcision, and dietary laws) ceases to have a positive significance for Jews after the passion of Christ. According to Soulen, Christians today often repudiate supersessionism but they do not always carefully examine just what that is supposed to mean. Soulen thinks Tapie's work is a remedy to this situation.\nReferences.\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29213", "revid": "50621489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29213", "title": "Software cracking", "text": "Modification of software, often to use it for free\nSoftware cracking (known as \"breaking\" mostly in the 1980s) is an act of removing copy protection from a software. Copy protection can be removed by applying a specific \"crack\". A \"crack\" can mean any tool that enables breaking software protection, a stolen product key, or guessed password. Cracking software generally involves circumventing licensing and usage restrictions on commercial software by illegal methods. These methods can include modifying code directly through disassembling and bit editing, sharing stolen product keys, or developing software to generate activation keys. Examples of \"crack\"s are: applying a \"patch\" or by creating reverse-engineered serial number generators known as \"keygens\", thus bypassing software registration and payments or converting a trial/demo version of the software into fully-functioning software without paying for it. Software cracking contributes to the rise of online piracy where pirated software is distributed to end-users through filesharing sites like BitTorrent, One click hosting (OCH), or via Usenet downloads, or by downloading bundles of the original software with cracks or keygens.\nSome of these tools are called keygen, patch, loader, or no-disc crack. A keygen is a handmade product serial number generator that often offers the ability to generate working serial numbers in your own name. A patch is a small computer program that modifies the machine code of another program. This has the advantage for a cracker to not include a large executable in a release when only a few bytes are changed. A loader modifies the startup flow of a program and does not remove the protection but circumvents it. A well-known example of a loader is a trainer used to cheat in games. Fairlight pointed out in one of their .nfo files that these types of cracks are not allowed for warez scene game releases. A nukewar has shown that the protection may not kick in at any point for it to be a valid crack.\nSoftware cracking is closely related to reverse engineering because the process of attacking a copy protection technology, is similar to the process of reverse engineering. The distribution of cracked copies is illegal in most countries. There have been lawsuits over cracking software. It might be legal to use cracked software in certain circumstances. Educational resources for reverse engineering and software cracking are, however, legal and available in the form of Crackme programs.\nHistory.\nSoftware are inherently expensive to produce but cheap to duplicate and distribute. Therefore, software producers generally tried to implement some form of copy protection before releasing it to the market. In 1984, Laind Huntsman, the head of software development for Formaster, a software protection company, commented that \"no protection system has remained uncracked by enterprising programmers for more than a few months\". In 2001, Dan S. Wallach, a professor from Rice University, argued that \"those determined to bypass copy-protection have always found ways to do so \u2013 and always will\".\nMost of the early software crackers were computer hobbyists who often formed groups that competed against each other in the cracking and spreading of software. Breaking a new copy protection scheme as quickly as possible was often regarded as an opportunity to demonstrate one's technical superiority rather than a possibility of money-making. Software crackers usually did not benefit materially from their actions and their motivation was the challenge itself of removing the protection. Some low skilled hobbyists would take already cracked software and edit various unencrypted strings of text in it to change messages a game would tell a game player, often something considered vulgar. Uploading the altered copies on file sharing networks provided a source of laughs for adult users. The cracker groups of the 1980s started to advertise themselves and their skills by attaching animated screens known as crack intros in the software programs they cracked and released. Once the technical competition had expanded from the challenges of cracking to the challenges of creating visually stunning intros, the foundations for a new subculture known as demoscene were established. Demoscene started to separate itself from the illegal \"warez scene\" during the 1990s and is now regarded as a completely different subculture. Many software crackers have later grown into extremely capable software reverse engineers; the deep knowledge of assembly required in order to crack protections enables them to reverse engineer drivers in order to port them from binary-only drivers for Windows to drivers with source code for Linux and other free operating systems. Also because music and game intro was such an integral part of gaming the music format and graphics became very popular when hardware became affordable for the home user.\nWith the rise of the Internet, software crackers developed secretive online organizations. In the latter half of the nineties, one of the most respected sources of information about \"software protection reversing\" was Fravia's website.\nIn 2017, a group of software crackers started a project to preserve Apple II software by removing the copy protection.\n+HCU.\nThe \"High Cracking University\" (+HCU) was founded by Old Red Cracker (+ORC), considered a genius of reverse engineering and a legendary figure in Reverse Code Engineering (RCE), to advance research into RCE. He had also taught and authored many papers on the subject, and his texts are considered classics in the field and are mandatory reading for students of RCE.\nThe addition of the \"+\" sign in front of the nickname of a reverser signified membership in the +HCU. Amongst the students of +HCU were the top of the elite Windows reversers worldwide. +HCU published a new reverse engineering problem annually and a small number of respondents with the best replies qualified for an undergraduate position at the university.\n+Fravia was a professor at +HCU. Fravia's website was known as \"+Fravia's Pages of Reverse Engineering\" and he used it to challenge programmers as well as the wider society to \"reverse engineer\" the \"brainwashing of a corrupt and rampant materialism\". In its heyday, his website received millions of visitors per year and its influence was \"widespread\". On his site, +Fravia also maintained a database of the tutorials generated by +HCU students for posterity.\nNowadays most of the graduates of +HCU have migrated to Linux and few have remained as Windows reversers. The information at the university has been rediscovered by a new generation of researchers and practitioners of RCE who have started new research projects in the field.\nMethods.\nThe most common software crack is the modification of an application's binary to cause or prevent a specific key branch in the program's execution. This is accomplished by reverse engineering the compiled program code using a debugger such as x64dbg, SoftICE, OllyDbg, GDB, or MacsBug until the software cracker reaches the subroutine that contains the primary method of protecting the software (or by disassembling an executable file with a program such as IDA). The binary is then modified using the debugger or a hex editor such as HIEW or monitor in a manner that replaces a prior branching opcode with its complement or a NOP opcode so the key branch will either always execute a specific subroutine or skip over it. Almost all common software cracks are a variation of this type. A region of code that must not be entered is often called a \"bad boy\" while one that should be followed is a \"good boy\".\nProprietary software developers are constantly developing techniques such as code obfuscation, encryption, and self-modifying code to make binary modification increasingly difficult. Even with these measures being taken, developers struggle to combat software cracking. This is because it is very common for a professional to publicly release a simple cracked EXE or Retrium Installer for public download, eliminating the need for inexperienced users to crack the software themselves.\nA specific example of this technique is a crack that removes the expiration period from a time-limited trial of an application. These cracks are usually programs that alter the program executable and sometimes shared libraries linked to the application and the process of altering the original binary files is called patching. Similar cracks are available for software that requires a hardware dongle. A company can also break the copy protection of programs that they have legally purchased but that are licensed to particular hardware, so that there is no risk of downtime due to hardware failure (and, of course, no need to restrict oneself to running the software on bought hardware only).\nAnother method is the use of special software such as CloneCD to scan for the use of a commercial copy protection application. After discovering the software used to protect the application, another tool may be used to remove the copy protection from the software on the CD or DVD. This may enable another program such as Alcohol 120%, CloneDVD, Game Jackal, or Daemon Tools to copy the protected software to a user's hard disk. Popular commercial copy protection applications which may be scanned for include SafeDisc and StarForce.\nIn other cases, it might be possible to decompile a program in order to get access to the original source code or code on a level higher than machine code. This is often possible with scripting languages and languages utilizing JIT compilation. An example is cracking (or debugging) on the .NET platform where one might consider manipulating CIL to achieve one's needs. Java's bytecode also works in a similar fashion in which there is an intermediate language before the program is compiled to run on the platform dependent machine code.\nAdvanced reverse engineering for protections such as SecuROM, SafeDisc, StarForce, or Denuvo requires a cracker, or many crackers to spend much more time studying the protection, eventually finding every flaw within the protection code, and then coding their own tools to \"unwrap\" the protection automatically from executable (.EXE) and library (.DLL) files.\nThere are a number of sites on the Internet that let users download cracks produced by warez groups for popular games and applications (although at the danger of acquiring malicious software that is sometimes distributed via such sites). Although these cracks are used by legal buyers of software, they can also be used by people who have downloaded or otherwise obtained unauthorized copies (often through P2P networks).\nSoftware piracy.\nSoftware cracking has led to the distribution of pirated software around the world (software piracy). It was estimated that the United States lost US$2.3 billion in business application software in 1996. Software piracy rates were especially prevalent in African, Asian, Eastern European, and Latin American countries. In certain countries such as Indonesia, Pakistan, Kuwait, China, and El Salvador, 90% of the software used was pirated.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29215", "revid": "1942604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29215", "title": "SOAP", "text": "Messaging protocol for web services\nSOAP (originally an acronym for Simple Object Access Protocol) is a messaging protocol specification for exchanging structured information in the implementation of web services in computer networks. It uses XML Information Set for its message format, and relies on application layer protocols, most often Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), although some legacy systems communicate over Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), for message negotiation and transmission.\nCharacteristics.\nSOAP provides the Messaging Protocol layer of a web services protocol stack for web services. It is an XML-based protocol consisting of three parts: \nSOAP has three major characteristics:\nAs an example of what SOAP procedures can do, an application can send a SOAP request to a server that has web services enabled\u2014such as a real-estate price database\u2014with the parameters for a search. The server then returns a SOAP response (an XML-formatted document) with the resulting data, e.g., prices, location, features. Since the generated data comes in a standardized machine-parsable format, the requesting application can then integrate it directly.\nThe SOAP architecture consists of several layers of specifications for:\nSOAP evolved as a successor of XML-RPC, though it borrows its transport and interaction neutrality from Web Service Addressing and the envelope/header/body from elsewhere (probably from WDDX).\nHistory.\nSOAP was designed as an object-access protocol and released as XML-RPC in June 1998 as part of Frontier 5.1 by Dave Winer, Don Box, Bob Atkinson, and Mohsen Al-Ghosein for Microsoft, where Atkinson and Al-Ghosein were working. The specification was not made available until it was submitted to IETF 13 September 1999. According to Don Box, this was due to politics within Microsoft. Because of Microsoft's hesitation, Dave Winer shipped XML-RPC in 1998.\nThe submitted Internet Draft did not reach RFC status and is therefore not considered a \"web standard\" as such. Version 1.1 of the specification was published as a W3C Note on 8 May 2000. Since version 1.1 did not reach W3C Recommendation status, it can not be considered a \"web standard\" either. Version 1.2 of the specification, however, became a W3C recommendation on June 24, 2003. \"SOAP\" originally stood for \"Simple Object Access Protocol\" but version 1.2 of the standard dropped this acronym.\nThe SOAP specification was maintained by the XML Protocol Working Group of the World Wide Web Consortium until the group was closed 10 July 2009. \nAfter SOAP was first introduced, it became the underlying layer of a more complex set of web services, based on WSDL, XSD and UDDI. These different services, especially UDDI, have proved to be of far less interest, but an appreciation of them gives a complete understanding of the expected role of SOAP compared to how web services have actually evolved.\nSOAP terminology.\nSOAP specification can be broadly defined to be consisting of the following three conceptual components: protocol concepts, encapsulation concepts and network concepts.\nSpecification.\nThe SOAP specification defines the messaging framework, which consists of:\nSOAP building blocks.\nA SOAP message is an ordinary XML document containing the following elements:\nTransport methods.\nBoth SMTP and HTTP are valid application layer protocols used as transport for SOAP, but HTTP has gained wider acceptance as it works well with today's internet infrastructure; specifically, HTTP works well with network firewalls. SOAP may also be used over HTTPS (which is the same protocol as HTTP at the application level, but uses an encrypted transport protocol underneath) with either simple or mutual authentication; this is the advocated WS-I method to provide web service security as stated in the WS-I Basic Profile 1.1.\nThis is a major advantage over other distributed protocols like GIOP/IIOP or DCOM, which are normally filtered by firewalls. SOAP over AMQP is yet another possibility that some implementations support. SOAP also has an advantage over DCOM that it is unaffected by security rights configured on the machines that require knowledge of both transmitting and receiving nodes. This lets SOAP be loosely coupled in a way that is not possible with DCOM. There is also the SOAP-over-UDP OASIS standard.\nMessage format.\nXML Information Set was chosen as the standard message format because of its widespread use by major corporations and open source development efforts. Typically, XML Information Set is serialized as XML. A wide variety of freely available tools significantly eases the transition to a SOAP-based implementation. The somewhat lengthy syntax of XML can be both a benefit and a drawback. While it facilitates error detection and avoids interoperability problems such as byte-order (endianness), it can slow processing speed and can be cumbersome. For example, CORBA, GIOP, ICE, and DCOM use much shorter, binary message formats. On the other hand, hardware appliances are available to accelerate processing of XML messages. Binary XML is also being explored as a means for streamlining the throughput requirements of XML.\nXML messages by their self-documenting nature usually have more 'overhead' (e.g., headers, nested tags, delimiters) than actual data in contrast to earlier protocols where the overhead was usually a relatively small percentage of the overall message.\nIn financial messaging SOAP was found to result in a 2\u20134 times larger message than previous protocols FIX (Financial Information Exchange) and CDR (Common Data Representation).\nXML Information Set does not have to be serialized in XML. For instance, CSV and JSON XML-infoset representations exist. There is also no need to specify a generic transformation framework. The concept of SOAP bindings allows for specific bindings for a specific application. The drawback is that both the senders and receivers have to support this newly defined binding.\nExample message (encapsulated in HTTP).\nThe message below requests a stock price for AT&amp;T (stock ticker symbol \"T\").\nPOST /InStock HTTP/1.1\nHost: www.example.org\nContent-Type: application/soap+xml; charset=utf-8\nContent-Length: 299\nSOAPAction: \"http://www.w3.org/2003/05/soap-envelope\"\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\"?&gt;\n&lt;soap:Envelope xmlns:soap=\"http://www.w3.org/2003/05/soap-envelope\" xmlns:m=\"http://www.example.org\"&gt;\n &lt;soap:Header&gt;\n &lt;/soap:Header&gt;\n &lt;soap:Body&gt;\n &lt;m:GetStockPrice&gt;\n &lt;m:StockName&gt;T&lt;/m:StockName&gt;\n &lt;/m:GetStockPrice&gt;\n &lt;/soap:Body&gt;\n&lt;/soap:Envelope&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29216", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29216", "title": "Viagra", "text": ""}
{"id": "29217", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29217", "title": "Sodium pentothal", "text": ""}
{"id": "29218", "revid": "50779047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29218", "title": "Sodium thiopental", "text": "Barbiturate general anesthetic\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSodium thiopental, also known as thiopentone and sold under the brand name Pentothal, is a rapid-onset short-acting barbiturate general anesthetic. It is the thiobarbiturate analog of pentobarbital, and an analog of thiobarbital. Sodium thiopental is a therapeutic alternative on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. It was the first of three drugs administered during most lethal injections in the United States until the US division of Hospira objected and stopped manufacturing the drug in 2011, and the European Union banned the export of the drug for this purpose. Although thiopental abuse carries a dependency risk, its recreational use is rare.\nSodium thiopental is well-known in popular culture, especially under the name \"sodium pentothal,\" as a \"truth serum,\" although its efficacy in this role is questioned.\nUses.\nAnesthesia.\nSodium thiopental is an ultra-short-acting barbiturate and has been used commonly in the induction phase of general anesthesia. Its use has been largely replaced with that of propofol, but may retain some popularity as an induction agent for rapid-sequence induction and intubation, such as in obstetrics. Following intravenous injection, the drug rapidly reaches the brain and causes unconsciousness within 30\u201345 seconds. At one minute, the drug attains a peak concentration of about 60% of the total dose in the brain. Thereafter, the drug distributes to the rest of the body, and in about 5\u201310 minutes the concentration in the brain is low enough that consciousness returns.\nA normal dose of sodium thiopental (usually 4-6\u00a0mg/kg) given to a pregnant woman for operative delivery (caesarean section) rapidly makes her unconscious, but the fetus in her uterus remains conscious. However, larger or repeated doses can depress the fetus's consciousness.\nSodium thiopental is not used to maintain anesthesia in surgical procedures because, in infusion, it displays zero-order elimination pharmacokinetics, leading to a long period before consciousness is regained. Instead, anesthesia is usually maintained with an inhaled anesthetic (gas) agent. Inhaled anesthetics are eliminated relatively quickly, so stopping the inhaled anesthetic allows rapid return of consciousness. Sodium thiopental would have to be given in large amounts to maintain unconsciousness during anaesthesia due to its rapid redistribution throughout the body (as it has a high volume of distribution). Since its half-life of 5.5 to 26 hours is quite long, consciousness would take a long time to return.\nIn veterinary medicine, sodium thiopental is used to induce anesthesia in animals. Since it is redistributed to fat, certain lean breeds of dogs such as sighthounds have prolonged recoveries from sodium thiopental due to their lack of body fat and their lean body mass. Conversely, obese animals recover rapidly, but it takes much longer for the drug to be entirely removed (metabolized) from their bodies. Sodium thiopental is always administered intravenously, as it can be fairly irritating to tissue and is a vesicant; severe tissue necrosis and sloughing can occur if it is injected incorrectly into the tissue around a vein.\nMedically-induced coma.\nIn addition to anesthesia induction, sodium thiopental was historically used to induce medical comas. It has now been superseded by drugs such as propofol because their effects wear off more quickly than thiopental.\nPatients with brain swelling, causing elevation of intracranial pressure, either secondary to trauma or following surgery, may benefit from this drug. Sodium thiopental, and the barbiturate class of drugs, decrease neuronal activity thereby decreasing cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen consumption (CMRO2), thus decreasing the cerebrovascular response to carbon dioxide, which in turn decreases intracranial pressure. Patients with refractory elevated intracranial pressure (RICH) due to traumatic brain injury (TBI) may have improved long term outcome when barbiturate coma is added to their neurointensive care treatment. Reportedly, thiopental has been shown to be superior to pentobarbital in reducing intracranial pressure. This phenomenon is also called an inverse steal or Robin Hood effect as cerebral perfusion to all parts of the brain is reduced (due to the decreased cerebrovascular response to carbon dioxide) allowing optimal perfusion to ischaemic areas of the brain which have higher metabolic demands, since vessels supplying ischaemic areas of the brain would already be maximally dilated because of the metabolic demand.\nEuthanasia.\nSodium thiopental is used intravenously for the purposes of euthanasia. In both Belgium and the Netherlands, where active euthanasia is allowed by law, the standard protocol recommends sodium thiopental as the ideal agent to induce coma, followed by pancuronium bromide to paralyze muscles and stop breathing.\nIntravenous administration is the most reliable and rapid way to accomplish euthanasia. Death is quick. A coma is first induced by intravenous administration of 20\u00a0mg/kg thiopental sodium (Nesdonal) in a small volume (10\u00a0mL physiological saline). Then, a triple dose of a non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug is given, such as 20\u00a0mg pancuronium bromide (Pavulon) or 20\u00a0mg vecuronium bromide (Norcuron). The paralytic should be given intravenously to ensure optimal bioavailability but pancuronium bromide may be administered intramuscularly at an increased dosage level of 40\u00a0mg.\nLethal injection.\nAlong with pancuronium bromide and potassium chloride, thiopental is used in 34 US states to execute prisoners by lethal injection. A large dose is given to ensure rapid loss of consciousness. Although death usually occurs within ten minutes of the beginning of the injection process, some have been known to take longer.\nIn December 2009, Ohio became the first state in the US to use a single dose of sodium thiopental for an execution, following the failed use of the standard three-drug cocktail during a prior execution, due to inability to locate suitable veins. Kenneth Biros was executed using the single-drug method.\nWashington became the second state in the US to use the single-dose sodium thiopental injections for executions. In September 2010, the execution of Cal Coburn Brown was the first in the state to use a single-dose, single-drug injection. His death was pronounced approximately one and a half minutes after the intravenous administration of five grams of the drug.\nAfter its use for the execution of Jeffrey Landrigan in the US, the United Kingdom introduced a ban on the export of sodium thiopental in December 2010, after it was established that no European supplies to the US were being used for any other purpose. The restrictions were based on \"the European Union Torture Regulation (including licensing of drugs used in execution by lethal injection)\". From 21 December 2011, the EU extended trade restrictions to prevent the export of certain medicinal products for capital punishment, stating that \"the Union disapproves of capital punishment in all circumstances and works towards its universal abolition\".\nTruth serum.\nThiopental is still used in some places as a truth serum to weaken the resolve of a subject and make the individual more compliant to pressure. Barbiturates decrease both higher cortical brain function and inhibition. It is thought that because lying is a more involved process than telling the truth, suppression of the higher cortical functions may lead to the uncovering of the truth. The drug tends to make subjects verbose and cooperative with interrogators; however, the reliability of confessions made under thiopental is questionable.\nPsychiatry.\nPsychiatrists have used thiopental to desensitize patients with phobias and to \"facilitate the recall of painful repressed memories.\" One psychiatrist who worked with thiopental is Jan Bastiaans, who used this procedure to help relieve trauma in surviving victims of the Holocaust. Another notable psychiatrist using thiopental for the first time in the 1960s in psychoanalytic therapy setting - in a somewhat similar way to psycholytic psychotherapy - was the Hungarian-Australian psychiatrist Imre Z\u00e1dor. He administered thiopental to psychotherapy patients to reduce transferential resistance in cases of anorexia nervosa as well as to resolve unconscious blockages in other cases.\nMechanism of action.\nSodium thiopental is a member of the barbiturate class of drugs, which are relatively non-selective compounds that bind to an entire superfamily of ligand-gated ion channels, of which the GABAA receptor channel is one of several representatives. This superfamily of ion channels includes the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR), the 5-HT3 receptor, the glycine receptor and others. Surprisingly, while GABAA receptor currents are increased by barbiturates (and other general anesthetics), ligand-gated ion channels that are predominantly permeable for cationic ions are blocked by these compounds. For example, neuronal nAChR are blocked by clinically relevant anesthetic concentrations of both sodium thiopental and pentobarbital. Such findings implicate (non-GABAergic) ligand-gated ion channels, e.g. the neuronal nAChR, in mediating some of the (side) effects of barbiturates. The GABAA receptor is an inhibitory channel that decreases neuronal activity, and barbiturates enhance the inhibitory action of the GABAA receptor.\nControversies.\nFollowing a shortage that led a court to delay an execution in California, a company spokesman for Hospira, the sole American manufacturer of the drug, objected to the use of thiopental in lethal injection. \"Hospira manufactures this product because it improves or saves lives, and the company markets it solely for use as indicated on the product labeling. The drug is not indicated for capital punishment and Hospira does not support its use in this procedure.\" On January 21, 2011, the company announced that it would stop production of sodium thiopental from its plant in Italy, because it could not provide Italian authorities with guarantees that exported doses would not be used in executions. According to a company spokesperson, Italy was the only viable place where it could produce the drug, leaving the US without a supplier.\nIn October 2015 the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) confiscated an overseas shipment of thiopental destined for the states of Arizona and Texas. The FDA said in a statement, \"Courts have concluded that sodium thiopental for the injection in humans is an unapproved drug and may not be imported into the country\".\nMetabolism.\nThiopental rapidly and easily crosses the blood\u2013brain barrier as it is a lipophilic molecule. As with all lipid-soluble anaesthetic drugs, the short duration of action of sodium thiopental is due almost entirely to its redistribution away from central circulation into muscle and fatty tissue, due to its very high lipid\u2013water partition coefficient (approximately 10), leading to sequestration in fatty tissue. Once redistributed, the free fraction in the blood is metabolized in the liver by zero-order kinetics. Sodium thiopental is mainly metabolized to pentobarbital, 5-ethyl-5-(1'-methyl-3'-hydroxybutyl)-2-thiobarbituric acid, and 5-ethyl-5-(1'-methyl-3'-carboxypropyl)-2-thiobarbituric acid.\nDosage.\nThe usual dose range for induction of anesthesia using thiopental is from 3 to 6\u00a0mg/kg; however, there are many factors that can alter this. Premedication with sedatives such as benzodiazepines or clonidine will reduce requirements due to drug synergy, as do specific disease states and other patient factors. Among patient factors are: age, sex, and lean body mass. Specific disease conditions that can alter the dose requirements of thiopentone and for that matter any other intravenous anaesthetic are: hypovolemia, burns, azotemia, liver failure, hypoproteinemia, etc.\nContraindications.\nThiopental should be used with caution in cases of liver disease, Addison's disease, myxedema, severe heart disease, severe hypotension, a severe breathing disorder, or a family history of porphyria.\nCo-administration of pentoxifylline and thiopental causes death by acute pulmonary edema in rats. This pulmonary edema was not mediated by cardiac failure or by pulmonary hypertension but was due to increased pulmonary vascular permeability.\nHistory.\nSodium thiopental was discovered in the early 1930s by Ernest H. Volwiler and Donalee L. Tabern, working for Abbott Laboratories. It was first used in human beings on March 8, 1934, by Dr. Ralph M. Waters in an investigation of its properties, which were short-term anesthesia and surprisingly little analgesia. Three months later, Dr. John S. Lundy started a clinical trial of thiopental at the Mayo Clinic at the request of Abbott. Abbott continued to make the drug until 2004, when it spun off its hospital-products division as Hospira.\nThiopental is famously associated with a number of anesthetic deaths in victims of the attack on Pearl Harbor. These deaths, relatively soon after the drug's introduction, were said to be due to excessive doses given to shocked trauma patients. However, evidence available through the freedom of information legislation suggested that the story was exaggerated. Of the 344 wounded that were admitted to the Tripler Army Hospital, only 13 did not survive, and it is unlikely that thiopentone overdose was responsible for more than a few of them.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29219", "revid": "7550809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29219", "title": "Stone Age", "text": "Prehistoric period before metal tools\nThe Stone Age was a broad prehistoric period during which stone was widely used to make stone tools with an edge, a point, or a percussion surface. The period lasted for roughly 3.4\u00a0million years and ended between 4000 BC and 2000\u00a0BC, with the advent of metalworking. Because of its enormous timescale, it encompasses 99% of human history. \nThough some simple metalworking of malleable metals, particularly the use of gold and copper for purposes of ornamentation, was known in the Stone Age, it is the melting and smelting of copper that marks the end of the Stone Age. In Western Asia, this occurred by about 3000\u00a0BC, when bronze became widespread. The term Bronze Age is used to describe the period that followed the Stone Age, as well as to describe cultures that had developed techniques and technologies for working copper alloys (bronze: originally copper and arsenic, later copper and tin) into tools, supplanting stone in many uses.\nStone Age artifacts that have been discovered include tools used by modern humans, by their predecessor species in the genus \"Homo\", and possibly by the earlier partly contemporaneous genera \"Australopithecus\" and \"Paranthropus\". Bone tools have been discovered that were used during this period as well but these are rarely preserved in the archaeological record. The Stone Age is further subdivided by the types of stone tools in use.\nThe Stone Age is the first period in the three-age system frequently used in archaeology to divide the timeline of human technological prehistory (especially in Europe and western Asia) into functional periods, with the next two being the Bronze Age and the Iron Age, respectively. The Stone Age is also commonly divided into three distinct periods: the earliest and most primitive being the Paleolithic era; a transitional period with finer tools known as the Mesolithic era; and the final stage known as the Neolithic era. Neolithic peoples were the first to transition away from hunter-gatherer societies into the settled lifestyle of inhabiting towns and villages as agriculture became widespread. In the chronology of prehistory, the Neolithic era usually overlaps with the Chalcolithic (\"Copper\") era preceding the Bronze Age.\nThe Archaeology of the Americas uses different markers to assign five periods which have different dates in different areas; the oldest period is the similarly named Lithic stage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical significance.\nThe Stone Age is contemporaneous with the evolution of the genus \"Homo\", with the possible exception of the early Stone Age, when species prior to \"Homo\" may have manufactured tools. According to the age and location of the current evidence, the cradle of the genus is the East African Rift System, especially toward the north in Ethiopia, where it is bordered by grasslands. The closest relative among the other living primates, the genus \"Pan\", represents a branch that continued on in the deep forest, where the primates evolved. The rift served as a conduit for movement into southern Africa and also north down the Nile into North Africa and through the continuation of the rift in the Levant to the vast grasslands of Asia.\nStarting from about 4\u00a0million years ago (mya) a single biome established itself from South Africa through the rift, North Africa, and across Asia to modern China. This has been called \"transcontinental 'savannahstan'\" recently. Starting in the grasslands of the rift, \"Homo erectus\", the predecessor of modern humans, found an ecological niche as a tool-maker and developed a dependence on it, becoming a \"tool-equipped savanna dweller\".\nStone Age in archaeology.\nBeginning of the Stone Age.\nThe oldest indirect evidence found of stone tool use is fossilised animal bones with tool marks; these are 3.4\u00a0million years old and were found in the Lower Awash Valley in Ethiopia. Archaeological discoveries in Kenya in 2015, identifying what may be the oldest evidence of hominin use of tools known to date, have indicated that \"Kenyanthropus platyops\" (a 3.2 to 3.5-million-year-old Pliocene hominin fossil discovered in Lake Turkana, Kenya, in 1999) may have been the earliest tool-users known.\nThe oldest stone tools were excavated from the site of Lomekwi 3 in West Turkana, northwestern Kenya, and date to 3.3\u00a0million years old. Prior to the discovery of these \"Lomekwian\" tools, the oldest known stone tools had been found at several sites at Gona, Ethiopia, on sediments of the paleo-Awash River, which serve to date them. All the tools come from the Busidama Formation, which lies above a disconformity, or missing layer, which would have been from 2.9 to 2.7\u00a0mya. The oldest sites discovered to contain tools are dated to 2.6\u20132.55\u00a0mya. One of the most striking circumstances about these sites is that they are from the Late Pliocene, where prior to their discovery tools were thought to have evolved only in the Pleistocene. Excavators at the locality point out that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0the earliest stone tool makers were skilled flintknappers\u00a0... The possible reasons behind this seeming abrupt transition from the absence of stone tools to the presence thereof include\u00a0... gaps in the geological record.\nThe species that made the Pliocene tools remains unknown. Fragments of \"Australopithecus garhi\", \"Australopithecus aethiopicus\", and \"Homo\", possibly \"Homo habilis\", have been found in sites near the age of the Gona tools.\nIn July 2018, scientists reported the discovery in China of what may possibly be, if confirmed, the oldest known stone tools outside Africa, estimated at 2.12\u00a0million years old.\nEnd of the Stone Age.\nInnovation in the technique of smelting ore is regarded as the end of the Stone Age and the beginning of the Bronze Age. The first highly significant metal manufactured was bronze, an alloy of copper and tin or arsenic, each of which was smelted separately. The transition from the Stone Age to the Bronze Age was a period during which modern people could smelt copper, but did not yet manufacture bronze, a time known as the Copper Age (or more technically the Chalcolithic or Eneolithic, both meaning 'copper\u2013stone'). The Chalcolithic by convention is the initial period of the Bronze Age. The Bronze Age was followed by the Iron Age.\nThe transition out of the Stone Age occurred between 6000 and 2500\u00a0BC for much of humanity living in North Africa and Eurasia.\nThe first evidence of human metallurgy dates to between the 6th and 5th millennia\u00a0BC in the archaeological sites of the Vin\u010da culture, including Majdanpek, Jarmovac, Plo\u010dnik, Rudna Glava in modern-day Serbia.\n\u00d6tzi the Iceman, a mummy from about 3300 BC, carried with him a copper axe and a flint knife.\nIn some regions, such as Sub-Saharan Africa, the Stone Age was followed directly by the Iron Age. The Middle East and Southeast Asian regions progressed past Stone Age technology around 6000\u00a0BC. Europe, and the rest of Asia became post-Stone Age societies by about 4000\u00a0BC. The proto-Inca cultures of South America continued at a Stone Age level until around 2000\u00a0BC, when gold, copper, and silver made their entrance. The peoples of the Americas notably did not develop a widespread behavior of smelting bronze or iron after the Stone Age period, although the technology existed. Stone tool manufacture continued even after the Stone Age ended in a given area. In Europe and North America, millstones were in use until well into the 20th century, and still are in many parts of the world.\nConcept of the Stone Age.\nThe terms \"Stone Age\", \"Bronze Age\", and \"Iron Age\" are not intended to suggest that advancements and time periods in prehistory are only measured by the type of tool material, rather than, for example, social organization, food sources exploited, adaptation to climate, adoption of agriculture, cooking, settlement, and religion. Like pottery, the typology of the stone tools combined with the relative sequence of the types in various regions provide a chronological framework for the evolution of humanity and society. They serve as diagnostics of date, rather than characterizing the people or the society.\nLithic analysis is a major and specialised form of archaeological investigation. It involves the measurement of stone tools to determine their typology, function and technologies involved. It includes the scientific study of the lithic reduction of the raw materials and methods used to make the prehistoric artifacts that are discovered. Much of this study takes place in the laboratory in the presence of various specialists. In experimental archaeology, researchers attempt to create replica tools, to understand how they were made. Flintknappers are craftsmen who use sharp tools to reduce flintstone to flint tool.\nIn addition to lithic analysis, field prehistorians use a wide range of techniques derived from multiple fields. The work of archaeologists in determining the paleocontext and relative sequence of the layers is supplemented by the efforts of geologic specialists in identifying layers of rock developed or deposited over geologic time; of paleontological specialists in identifying bones and animals; of palynologists in discovering and identifying pollen, spores and plant species; of physicists and chemists in laboratories determining ages of materials by carbon-14, potassium-argon and other methods. The study of the Stone Age has never been limited to stone tools and archaeology, even though they are important forms of evidence. The chief focus of study has always been on the society and the living people who belonged to it.\nUseful as it has been, the concept of the Stone Age has its limitations. The date range of this period is ambiguous, disputed, and variable, depending upon the region in question. While it is possible to speak of a general 'Stone Age' period for the whole of humanity, some groups never developed metal-smelting technology, and so remained in the so-called 'Stone Age' until they encountered technologically developed cultures. The term was innovated to describe the archaeological cultures of Europe. It may not always be the best in relation to regions such as some parts of the Indies and Oceania, where farmers or hunter-gatherers used stone for tools until European colonisation began.\nArchaeologists of the late 19th and early 20th centuries CE, who adapted the three-age system to their ideas, hoped to combine cultural anthropology and archaeology in such a way that a specific contemporaneous tribe could be used to illustrate the way of life and beliefs of the people exercising a particular Stone-Age technology. As a description of people living today, the term \"Stone Age\" is controversial. The Association of Social Anthropologists discourages this use, asserting:To describe any living group as 'primitive' or 'Stone Age' inevitably implies that they are living representatives of some earlier stage of human development that the majority of humankind has left behind.\nThree-stage system.\nIn the 1920s, South African archaeologists organizing the stone tool collections of that country observed that they did not fit the newly detailed Three-Age System. In the words of J. Desmond Clark:\nIt was early realized that the threefold division of culture into Stone, Bronze and Iron Ages adopted in the nineteenth century for Europe had no validity in Africa outside the Nile valley.\nConsequently, they proposed a new system for Africa, the Three-stage System. Clark regarded the Three-age System as valid for North Africa; in sub-Saharan Africa, the Three-stage System was best. In practice, the failure of African archaeologists either to keep this distinction in mind, or to explain which one they mean, contributes to the considerable equivocation already present in the literature. There are in effect two Stone Ages, one part of the Three-age and the other constituting the Three-stage. They refer to one and the same artifacts and the same technologies, but vary by locality and time.\nThe three-stage system was proposed in 1929 by Astley John Hilary Goodwin, a professional archaeologist, and Clarence van Riet Lowe, a civil engineer and amateur archaeologist, in an article titled \"Stone Age Cultures of South Africa\" in the journal \"Annals of the South African Museum\". By then, the dates of the Early Stone Age, or Paleolithic, and Late Stone Age, or Neolithic (\"neo\" = new), were fairly solid and were regarded by Goodwin as absolute. He therefore proposed a relative chronology of periods with floating dates, to be called the Earlier and Later Stone Age. The Middle Stone Age would not change its name, but it would not mean Mesolithic.\nThe duo thus reinvented the Stone Age. In Sub-Saharan Africa, however, iron-working technologies were either invented independently or came across the Sahara from the north (see \"iron metallurgy in Africa\"). The Neolithic was characterized primarily by herding societies rather than large agricultural societies, and although there was copper metallurgy in Africa as well as bronze smelting, archaeologists do not currently recognize a separate Copper Age or Bronze Age. Moreover, the technologies included in those 'stages', as Goodwin called them, were not exactly the same. Since then, the original relative terms have become identified with the technologies of the Paleolithic and Mesolithic, so that they are no longer relative. Moreover, there has been a tendency to drop the comparative degree in favor of the positive: resulting in two sets of Early, Middle and Late Stone Ages of quite different content and chronologies.\nBy voluntary agreement, archaeologists respect the decisions of the Pan-African Congress on Prehistory, which meets every four years to resolve the archaeological business brought before it. Delegates are actually international; the organization takes its name from the topic. Louis Leakey hosted the first one in Nairobi in 1947. It adopted Goodwin and Lowe's 3-stage system at that time, the stages to be called Early, Middle and Later.\nProblem of the transitions.\nThe problem of the transitions in archaeology is a branch of the general philosophic continuity problem, which examines how discrete objects of any sort that are contiguous in any way can be presumed to have a relationship of any sort. In archaeology, the relationship is one of causality. If Period B can be presumed to descend from Period A, there must be a boundary between A and B, the A\u2013B boundary. The problem is in the nature of this boundary. If there is no distinct boundary, then the population of A suddenly stopped using the customs characteristic of A and suddenly started using those of B, an unlikely scenario in the process of evolution. More realistically, a distinct border period, the A/B transition, existed, in which the customs of A were gradually dropped and those of B acquired. If transitions do not exist, then there is no proof of any continuity between A and B.\nThe Stone Age of Europe is characteristically in deficit of known transitions. The 19th and early 20th-century innovators of the modern three-age system recognized the problem of the initial transition, the \"gap\" between the Paleolithic and the Neolithic. Louis Leakey provided something of an answer by proving that man evolved in Africa. The Stone Age must have begun there to be carried repeatedly to Europe by migrant populations. The different phases of the Stone Age thus could appear there without transitions. The burden on African archaeologists became all the greater, because now they must find the missing transitions in Africa. The problem is difficult and ongoing.\nAfter its adoption by the First Pan African Congress in 1947, the Three-Stage Chronology was amended by the Third Congress in 1955 to include a First Intermediate Period between Early and Middle, to encompass the Fauresmith and Sangoan technologies, and the Second Intermediate Period between Middle and Later, to encompass the Magosian technology and others. The chronologic basis for the definition was entirely relative. With the arrival of scientific means of finding an absolute chronology, the two intermediates turned out to be will-of-the-wisps. They were in fact Middle and Lower Paleolithic. Fauresmith is now considered to be a facies of Acheulean, while Sangoan is a facies of Lupemban. Magosian is \"an artificial mix of two different periods\".\nOnce seriously questioned, the intermediates did not wait for the next Pan African Congress two years hence, but were officially rejected in 1965 (again on an advisory basis) by Burg Wartenstein Conference #29, \"Systematic Investigation of the African Later Tertiary and Quaternary\", a conference in anthropology held by the Wenner-Gren Foundation, at Burg Wartenstein Castle, which it then owned in Austria, attended by the same scholars that attended the Pan African Congress, including Louis Leakey and Mary Leakey, who was delivering a pilot presentation of her typological analysis of Early Stone Age tools, to be included in her 1971 contribution to \"Olduvai Gorge\", \"Excavations in Beds I and II, 1960\u20131963.\"\nHowever, although the intermediate periods were gone, the search for the transitions continued.\nChronology.\nIn 1859 Jens Jacob Worsaae first proposed a division of the Stone Age into older and younger parts based on his work with Danish kitchen middens that began in 1851. In the subsequent decades this simple distinction developed into the archaeological periods of today. The major subdivisions of the Three-age Stone Age cross two epoch boundaries on the geologic time scale:\nThe succession of these phases varies enormously from one region (and culture) to another.\nThree-age chronology.\nThe Paleolithic or Palaeolithic (from Greek: \u03c0\u03b1\u03bb\u03b1\u03b9\u03cc\u03c2, \"palaios\", \"old\"; and \u03bb\u03af\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2, \"lithos\", \"stone\" lit. \"old stone\", coined by archaeologist John Lubbock and published in 1865) is the earliest division of the Stone Age. It covers the greatest portion of humanity's time (roughly 99% of \"human technological history\", where \"human\" and \"humanity\" are interpreted to mean the genus \"Homo\"), extending from 2.5 or 2.6\u00a0million years ago, with the first documented use of stone tools by hominins such as \"Homo habilis\", to the end of the Pleistocene around 10,000\u00a0BC. The Paleolithic era ended with the Mesolithic, or in areas with an early Neolithisation, the Epipaleolithic.\nLower Paleolithic.\nAt sites dating from the Lower Paleolithic Period (about 2,500,000 to 200,000 years ago), simple pebble tools have been found in association with the remains of what may have been the earliest human ancestors. A somewhat more sophisticated Lower Paleolithic tradition, known as the Chopper chopping tool industry, is widely distributed in the Eastern Hemisphere. This tradition is thought to have been the work of the hominin species named \"Homo erectus\". Although no such fossil tools have yet been found, it is believed that \"H.\u00a0erectus\" probably made tools of wood and bone as well as stone.\nAbout 700,000 years ago, a new Lower Paleolithic tool, the hand axe, appeared. The earliest European hand axes are assigned to the Abbevillian industry, which developed in northern France in the valley of the Somme River; a later, more refined hand-axe tradition is seen in the Acheulian industry, evidence of which has been found in Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and Asia. Some of the earliest known hand axes were found at Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania) in association with remains of \"H.\u00a0erectus\". Alongside the hand-axe tradition, there developed a distinct and very different stone-tool industry, based on flakes of stone: special tools were made from worked (carefully shaped) flakes of flint. In Europe, the Clactonian industry is one example of a flake tradition. The early flake industries probably contributed to the development of the Middle Paleolithic flake tools of the Mousterian industry, which is associated with the remains of Neanderthal man.\nOldowan in Africa.\nThe earliest documented stone tools have been found in eastern Africa, manufacturers unknown, at the 3.3 million-year-old site of Lomekwi 3 in Kenya. Better known are the later tools belonging to an industry known as Oldowan, after the type site of Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania.\nThe tools were formed by knocking pieces off a river pebble, or stones like it, with a hammerstone to obtain large and small pieces with one or more sharp edges. Typically, but not necessarily, small pieces are detached from a larger piece, in which case the larger piece may be called the core and the smaller pieces the flakes. The prevalent usage, however, is to call all the results flakes, which can be confusing. A split in half is called bipolar flaking.\nConsequently, the method is often called \"core-and-flake\". More recently, the tradition has been called \"small flake\" since the flakes were small compared to subsequent Acheulean tools.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The essence of the Oldowan is the making and often immediate use of small flakes.\nAnother naming scheme is \"Pebble Core Technology (PBC)\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pebble cores are ... artifacts that have been shaped by varying amounts of hard-hammer percussion.\nVarious refinements in the shape have been called choppers, discoids, polyhedrons, subspheroid, etc. To date no reasons for the variants have been ascertained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From a functional standpoint, pebble cores seem designed for no specific purpose.\nHowever, they would not have been manufactured for no purpose:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pebble cores can be useful in many cutting, scraping or chopping tasks, but ... they are not particularly more efficient in such tasks than a sharp-edged rock.\nThe whole point of their utility is that each is a \"sharp-edged rock\" in locations where nature has not provided any. There is additional evidence that Oldowan, or Mode 1, tools were used in \"percussion technology\"; that is, they were designed to be gripped at the blunt end and strike something with the edge, from which use they were given the name of choppers. Modern science has been able to detect mammalian blood cells on Mode 1 tools at Sterkfontein, Member 5 East, in South Africa. As the blood must have come from a fresh kill, the tool users are likely to have done the killing and used the tools for butchering. Plant residues bonded to the silicon of some tools confirm the use to chop plants.\nAlthough the exact species authoring the tools remains unknown, Mode 1 tools in Africa were manufactured and used predominantly by \"Homo habilis\". They cannot be said to have developed these tools or to have contributed the tradition to technology. They continued a tradition of yet unknown origin. As chimpanzees sometimes naturally use percussion to extract or prepare food in the wild, and may use either unmodified stones or stones that they have split, creating an Oldowan tool, the tradition may well be far older than its current record.\nTowards the end of Oldowan in Africa the new species \"Homo erectus\" appeared over the range of \"Homo habilis\". The earliest \"unambiguous\" evidence is a whole cranium, KNM-ER 3733 (a find identifier) from Koobi Fora in Kenya, dated to 1.78\u00a0mya. An early skull fragment, KNM-ER 2598, dated to 1.9\u00a0mya, is considered a good candidate also. Transitions in paleoanthropology are always hard to find, if not impossible, but based on the \"long-legged\" limb morphology shared by \"H.\u00a0habilis\" and \"H.\u00a0rudolfensis\" in East Africa, an evolution from one of those two has been suggested.\nThe most immediate cause of the new adjustments appears to have been an increasing aridity in the region and consequent contraction of parkland savanna, interspersed with trees and groves, in favor of open grassland, dated 1.8\u20131.7 mya. During that transitional period the percentage of grazers among the fossil species increased from around 15\u201325% to 45%, dispersing the food supply and requiring a facility among the hunters to travel longer distances comfortably, which \"H.\u00a0erectus\" obviously had. The ultimate proof is the \"dispersal\" of \"H.\u00a0erectus\" \"across much of Africa and Asia, substantially before the development of the Mode 2 technology and use of fire\". \"H.\u00a0erectus\" carried Mode 1 tools over Eurasia.\nAccording to the current evidence (which may change at any time) Mode 1 tools are documented from about 2.6\u00a0mya to about 1.5\u00a0mya in Africa, and to 0.5\u00a0mya outside of it. The genus Homo is known from \"H.\u00a0habilis\" and \"H.\u00a0rudolfensis\" from 2.3 to 2.0\u00a0mya, with the latest habilis being an upper jaw from Koobi Fora, Kenya, from 1.4\u00a0mya. \"H.\u00a0erectus\" is dated 1.8\u20130.6 mya. \nAccording to this chronology Mode 1 was inherited by \"Homo\" from unknown Hominans, probably \"Australopithecus\" and \"Paranthropus\", who must have continued on with Mode 1 and then with Mode 2 until their extinction no later than 1.1\u00a0mya. Meanwhile, living contemporaneously in the same regions \"H.\u00a0habilis\" inherited the tools around 2.3\u00a0mya. At about 1.9\u00a0mya \"H.\u00a0erectus\" came on stage and lived contemporaneously with the others. Mode 1 was now being shared by a number of Hominans over the same ranges, presumably subsisting in different niches, but the archaeology is not precise enough to say which.\nOldowan out of Africa.\nTools of the Oldowan tradition first came to archaeological attention in Europe, where, being intrusive and not well defined, compared to the Acheulean, they were puzzling to archaeologists. The mystery would be elucidated by African archaeology at Olduvai, but meanwhile, in the early 20th century, the term \"Pre-Acheulean\" came into use in climatology. C.\u00a0E.\u00a0P. Brooks, a British climatologist working in the United States, used the term to describe a \"chalky boulder clay\" underlying a layer of gravel at Hoxne, central England, where Acheulean tools had been found. Whether any tools would be found in it and what type was not known. Hugo Obermaier, a contemporary German archaeologist working in Spain, stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Unfortunately, the stage of human industry which corresponds to these deposits cannot be positively identified. All we can say is that it is pre-Acheulean.\nThis uncertainty was clarified by the subsequent excavations at Olduvai; nevertheless, the term is still in use for pre-Acheulean contexts, mainly across Eurasia, that are yet unspecified or uncertain but with the understanding that they are or will turn out to be pebble-tool.\nThere are ample associations of Mode 2 with \"H.\u00a0erectus\" in Eurasia. \"H.\u00a0erectus\"\u00a0\u2013 Mode 1 associations are scantier but they do exist, especially in the Far East. One strong piece of evidence prevents the conclusion that only \"H.\u00a0erectus\" reached Eurasia: at Yiron, Israel, Mode 1 tools have been found dating to 2.4\u00a0mya, about 0.5\u00a0my earlier than the known \"H.\u00a0erectus\" finds. If the date is correct, either another Hominan preceded \"H.\u00a0erectus\" out of Africa or the earliest \"H.\u00a0erectus\" has yet to be found.\nAfter the initial appearance at Gona in Ethiopia at 2.7 mya, pebble tools date from 2.0\u00a0mya at Sterkfontein, Member 5, South Africa, and from 1.8\u00a0mya at El Kherba, Algeria, North Africa. The manufacturers had already left pebble tools at Yiron, Israel, at 2.4 mya, Riwat, Pakistan, at 2.0\u00a0mya, and Renzidong, South China, at over 2\u00a0mya. The identification of a fossil skull at Mojokerta, Pernung Peninsula on Java, dated to 1.8\u00a0mya, as \"H.\u00a0erectus\", suggests that the African finds are not the earliest to be found in Africa, or that, in fact, erectus did not originate in Africa after all but on the plains of Asia. The outcome of the issue waits for more substantial evidence. Erectus was found also at Dmanisi, Georgia, from 1.75\u00a0mya in association with pebble tools.\nPebble tools are found the latest first in southern Europe and then in northern Europe. They begin in the open areas of Italy and Spain, the earliest dated to 1.6\u00a0mya at Pirro Nord, Italy. The mountains of Italy are rising at a rapid rate in the framework of geologic time; at 1.6\u00a0mya they were lower and covered with grassland (as much of the highlands still are). Europe was otherwise mountainous and covered over with dense forest, a formidable terrain for warm-weather savanna dwellers. Similarly there is no evidence that the Mediterranean was passable at Gibraltar or anywhere else to \"H.\u00a0erectus\" or earlier hominins. They might have reached Italy and Spain along the coasts.\nIn northern Europe, pebble tools are found earliest at Happisburgh, United Kingdom, from 0.8\u00a0mya. The last traces are from Kent's Cavern, dated 0.5\u00a0mya. By that time \"H.\u00a0erectus\" is regarded as having been extinct; however, a more modern version apparently had evolved, \"Homo heidelbergensis\", who must have inherited the tools. He also explains the last of the Acheulean in Germany at 0.4\u00a0mya.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, archaeologists worked on the assumption that a succession of hominins and cultures prevailed, that one replaced another. Today the presence of multiple hominins living contemporaneously near each other for long periods is accepted as proven true; moreover, by the time the previously assumed \"earliest\" culture arrived in northern Europe, the rest of Africa and Eurasia had progressed to the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic, so that across the earth all three were for a time contemporaneous. In any given region there was a progression from Oldowan to Acheulean, Lower to Upper, no doubt.\nAcheulean in Africa.\nThe end of Oldowan in Africa was brought on by the appearance of Acheulean, or Mode 2, stone tools. The earliest known instances are in the 1.7\u20131.6 mya layer at Kokiselei, West Turkana, Kenya. At Sterkfontein, South Africa, they are in Member 5 West, 1.7\u20131.4 mya. The 1.7 is a fairly certain, fairly standard date. Mode 2 is often found in association with \"H.\u00a0erectus\". It makes sense that the most advanced tools should have been innovated by the most advanced hominin; consequently, they are typically given credit for the innovation.\nA Mode 2 tool is a biface consisting of two concave surfaces intersecting to form a cutting edge all the way around, except in the case of tools intended to feature a point. More work and planning go into the manufacture of a Mode 2 tool. The manufacturer hits a slab off a larger rock to use as a blank. Then large flakes are struck off the blank and worked into bifaces by hard-hammer percussion on an anvil stone. Finally the edge is retouched: small flakes are hit off with a bone or wood soft hammer to sharpen or resharpen it. The core can be either the blank or another flake. Blanks are ported for manufacturing supply in places where nature has provided no suitable stone.\nAlthough most Mode 2 tools are easily distinguished from Mode 1, there is a close similarity of some Oldowan and some Acheulean, which can lead to confusion. Some Oldowan tools are more carefully prepared to form a more regular edge. One distinguishing criterion is the size of the flakes. In contrast to the Oldowan \"small flake\" tradition, Acheulean is \"large flake\": \"The primary technological distinction remaining between Oldowan and the Acheulean is the preference for large flakes (&gt;10 cm) as blanks for making large cutting tools (handaxes and cleavers) in the Acheulean.\" \"Large Cutting Tool\" (LCT) has become part of the standard terminology as well.\nIn North Africa, the presence of Mode 2 remains a mystery, as the oldest finds are from Thomas Quarry in Morocco at 0.9\u00a0mya. Archaeological attention, however, shifts to the Jordan Rift Valley, an extension of the East African Rift Valley (the east bank of the Jordan is slowly sliding northward as East Africa is thrust away from Africa). Evidence of use of the Nile Valley is in deficit, but Hominans could easily have reached the palaeo-Jordan River from Ethiopia along the shores of the Red Sea, one side or the other. A crossing would not have been necessary, but it is more likely there than over a theoretical but unproven land bridge through either Gibraltar or Sicily.\nMeanwhile, Acheulean went on in Africa past the 1.0\u00a0mya mark and also past the extinction of \"H.\u00a0erectus\" there. The last Acheulean in East Africa is at Olorgesailie, Kenya, dated to about 0.9\u00a0mya. Its owner was still \"H.\u00a0erectus\", but in South Africa, Acheulean at Elandsfontein, 1.0\u20130.6 mya, is associated with Saldanha man, classified as \"H.\u00a0heidelbergensis\", a more advanced, but not yet modern, descendant most likely of \"H.\u00a0erectus\". The Thoman Quarry Hominans in Morocco similarly are most likely Homo rhodesiensis, in the same evolutionary status as \"H.\u00a0heidelbergensis\".\nAcheulean out of Africa.\nMode 2 is first known out of Africa at 'Ubeidiya, Israel, a site now on the Jordan River, then frequented over the long term (hundreds of thousands of years) by Homo on the shore of a variable-level palaeo-lake, long since vanished. The geology was created by successive \"transgression and regression\" of the lake resulting in four cycles of layers. The tools are located in the first two, Cycles Li (Limnic Inferior) and Fi (Fluviatile Inferior), but mostly in Fi. The cycles represent different ecologies and therefore different cross-sections of fauna, which makes it possible to date them. They appear to be the same faunal assemblages as the Ferenta Faunal Unit in Italy, known from excavations at Selvella and Pieterfitta, dated to 1.6\u20131.2\u00a0mya.\nAt 'Ubeidiya the marks on the bones of the animal species found there indicate that the manufacturers of the tools butchered the kills of large predators, an activity that has been termed \"scavenging\". There are no living floors, nor did they process bones to obtain the marrow. These activities cannot be understood therefore as the only or even the typical economic activity of Hominans. Their interests were selective: they were primarily harvesting the meat of Cervids, which is estimated to have been available without spoiling for up to four days after the kill.\nThe majority of the animals at the site were of \"Palaearctic biogeographic origin\". However, these overlapped in range on 30\u201360% of \"African biogeographic origin\". The biome was Mediterranean, not savanna. The animals were not passing through; there was simply an overlap of normal ranges. Of the Hominans, \"H.\u00a0erectus\" left several cranial fragments. Teeth of undetermined species may have been \"H.\u00a0ergaster\". The tools are classified as \"Lower Acheulean\" and \"Developed Oldowan\". The latter is a disputed classification created by Mary Leakey to describe an Acheulean-like tradition in Bed II at Olduvai. It is dated 1.53\u20131.27 mya. The date of the tools therefore probably does not exceed 1.5\u00a0mya; 1.4 is often given as a date. This chronology, which is definitely later than in Kenya, supports the \"out of Africa\" hypothesis for Acheulean, if not for the Hominans.\nFrom Southwest Asia, as the Levant is now called, the Acheulean extended itself more slowly eastward, arriving at Isampur, India, about 1.2\u00a0mya. It does not appear in China and Korea until after 1mya and not at all in Indonesia. There is a discernible boundary marking the furthest extent of the Acheulean eastward before 1\u00a0mya, called the Movius Line, after its proposer, Hallam L. Movius. On the east side of the line the small flake tradition continues, but the tools are additionally worked Mode 1, with flaking down the sides. In Athirampakkam at Chennai in Tamil Nadu the Acheulean age started at 1.51\u00a0mya and it is also prior than North India and Europe.\nThe cause of the Movius Line remains speculative, whether it represents a real change in technology or a limitation of archeology, but after 1\u00a0mya evidence not available to Movius indicates the prevalence of Acheulean. For example, the Acheulean site at Bose, China, is dated 0.803\u00b13K mya. The authors of this chronologically later East Asian Acheulean remain unknown, as does whether it evolved in the region or was brought in.\nThere is no named boundary line between Mode 1 and Mode 2 on the west; nevertheless, Mode 2 is equally late in Europe as it is in the Far East. The earliest comes from a rock shelter at Estrecho de Qu\u00edpar in Spain, dated to greater than 0.9\u00a0mya. Teeth from an undetermined Hominan were found there also. The last Mode 2 in Southern Europe is from a deposit at Fontana Ranuccio near Anagni in Italy dated to 0.45\u00a0mya, which is generally linked to \"Homo cepranensis\", a \"late variant of \"H.\u00a0erectus\"\", a fragment of whose skull was found at Ceprano nearby, dated 0.46\u00a0mya.\nMiddle Paleolithic.\nThis period is best known as the era during which the Neanderthals lived in Europe and the Near East (c. 300,000\u201328,000 years ago). Their technology is mainly the Mousterian, but Neanderthal physical characteristics have been found also in ambiguous association with the more recent Ch\u00e2telperronian archeological culture in Western Europe and several local industries like the Szeletian in Eastern Europe/Eurasia. There is no evidence for Neanderthals in Africa, Australia or the Americas.\nNeanderthals nursed their elderly and practised ritual burial indicating an organised society. The earliest evidence (Mungo Man) of settlement in Australia dates to around 40,000 years ago when modern humans likely crossed from Asia by island-hopping. Evidence for symbolic behavior such as body ornamentation and burial is ambiguous for the Middle Paleolithic and still subject to debate. The Bhimbetka rock shelters exhibit the earliest traces of human life in India, some of which are approximately 30,000 years old.\nUpper Paleolithic.\nFrom 50,000 to 10,000 years ago in Europe, the Upper Paleolithic ends with the end of the Pleistocene and onset of the Holocene era (the end of the Last Glacial Period). Modern humans spread out further across the Earth during the period known as the Upper Paleolithic.\nThe Upper Paleolithic is marked by a relatively rapid succession of often complex stone artifact technologies and a large increase in the creation of art and personal ornaments. During period between 35 and 10\u00a0kya evolved: from 38 to 30 kya Ch\u00e2telperronian, 40\u201328 Aurignacian, 28\u201322 Gravettian, 22\u201317 Solutrean, and 18\u201310 Magdalenian. All of these industries except the Ch\u00e2telperronian are associated with anatomically modern humans. Authorship of the Ch\u00e2telperronian is still the subject of much debate.\nMost scholars date the arrival of humans in Australia at 40,000 to 50,000 years ago, with a possible range of up to 125,000 years ago. The earliest anatomically modern human remains found in Australia (and outside of Africa) are those of Mungo Man; they have been dated at 42,000 years old.\nThe Americas were colonised via the Bering land bridge which was exposed during this period by lower sea levels. These people are called the Paleo-Indians, and the earliest accepted dates are those of the Clovis culture sites, some 13,500 years ago. Globally, societies were hunter-gatherers but evidence of regional identities begins to appear in the wide variety of stone tool types being developed to suit very different environments.\nEpipaleolithic/Mesolithic.\nThe period starting from the end of the last ice age, 10,000 years ago, to around 6,000 years ago was characterized by rising sea levels and a need to adapt to a changing environment and find new food sources. The development of Mode 5 (microlith) tools began in response to these changes. They were derived from the previous Paleolithic tools, hence the term Epipaleolithic, or were intermediate between the Paleolithic and the Neolithic, hence the term Mesolithic (Middle Stone Age), used for parts of Eurasia, but not outside it. The choice of a word depends on exact circumstances and the inclination of the archaeologists excavating the site. Microliths were used in the manufacture of more efficient composite tools, resulting in an intensification of hunting and fishing and with increasing social activity the development of more complex settlements, such as Lepenski Vir. Domestication of the dog as a hunting companion probably dates to this period.\nThe earliest known battle occurred during the Mesolithic period at a site in Egypt known as Cemetery 117.\nNeolithic.\nThe Neolithic, or New Stone Age, was approximately characterized by the adoption of agriculture. The shift from food gathering to food producing, in itself one of the most revolutionary changes in human history, was accompanied by the so-called Neolithic Revolution: the development of pottery, polished stone tools, and construction of more complex, larger settlements such as G\u00f6bekli Tepe and \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck. Some of these features began in certain localities even earlier, in the transitional Mesolithic. The first Neolithic cultures started around 7000\u00a0BC in the Fertile Crescent and spread concentrically to other areas of the world; however, the Near East was probably not the only nucleus of agriculture, the cultivation of maize in Meso-America and of rice in the Far East being others.\nDue to the increased need to harvest and process plants, ground stone and polished stone artifacts became much more widespread, including tools for grinding, cutting, and chopping. Skara Brae, located in Orkney, Scotland, is one of Europe's best examples of a Neolithic village. The community contains stone beds, shelves and even an indoor toilet linked to a stream. The first large-scale constructions were built, including settlement towers and walls, e.g., Jericho (Tell es-Sultan) and ceremonial sites, e.g. Stonehenge. The \u0120gantija temples of Gozo in the Maltese archipelago are the oldest surviving free-standing structures in the world, erected c.\u20093600\u20132500 BC. The earliest evidence for established trade exists in the Neolithic with newly settled people importing exotic goods over distances of many hundreds of miles.\nThese facts show that there were sufficient resources and co-operation to enable large groups to work on these projects. To what extent this was a basis for the development of elites and social hierarchies is a matter of ongoing debate. Although some late Neolithic societies formed complex stratified chiefdoms similar to Polynesian societies such as the Ancient Hawaiians, based on the societies of modern tribesmen at an equivalent technological level, most Neolithic societies were relatively simple and egalitarian. A comparison of art in the two ages leads some theorists to conclude that Neolithic cultures were noticeably more hierarchical than the Paleolithic cultures that preceded them.\nAfrican chronology.\nEarly Stone Age (ESA).\nThe Early Stone Age in Africa is not to be identified with \"Old Stone Age\", a translation of Paleolithic, or with Paleolithic, or with the \"Earlier Stone Age\" that originally meant what became the Paleolithic and Mesolithic. In the initial decades of its definition by the Pan-African Congress of Prehistory, it was parallel in Africa to the Upper and Middle Paleolithic. However, since then Radiocarbon dating has shown that the Middle Stone Age is in fact contemporaneous with the Middle Paleolithic. The Early Stone Age therefore is contemporaneous with the Lower Paleolithic and happens to include the same main technologies, Oldowan and Acheulean, which produced Mode 1 and Mode 2 stone tools respectively. A distinct regional term is warranted, however, by the location and chronology of the sites and the exact typology.\nMiddle Stone Age (MSA).\nThe Middle Stone Age was a period of African prehistory between Early Stone Age and Late Stone Age. It began around 300,000 years ago and ended around 50,000 years ago. It is considered as an equivalent of European Middle Paleolithic. It is associated with anatomically modern or almost modern \"Homo sapiens\". Early physical evidence comes from Omo and Herto, both in Ethiopia and dated respectively at c. 195 ka and at c. 160 ka.\nLater Stone Age (LSA).\nThe Later Stone Age (LSA, sometimes also called the Late Stone Age) refers to a period in African prehistory. Its beginnings are roughly contemporaneous with the European Upper Paleolithic. It lasts until historical times and this includes cultures corresponding to Mesolithic and Neolithic in other regions.\nMaterial culture.\nTools.\nStone tools were made from a variety of stones. For example, flint and chert were shaped (or \"chipped\") for use as cutting tools and weapons, while basalt and sandstone were used for ground stone tools, such as quern-stones. Wood, bone, shell, antler (deer) and other materials were widely used, as well. During the most recent part of the period, sediments (such as clay) were used to make pottery. Agriculture was developed and certain animals were domesticated as well.\nSome species of non-primates are able to use stone tools, such as the sea otter, which breaks abalone shells with them. Primates can both use and manufacture stone tools. This combination of abilities is more marked in apes and humans, but only humans, or more generally hominins, depend on tool use for survival. The key anatomical and behavioral features required for tool manufacture, which are possessed only by hominins, are the larger thumb and the ability to hold by means of an assortment of grips.\nFood and drink.\nFood sources of the Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers were wild plants and animals harvested from the environment. They liked animal organ meats, including the livers, kidneys and brains. Large seeded legumes were part of the human diet long before the agricultural revolution, as is evident from archaeobotanical finds from the Mousterian layers of Kebara Cave, in Israel.&lt;ref name=\"doi10.1016/j.jas.2004.11.006\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Moreover, recent evidence indicates that humans processed and consumed wild cereal grains as far back as 23,000 years ago in the Upper Paleolithic.\nNear the end of the Wisconsin glaciation, 15,000 to 9,000 years ago, mass extinction of Megafauna such as the woolly mammoth occurred in Asia, Europe, North America and Australia. This was the first Holocene extinction event. It possibly forced modification in the dietary habits of the humans of that age and with the emergence of agricultural practices, plant-based foods also became a regular part of the diet. A number of factors have been suggested for the extinction: certainly over-hunting, but also deforestation and climate change. The net effect was to fragment the vast ranges required by the large animals and extinguish them piecemeal in each fragment.\nShelter and habitat.\nAround 2 million years ago, \"Homo habilis\" is believed to have constructed the first man-made structure in East Africa, consisting of simple arrangements of stones to hold branches of trees in position. A similar stone circular arrangement believed to be around 380,000 years old was discovered at Terra Amata, near Nice, France. (Concerns about the dating have been raised: see Terra Amata.) Several human habitats dating back to the Stone Age have been discovered around the globe, including:\nArt.\nPrehistoric art is visible in the artifacts. Prehistoric music is inferred from found instruments, while parietal art can be found on rocks of any kind. The latter are petroglyphs and rock paintings. The art may or may not have had a religious function.\nPetroglyphs.\nPetroglyphs appeared in the Neolithic. A Petroglyph is an intaglio abstract or symbolic image engraved on natural stone by various methods, usually by prehistoric peoples. They were a dominant form of pre-writing symbols. Petroglyphs have been discovered in different parts of the world, including Australia (Sydney rock engravings), Asia (Bhimbetka, India), North America (Death Valley National Park), South America (Cumbe Mayo, Peru), and Europe (Finnmark, Norway).\nRock paintings.\nIn Paleolithic times, mostly animals were painted, in theory ones that were used as food or represented strength, such as the rhinoceros or large cats (as in the Chauvet Cave). Signs such as dots were sometimes drawn. Rare human representations include handprints and half-human/half-animal figures. The Cave of Chauvet in the Ard\u00e8che department, France, contains the most important cave paintings of the Paleolithic era, dating from about 36,000 BC. The Altamira cave paintings in Spain were done 14,000 to 12,000 BC and show, among others, bisons. The hall of bulls in Lascaux, Dordogne, France, dates from about 15,000 to 10,000 BC.\nThe meaning of many of these paintings remains unknown. They may have been used for seasonal rituals. The animals are accompanied by signs that suggest a possible magic use. Arrow-like symbols in Lascaux are sometimes interpreted as calendar or almanac use, but the evidence remains interpretative.\nSome scenes of the Mesolithic, however, can be typed and therefore, judging from their various modifications, are fairly clear. One of these is the battle scene between organized bands of archers. For example, \"the marching warriors\", a rock painting at Cingle de la Mola, Castell\u00f3n in Spain, dated to about 7,000\u20134,000 BC, depicts about 50 bowmen in two groups marching or running in step toward each other, each man carrying a bow in one hand and a fistful of arrows in the other. A file of five men leads one band, one of whom is a figure with a \"high crowned hat\".\nIn other scenes elsewhere, the men wear head-dresses and knee ornaments but otherwise fight nude. Some scenes depict the dead and wounded, bristling with arrows. One is reminded of \u00d6tzi the Iceman, a Copper Age mummy revealed by an Alpine melting glacier, who collapsed from loss of blood due to an arrow wound in the back.\nStone Age rituals and beliefs.\nModern studies and the in-depth analysis of finds dating from the Stone Age indicate certain rituals and beliefs of the people in those prehistoric times. It is now believed that activities of the Stone Age humans went beyond the immediate requirements of procuring food, body coverings, and shelters. Specific rites relating to death and burial were practiced, though certainly differing in style and execution between cultures. Megalithic tombs, multichambered, and dolmens, single-chambered, were graves with a huge stone slab stacked over other similarly large stone slabs; they have been discovered all across Europe and Asia and were built in the Neolithic and the Bronze Age.\nModern popular culture.\nThe image of the caveman is commonly associated with the Stone Age. For example, a 2003 documentary series showing the evolution of humans through the Stone Age was called \"Walking with Cavemen\", but only the last programme showed humans living in caves. While the idea that human beings and dinosaurs coexisted is sometimes portrayed in popular culture in cartoons, films and computer games, such as \"The Flintstones\", \"One Million Years B.C.\" and \"Chuck Rock\", the notion of hominids and non-avian dinosaurs co-existing is not supported by any scientific evidence.\nOther depictions of the Stone Age include the best-selling \"Earth's Children\" series of books by Jean M. Auel, which are set in the Paleolithic and are loosely based on archaeological and anthropological findings.\nThe 1981 film \"Quest for Fire\" by Jean-Jacques Annaud tells the story of a group of early homo sapiens searching for their lost fire. A 21st-century series, \"Chronicles of Ancient Darkness\" by Michelle Paver tells of two New Stone Age children fighting to fulfil a prophecy and save their clan.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29220", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29220", "title": "Stone age", "text": ""}
{"id": "29221", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29221", "title": "Single-document interface", "text": ""}
{"id": "29222", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29222", "title": "Sam Loyd", "text": "American chess player and composer; puzzle author; and recreational mathematician (1841-1911)\nSamuel Loyd (January 30, 1841 \u2013 April 10, 1911) was an American chess player, chess composer, puzzle author, and recreational mathematician. Loyd was born in Philadelphia but raised in New York City.\nAs a chess composer, he authored a number of chess problems, often with interesting themes. At his peak, Loyd was one of the best chess players in the US, and he was ranked 15th in the world, according to chessmetrics.com.\nHe played in the strong Paris 1867 chess tournament (won by Ignatz von Kolisch) with little success, placing near the bottom of the field.\nFollowing his death, his book \"Cyclopedia of 5000 Puzzles\" was published (1914) by his son, Samuel Loyd Jr. His son, named after his father, dropped the \"Jr\" from his name and started publishing reprints of his father's puzzles.\nLoyd (senior) was inducted into the US Chess Hall of Fame in 1987.\nReputation.\nLoyd is widely acknowledged as one of America's great puzzle writers and popularizers, often mentioned as \"the greatest.\" Martin Gardner featured Loyd in his August 1957 Mathematical Games column in \"Scientific American\" and called him \"America's greatest puzzler\". In 1898, \"The Strand\" dubbed him \"the prince of puzzlers\". As a chess problemist, his composing style is distinguished by wit and humour.\nHe is also known for lies and self-promotion, however, and he has been criticized on these grounds\u2014Martin Gardner's assessment continues \"but also obviously a hustler\". Canadian puzzler Mel Stover called Loyd \"an old reprobate\", and Matthew Costello called him \"puzzledom's greatest celebrity... popularizer, genius\", but also a \"huckster\" and \"fast-talking snake oil salesman\".\nHe collaborated with puzzler Henry Dudeney for a while, but Dudeney broke off the correspondence and accused Loyd of stealing his puzzles and publishing them under his own name. Dudeney despised Loyd so intensely that he equated him with the devil.\nLoyd claimedthat he invented the fifteen tiles in the box and one space puzzle. The actual inventor was Noyes Chapman, who applied for a patent in March 1880.\nAn enthusiast of Tangram puzzles, Loyd popularized them with \"The Eighth Book Of Tan\", a book of seven hundred unique Tangram designs and a fanciful history of the origin of the Tangram, claiming that the puzzle was invented 4,000 years ago by a god named Tan. This was presented as true and has been described as \"Sam Loyd's Most Successful Hoax\".\nChess problems.\nExcelsior problem.\nOne of his best-known chess problems is the following, called \"Excelsior\" by Loyd after the poem by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. White is to move and checkmate Black in five moves against any defense:\nLoyd bet a friend that he could not pick a piece that \"didn't\" give mate in the main line, and when it was published in 1861 it was with the stipulation that White mates with \"the least likely piece or pawn\".\nSteinitz Gambit problem.\nOne of the most famous chess problems by Loyd. He wrote on this problem: \"The originality of the problem is due to the White King being placed in absolute safety, and yet coming out on a reckless career, with no immediate threat and in the face of innumerable checks.\"\nCharles XII problem.\nThis problem was originally published in 1859. The story involves a chess incident during the siege of Charles XII of Sweden by the Turks at Bender in 1713. \"Charles beguiled this period by means of drills and chess, and used frequently to play with his minister, Christian Albert Grosthusen, some of the contests being mentioned by Voltaire. One day while so engaged, the game had been played to this stage, and Charles (White) had just announced checkmate in three.\"\n1. Rxg3 Bxg3\n2. Nf3 Bxh2\n3. g4#\n\"Scarcely had he uttered the words, when a (Turkish) bullet, shattering the window, dashed the White knight off of the board in fragments. Grothusen started violently, but Charles, with utmost coolness, begged him to put back the other knight and work out the mate, observing that it was pretty enough. But another glance at the board made Charles smile. We do not need the knight. I can give it to you and still mate in four!\" \n1. hxg3 Be3\n2. Rg4 Bg5\n3. Rh4+ Bxh4\n4. g4#\nWho would believe it, he had scarcely spoken when another bullet flew across the room, and the pawn at h2 shared the fate of the knight. Grothusen turned pale. \"You have our good friends the Turks with you,\" said the king unconcerned, \"it can scarcely be expected that I should contend against such odds; but let me see if I can dispense with that pawn. I have it!\" he shouted with a laugh, \"I have great pleasure in informing you that there is undoubtedly a mate in 5.\" \n1. Rb7 Be3\n2. Rb1 Bg5\n3. Rh1+ Bh4\n4. Rh2 gxh2\n5. g4#\nIn 1900, Friedrich Amelung pointed out that in the original position, if the first bullet had struck the rook instead of the knight, Charles would still have a mate in six.\n1. Nf3 Be1\n2. Nxe1 Kh4\n3. h3 Kh5\n4. Nd3 Kh4\n5. Nf4 h5\n6. Ng6#\nIn 2003, ChessBase posted a fifth variation, attributed to Brian Stewart. After the first bullet took out the knight, if the second had removed the g-pawn rather than the h-pawn, Charles would be able to mate in ten.\n1. hxg3 Be1\n2. Rg4 Bxg3\n3. Rxg3 Kh4\n4. Kf4 h5\n5. Rg2 Kh3\n6. Kf3 h4\n7. Rg4 Kh2\n8. Rxh4+ Kg1\n9. Rh3 Kf1\n10. Rh1#\nPuzzles.\nBack from the Klondike.\nThis is one of Sam Loyd's most famous puzzles, first printed in the \"New York Journal and Advertiser\", April 24, 1898 (as far as available evidence indicates). Loyd's original instructions were to: Start from that heart in the center and go three steps in a straight line in any one of the eight directions, north, south, east or west, or on the bias, as the ladies say, northeast, northwest, southeast or southwest. When you have gone three steps in a straight line, you will reach a square with a number on it, which indicates the second day's journey, as many steps as it tells, in a straight line in any of the eight directions. From this new point when reached, march on again according to the number indicated, and continue on, following the requirements of the numbers reached, until you come upon a square with a number which will carry you just one step beyond the border, when you are supposed to be out of the woods and can holler all you want, as you will have solved the puzzle.\nVanishing puzzles.\nA vanishing puzzle is a mechanical optical illusion showing different numbers of a certain object when parts of the puzzle are moved around.\nLoyd patented rotary vanishing puzzles in 1896 and published versions named \"Get Off the Earth\", \"Teddy and the Lion\" and \"The Disappearing Bicyclist\" (pictured). Each had a circular card connected to a cardboard backdrop with a pin, letting it rotate. In \"the Disappearing Bicyclist\", when the disc is rotated such that the arrow points to A, 13 boys can be seen. When rotated so that the arrow points to B, only 12 boys appear.\nVanishing area puzzle.\nA square with a side length of 8 units (\"chessboard\") is dissected into four pieces, which can be assembled into a 5x13 rectangle. Since the area of the square is 64 units but the area of the rectangle is 65 units, this seems paradoxical at first. It is just an optical illusion, however, as the pieces don't fit exactly to form a rectangle, but leave a small barely visible gap along the diagonal. This puzzle is also known as the chessboard paradox or paradox of Loyd and Schl\u00f6milch.\nTrick Donkeys problem.\nOne of Loyd's notable puzzles was the \"Trick Donkeys\". It was based on a similar puzzle involving dogs published in 1857. In the problem, the solver must cut the drawing along the dotted lines and rearrange the three pieces so that the riders appear to be riding the donkeys.\nSam Loyd Award.\nThe \"Association for Games &amp; Puzzles International\" (previously the \"Association of Game &amp; Puzzle Collectors\", and prior to 1999, the \"American Game Collectors Association\", AGCA), gives the \"Sam Loyd Award\" for promoting interest in mechanical puzzles through design, development, or manufacture. The following individuals have won it:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nChess\nInteractive puzzle"}
{"id": "29225", "revid": "2665896", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29225", "title": "Schnorkel", "text": ""}
{"id": "29228", "revid": "50392283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29228", "title": "Shiba Inu", "text": "Japanese dog breed\nThe is a breed of hunting dog from Japan. A small-to-medium breed, it is the smallest of the six original dog breeds native to Japan. The Shiba Inu was originally bred for hunting. Its name literally translates to \"brushwood dog\", as it is used to flush game.\nThe Shiba Inu is a small, alert, and agile dog that copes very well with mountainous terrain and hiking trails. Its appearance is similar to other Japanese dog breeds such as the Akita Inu or Hokkaido, but the Shiba Inu is a different breed with a distinct bloodline, temperament, and smaller size than other Japanese dog breeds.\nAppearance.\nThe breed's standard colors are red, sesame, black sesame, red sesame (sashige), black and tan, or cream. All have a cream to white ventral color, known as . \"Urajiro\" literally translates to \"underside white\". The \"urajiro\" is required in the following areas on all coat colors: on the sides of the muzzle, on the cheeks, inside the ears, on the underjaw and upper throat inside of legs, on the abdomen, around the vent and the ventral side of the tail. On reds: commonly on the throat, fore chest, and chest. On blacks and sesames: commonly as a triangular mark on both sides of the fore chest.\nOther than the \"urajiro\" areas, the cream color is considered a \"major fault\" by both the Japan Kennel Club and American Kennel Club. It is not intentionally bred in a show dog, as the required markings are not discernible. However, a cream coat is acceptable according to The Kennel Club (UK) breed standard.\nShiba inu have a double coat, the topcoat is stiff with guard hairs and the undercoat is soft and plush. Although less common, shiba inu can also be long-haired or \"woolly\" as a result of inheriting the recessive gene from both parents. \nTemperament.\nThe Shiba Inu is considered an alert, affectionate, and independent breed with high intelligence but also somewhat stubborn and strong-willed.\nThe terms , , and have subtle interpretations that have been the subject of much commentary.\nA survey of experts classified the Shiba Inu as having \"high aggression, high reactivity and medium trainability\". A possible explanation for this and other observed behaviour is that the Shiba Inu is more closely related to the wolf than domesticated dogs from other countries. Due to the high intelligence of the breed it requires a lot of exercise and stimulation. Insufficient exercise can lead to anxiety which leads to undesirable behaviours, notably the \"shiba scream\". The shiba inu has a reputation for being \"aloof\" and early socialization as a puppy is key for the dog get along with other people and animals. \nA survey in Japan found the Shiba Inu to be more likely to engage in destructive behaviour, refusal to walk whilst on a lead, engage in mounting behaviour, and tail chasing. The Shiba Inu was also found to be less likely to bark at noises whilst inside the house.\nHistory.\nThe Shiba Inu has been identified as a basal breed that predates the emergence of the modern breeds in the 19th century. Dogs with a similar appearance to the Shiba Inu were represented in \"dog\u016b\" made during the prehistoric J\u014dmon period of Japanese history.\nThe Shiba Inu was bred to hunt and flush small game, such as birds and rabbits. Shiba lived in the mountainous areas of the Ch\u016bbu region. During the Meiji Restoration, western dog breeds were imported and crosses between these and native Japanese breeds became popular. From 1912 to 1926, almost no pure Shiba remained. From around 1928, hunters and intellectuals began to show interest in the protection of the remaining pure Shiba.\nDespite efforts to preserve the breed, the Shiba nearly became extinct during World War II due to wartime food shortage, as well as outbreaks of distemper in the 1950s and 60s and the Great Tottori Fire, which discouraged preservation efforts. All subsequent dogs were bred from the only three surviving bloodlines. These bloodlines were the Shinshu Shiba from Nagano Prefecture, the Mino Shiba from the former Mino Province in the south of present-day Gifu Prefecture, and the San'in Shiba from Tottori and Shimane Prefectures.\nThe Shinshu Shibas possessed a solid undercoat, with a dense layer of guard hairs, and were small and red in color. The Mino Shibas tended to have thick, prick ears, and possessed a sickle tail, rather than the common curled tail found on most modern Shibas. The San'in Shibas were larger than most modern shibas, and tended to be black, without the common tan and white accents found on modern black-and-tan shibas.\nWhen the study of Japanese dogs was formalized in the early and mid-20th century, these three strains were combined into one overall breed, the Shiba Inu. The first Japanese breed standard for the Shiba, the Nippo Standard, was published in 1934. In December 1936, the Shiba Inu was recognized as a Natural Monument of Japan through the Cultural Properties Act, largely due to the efforts of Nippo (Nihon Ken Hozonkai), the Association for the Preservation of the Japanese Dog.\nIn 1954, a military family brought the first Shiba Inu to the United States. In 1979, the first recorded litter was born in the United States. The Shiba was recognized by the American Kennel Club in 1992 and added to the AKC Non-Sporting Group in 1993. It is now primarily kept as a pet both in Japan and abroad. According to the American Kennel Club, the Shiba Inu is the number one companion dog in Japan. In the United States the breed ranked 42th place in registrations for 2024 with the American Kennel Club.\nHealth.\nA study in Japan on patella luxation in small breeds found the Shiba Inu to have the second highest rate of the condition, with 35% of the Shiba Inus surveyed being affected. Three genes belonging to the breed were associated with glaucoma, as found in an analysis of DNA sequencing. Another study from Japan reviewing cases of dogs presented for ophthalmologic examination found the Shiba Inu to make up 33% of all glaucoma cases whilst only making up 2.7% of the total population used in the study. Pyometra, a uterine infection of intact bitches, is slightly more common in the Shiba Inu. The Shiba Inu is predisposed to canine atopic dermatitis. An auto-immune disease common in Akitas Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome is known to occur in the Shiba Inu.\nLifespan.\nA review of cemetery data in Japan found that the Shiba Inu had a life expectancy of 15.5 years, greater than any other breed. A 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 14.6 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds.\nSanin Shiba Inu.\nThe Sanin Shiba Inu is a variety of Shiba Inu. It comes from the Inaba Inu of Tottori Prefecture and the Sekishu Inu of Shimane Prefecture, and both are endangered due to the increase of western dogs. In the early Showa period, Masumi Ozaki, a former landowner in Tottori prefecture, started preservation breeding to prevent the loss of local breeds.\nHowever, as World War II grew more intense, the breeding projects became difficult to maintain. Due to the use of dogs for fur by the military, the number of dogs decreased from 50 to 20. In 1947, the two breeds were bred together to create the foundation stock of the Sanin Shiba Inu. The numbers were still low but the dogs were protected by the Ozaki family, who carried on the preservation activities.\nDespite the end of the war, more threats to the breeds emerged in the 1950s and 60s, two outbreaks of distemper occurred in Tottori prefecture, killing many dogs. In addition, the Great Tottori Fire discouraged preservation efforts even more.\nIn popular culture.\nDespite not being a popular dog breed outside of Japan, the Shiba Inu has become popular on the Internet. Doge is an Internet meme from 2013 characterized by Kabosu, a Shiba Inu, and broken English. A cryptocurrency, Dogecoin, is named after this meme, and its logo bears an image of Kabosu. Another cryptocurrency is also named Shiba Inu after the breed. Another Shiba Inu dog that went viral was a dog known as Cheems. He went viral during the COVID-19 pandemic and gained worldwide attention. Cheems died during cancer surgery on August 18, 2023 at the age of 12\u00bd years. In December 2024, a man by the name of Kantaro Inagaki began to document his walks across Japan with a shiba inu named San-chan. San-chan became the internet's newest viral shiba inu, and their social media continues to amass millions of views and followers.\nThe breed is often referred to as \"Shibe\" in memes. According to Jamie Cohen, an assistant professor of media studies at Queens College of the City University of New York, the Shiba Inu breed has had a significant presence in online culture since at least 2010.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29229", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29229", "title": "Slot machine", "text": "Casino gambling machine\nA slot machine, fruit machine (British English), puggie (Scots), poker machine or pokie (Australian English and New Zealand English) is a gambling machine that creates a game of chance for its customers.\nA slot machine's standard layout features a screen displaying three or more reels that \"spin\" when the game is activated. Some modern slot machines still include a lever as a skeuomorphic design trait to trigger play. However, the mechanical operations of early machines have been superseded by random number generators, and most are now operated using buttons and touchscreens.\nSlot machines include one or more currency detectors that validate the form of payment, whether coin, banknote, voucher, or token. The machine pays out according to the pattern of symbols displayed when the reels stop \"spinning\". Slot machines are the most popular gambling method in casinos and contribute about 70% of the average U.S. casino's income. \nDigital technology has resulted in variations in the original slot machine concept. As the player is essentially playing a video game, manufacturers can offer more interactive elements, such as advanced bonus rounds and more varied video graphics. Slot machines\u2019 terminology, characteristics, and regulation vary by country of manufacture and use.\nTerms and their sources.\nThe \"slot machine\" term derives from the slots on the machine for inserting and retrieving coins. \"Fruit machine\" comes from the traditional fruit images on the spinning reels such as lemons and cherries. Slot machines are also known pejoratively as \"one-armed bandits\", alluding to the large mechanical levers affixed to the sides of early mechanical machines, and to the games' ability to empty players' pockets and wallets as thieves would.\nHistory.\nSittman and Pitt of Brooklyn, New York, developed a gambling machine in 1891 that was a precursor to the modern slot machine. It contained five drums holding a total of 50 card faces and was based on poker. The machine proved extremely popular, and soon many bars in the city had one or more of them. Players would insert a nickel and pull a lever, which would spin the drums and the cards that they held, the player hoping for a good poker hand. There was no direct payout mechanism, so a pair of kings might get the player a free beer, whereas a royal flush could pay out cigars or drinks; the prizes were wholly dependent upon what the establishment would offer. To improve the odds for the house, two cards were typically removed from the deck, the ten of spades and the jack of hearts, doubling the odds against winning a royal flush. The drums could also be rearranged to further reduce a player's chance of winning.\nBecause of the vast number of possible wins in the original poker-based game, it proved practically impossible to make a machine capable of awarding an automatic payout for all possible winning combinations. At some time between 1887 and 1895, Charles Fey of San Francisco, California, devised a much simpler automatic mechanism with three spinning reels containing a total of five symbols: horseshoes, diamonds, spades, hearts and a Liberty Bell; the bell gave the machine its name. By replacing ten cards with five symbols and using three reels instead of five drums, the complexity of reading a win was considerably reduced, allowing Fey to design an effective automatic payout mechanism. Three bells in a row produced the biggest payoff, ten nickels (50\u00a2). Liberty Bell was a huge success and spawned a thriving mechanical gaming device industry. After a few years, the devices were banned in California, but Fey still could not keep up with the demand for them elsewhere. The Liberty Bell machine was so popular that it was copied by many slot machine manufacturers. The first of these, also called the \"Liberty Bell\", was produced by the manufacturer Herbert Mills in 1907. By 1908, \"bell\" machines had been installed in cigar stores, brothels and barber shops. Early machines, including an 1899 Liberty Bell, are now part of the Nevada State Museum's Fey Collection.\nThe first Liberty Bell machines produced by Mills used the same symbols on the reels as did Charles Fey's original. Soon afterward, another version was produced with patriotic symbols, such as flags and wreaths, on the wheels. Later, a similar machine called the Operator's Bell was produced that included the option of adding a gum-vending attachment. As the gum offered was fruit-flavored, fruit symbols were placed on the reels: lemons, cherries, oranges and plums. A bell was retained, and a picture of a stick of Bell-Fruit Gum, the origin of the bar symbol, was also present. This set of symbols proved highly popular and was used by other companies that began to make their own slot machines: Caille, Watling, Jennings and Pace.\nA commonly used technique to avoid gambling laws in several states was to award food prizes. For this reason, several gumball and other vending machines were regarded with mistrust by the courts. The two Iowa cases of \"State v. Ellis\" and \"State v. Striggles\" are both used in criminal law classes to illustrate the concept of reliance upon authority as it relates to the axiomatic \"ignorantia juris non excusat\" (\"ignorance of the law is no excuse\"). In these cases, a mint vending machine was declared to be a gambling device because the machine would, by internally manufactured chance, occasionally give the next user several tokens exchangeable for more candy. Despite the display of the result of the next use on the machine, the courts ruled that \"[t]he machine appealed to the player's propensity to gamble, and that is [a] vice.\"\nIn 1963, Bally developed the first fully electromechanical slot machine called Money Honey (although earlier machines such as Bally's High Hand draw-poker machine had exhibited the basics of electromechanical construction as early as 1940). Its electromechanical workings made Money Honey the first slot machine with a bottomless hopper and automatic payout of up to 500 coins without the help of an attendant. The popularity of this machine led to the increasing predominance of electronic games, with the side lever soon becoming vestigial.\nThe first video slot machine was developed in 1976 in Kearny Mesa, California by the Las Vegas\u2013based Fortune Coin Co. This machine used a modified Sony Trinitron color receiver for the display and logic boards for all slot-machine functions. The prototype was mounted in a full-size, show-ready slot-machine cabinet. The first production units went on trial at the Las Vegas Hilton Hotel. After some modifications to defeat cheating attempts, the video slot machine was approved by the Nevada State Gaming Commission and eventually found popularity on the Las Vegas Strip and in downtown casinos. Fortune Coin Co. and its video slot-machine technology were purchased by IGT (International Gaming Technology) in 1978.\nThe first American video slot machine to offer a \"second screen\" bonus round was Reel 'Em In, developed by WMS Industries in 1996. This type of machine had appeared in Australia from at least 1994 with the Three Bags Full game. With this type of machine, the display changes to provide a different game in which an additional payout may be awarded.\nOperation.\nDepending on the machine, the player can insert cash or, in \"ticket-in, ticket-out\" machines, a paper ticket with a barcode, into a designated slot on the machine. The machine is then activated by means of a lever or button (either physical or on a touchscreen), which activates reels that spin and stop to rearrange the symbols. If a player matches a winning combination of symbols, the player earns credits based on the paytable. Symbols vary depending on the theme of the machine. Classic symbols include objects such as fruits, bells, and stylized lucky sevens. Most slot games have a theme, such as a specific style, location, or character. Symbols and other bonus features of the game are typically aligned with the theme. Some themes are licensed from popular media franchises, including films, television series (including game shows such as \"Wheel of Fortune\", which has been one of the most popular lines of slot machines overall), entertainers, and musicians.\nMulti-line slot machines have become more popular since the 1990s. These machines have more than one payline, meaning that visible symbols that are not aligned on the main horizontal may be considered as winning combinations. Traditional three-reel slot machines commonly have one, three, or five paylines while video slot machines may have 9, 15, 25, or as many as 1024 different paylines. Most accept variable numbers of credits to play, with 1 to 15 credits per line being typical. The higher the amount bet, the higher the payout will be if the player wins.\nOne of the main differences between video slot machines and reel machines is in the way payouts are calculated. With reel machines, the only way to win the maximum jackpot is to play the maximum number of coins (usually three, sometimes four or even five coins per spin). With video machines, the fixed payout values are multiplied by the number of coins per line that is being bet. In other words: on a reel machine, the odds are more favorable if the gambler plays with the maximum number of coins available. However, depending on the structure of the game and its bonus features, some video slots may still include features that improve chances at payouts by making increased wagers.\n\"Multi-way\" games eschew fixed paylines in favor of allowing symbols to pay anywhere, as long as there is at least one in at least three consecutive reels from left to right. Multi-way games may be configured to allow players to bet by-reel: for example, on a game with a 3x5 pattern (often referred to as a 243-way game), playing one reel allows all three symbols in the first reel to potentially pay, but only the center row pays on the remaining reels (often designated by darkening the unused portions of the reels). Other multi-way games use a 4x5 or 5x5 pattern, where there are up to five symbols in each reel, allowing for up to 1,024 and 3,125 ways to win respectively. The Australian manufacturer Aristocrat brands games featuring this system as \"Reel Power\", \"Xtra Reel Power\" and \"Super Reel Power\" respectively. A variation involves patterns where symbols are adjacent to one another. Most of these games have a hexagonal reel formation, and much like multi-way games, any patterns not played are darkened out of use.\nDenominations can range from 1 cent (\"penny slots\") all the way up to $100.00 or more per credit. The latter are typically known as \"high limit\" machines, and machines configured to allow for such wagers are often located in dedicated areas (which may have a separate team of attendants to cater to the needs of those who play there). The machine automatically calculates the number of credits the player receives in exchange for the cash inserted. Newer machines often allow players to choose from a selection of denominations on a splash screen or menu.\nPay table.\nEach machine has a table that lists the number of credits the player will receive if the symbols listed on the pay table line up on the pay line of the machine. Some symbols are wild and can represent many, or all, of the other symbols to complete a winning line. Especially on older machines, the pay table is listed on the face of the machine, usually above and below the area containing the wheels. On video slot machines, they are usually contained within a help menu, along with information on other features.\nTechnology.\nReels.\nHistorically, all slot machines used revolving mechanical reels to display and determine results. Although the original slot machine used five reels, simpler, and therefore more reliable, three reel machines quickly became the standard.\nA problem with three reel machines is that the number of combinations is only cubic \u2013 the original slot machine with three physical reels and 10 symbols on each reel had only 103 = 1,000 possible combinations. This limited the manufacturer's ability to offer large jackpots since even the rarest event had a likelihood of 0.1%. The maximum theoretical payout, assuming 100% return to player would be 1000 times the bet, but that would leave no room for other pays, making the machine very high risk, and also quite boring.\nAlthough the number of symbols eventually increased to about 22, allowing 10,648 combinations, this still limited jackpot sizes as well as the number of possible outcomes.\nIn the 1980s, however, slot machine manufacturers incorporated electronics into their products and programmed them to weight particular symbols. Thus the odds of losing symbols appearing on the payline became disproportionate to their actual frequency on the physical reel. A symbol would only appear once on the reel displayed to the player, but could, in fact, occupy several stops on the multiple reel.\nIn 1984, Inge Telnaes received a patent for a device titled, \"Electronic Gaming Device Utilizing a Random Number Generator for Selecting the Reel Stop Positions\" (US Patent 4448419), which states: \"It is important to make a machine that is perceived to present greater chances of payoff than it actually has within the legal limitations that games of chance must operate.\" The patent was later bought by International Game Technology and has since expired.\nA virtual reel that has 256 virtual stops per reel would allow up to 2563 = 16,777,216 final positions. The manufacturer could choose to offer a $1 million jackpot on a $1 bet, confident that it will only happen, over the long term, once every 16.8 million plays.\nComputerization.\nWith microprocessors now ubiquitous, the computers inside modern slot machines allow manufacturers to assign a different probability to every symbol on every reel. To the player, it might appear that a winning symbol was \"so close\", whereas in fact the probability is much lower.\nIn the 1980s in the U.K., machines embodying microprocessors became common. These used a number of features to ensure the payout was controlled within the limits of the gambling legislation. As a coin was inserted into the machine, it could go either directly into the cashbox for the benefit of the owner or into a channel that formed the payout reservoir, with the microprocessor monitoring the number of coins in this channel. The drums themselves were driven by stepper motors, controlled by the processor and with proximity sensors monitoring the position of the drums. A \"look-up table\" within the software allows the processor to know what symbols were being displayed on the drums to the gambler. This allowed the system to control the level of payout by stopping the drums at positions it had determined. If the payout channel had filled up, the payout became more generous; if nearly empty, the payout became less so (thus giving good control of the odds).\nVideo slot machines.\nVideo slot machines do not use mechanical reels, but use graphical reels on a computerized display. As there are no mechanical constraints on the design of video slot machines, games often use at least five reels, and may also use non-standard layouts. This greatly expands the number of possibilities: a machine can have 50 or more symbols on a reel, giving odds as high as 300 million to 1 against \u2013 enough for even the largest jackpot. As there are so many combinations possible with five reels, manufacturers do not need to weight the payout symbols (although some may still do so). Instead, higher paying symbols will typically appear only once or twice on each reel, while more common symbols earning a more frequent payout will appear many times. Video slot machines usually make more extensive use of multimedia, and can feature more elaborate minigames as bonuses. Modern cabinets typically use flat-panel displays, but cabinets using larger curved screens (which can provide a more immersive experience for the player) are not uncommon.\nVideo slot machines typically encourage the player to play multiple \"lines\": rather than simply taking the middle of the three symbols displayed on each reel, a line could go from top left to the bottom right or any other pattern specified by the manufacturer. As each symbol is equally likely, there is no difficulty for the manufacturer in allowing the player to take as many of the possible lines on offer as desired \u2013 the long-term return to the player will be the same. The difference for the player is that the more lines they play, the more likely they are to get paid on a given spin (because they are betting more).\nTo avoid seeming as if the player's money is simply ebbing away (whereas a payout of 100 credits on a single-line machine would be 100 bets and the player would feel they had made a substantial win, on a 20-line machine, it would only be five bets and not seem as significant), manufacturers commonly offer bonus games, which can return many times their bet. The player is encouraged to keep playing to reach the bonus: even if they are losing, the bonus game could allow them to win back their losses.\nPayout percentage.\nSlot machines are typically programmed to pay out as winnings 0% to 99% of the money that is wagered by players. This is known as the \"theoretical payout percentage\" or RTP, \"return to player\". The minimum theoretical payout percentage varies among jurisdictions and is typically established by law or regulation. For example, the minimum payout in Nevada is 75%, in New Jersey 83%, and in Mississippi 80%. The winning patterns on slot machines \u2013 the amounts they pay and the frequencies of those payouts \u2013 are carefully selected to yield a certain fraction of the money paid to the \"house\" (the operator of the slot machine) while returning the rest to the players during play. Suppose that a certain slot machine costs $1 per spin and has a return to player (RTP) of 95%. It can be calculated that, over a sufficiently long period such as 1,000,000 spins, the machine will return an average of $950,000 to its players, who have inserted $1,000,000 during that time. In this (simplified) example, the slot machine is said to pay out 95%. The operator keeps the remaining $50,000. Within some EGM development organizations this concept is referred to simply as \"par\". \"Par\" also manifests itself to gamblers as promotional techniques: \"Our 'Loose Slots' have a 93% payback! Play now!\"\nA slot machine's theoretical payout percentage is set at the factory when the software is written. Changing the payout percentage after a slot machine has been placed on the gaming floor requires a physical swap of the software or \"firmware\", which is usually stored on an EPROM but may be loaded onto non-volatile random access memory (NVRAM) or even stored on CD-ROM or DVD, depending on the capabilities of the machine and the applicable regulations. In certain jurisdictions, such as New Jersey, the EPROM has a tamper-evident seal and can only be changed in the presence of Gaming Control Board officials. Other jurisdictions, including Nevada, randomly audit slot machines to ensure that they contain only approved software.\nHistorically, many casinos, both online and offline, have been unwilling to publish individual game RTP figures, making it impossible for the player to know whether they are playing a \"loose\" or a \"tight\" game. Since the turn of the century, some information regarding these figures has started to come into the public domain either through various casinos releasing them\u2014primarily this applies to online casinos\u2014or through studies by independent gambling authorities.\nThe \"return to player\" is not the only statistic that is of interest. The probabilities of every payout on the pay table is also critical. For example, consider a hypothetical slot machine with a dozen different values on the pay table. However, the probabilities of getting all the payouts are zero except the largest one. If the payout is 4,000 times the input amount, and it happens every 4,000 times on average, the \"return to player\" is exactly 100%, but the game would be dull to play. Also, most people would not win anything, and having entries on the paytable that have a return of zero would be deceptive. As these individual probabilities are closely guarded secrets, it is possible that the advertised machines with high return to player simply increase the probabilities of these jackpots. The casino could legally place machines of a similar style payout and advertise that some machines have 100% return to player. The added advantage is that these large jackpots increase the excitement of the other players.\nThe table of probabilities for a specific machine is called the Probability and Accounting Report or PAR sheet, also PARS commonly understood as Paytable and Reel Strips. Mathematician Michael Shackleford revealed the PARS for one commercial slot machine, an original International Gaming Technology \"Red White and Blue\" machine. This game, in its original form, is obsolete, so these specific probabilities do not apply. He only published the odds after a fan of his sent him some information provided on a slot machine that was posted on a machine in the Netherlands. The psychology of the machine design is quickly revealed. There are 13 possible payouts ranging from 1:1 to 2,400:1. The 1:1 payout comes every 8 plays. The 5:1 payout comes every 33 plays, whereas the 2:1 payout comes every 600 plays. Most players assume the likelihood increases proportionate to the payout. The one mid-size payout that is designed to give the player a thrill is the 80:1 payout. It is programmed to occur an average of once every 219 plays. The 80:1 payout is high enough to create excitement, but not high enough that it makes it likely that the player will take their winnings and abandon the game. More than likely the player began the game with at least 80 times his bet (for instance there are 80 quarters in $20). In contrast the 150:1 payout occurs only on average of once every 6,241 plays. The highest payout of 2,400:1 occurs only on average of once every 643 = 262,144 plays since the machine has 64 virtual stops. The player who continues to feed the machine is likely to have several mid-size payouts, but unlikely to have a large payout. He quits after he is bored or has exhausted his bankroll.\nDespite their confidentiality, occasionally a PAR sheet is posted on a website. They have limited value to the player, because usually a machine will have 8 to 12 different possible programs with varying payouts. In addition, slight variations of each machine (e.g., with \"double jackpots\" or \"five times play\") are always being developed. The casino operator can choose which EPROM chip to install in any particular machine to select the payout desired. The result is that there is not really such a thing as a high payback type of machine, since every machine potentially has multiple settings. From October 2001 to February 2002, columnist Michael Shackleford obtained PAR sheets for five different nickel machines; four IGT games \"Austin Powers\", \"Fortune Cookie\", \"Leopard Spots\" and \"Wheel of Fortune\" and one game manufactured by WMS; \"Reel 'em In\". Without revealing the proprietary information, he developed a program that would allow him to determine with usually less than a dozen plays on each machine which EPROM chip was installed. Then he did a survey of over 400 machines in 70 different casinos in Las Vegas. He averaged the data, and assigned an average payback percentage to the machines in each casino. The resultant list was widely publicized for marketing purposes (especially by the Palms casino which had the top ranking).\nOne reason that the slot machine is so profitable to a casino is that the player must play the \"high house edge and high payout\" wagers along with the \"low house edge and low payout\" wagers. In a more traditional wagering game like craps, the player knows that certain wagers have almost a 50/50 chance of winning or losing, but they only pay a limited multiple of the original bet (usually no higher than three times). Other bets have a higher house edge, but the player is rewarded with a bigger win (up to thirty times in craps). The player can choose what kind of wager he wants to make. A slot machine does not afford such an opportunity. Theoretically, the operator could make these probabilities available, or allow the player to choose which one so that the player is free to make a choice. However, no operator has ever enacted this strategy. Different machines have different maximum payouts, but without knowing the odds of getting the jackpot, there is no rational way to differentiate.\nIn many markets where central monitoring and control systems are used to link machines for auditing and security purposes, usually in wide area networks of multiple venues and thousands of machines, player return must usually be changed from a central computer rather than at each machine. A range of percentages is set in the game software and selected remotely.\nIn 2006, the Nevada Gaming Commission began working with Las Vegas casinos on technology that would allow the casino's management to change the game, the odds, and the payouts remotely. The change cannot be done instantaneously, but only after the selected machine has been idle for at least four minutes. After the change is made, the machine must be locked to new players for four minutes and display an on-screen message informing potential players that a change is being made.\nLinked machines.\nSome varieties of slot machines can be linked together in a setup sometimes known as a \"community\" game. The most basic form of this setup involves progressive jackpots that are shared between the bank of machines, but may include multiplayer bonuses and other features.\nIn some cases multiple machines are linked across multiple casinos. In these cases, the machines may be owned by the manufacturer, who is responsible for paying the jackpot. The casinos lease the machines rather than owning them outright. Casinos in New Jersey, Nevada, Louisiana, Arkansas, and South Dakota now offer multi-state progressive jackpots, which now offer bigger jackpot pools.\nFraud.\nMechanical slot machines and their coin acceptors were sometimes susceptible to cheating devices and other scams. One historical example involved spinning a coin with a short length of plastic wire. The weight and size of the coin would be accepted by the machine and credits would be granted. However, the spin created by the plastic wire would cause the coin to exit through the reject chute into the payout tray. This particular scam has become obsolete due to improvements in newer slot machines. Another obsolete method of defeating slot machines was to use a light source to confuse the optical sensor used to count coins during payout.\nModern slot machines are controlled by EPROM computer chips and, in large casinos, coin acceptors have become obsolete in favor of bill acceptors. These machines and their bill acceptors are designed with advanced anti-cheating and anti-counterfeiting measures and are difficult to defraud. Early computerized slot machines were sometimes defrauded through the use of cheating devices, such as the \"slider\", \"monkey paw\", \"lightwand\" and \"the tongue\". Many of these old cheating devices were made by the late Tommy Glenn Carmichael, a slot machine fraudster who reportedly stole over $5 million. In the modern day, computerized slot machines are fully deterministic and thus outcomes can be sometimes successfully predicted.\nSkill stops.\nSkill stop buttons predated the Bally electromechanical slot machines of the 1960s and 1970s. They appeared on mechanical slot machines manufactured by Mills Novelty Co. as early as the mid 1920s. These machines had modified reel-stop arms, which allowed them to be released from the timing bar, earlier than in a normal play, simply by pressing the buttons on the front of the machine, located between each reel.\n\"Skill stop\" buttons were added to some slot machines by Zacharias Anthony in the early 1970s. These enabled the player to stop each reel, allowing a degree of \"skill\" so as to satisfy the New Jersey gaming laws of the day which required that players were able to control the game in some way. The original conversion was applied to approximately 50 late-model Bally slot machines. Because the typical machine stopped the reels automatically in less than 10 seconds, weights were added to the mechanical timers to prolong the automatic stopping of the reels. By the time the New Jersey Alcoholic Beverages Commission (ABC) had approved the conversion for use in New Jersey arcades, the word was out and every other distributor began adding skill stops. The machines were a huge hit on the Jersey Shore and the remaining unconverted Bally machines were destroyed as they had become instantly obsolete.\nLegislation.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the public and private availability of slot machines is highly regulated by state governments. Many states have established gaming control boards to regulate the possession and use of slot machines and other forms of gaming.\nNevada is the only state that has no significant restrictions against slot machines both for public and private use. In New Jersey, slot machines are only allowed in hotel casinos operated in Atlantic City. Several states (Indiana, Louisiana and Missouri) allow slot machines (as well as any casino-style gambling) only on licensed riverboats or permanently anchored barges. Since Hurricane Katrina, Mississippi has removed the requirement that casinos on the Gulf Coast operate on barges and now allows them on land along the shoreline. Delaware allows slot machines at three horse tracks; they are regulated by the state lottery commission. In Wisconsin, bars and taverns are allowed to have up to five machines. These machines usually allow a player to either take a payout, or gamble it on a double-or-nothing \"side game\".\nThe territory of Puerto Rico places significant restrictions on slot machine ownership, but the law is widely flouted and slot machines are common in bars and coffeeshops.\nIn regards to tribal casinos located on Native American reservations, slot machines played against the house and operating independently from a centralized computer system are classified as \"Class III\" gaming by the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (IGRA), and sometimes promoted as \"Vegas-style\" slot machines. In order to offer Class III gaming, tribes must enter into a compact (agreement) with the state that is approved by the Department of the Interior, which may contain restrictions on the types and quantity of such games. As a workaround, some casinos may operate slot machines as \"Class II\" games\u2014a category that includes games where players play exclusively against at least one other opponent and not the house, such as bingo or any related games (such as pull-tabs). In these cases, the reels are an entertainment display with a pre-determined outcome based on a centralized game played against other players. Under the IGRA, Class II games are regulated by individual tribes and the National Indian Gaming Commission, and do not require any additional approval if the state already permits tribal gaming.\nSome historical race wagering terminals operate in a similar manner, with the machines using slots as an entertainment display for outcomes paid using the parimutuel betting system, based on results of randomly-selected, previously-held horse races (with the player able to view selected details about the race and adjust their picks before playing the credit, or otherwise use an auto-bet system).\nPrivate ownership.\nAlaska, Arizona, Arkansas, Kentucky, Maine, Minnesota, Nevada, Ohio, Rhode Island, Texas, Utah, Virginia, and West Virginia place no restrictions on private ownership of slot machines. Conversely, in Connecticut, Hawaii, Nebraska, South Carolina, and Tennessee, private ownership of any slot machine is completely prohibited. The remaining states allow slot machines of a certain age (typically 25\u201330 years) or slot machines manufactured before a specific date.\nCanada.\nThe Government of Canada has minimal involvement in gambling beyond the Canadian Criminal Code. In essence, the term \"lottery scheme\" used in the code means slot machines, bingo and table games normally associated with a casino. These fall under the jurisdiction of the province or territory without reference to the federal government; in practice, all Canadian provinces operate gaming boards that oversee lotteries, casinos and video lottery terminals under their jurisdiction.\nOLG piloted a classification system for slot machines at the Grand River Raceway developed by University of Waterloo professor Kevin Harrigan, as part of its PlaySmart initiative for responsible gambling. Inspired by nutrition labels on foods, they displayed metrics such as volatility and frequency of payouts. OLG has also deployed electronic gaming machines with pre-determined outcomes based on a bingo or pull-tab game, initially branded as \"TapTix\", which visually resemble slot machines.\nIn Ontario, 4 April 2022 saw the re-introduction of the online gambling market. This became possible when the Canadian Criminal Code was amended to allow single-event wagering August 2021. The province is expected to generate about $800 million in gross revenue per year.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia \"Poker Machines\" or \"pokies\" are officially termed \"gaming machines\". In Australia, gaming machines are a matter for state governments, so laws vary between states. Gaming machines are found in casinos (approximately one in each major city), pubs and clubs in some states (usually sports, social, or RSL clubs). The first Australian state to legalize this style of gambling was New South Wales, when in 1956 they were made legal in all registered clubs in the state. There are suggestions that the proliferation of poker machines has led to increased levels of problem gambling; however, the precise nature of this link is still open to research.\nIn 1999 the Australian Productivity Commission reported that nearly half of Australia's gaming machines were in New South Wales. At the time, 21% of all the gambling machines in the world were operating in Australia and, on a per capita basis, Australia had roughly five times as many gaming machines as the United States. Australia ranks 8th in total number of gaming machines after Japan, U.S.A., Italy, U.K., Spain and Germany. This primarily is because gaming machines have been legal in the state of New South Wales since 1956; over time, the number of machines has grown to 97,103 (at December 2010, including the Australian Capital Territory). By way of comparison, the U.S. State of Nevada, which legalised gaming including slots several decades before N.S.W., had 190,135 slots operating.\nRevenue from gaming machines in pubs and clubs accounts for more than half of the $4 billion in gambling revenue collected by state governments in fiscal year 2002\u201303.\nIn Queensland, gaming machines in pubs and clubs must provide a return rate of 85%, while machines located in casinos must provide a return rate of 90%. Most other states have similar provisions. In Victoria, gaming machines must provide a minimum return rate of at least 85% (including jackpot contribution), are prohibited from accepting bills greater than $50 in denomination, and each wager must be manually initiated by the player (thus prohibiting \"autoplay\" mechanisms). \nWestern Australia has the most restrictive regulations on electronic gaming machines (EGMs) in general. They may only be operated at the Crown Perth casino resort, which is the only casino in Western Australia, and have a return rate of 90%. Many EGMs operate games that are nearly identical to slot machines, but with modifications to comply with state law: EGMs are prohibited from using spinning reels, and must not use symbols associated with poker machines used elsewhere. Each wager must take at least three seconds to play, and each wager must be initiated by the user.\nThis policy has an extensive political history, reaffirmed by the 1974 Royal Commission into Gambling:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Poker machine playing is a mindless, repetitive and insidious form of gambling which has many undesirable features. It requires no thought, no skill or social contact. The odds are never about winning. Watching people playing the machines over long periods of time, the impressionistic evidence at least is that they are addictive to many people. Historically poker machines have been banned from Western Australia and we consider that, in the public interest, they should stay banned.\nDespite the state having praised its restrictions for keeping gaming machines from being widely available to the public as in other states, the machines have faced criticism for being almost indistinguishable to a normal slot machine, and thus having the same addictive qualities. In March 2022, a royal commission found Crown Gaming to be unfit to hold a gaming license in WA, citing issues surrounding money laundering, failing to minimise harms from problem gambling, and the regulatory framework of the Gaming and Wagering Commission being considered outdated. To implement the recommendations of the Commission, EGMs were limited to maximum bets of $10 beginning in July 2023, while also requiring the implementation of weekly limits on play and losses, and the implementation of cashless machines requiring pre-loaded player cards to function.\nNick Xenophon was elected on an independent No Pokies ticket in the South Australian Legislative Council at the 1997 South Australian state election on 2.9 percent, re-elected at the 2006 election on 20.5 percent, and elected to the Australian Senate at the 2007 federal election on 14.8 percent. Independent candidate Andrew Wilkie, an anti-pokies campaigner, was elected to the Australian House of Representatives seat of Denison at the 2010 federal election. Wilkie was one of four crossbenchers who supported the Gillard Labor government following the hung parliament result. Wilkie immediately began forging ties with Xenophon as soon as it was apparent that he was elected. In exchange for Wilkie's support, the Labor government are attempting to implement precommitment technology for high-bet/high-intensity poker machines, against opposition from the Tony Abbott Coalition and Clubs Australia.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020, every establishment in the country that facilitated poker machines was shut down, in an attempt to curb the spread of the virus, bringing Australia's usage of poker machines effectively to zero.\nRussia.\nIn Russia, \"slot clubs\" appeared quite late, only in 1992. Before 1992, slot machines were only in casinos and small shops, but later slot clubs began appearing all over the country. The most popular and numerous were \"Vulcan 777\" and \"Taj Mahal\". Since 2009, when gambling establishments were banned, almost all slot clubs disappeared and are found only in a specially authorized gambling zones.\nUnited Kingdom.\nSlot machines are covered by the Gambling Act 2005, which superseded the Gaming Act 1968.\nSlot machines in the U.K. are categorised by definitions produced by the Gambling Commission as part of the Gambling Act of 2005.\nCasinos built under the provisions of the 1968 Act are allowed to house either up to twenty machines of categories B\u2013D or any number of C\u2013D machines. As defined by the 2005 Act, large casinos can have a maximum of one hundred and fifty machines in any combination of categories B\u2013D (subject to a machine-to-table ratio of 5:1); small casinos can have a maximum of eighty machines in any combination of categories B\u2013D (subject to a machine-to-table ratio of 2:1).\nCategory A.\nCategory A games were defined in preparation for the planned \"Super Casinos\". Despite a lengthy bidding process with Manchester being chosen as the single planned location, the development was cancelled soon after Gordon Brown became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. As a result, there are no lawful Category A games in the U.K.\nCategory B.\nCategory B games are divided into subcategories. The differences between B1, B3 and B4 games are mainly the stake and prizes as defined in the above table. Category B2 games \u2013 Fixed odds betting terminals (FOBTs) \u2013 have quite different stake and prize rules: FOBTs are mainly found in licensed betting shops, or bookmakers, usually in the form of electronic roulette.\nThe games are based on a random number generator; thus each game's probability of getting the jackpot is independent of any other game: probabilities are all equal. If a pseudorandom number generator is used instead of a truly random one, probabilities are not independent since each number is determined at least in part by the one generated before it.\nCategory C.\nCategory C games are often referred to as fruit machines, one-armed bandits and AWP (amusement with prize). Fruit machines are commonly found in pubs, clubs, and arcades. Machines commonly have three but can be found with four or five reels, each with 16\u201324 symbols printed around them. The reels are spun each play, from which the appearance of particular combinations of symbols result in payment of their associated winnings by the machine (or alternatively initiation of a subgame). These games often have many extra features, trails and subgames with opportunities to win money; usually more than can be won from just the payouts on the reel combinations.\nFruit machines in the U.K. almost universally have the following features, generally selected at random using a pseudorandom number generator:\nIt is known for machines to pay out multiple jackpots, one after the other (this is known as a \"repeat\") but each jackpot requires a new game to be played so as not to violate the law about the maximum payout on a single play. Typically this involves the player only pressing the Start button at the \"repeat\" prompt, for which a single credit is taken, regardless of whether this causes the reels to spin or not. Machines are also known to intentionally set aside money, which is later awarded in a series of wins, known as a \"streak\". The minimum payout percentage is 70%, with pubs often setting the payout at around 78%.\nJapan.\nJapanese slot machines, known as from the words \"pachinko\" and \"slot machine\", are a descendant of the traditional Japanese pachinko game. Slot machines are a fairly new phenomenon and they can be found mostly in pachinko parlors and the adult sections of amusement arcades, known as game centers.\nJackpot disputes.\nElectronic slot machines can malfunction. When the displayed amount is smaller than the one it is supposed to be, the error usually goes unnoticed. When it happens the other way, disputes are likely. Below are some notable arguments caused by the owners of the machines saying that the displayed amounts were far larger than the ones patrons should get.\nUnited States.\nTwo such cases occurred in casinos in Colorado in 2010, where software errors led to indicated jackpots of $11 million and $42 million. Analysis of machine records by the state Gaming Commission revealed faults, with the true jackpot being substantially smaller. State gaming laws did not require a casino to honour payouts in that case.\nVietnam.\nOn October 25, 2009, while a Vietnamese American man, Ly Sam, was playing a slot machine in the Palazzo Club at the Sheraton Saigon Hotel in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, it displayed that he had hit a jackpot of US$55,542,296.73. The casino refused to pay, saying it was a machine error, Ly sued the casino. On January 7, 2013, the District 1 People's Court in Ho Chi Minh City decided that the casino had to pay the amount Ly claimed in full, not trusting the error report from an inspection company hired by the casino. Both sides appealed thereafter, and Ly asked for interest while the casino refused to pay him. In January, 2014, the news reported that the case had been settled out of court, and Ly had received an undisclosed sum.\nProblem gambling and slot machines.\nNatasha Dow Sch\u00fcll, associate professor in New York University's Department of Media, Culture and Communication, uses the term \"machine zone\" to describe the state of immersion that users of slot machines experience when gambling, where they lose a sense of time, space, bodily awareness, and monetary value.\nMike Dixon, PhD, professor of psychology at the University of Waterloo, studies the relationship between slot players and machines. In one of Dixon's studies, players were observed experiencing heightened arousal from the sensory stimulus coming from the machines. They \"sought to show that these 'losses disguised as wins' (LDWs) would be as arousing as wins, and more arousing than regular losses.\"\nPsychologists Robert Breen and Marc Zimmerman found that players of video slot machines reach a debilitating level of involvement with gambling three times as rapidly as those who play traditional casino games, even if they have engaged in other forms of gambling without problems.\nEye-tracking research in local bookkeepers' offices in the UK suggested that, in slots games, the reels dominated players' visual attention, and that problem gamblers looked more frequently at amount-won messages than did those without gambling problems.\nThe 2011 \"60 Minutes\" report \"Slot Machines: The Big Gamble\" focused on the link between slot machines and gambling addiction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29230", "revid": "137678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29230", "title": "Sneaker Pimps", "text": "British electronic music band\nSneaker Pimps are an English electronic music band, formed in Hartlepool in 1994. They are best known for their debut album, \"Becoming X\" (1996), and its singles \"6 Underground\" and \"Spin Spin Sugar\". The band's name is derived from an article the Beastie Boys published in their \"Grand Royal\" magazine about a man they hired to acquire classic sneakers.\nThe band was founded by electronic musician Liam Howe and guitarist Chris Corner. They later recruited Kelli Ali (then known as Kelli Dayton) as lead singer, plus guitarist Joe Wilson and drummer Dave Westlake as backup musicians. After \"Becoming X\", the band decided to replace Ali with Corner on vocals. Wilson and Westlake departed in 2002. In 2016 Howe and Corner revived the group after a lengthy hiatus. In 2021, they began releasing new music.\nHistory.\nChris Corner and Liam Howe met as teenagers in the 1980s, both taking an interest in recording and studio experimentation. They banded together under the name F.R.I.S.K. and produced the \"Soul of Indiscretion\" EP, an early example of what became known as trip hop. The mix of beats and acoustic folk sounds was further explored on two more instrumental EPs: \"F.R.I.S.K.\" and \"World as a Cone\". They were signed to Clean Up Records. The duo also worked as DJs and producers under the name Line of Flight.\nHowe and Corner launched Sneaker Pimps as a recording group in 1994. The following year, they recruited Ian Pickering to help write lyrics for what would become Sneaker Pimps' debut album, \"Becoming X\". Corner recorded vocals for several demo tracks, but the band decided the kind of music they were writing would better suit a female voice. At their manager's suggestion, they saw Kelli Ali (then known as Kelli Dayton) performing in a pub with her band The Lumieres, and invited her to sing on some demos, including an early version of \"6 Underground\". She soon joined the band, and the demos won the group a contract with Virgin Records. The group was presented as a trio featuring Howe, Corner, and Ali; while bassist Joe Wilson and drummer Dave Westlake were added as supporting musicians.\nReleased in 1996, \"Becoming X\" sold over one million copies. The band toured for two years to support the album, including gigs alongside Aphex Twin. A \"grueling\" tour of the US strained relations within the band, and Howe left the tour prematurely. A remix album, \"Becoming Remixed\", followed in 1998.\nHowe and Corner then developed their own studio, also called Line of Flight after their earlier production work, and began sessions for the second Sneaker Pimps album. Kelli Ali had taken a break after the \"Becoming X\" tour and was away traveling, so Corner sang on the new demos. When Ali returned, she was told by Howe and Corner that her voice was no longer considered suitable for their new music, and that Corner's voice was a better fit. Due to other ongoing personality conflicts and the band's concern about being stereotyped as a faddish female-fronted trip-hop act, Ali was fired and Corner took over on lead vocals.\nThis significant lineup change caused Virgin Records to drop the band. Their second album \"Splinter\" was released in the UK on Clean Up Records in 1999, and failed to match the commercial success of \"Becoming X\". New songs were premiered during a 2001 European tour opening for Placebo. Their third album \"Bloodsport\" was released on Tommy Boy Records in 2002. Howe and Corner also gained notice by writing and producing for other artists, including Natalie Imbruglia, and for remixing songs under the name Line of Flight.\nIn 2002, Joe Wilson and Dave Westlake left Sneaker Pimps. In 2003, a fourth Sneaker Pimps album was demoed but shelved. The album, which started as the soundtrack for an abandoned indie film project called \"Blind Michael\", is referred to in fan circles as \"SP4\". Corner then launched the solo project IAMX, which included several songs from the \"SP4\" project. After some additional cancelled projects, in 2006 Howe and Corner recorded some new demo tracks with an unidentified female singer; the tracks turned up on a MiniDisc found in a bar in Russia and are now commonly referred to as \"SP5 demos\". The tracks were leaked online and were later confirmed to be legitimate new Sneaker Pimps songs.\nAfter several years of side projects, Howe hinted in 2015 that Sneaker Pimps may reform. Corner confirmed the reunion in 2016, and as of early 2019 they were reportedly working on a new album. Deluxe box sets of previous albums and two new studio albums were announced to be released variously across 2021.\nIn May 2021, the band announced a new album entitled \"Squaring the Circle\". The album was produced at Sawtooth Studios in Pioneertown, California and The Tower Studios in London. Main vocals are shared by Corner and \"featured artist\" Simonne Jones. Five of the songs originate from the SP5 demos, \"Lifeline\" (originally \"Samaritan\"), \"Child in the Dark\" (originally \"Satellite\"), So Far Gone (originally \"Sun Ate the Moon\"), \"Come Like the Cure\" (originally \"Elias\") and \"No Show\" (originally \"Rush\").\nMembers.\nIn the studio, the band regularly swapped instruments. As Corner explained during the recording sessions for \"Bloodsport\", \"we tend towards jobs, but generally we can mix and match. If we get bored of one aspect, someone else jumps in the seat. Gone are the days where it\u2019s like 'You\u2019re the drummer, I\u2019m the synth player.\" When playing live, however, their roles were more fixed:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29234", "revid": "8454797", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29234", "title": "Spear", "text": "Polearm with a long shaft and pointed head used for thrusting or throwing\nA spear is a polearm consisting of a shaft, usually of wood, with a pointed head. The head may be simply the sharpened end of the shaft itself, as is the case with fire hardened spears, or it may be made of a more durable material fastened to the shaft, such as bone, flint, obsidian, copper, bronze, iron, or steel. The most common design for hunting and/or warfare, since modern times has incorporated a metal spearhead shaped like a triangle, diamond, or leaf. The heads of fishing spears usually feature multiple sharp points, with or without barbs.\nSpears can be divided into two broad categories: those designed for thrusting as a melee weapon (including weapons such as lances and pikes) and those designed for throwing as a ranged weapon (usually referred to as javelins).\nThe spear has been used throughout human history as a weapon for hunting and/or fishing and for warfare. Along with the club, knife, and axe, it is one of the earliest and most widespread tools ever developed by early humans. As a weapon, it may be wielded with either one or two hands. It was used in virtually every conflict up until the modern era, where even to this day, it lives on in the form of a bayonet fixed onto the muzzle of a long gun.\nEarly humans progressively invented tools and techniques for trapping animals. The earliest spears were crafted from wood, with tips toughened by burning. By 15,000 BC, hunters employed wooden and bone spear-launchers to enhance force and distance. These devices were frequently adorned with carvings of creatures.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe word \"spear\" comes from the Old English \"spere\", from the Proto-Germanic \"speri\", from a Proto-Indo-European root \"*sper-\" \"spear, pole\".\nOrigins.\nSpear manufacture and use is not confined to humans. It is also practiced by the western chimpanzee. Chimpanzees near K\u00e9dougou, Senegal have been observed to create spears by breaking straight limbs off trees, stripping them of their bark and side branches, and sharpening one end with their teeth. They then used the weapons to hunt galagos sleeping in hollows.\nPrehistory.\nThe Clacton Spear found in England and the Sch\u00f6ningen spears found in present-day Germany document that wooden spears have been used for hunting since at least 400,000 years ago. A 2012 study from the site of Kathu Pan in South Africa suggests that hominids, possibly \"Homo heidelbergensis\", may have developed the technology of hafted stone-tipped spears in Africa about 500,000 years ago. Wood does not preserve well, however, and Craig Stanford, a primatologist and professor of anthropology at the University of Southern California, has suggested that the discovery of spear use by chimpanzees means that early humans may have used wooden spears before this.\nFrom circa 200,000 BC onwards, Middle Paleolithic humans began to make complex stone blades with flaked edges which were used as spear heads. These stone heads could be fixed to the spear shaft by gum or resin or by bindings made of animal sinew, leather strips or vegetable matter. During this period, a clear difference remained between spears designed to be thrown and those designed to be used in hand-to-hand combat. By the Magdalenian period (c. 15,000\u20139500 BC), spear-throwers similar to the later atlatl were in use.\nMilitary.\nEurope.\nClassical antiquity.\nAncient Greeks.\nThe spear is the main weapon of the warriors of Homer's \"Iliad\". The use of both a single thrusting spear and two throwing spears are mentioned. It has been suggested that two styles of combat are being described; an early style, with thrusting spears, dating to the Mycenaean period in which the Iliad is set, and, anachronistically, a later style, with throwing spears, from Homer's own Archaic period.\nIn the 7th century BC, the Greeks evolved a new close-order infantry formation, the phalanx. The key to this formation was the hoplite, who was equipped with a large, circular, bronze-faced shield (aspis) and a spear with an iron head and bronze butt-spike (doru). The hoplite phalanx dominated warfare among the Greek City States from the 7th into the 4th century BC.\nThe 4th century saw major changes. One was the greater use of peltasts, light infantry armed with spear and javelins. The other was the development of the sarissa, a two-handed pike in length, by the Macedonians under Phillip of Macedon and Alexander the Great. The pike phalanx, supported by peltasts and cavalry, became the dominant mode of warfare among the Greeks from the late 4th century onward until Greek military systems were supplanted by the Roman legions.\nAncient Romans.\nIn the pre-Marian Roman armies, the first two lines of battle, the \"hastati\" and \"principes\", often fought with a sword called a \"gladius\" and \"pila\", heavy javelins that were specifically designed to be thrown at an enemy to pierce and foul a target's shield. Originally, the \"principes\" were armed with a short spear called a \"hasta\", but these gradually fell out of use, eventually being replaced by the gladius. The third line, the \"triarii\", continued to use the \"hasta\".\nFrom the late 2nd century BC, all legionaries were equipped with the \"pilum\". The \"pilum\" continued to be the standard legionary spear until the end of the 2nd century AD. \"Auxilia\", however, were equipped with a simple hasta and, perhaps, javelins or darts. During the 3rd century AD, although the \"pilum\" continued to be used, legionaries usually were equipped with other forms of throwing and thrusting spear, similar to \"auxilia\" of the previous century. By the 4th century, the \"pilum\" had effectively disappeared from common use.\nIn the late period of the Roman Empire, the spear became more often used because of its anti-cavalry capacities as the barbarian invasions were often conducted by people with a developed culture of cavalry in warfare.\nMedieval period.\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the spear and shield continued to be used by nearly all Western European cultures. Since a medieval spear required only a small amount of steel along the sharpened edges (most of the spear-tip was wrought iron), it was an economical weapon. Quick to manufacture, and needing less smithing skill than a sword, it remained the main weapon of the common soldier. The Vikings, for instance, although often portrayed with an axe, sword, or lance in hand, were armed mostly with spears, as were their Anglo-Saxon, Irish, or continental contemporaries. Spears eventually evolved into lances; this is where the lance depiction comes from. With a good majority of Medieval weapons being spears they became integrated into many war tactics. Spears were very commonly used while providing a defensive block. When men on horses tried to get by these blocks, they would often be killed by the spears that could poke through the shield walls. Spears became more common than swords and axes because of how cheap, long, and fast spears were made.\nInfantry.\nBroadly speaking, spears were either designed to be used in melee, or to be thrown. Within this simple classification, there was a remarkable range of types. For example, M. J. Swanton identified thirty different spearhead categories and sub-categories in early Saxon England. Most medieval spearheads were generally leaf-shaped. Notable types of early medieval spears include the \"angon\", a throwing spear with a long head similar to the Roman \"pilum\", used by the Franks and Anglo-Saxons, and the winged (or lugged) spear, which had two prominent wings at the base of the spearhead, either to prevent the spear penetrating too far into an enemy or to aid in spear fencing. Originally a Frankish weapon, the winged spear also was popular with the Vikings. It would become the ancestor of later medieval polearms, such as the partisan and spetum.\nThe thrusting spear also has the advantage of reach, being considerably longer than other weapon types. Exact spear lengths are hard to deduce as few spear shafts survive archaeologically, but would seem to have been the average length. Some nations were noted for their long spears, including the Scots and the Flemish. Spears usually were used in tightly ordered formations, such as the shield wall or the schiltron. To resist cavalry, spear shafts could be planted against the ground. William Wallace drew up his schiltrons in a circle at the Battle of Falkirk in 1298 to deter charging cavalry; this was a widespread tactic sometimes known as the \"crown\" formation. Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray used a circular schiltron on the first day of the Battle of Bannockburn. However, the rectangular schiltron was much more common and was used by King Robert the Bruce on the second day of the Battle of Bannockburn and in the Battle of Old Byland when he defeated English armies.\nThrowing spears became rarer as the Middle Ages drew on, but survived in the hands of specialists such as the Catalan Almogavars. They were commonly used in Ireland until the end of the 16th century.\nSpears began to lose fashion among the infantry during the 14th century, being replaced by polearms that combined the thrusting properties of the spear with the cutting properties of the axe, such as the halberd. Where spears were retained they grew in length, eventually evolving into pikes, which would be a dominant infantry weapon in the 16th and 17th centuries.\nCavalry.\nCavalry spears were originally the same as infantry spears and were often used with two hands or held with one hand overhead. In the 12th century, after the adoption of stirrups and a high-cantled saddle, the spear became a decidedly more powerful weapon. A mounted knight would secure the lance by holding it with one hand and tucking it under the armpit (the \"couched lance\" technique) In combination with a lance rest, this allowed all the momentum of the horse and knight to be focused on the weapon's tip, whilst still retaining accuracy and control. This use of the spear spurred the development of the lance as a distinct weapon that was perfected in the medieval sport of jousting.\nIn the 14th century, tactical developments meant that knights and men-at-arms often fought on foot. This led to the practice of shortening the lance to about to make it more manageable. As dismounting became commonplace, specialist polearms such as the pollaxe were adopted by knights and this practice ceased.\nIntroduction of gunpowder.\nThe development of both the long, two-handed pike and gunpowder firearms in Renaissance Europe saw an ever-increasing focus on integrated infantry tactics. Those infantry not armed with these weapons carried variations on the polearm, including the halberd and the bill. At the start of the Renaissance, cavalry remained predominantly lance-armed; gendarmes with the heavy knightly lance and lighter cavalry with a variety of lighter lances. By the 1540s, however, pistol-armed cavalry called reiters were beginning to make their mark. Cavalry armed with pistols and other lighter firearms, along with a sword, had virtually replaced lance armed cavalry in Western Europe by the beginning of the 17th century.\nUltimately, the spear proper was rendered obsolete on the battlefield. Its last flowering was the half-pike or spontoon, a shortened version of the pike carried by officers of various ranks. While originally a weapon, this came to be seen more as a badge of office, or \"leading staff\" by which troops were directed. The half-pike, sometimes known as a boarding pike, was also used as a weapon on board ships until the late 19th century.\nMiddle East.\nModern era.\nMuslim warriors used a spear that was called an \"az-za\u0121\u0101yah\". Berbers pronounced it \"za\u0121\u0101ya\", but the English term, derived from the Old French via Berber, is \"assegai\". It is a polearm used for throwing or hurling, usually a light spear or javelin made of hard wood and pointed with a forged iron tip. The \"az-za\u0121\u0101yah\" played an important role during the Islamic conquest as well as during later periods, well into the 20th century. A longer pole \"az-za\u0121\u0101yah\" was being used as a hunting weapon from horseback. The \"az-za\u0121\u0101yah\" was widely used. It existed in various forms in areas stretching from Southern Africa to the Indian subcontinent, although these places already had their own variants of the spear. This javelin was the weapon of choice during the \"Fulani jihad\" as well as during the Mahdist War in Sudan. It is still being used by certain wandering Sufi ascetics \"(Derwishes)\".\nAsia.\nChina.\nIn the Chinese martial arts, the Chinese spear (Qiang \u69cd) is popularly known as the \"king of weapons\". The spear is listed in the group of the four major weapons (along with the gun (staff), dao (a single-edged blade similar to a sabre), and the jian (sword)).\nSpears were used first as hunting weapons amongst the ancient Chinese. They became popular as infantry weapons during the Warring States and Qin era, when spearmen were used as especially highly disciplined soldiers in organized group attacks. When used in formation fighting, spearmen would line up their large rectangular or circular shields in a shieldwall manner. The Qin also employed long spears (more akin to a pike) in formations similar to Swiss pikemen in order to ward off cavalry. The Han Empire would use similar tactics as its Qin predecessors. Halberds, polearms, and dagger axes were also common weapons during this time.\nSpears were also common weaponry for Warring States, Qin, and Han era cavalry units. During these eras, the spear would develop into a longer lance-like weapon used for cavalry charges.\nThere are many words in Chinese that would be classified as a spear in English. The \"Mao\" is the predecessor of the \"Qiang\". The first bronze \"Mao\" appeared in the Shang dynasty. This weapon was less prominent on the battlefield than the \"ge\" (dagger-axe). In some archaeological examples two tiny holes or ears can be found in the blade of the spearhead near the socket, these holes were presumably used to attach tassels, much like modern day wushu spears.\nIn the early Shang, the \"Mao\" appeared to have a relatively short shaft as well as a relatively narrow shaft as opposed to \"Mao\" in the later Shang and Western Zhou period. Some \"Mao\" from this era are heavily decorated as is evidenced by a Warring States period \"Mao\" from the Ba Shu area.\nIn the Han dynasty the \"Mao\" and the \"Ji\" (\u621f \"Ji\" can be loosely defined as a halberd) rose to prominence in the military. Interesting to note is that the amount of iron Mao-heads found exceeds the number of bronze heads. By the end of the Han dynasty (Eastern Han) the process of replacement of the iron \"Mao\" had been completed and the bronze \"Mao\" had been rendered completely obsolete. After the Han dynasty toward the Sui and Tang dynasties the \"Mao\" used by cavalry were fitted with much longer shafts, as is mentioned above. During this era, the use of the \"Shuo\" (\u77df) was widespread among the footmen. The \"Shuo\" can be likened to a pike or simply a long spear.\nAfter the Tang dynasty, the popularity of the \"Mao\" declined and was replaced by the \"Qiang\" (\u67aa). The Tang dynasty divided the \"Qiang\" in four categories: \"\u4e00\u66f0\u6f06\u67aa\uff0c \u4e8c\u66f0\u6728\u67aa\uff0c \u4e09\u66f0\u767d\u6746\u67aa\uff0c \u56db\u66f0\u6251\u5934\u67aa\u3002\u201d Roughly translated the four categories are: Qi (a kind of wood) Spears, Wooden Spears, Bai Gan (A kind of wood) Spears and Pu Tou Qiang. The Qiang that were produced in the Song and Ming dynasties consisted of four major parts: Spearhead, Shaft, End Spike and Tassel. The types of Qiang that exist are many. Among the types there are cavalry Qiang that were the length of one \"zhang\" (approximately ), Litte-Flower Spears (Xiao Hua Qiang \u5c0f\u82b1\u67aa) that are the length of one person and their arm extended above his head, double hooked spears, single hooked spears, ringed spears and many more.\nThere is some confusion as to how to distinguish the \"Qiang\" from the \"Mao\", as they are obviously very similar. Some people say that a \"Mao\" is longer than a \"Qiang\", others say that the main difference is between the stiffness of the shaft, where the \"Qiang\" would be flexible and the \"Mao\" would be stiff. Scholars seem to lean toward the latter explanation more than the former. Because of the difference in the construction of the \"Mao\" and the \"Qiang\", the usage is also different, though there is no definitive answer as to what exactly the differences are between the \"Mao\" and the \"Qiang\".\nDespite their obsolence, spears remained in use with the Qing Army in the late 19th century: during the First Sino-Japanese War, 40% of Imperial soldiers didn't have rifles or even muskets. Spears and other melee weapons were also widely used by the Boxers during their eponymous rebellion.\nDuring the Warlord Era, the army of warlord Sun Chuanfang had units armed only with spears to oppose Chiang Kai Shek's Northern Expedition as a stopgap measure until he could import more rifles. The Chinese Red Army guerillas often made use of spears against the Japanese occupation forces during the Second Sino-Japanese War, while several Japanese puppet government troops had to make do with bamboo spears. During the Chinese Civil War, both Communist and Nationalist forces made use of spears, the latter mostly due Chiang's refusal to supply local commanders with rifles to prevent potential rivals from raising well-armed militias and challenging his authority.\nIndia.\nSpears are known as Bhala in Indian languages. Spears in the Indian society were used both in missile and non-missile form, both by cavalry and foot-soldiers. Mounted spear-fighting was practiced using with a , ball-tipped wooden lance called a \"bothati\", the end of which was covered in dye so that hits may be confirmed. Spears were constructed from a variety of materials such as the \"sang\" made completely of steel, and the \"ballam\" which had a bamboo shaft.\nThe Arab presence in Sindh and the Mameluks of Delhi introduced the Middle Eastern javelin into India.\nThe Rajputs wielded a type of spear for infantrymen which had a club integrated into the spearhead, and a pointed butt end. Other spears had forked blades, several spear-points, and numerous other innovations. One particular spear unique to India was the \"vita\" or corded lance.\nUsed by the Maratha Army, it had a rope connecting the spear with the user's wrist, allowing the weapon to be thrown and pulled back. The \"Vel\" is a type of spear or lance, originated in Southern India, primarily used by Tamils.\nSikh Nihangs sometimes carry a spear even today. Spears were used in conflicts and training by armed paramilitary units such as the razakars of Nizams of Hyderabad State as late as the second half of the 20th century.\nJapan.\nThe hoko spear was used in ancient Japan sometime between the Yayoi period and the Heian period, but it became unpopular as early samurai often acted as horseback archers. Medieval Japan employed spears again for infantrymen to use, but it was not until the 11th century in that samurai began to prefer spears over bows. Several polearms were used in the Japanese theatres; the naginata was a glaive-like weapon with a long, curved blade popularly among the samurai and the Buddhist warrior-monks, often used against cavalry; the yari was a longer polearm, with a straight-bladed spearhead, which became the weapon of choice of both the samurai and the ashigaru (footmen) during the Warring States Era; the horseback samurai used shorter yari for his single-armed combat; on the other hand, ashigaru infantries used long yari (similar with European pike) for their massed combat formation.\nPhilippines.\nFilipino spears (sibat) were used as both a weapon and a tool throughout the Philippines. It is also called a \"bangkaw\" (after the Bankaw Revolt.), \"sumbling\" or \"palupad\" in the islands of Visayas and Mindanao. Sibat are typically made from rattan, either with a sharpened tip or a head made from metal. These heads may either be single-edged, double-edged or barbed. Styles vary according to function and origin. For example, a sibat designed for fishing may not be the same as those used for hunting.\nThe spear was used as the primary weapon in expeditions and battles against neighbouring island kingdoms and it became famous during the 1521 Battle of Mactan, where the chieftain Lapu Lapu of Cebu fought against Spanish forces led by Ferdinand Magellan who was subsequently killed.\nAfrica.\nSouth Africa.\nThe various types of the assegai (a light spear or javelin made of wood and pointed with iron or fire-hardened tip) were used throughout Africa and it was the most common weapon used before the introduction of firearms. The Zulu, Xhosa and other Nguni tribes of South Africa were renowned for their use of the assegai. Shaka of the Zulu invented a shorter stabbing spear with a shaft and a larger, broader blade one foot (0.3m) long. This weapon is otherwise known as the \"iklwa\" or \"ixwa\", after the sound that was heard as it was withdrawn from the victim's wound. The traditional spear was not abandoned, but was used to range attack enemy formations before closing in for close quarters battle with the iklwa. This tactical combination originated during Shaka's military reforms. This weapon was typically used with one hand while the off hand held a cowhide shield for protection.\nEgypt.\nSimilar to most armies of their period, Ancient Egyptian forces were centered around the use of the spear. In battle, spearmen would be armed with a bronze-tipped spear (dja) and shield (ikem), which were used in elaborate formations much like Greek and Roman forces. Before the Hyksos invasion into Egypt, wooden spears were used, which were prone to splinter, but the influx of a new population brought innovations around bronze technology. Unlike other cultures who wielded spears at this time, the Egyptians did not treat their javelins (around 1 meter to 3.3 feet long) as disposable, using them both for thrusting and throwing.\nThe Americas.\nWest Mexico and South America (Pre-Colombia).\nAs advanced metallurgy was largely unknown in pre-Columbian America outside of Western Mexico and South America, most weapons in Meso-America were made of wood or obsidian. This did not mean that they were less lethal, as obsidian may be sharpened to become many times sharper than steel. Meso-American spears varied greatly in shape and size. While the Aztecs preferred the sword-like macuahuitl clubs for fighting, the advantage of a far-reaching thrusting weapon was recognised, and a large portion of the army would carry the tepoztopilli into battle. The tepoztopilli was a polearm, and to judge from depictions in various Aztec codices, it was roughly the height of a man, with a broad wooden head about twice the length of the users' palm or shorter, edged with razor-sharp obsidian blades which were deeply set in grooves carved into the head, and cemented in place with bitumen or plant resin as an adhesive. The tepoztopilli was able both to thrust and slash effectively.\nThrowing spears also were used extensively in Meso-American warfare, usually with the help of an atlatl. Throwing spears were typically shorter and more stream-lined than the tepoztopilli, and some had obsidian edges for greater penetration.\nNative Americans.\nTypically, most spears made by Native Americans were created from materials surrounding their communities. Usually, the shaft of the spear was made with a wooden stick while the head of the spear was fashioned from arrowheads, pieces of metal such as copper, or a bone that had been sharpened. Spears were a preferred weapon by many since it was inexpensive to create, could more easily be taught to others, and could be made quickly and in large quantities.\nNative Americans used the buffalo pound method to kill buffalo, which required a hunter to dress as a buffalo and lure one into a ravine where other hunters were hiding. Once the buffalo appeared, the other hunters would kill him with spears. A variation of this technique, called the buffalo jump, was when a runner would lead the animals towards a cliff. As the buffalo got close to the cliff, other members of the tribe would jump out from behind rocks or trees and scare the buffalo over the cliff. Other hunters would be waiting at the bottom of the cliff to spear the animal to death.\nHunting.\nOne of the earliest forms of killing prey for humans, hunting game with a spear and spear fishing continues to this day as both a means of catching food and as a cultural activity. Some of the most common prey for early humans were megafauna such as mammoths which were hunted with various kinds of spear. One theory for the Quaternary extinction event was that most of these animals were hunted to extinction by humans with spears. Even after the invention of other hunting weapons such as the bow and sling, the spear continued to be used, either as a projectile weapon or used by hand, such as in bear hunting and boar hunting.\nModern revival.\nSpear hunting fell out of favor in most of Europe in the 18th century, but continued in Germany, enjoying a revival in the 1930s. Spear hunting is still practiced in the United States. Animals taken are primarily wild boar and deer, although trophy animals as large as Cape Buffalo have been hunted with spears. Alligators are hunted in Florida with a type of harpoon.\nIn underwater settings, the practice of sport fishing with spearguns is also quite prominent. The invention of the speargun is attributed to either Alec Kramarenko in the mid-1930s or Georges Beuchat in 1947.\nGymnastics.\nOne of the gymnastic exercises performed by the ancient Greeks was the throwing of a spear, referred to as \u1f00\u03ba\u03c5\u03bd\u03c4\u03b9\u03c3\u03bc\u03cc\u03c2.\nIn myth and legend.\nSymbolism.\nLike many weapons, a spear may also be a symbol of power.\nThe Celts would symbolically destroy a dead warrior's spear either to prevent its use by another or as a sacrificial offering.\nIn classical Greek mythology Zeus' bolts of lightning may be interpreted as a symbolic spear. Some would carry that interpretation to the spear that frequently is associated with Athena, interpreting her spear as a symbolic connection to some of Zeus' power beyond the Aegis once he rose to replacing other deities in the pantheon. Athena was depicted with a spear prior to that change in myths, however. Chiron's wedding-gift to Peleus when he married the nymph Thetis in classical Greek mythology, was an ashen spear as the nature of ashwood with its straight grain made it an ideal choice of wood for a spear.\nThe Romans and their early enemies would force prisoners to walk underneath a 'yoke of spears', which humiliated them. The yoke would consist of three spears, two upright with a third tied between them at a height which made the prisoners stoop. It has been suggested that the arrangement has a magical origin, a way to trap evil spirits.\nIn Norse mythology, the god Odin's spear (named Gungnir) was made by the sons of Ivaldi. It had the special property that it never missed its mark. During the War with the Vanir, Odin symbolically threw Gungnir into the Vanir host. This practice of symbolically casting a spear into the enemy ranks at the start of a fight was sometimes used in historic clashes, to seek Odin's support in the coming battle. In Wagner's opera \"Siegfried\", the haft of Gungnir is said to be from the \"World-Tree\" Yggdrasil.\nOther spears of religious significance are the Holy Lance and the L\u00fain of Celtchar, believed by some to have vast mystical powers.\nSir James George Frazer in \"The Golden Bough\" noted the phallic nature of the spear and suggested that in the Arthurian legends the spear or lance functioned as a symbol of male fertility, paired with the Grail (as a symbol of female fertility).\nThe Hindu god of war Murugan is worshipped by Tamils in the form of the spear called \"Vel\", which is his primary weapon.\nThe term \"spear\" is also used (in a somewhat archaic manner) to describe the male line of a family, as opposed to the distaff or female line.\nSee also.\nRelated weapons.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29236", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29236", "title": "Sigrid Undset", "text": "Norwegian novelist (1882\u20131949)\nSigrid Undset (; 20 May 1882 \u2013 10 June 1949) was a Danish-born Norwegian novelist. She was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1928.\nBorn in Denmark and raised in Norway, Undset had her first books of historical fiction published in 1907. She fled Norway for the United States in 1940 because of her opposition to Nazi Germany and the German invasion and occupation of Norway, but returned after the end of World War II in Europe in 1945.\nHer best-known work is \"Kristin Lavransdatter\", a trilogy about life in Norway in the Middle Ages, portrayed through the experiences of a woman from birth until death. Its three volumes were published between 1920 and 1922.\nEarly life.\nSigrid Undset was born on 20 May 1882 in the small town of Kalundborg, Denmark, at the childhood home of her mother, Charlotte Undset (1855\u20131939, n\u00e9e Anna Maria Charlotte Gyth). Her father was the Norwegian archaeologist Ingvald Martin Undset (1853\u20131893). Sigrid Undset was the eldest of three daughters. She and her family moved to Norway when she was two.\nShe grew up in the Norwegian capital, Oslo (or Kristiania, as it was known until 1925), where the family moved in July 1884. When she was only 11 years old, her father died at the age of 40 after a long illness.\nThe family's economic situation meant that Undset had to give up hope of a university education and after a one-year secretarial course she obtained work at the age of 16 as a secretary with an engineering company in Kristiania, a post she went on to hold for 10 years. She later said that she detested the work.\nShe joined the Norwegian Authors' Union in 1907 and from 1933 through 1935 headed its Literary Council, eventually serving as the union's chairwoman from 1935 until 1940.\nWriter.\nWhile employed at office work, Undset wrote and studied. She was 16 years old when she made her first attempt at writing a novel set in the Nordic Middle Ages. The manuscript, a historical novel set in medieval Denmark, was ready by the time she was 22. It was turned down by the publishing house.\nNonetheless, two years later, she completed another manuscript, much less voluminous than the first at only 80 pages. She had put aside the Middle Ages and had instead produced a realistic description of a woman with a middle-class background in contemporary Kristiania. This book was also refused by the publishers at first but it was subsequently accepted. The title was \"Fru Marta Oulie\", and the opening sentence (the words of the book's main character) scandalised readers: \"I have been unfaithful to my husband\".\nThus, at the age of 25, Undset made her literary debut with a short realistic novel on adultery, set against a contemporary background. It created a stir, and she found herself ranked as a promising young author in Norway. During the years up to 1919, Undset published a number of novels set in contemporary Kristiania. Her contemporary novels of the period 1907\u20131918 are about the city and its inhabitants. They are stories of working people, of trivial family destinies, of the relationship between parents and children. Her main subjects are women and their love. Or, as she herself put it\u2014in her typically curt and ironic manner\u2014\"the immoral kind\" (of love).\nThis realistic period culminated in the novels \"Jenny\" (1911) and \"Vaaren\" (Spring) (1914). The first is about a woman painter who, as a result of romantic crises, believes that she is wasting her life, and, in the end, commits suicide. The other tells of a woman who succeeds in saving both herself and her love from a serious matrimonial crisis, finally creating a secure family. These books placed Undset apart from the incipient women's emancipation movement in Europe.\nUndset's books sold well from the start, and, after the publication of her third book, she left her office job and prepared to live on her income as a writer. Having been granted a writer's scholarship, she set out on a lengthy journey in Europe. After short stops in Denmark and Germany, she continued to Italy, arriving in Rome in December 1909, where she remained for nine months. Undset's parents had had a close relationship with Rome, and, during her stay there, she followed in their footsteps. The encounter with Southern Europe meant a great deal to her; she made friends within the circle of Scandinavian artists and writers in Rome.\nMarriage and children.\nIn Rome, Undset met Anders Castus Svarstad, a Norwegian painter, whom she married almost three years later. She was 30; Svarstad was thirteen years older, married, and had a wife and three children in Norway. It was nearly three years before Svarstad got his divorce from his first wife.\nUndset and Svarstad were married in 1912 and went to stay in London for six months. From London, they returned to Rome, where their first child was born in January 1913. A boy, he was named after his father. In the years up to 1919, she had another child, and the household also took in Svarstad's three children from his first marriage. These were difficult years: her second child, a girl, was mentally handicapped, as was one of Svarstad's sons by his first wife.\nShe continued writing, finishing her last realistic novels and collections of short stories. She also entered the public debate on topical themes: women's emancipation and other ethical and moral issues. She had considerable polemical gifts, and was critical of emancipation as it was developing, and of the moral and ethical decline she felt was threatening in the wake of the First World War.\nIn 1919, she moved to Lillehammer, a small town in the Gudbrand Valley in southeast Norway, taking her two children with her, while her husband stayed in Italy. She was then expecting her third child. The intention was that she should take a rest at Lillehammer and move back to Kristiania as soon as Svarstad had their new house in order. However, the marriage broke down and a divorce followed. In August 1919, she gave birth to her third child, at Lillehammer. She decided to make Lillehammer her home, and within two years, Bjerkeb\u00e6k, a large house of traditional Norwegian timber architecture, was completed, along with a large fenced garden with views of the town and the villages around. Here she was able to retreat and concentrate on her writing.\n\"Kristin Lavransdatter\" trilogy and \"The Master of Hestviken\" tetralogy.\nAfter the birth of her third child, and with a secure roof over her head, Undset started a major project: \"Kristin Lavransdatter\". She was at home in the subject matter, having written a short novel at an earlier stage about a period in Norwegian history closer to the Pre-Christian era. She had also published a Norwegian retelling of the Arthurian legends. She had studied Old Norse manuscripts and Medieval chronicles and visited and examined Medieval churches and monasteries, both at home and abroad. She was now an authority on the period she was portraying and a very different person from the 22-year-old who had written her first novel about the Middle Ages.\nIt was only after the end of her marriage that Undset wrote her masterpiece. In the years between 1920 and 1927, she first published the three-volume \"Kristin\", and then the 4-volume \"Olav\" (Audunss\u00f8n), swiftly translated into English as \"The Master of Hestviken\". Simultaneously with this creative process, she was engaged in trying to find meaning in her own life, finding the answer in God.\nUndset experimented with modernist tropes such as stream of consciousness in her novel, although the original English translation by Charles Archer excised many of these passages. In 1997, the first volume of Tiina Nunnally's new translation of the work won the PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction in the category of translation. The names of each volume were translated by Archer as \"The Bridal Wreath\", \"The Mistress of Husaby\", and \"The Cross\", and by Nunnally as \"The Wreath\", \"The Wife\", and \"The Cross\". Subsequent translation of the Hestviken tetralogy by Nunnally are retitled \"Olav Audunss\u00f8n (1):Vows\" (\"The Axe\")\", \u2026(2) Providence\", (\"The Snake Pit\"), \"\u2026(3) Crossroads\" (\"In The Wilderness\"), and \"\u2026(4) Winter\" (\"The Son Avenger\"). \nCatholicism.\nBoth Undset's parents were atheists and, although, in accord with the norm of the day, she and her two younger sisters were baptised and with their mother regularly attended the local Lutheran church, the milieu in which they were raised was a thoroughly secular one. Undset spent much of her life as an agnostic, but marriage and the outbreak of the First World War were to change her attitudes. During those difficult years she experienced a crisis of faith, almost imperceptible at first, then increasingly strong. The crisis led her from clear agnostic skepticism, by way of painful uneasiness about the ethical decline of the age, towards Christianity.\nIn all her writing, one senses an observant eye for the mystery of life and for that which cannot be explained by reason or the human intellect. At the back of her sober, almost brutal realism, there is always an inkling of something unanswerable. At any rate, this crisis radically changed her views and ideology. Whereas she had once believed that man created God, she eventually came to believe that God created man.\nBeginning around 1917, Undset developed a passionate interest in the writings of Monsignor Robert Hugh Benson, many of whose writings she would later translate into Norwegian.\nHowever, she did not turn to the established Lutheran Church of Norway, where she had been nominally reared. This is because, according to Geir Hasnes, Undset had always considered the Lutheran Church \"anemic\" and \"detested the fact that every minister seemed to preach his personal version of Lutheranism.\"\nShe was received into the Catholic Church in November 1924, after thorough instruction from the Catholic priest in her local parish. She was 42 years old. She subsequently became a lay Dominican.\nIt is noteworthy that \"The Master of Hestviken\", written immediately after Undset's conversion, takes place in a historical period when Norway was Catholic, that it has very religious themes of the main character's relations with God and his deep feeling of sin, and that the Medieval Catholic Church is presented in a favorable light, with virtually all clergy and monks in the series being positive characters.\nIn Norway, Undset's conversion to Catholicism was not only considered sensational; it was scandalous. It was also noted abroad, where her name was becoming known through the international success of \"Kristin Lavransdatter\". At the time, there were very few practicing Catholics in Norway, which was an almost exclusively Lutheran country. Anti-Catholicism was widespread not only among the Lutheran clergy, but through large sections of the population. Likewise, there was just as much anti-Catholic scorn among the Norwegian intelligentsia, many of whom were adherents of socialism and communism. The attacks against her faith and character were quite vicious at times, with the result that Undset's literary gifts were aroused in response. \nFor many years, she participated in the public debate, going out of her way to introduce the ongoing Catholic literary revival into Norwegian literature. In response, she was swiftly dubbed \"The Mistress of Bjerkeb\u00e6k\" and \"The Catholic Lady\".\nUndset's essays about Elizabethan era English Catholic martyrs Margaret Clitherow and Robert Southwell were collected and published in \"Stages on the Road\". Furthermore, Undset's \"Saga of Saints\" told the whole of Norwegian history through the lives of Norwegian Saints and Venerables.\nIn May 1928, Undset travelled to England and visited G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc, both of whose writings she would soon translate into Norwegian. According to legend, Undset once walked into the office of the manager of the monolithic Aschehoug publishing company. Undset then threw a copy of Chesterton's \"The Everlasting Man\" on the manager's desk and exclaimed, \"This is the best book ever written! It has to be translated into Norwegian!\" Whether or not the story is merely apocryphal, Undset's own translation of \"The Everlasting Man\" was published in 1931.\nLater life.\nAt the end of this creative eruption, Undset entered calmer waters. After 1929, she completed a series of novels set in contemporary Oslo, with a strong Catholic element. She selected her themes from the small Catholic community in Norway. But here also, the main theme is love. She also published a number of weighty historical works which put the history of Norway into a sober perspective. In addition, she translated several Icelandic sagas into Modern Norwegian and published a number of literary essays, mainly on English literature, of which a long essay on the Bront\u00eb sisters, and one on D. H. Lawrence, are especially worth mentioning.\nIn 1934, she published \"Eleven Years Old\", an autobiographical work. With a minimum of camouflage, it tells the story of her own childhood in Kristiania, of her home, rich in intellectual values and love, and of her sick father.\nAt the end of the 1930s, she commenced work on a new historical novel set in 18th century Scandinavia. Only the first volume, \"Madame Dorthea\", was published, in 1939. The Second World War broke out that same year and proceeded to break her, both as a writer and as a woman. She never completed her new novel. When Joseph Stalin's invasion of Finland touched off the Winter War, Undset supported the Finnish war effort by donating her Nobel Prize on 25 January 1940.\nExile.\nWhen Germany invaded Norway in April 1940, Undset was forced to flee. She had strongly criticised both Nazi ideology and Adolf Hitler since the early 1930s, and, from an early date, her books were banned as part of censorship in Nazi Germany. She accordingly knew her name was on a list of those to be rounded up in the first wave of arrests and had no wish to become a target of the Gestapo. She accordingly fled to neutral Sweden. \nHer eldest son, Norwegian Army Second Lieutenant Anders Svarstad, was killed in action at the age of 27, on 27 April 1940, while defending Segalstad Bridge in Gausdal from German troops.\nUndset's sick daughter had died shortly before the outbreak of the war. Bjerkeb\u00e6k was requisitioned by the Wehrmacht, and used as officers' quarters throughout the Occupation of Norway. Undset's library had already been secretly divided between her closest local friends. The books were hidden at great risk throughout the Nazi occupation and were returned to her after the Liberation of Norway.\nIn 1940, Undset and her younger son left neutral Sweden then crossed the Soviet Union via the Trans-Siberian Railroad before arriving as a political refugee in the United States. There, she untiringly pleaded occupied Norway's cause and the plight of European Jews in writings, speeches and interviews. She lived in Brooklyn Heights, New York. She was active in St. Ansgar's Scandinavian Catholic League and wrote several articles for its bulletin. She also traveled to Florida, where she became a close friend of novelist Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings.\nFollowing the Gestapo's arrest and summary execution of Danish Lutheran pastor and playwright Kaj Munk on 4 January 1944, the Danish resistance newspaper \"De frie Danske\" printed protests from many famous Scandinavian intellectuals, including Undset.\nReturn to Norway and death.\nUndset returned to Norway after the liberation in 1945. She lived another four years but never published another word. Neither she nor her son Hans thrived after returning to Bjerkeb\u00e6k. In May 1948 she had a psychological breakdown, while on visit to her birth town Kalundborg. In June 1949 she was admitted to Lillehammer hospital with kidney inflammation. Undset died shortly after at 67 in Lillehammer, Norway, where she had lived from 1919 through 1940. She was buried in the village of Mesnali, 15 kilometers east of Lillehammer, where also her daughter and the son who died in battle are remembered. The grave is recognizable by three black crosses.\nCultural impact.\nSigrid Undset and the plot of \"Kristin Lavransdatter\" are important elements in the 2006 Academy Award-winning animated short film, \"The Danish Poet\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29237", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29237", "title": "Seed fill", "text": ""}
{"id": "29238", "revid": "1309179859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29238", "title": "Systems theory", "text": "Interdisciplinary study of systems \nSystems theory is the transdisciplinary study of systems, i.e. cohesive groups of interrelated, interdependent components that can be natural or artificial. Every system has causal boundaries, is influenced by its context, defined by its structure, function and role, and expressed through its relations with other systems. A system is \"more than the sum of its parts\" when it expresses synergy or emergent behavior.\nChanging one component of a system may affect other components or the whole system. It may be possible to predict these changes in patterns of behavior. For systems that learn and adapt, the growth and the degree of adaptation depend upon how well the system is engaged with its environment and other contexts influencing its organization. Some systems support other systems, maintaining the other system to prevent failure. The goals of systems theory are to model a system's dynamics, constraints, conditions, and relations; and to elucidate principles (such as purpose, measure, methods, tools) that can be discerned and applied to other systems at every level of nesting, and in a wide range of fields for achieving optimized equifinality.\nGeneral systems theory is about developing broadly applicable concepts and principles, as opposed to concepts and principles specific to one domain of knowledge. It distinguishes dynamic or active systems from static or passive systems. Active systems are activity structures or components that interact in behaviours and processes or interrelate through formal contextual boundary conditions (attractors). Passive systems are structures and components that are being processed. For example, a computer program is passive when it is a file stored on the hard drive and active when it runs in memory. The field is related to systems thinking, machine logic, and systems engineering.\nOverview.\nSystems theory is manifest in the work of practitioners in many disciplines, for example the works of physician Alexander Bogdanov, biologist Ludwig von Bertalanffy, linguist B\u00e9la H. B\u00e1n\u00e1thy, and sociologist Talcott Parsons; in the study of ecological systems by Howard T. Odum, Eugene Odum; in Fritjof Capra's study of organizational theory; in the study of management by Peter Senge; in interdisciplinary areas such as human resource development in the works of Richard A. Swanson; and in the works of educators Debora Hammond and Alfonso Montuori.\nAs a transdisciplinary, interdisciplinary, and multiperspectival endeavor, systems theory brings together principles and concepts from ontology, the philosophy of science, physics, computer science, biology, and engineering, as well as geography, sociology, political science, psychotherapy (especially family systems therapy), and economics.\nSystems theory promotes dialogue between autonomous areas of study as well as within systems science itself. In this respect, with the possibility of misinterpretations, von Bertalanffy believed a general theory of systems \"should be an important regulative device in science,\" to guard against superficial analogies that \"are useless in science and harmful in their practical consequences.\"\nOthers remain closer to the direct systems concepts developed by the original systems theorists. For example, Ilya Prigogine, of the Center for Complex Quantum Systems at the University of Texas, has studied emergent properties, suggesting that they offer analogues for living systems. The distinction of autopoiesis as made by Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela represent further developments in this field. Important names in contemporary systems science include Russell Ackoff, Ruzena Bajcsy, B\u00e9la H. B\u00e1n\u00e1thy, Gregory Bateson, Anthony Stafford Beer, Peter Checkland, Barbara Grosz, Brian Wilson, Robert L. Flood, Allenna Leonard, Radhika Nagpal, Fritjof Capra, Warren McCulloch, Kathleen Carley, Michael C. Jackson, Katia Sycara, and Edgar Morin among others.\nWith the modern foundations for a general theory of systems following World War I, Ervin L\u00e1szl\u00f3, in the preface for Bertalanffy's book, \"Perspectives on General System Theory\", points out that the translation of \"general system theory\" from German into English has \"wrought a certain amount of havoc\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It (General System Theory) was criticized as pseudoscience and said to be nothing more than an admonishment to attend to things in a holistic way. Such criticisms would have lost their point had it been recognized that von Bertalanffy's general system theory is a perspective or paradigm, and that such basic conceptual frameworks play a key role in the development of exact scientific theory. .. Allgemeine Systemtheorie is not directly consistent with an interpretation often put on 'general system theory,' to wit, that it is a (scientific) \"theory of general systems.\" To criticize it as such is to shoot at straw men. Von Bertalanffy opened up something much broader and of much greater significance than a single theory (which, as we now know, can always be falsified and has usually an ephemeral existence): he created a new paradigm for the development of theories.\nTheorie (or \"Lehre\") \"has a much broader meaning in German than the closest English words 'theory' and 'science',\" just as \"Wissenschaft\" (or 'Science'). These ideas refer to an organized body of knowledge and \"any systematically presented set of concepts, whether empirically, axiomatically, or philosophically\" represented, while many associate \"Lehre\" with theory and science in the etymology of general systems, though it also does not translate from the German very well; its \"closest equivalent\" translates to 'teaching', but \"sounds dogmatic and off the mark.\" An adequate overlap in meaning is found within the word \"nomothetic\", which can mean \"having the capability to posit long-lasting sense.\" While the idea of a \"general systems theory\" might have lost many of its root meanings in the translation, by defining a new way of thinking about science and scientific paradigms, systems theory became a widespread term used for instance to describe the interdependence of relationships created in organizations.\nA system in this frame of reference can contain regularly interacting or interrelating groups of activities. For example, in noting the influence in the evolution of \"an individually oriented industrial psychology [into] a systems and developmentally oriented organizational psychology,\" some theorists recognize that organizations have complex social systems; separating the parts from the whole reduces the overall effectiveness of organizations. This difference, from conventional models that center on individuals, structures, departments and units, separates in part from the whole, instead of recognizing the interdependence between groups of individuals, structures and processes that enable an organization to function.\nL\u00e1szl\u00f3 explains that the new systems view of organized complexity went \"one step beyond the Newtonian view of organized simplicity\" which reduced the parts from the whole, or understood the whole without relation to the parts. The relationship between organisations and their environments can be seen as the foremost source of complexity and interdependence. In most cases, the whole has properties that cannot be known from analysis of the constituent elements in isolation.\nB\u00e9la H. B\u00e1n\u00e1thy, who argued\u2014along with the founders of the systems society\u2014that \"the benefit of humankind\" is the purpose of science, has made significant and far-reaching contributions to the area of systems theory. For the Primer Group at the International Society for the System Sciences, B\u00e1n\u00e1thy defines a perspective that iterates this view:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The systems view is a world-view that is based on the discipline of SYSTEM INQUIRY. Central to systems inquiry is the concept of SYSTEM. In the most general sense, system means a configuration of parts connected and joined together by a web of relationships. The Primer Group defines system as a family of relationships among the members acting as a whole. Von Bertalanffy defined system as \"elements in standing relationship.\"\nApplications.\nBiology.\nSystems biology is a movement that draws on several trends in bioscience research. Proponents describe systems biology as a biology-based interdisciplinary study field that focuses on complex interactions in biological systems, claiming that it uses a new perspective (holism instead of reduction).\nParticularly from the year 2000 onwards, the biosciences use the term widely and in a variety of contexts. An often stated ambition of systems biology is the modelling and discovery of emergent properties which represents properties of a system whose theoretical description requires the only possible useful techniques to fall under the remit of systems biology. It is thought that Ludwig von Bertalanffy may have created the term \"systems biology\" in 1928.\nSubdisciplines of systems biology include:\nEcology.\nSystems ecology is an interdisciplinary field of ecology that takes a holistic approach to the study of ecological systems, especially ecosystems; it can be seen as an application of general systems theory to ecology.\nCentral to the systems ecology approach is the idea that an ecosystem is a complex system exhibiting emergent properties. Systems ecology focuses on interactions and transactions within and between biological and ecological systems, and is especially concerned with the way the functioning of ecosystems can be influenced by human interventions. It uses and extends concepts from thermodynamics and develops other macroscopic descriptions of complex systems.\nChemistry.\nSystems chemistry is the science of studying networks of interacting molecules, to create new functions from a set (or library) of molecules with different hierarchical levels and emergent properties. Systems chemistry is also related to the origin of life (abiogenesis).\nEngineering.\nSystems engineering is an interdisciplinary approach and means for enabling the realisation and deployment of successful systems. It can be viewed as the application of engineering techniques to the engineering of systems, as well as the application of a systems approach to engineering efforts. Systems engineering integrates other disciplines and specialty groups into a team effort, forming a structured development process that proceeds from concept to production to operation and disposal. Systems engineering considers both the business and the technical needs of all customers, with the goal of providing a quality product that meets the user's needs.\nUser-centered design process.\nSystems thinking is a crucial part of user-centered design processes and is necessary to understand the whole impact of a new human computer interaction (HCI) information system. Overlooking this and developing software without insights input from the future users (mediated by user experience designers) is a serious design flaw that can lead to complete failure of information systems, increased stress and mental illness for users of information systems leading to increased costs and a huge waste of resources. It is currently surprisingly uncommon for organizations and governments to investigate the project management decisions leading to serious design flaws and lack of usability.\nThe Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers estimates that roughly 15% of the estimated $1 trillion used to develop information systems every year is completely wasted and the produced systems are discarded before implementation by entirely preventable mistakes. According to the CHAOS report published in 2018 by the Standish Group, a vast majority of information systems fail or partly fail according to their survey:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pure success is the combination of high customer satisfaction with high return on value to the organization. Related figures for the year 2017 are: successful: 14%, challenged: 67%, failed 19%.\nMathematics.\nSystem dynamics is an approach to understanding the nonlinear behaviour of complex systems over time using stocks, flows, internal feedback loops, and time delays. The field of category theory has recently been used by researchers including David Jaz Myers to formalise concepts from systems theory.\nSocial sciences and humanities.\nPsychology.\nSystems psychology is a branch of psychology that studies human behaviour and experience in complex systems.\nIt received inspiration from systems theory and systems thinking, as well as the basics of theoretical work from Roger Barker, Gregory Bateson, Humberto Maturana and others. It makes an approach in psychology in which groups and individuals receive consideration as systems in homeostasis. Systems psychology \"includes the domain of engineering psychology, but in addition seems more concerned with societal systems and with the study of motivational, affective, cognitive and group behavior that holds the name engineering psychology.\"\nIn systems psychology, characteristics of organizational behaviour (such as individual needs, rewards, expectations, and attributes of the people interacting with the systems) \"considers this process in order to create an effective system.\"\nInformatics.\nSystem theory has been applied in the field of neuroinformatics and connectionist cognitive science. Attempts are being made in neurocognition to merge connectionist cognitive neuroarchitectures with the approach of system theory and dynamical systems theory.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nSystems thinking can date back to antiquity, whether considering the first systems of written communication with Sumerian cuneiform to Maya numerals, or the feats of engineering with the Egyptian pyramids. Differentiated from Western rationalist traditions of philosophy, C. West Churchman often identified with the I Ching as a systems approach sharing a frame of reference similar to pre-Socratic philosophy and Heraclitus. Ludwig von Bertalanffy traced systems concepts to the philosophy of Gottfried Leibniz and Nicholas of Cusa's \"coincidentia oppositorum\". While modern systems can seem considerably more complicated, they may embed themselves in history.\nFigures like James Joule and Sadi Carnot represent an important step to introduce the \"systems approach\" into the (rationalist) hard sciences of the 19th century, also known as the energy transformation. Then, the thermodynamics of this century, by Rudolf Clausius, Josiah Gibbs and others, established the \"system\" reference model as a formal scientific object.\nSimilar ideas are found in learning theories that developed from the same fundamental concepts, emphasising how understanding results from knowing concepts both in part and as a whole. In fact, Bertalanffy's organismic psychology paralleled the learning theory of Jean Piaget. Some consider interdisciplinary perspectives critical in breaking away from industrial age models and thinking, wherein history represents history and math represents math, while the arts and sciences specialization remain separate and many treat teaching as behaviorist conditioning.\nThe contemporary work of Peter Senge provides detailed discussion of the commonplace critique of educational systems grounded in conventional assumptions about learning, including the problems with fragmented knowledge and lack of holistic learning from the \"machine-age thinking\" that became a \"model of school separated from daily life.\" In this way, some systems theorists attempt to provide alternatives to, and evolved ideation from orthodox theories which have grounds in classical assumptions, including individuals such as Max Weber and \u00c9mile Durkheim in sociology and Frederick Winslow Taylor in scientific management. The theorists sought holistic methods by developing systems concepts that could integrate with different areas.\nSome may view the contradiction of reductionism in conventional theory (which has as its subject a single part) as simply an example of changing assumptions. The emphasis with systems theory shifts from parts to the organization of parts, recognizing interactions of the parts as not static and constant but dynamic processes. Some questioned the conventional closed systems with the development of open systems perspectives. The shift originated from absolute and universal authoritative principles and knowledge to relative and general conceptual and perceptual knowledge and still remains in the tradition of theorists that sought to provide means to organize human life. In other words, theorists rethought the preceding history of ideas; they did not lose them. Mechanistic thinking was particularly critiqued, especially the industrial-age mechanistic metaphor for the mind from interpretations of Newtonian mechanics by Enlightenment philosophers and later psychologists that laid the foundations of modern organizational theory and management by the late 19th century.\nFounding and early development.\nWhere assumptions in Western science from Plato and Aristotle to Isaac Newton's \"Principia\" (1687) have historically influenced all areas from the hard to social sciences (see, David Easton's seminal development of the \"political system\" as an analytical construct), the original systems theorists explored the implications of 20th-century advances in terms of systems.\nBetween 1929 and 1951, Robert Maynard Hutchins at the University of Chicago had undertaken efforts to encourage innovation and interdisciplinary research in the social sciences, aided by the Ford Foundation with the university's interdisciplinary Division of the Social Sciences established in 1931.\nMany early systems theorists aimed at finding a general systems theory that could explain all systems in all fields of science.\n\"General systems theory\" (GST; German: \"allgemeine Systemlehre\") was coined in the 1940s by Ludwig von Bertalanffy, who sought a new approach to the study of living systems. Bertalanffy developed the theory via lectures beginning in 1937 and then via publications beginning in 1946. According to Mike C. Jackson (2000), Bertalanffy promoted an embryonic form of GST as early as the 1920s and 1930s, but it was not until the early 1950s that it became more widely known in scientific circles.\nJackson also claimed that Bertalanffy's work was informed by Alexander Bogdanov's three-volume \"Tectology\" (1912\u20131917), providing the conceptual base for GST. A similar position is held by Richard Mattessich (1978) and Fritjof Capra (1996). Despite this, Bertalanffy never even mentioned Bogdanov in his works.\nThe systems view was based on several fundamental ideas. First, all phenomena can be viewed as a web of relationships among elements, or a system. Second, all systems, whether electrical, biological, or social, have common patterns, behaviors, and properties that the observer can analyze and use to develop greater insight into the behavior of complex phenomena and to move closer toward a unity of the sciences. System philosophy, methodology and application are complementary to this science.\nCognizant of advances in science that questioned classical assumptions in the organizational sciences, Bertalanffy's idea to develop a theory of systems began as early as the interwar period, publishing \"An Outline for General Systems Theory\" in the \"British Journal for the Philosophy of Science\" by 1950.\nIn 1954, von Bertalanffy, along with Anatol Rapoport, Ralph W. Gerard, and Kenneth Boulding, came together at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences in Palo Alto to discuss the creation of a \"society for the advancement of General Systems Theory.\" In December that year, a meeting of around 70 people was held in Berkeley to form a society for the exploration and development of GST. The Society for General Systems Research (renamed the International Society for Systems Science in 1988) was established in 1956 thereafter as an affiliate of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), specifically catalyzing systems theory as an area of study. The field developed from the work of Bertalanffy, Rapoport, Gerard, and Boulding, as well as other theorists in the 1950s like William Ross Ashby, Margaret Mead, Gregory Bateson, and C. West Churchman, among others.\nBertalanffy's ideas were adopted by others, working in mathematics, psychology, biology, game theory, and social network analysis. Subjects that were studied included those of complexity, self-organization, connectionism and adaptive systems. In fields like cybernetics, researchers such as Ashby, Norbert Wiener, John von Neumann, and Heinz von Foerster examined complex systems mathematically; Von Neumann discovered cellular automata and self-reproducing systems, again with only pencil and paper. Aleksandr Lyapunov and Jules Henri Poincar\u00e9 worked on the foundations of chaos theory without any computer at all. At the same time, Howard T. Odum, known as a radiation ecologist, recognized that the study of general systems required a language that could depict energetics, thermodynamics and kinetics at any system scale. To fulfill this role, Odum developed a general system, or universal language, based on the circuit language of electronics, known as the Energy Systems Language.\nThe Cold War affected the research project for systems theory in ways that sorely disappointed many of the seminal theorists. Some began to recognize that theories defined in association with systems theory had deviated from the initial general systems theory view. Economist Kenneth Boulding, an early researcher in systems theory, had concerns over the manipulation of systems concepts. Boulding concluded from the effects of the Cold War that abuses of power always prove consequential and that systems theory might address such issues. Since the end of the Cold War, a renewed interest in systems theory emerged, combined with efforts to strengthen an ethical view on the subject.\nIn sociology, systems thinking also began in the 20th century, including Talcott Parsons' action theory and Niklas Luhmann's social systems theory. According to Rudolf Stichweh (2011):Since its beginnings the social sciences were an important part of the establishment of systems theory... [T]he two most influential suggestions were the comprehensive sociological versions of systems theory which were proposed by Talcott Parsons since the 1950s and by Niklas Luhmann since the 1970s.Elements of systems thinking can also be seen in the work of James Clerk Maxwell, particularly control theory.\nGeneral systems research and systems inquiry.\nMany early systems theorists aimed at finding a general systems theory that could explain all systems in all fields of science. Ludwig von Bertalanffy began developing his 'general systems theory' via lectures in 1937 and then via publications from 1946. The concept received extensive focus in his 1968 book, \"General System Theory: Foundations, Development, Applications\".\nThere are many definitions of a general system, some properties that definitions include are: an overall goal of the system, parts of the system and relationships between these parts, and emergent properties of the interaction between the parts of the system that are not performed by any part on its own.58 Derek Hitchins defines a system in terms of entropy as a collection of parts and relationships between the parts where the parts of their interrelationships decrease entropy.58\nBertalanffy aimed to bring together under one heading the organismic science that he had observed in his work as a biologist. He wanted to use the word \"system\" for those principles that are common to systems in general. In \"General System Theory\" (1968), he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]here exist models, principles, and laws that apply to generalized systems or their subclasses, irrespective of their particular kind, the nature of their component elements, and the relationships or \"forces\" between them. It seems legitimate to ask for a theory, not of systems of a more or less special kind, but of universal principles applying to systems in general.\nIn the preface to von Bertalanffy's \"Perspectives on General System Theory\", Ervin L\u00e1szl\u00f3 stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thus when von Bertalanffy spoke of Allgemeine Systemtheorie it was consistent with his view that he was proposing a new perspective, a new way of doing science. It was not directly consistent with an interpretation often put on \"general system theory\", to wit, that it is a (scientific) \"theory of general systems.\" To criticize it as such is to shoot at straw men. Von Bertalanffy opened up something much broader and of much greater significance than a single theory (which, as we now know, can always be falsified and has usually an ephemeral existence): he created a new paradigm for the development of theories.\nBertalanffy outlines systems inquiry into three major domains: philosophy, science, and technology. In his work with the Primer Group, B\u00e9la H. B\u00e1n\u00e1thy generalized the domains into four integratable domains of systemic inquiry:\nThese operate in a recursive relationship, he explained; integrating 'philosophy' and 'theory' as knowledge, and 'method' and 'application' as action; systems inquiry is thus knowledgeable action.\nProperties of general systems.\nGeneral systems may be split into a hierarchy of systems, where there is less interactions between the different systems than there is the components in the system. The alternative is heterarchy where all components within the system interact with one another.65 Sometimes an entire system will be represented inside another system as a part, sometimes referred to as a holon. These hierarchies of system are studied in hierarchy theory. The amount of interaction between parts of systems higher in the hierarchy and parts of the system lower in the hierarchy is reduced. If all the parts of a system are tightly coupled (interact with one another a lot) then the system cannot be decomposed into different systems. The amount of coupling between parts of a system may differ temporally, with some parts interacting more often than other, or for different processes in a system.293 Herbert A. Simon distinguished between decomposable, nearly decomposable and nondecomposable systems.72\nRussell L. Ackoff distinguished general systems by how their goals and subgoals could change over time. He distinguished between goal-maintaining, goal-seeking, multi-goal and reflective (or goal-changing) systems.73\nSystem types and fields.\nTheoretical fields.\nCybernetics.\nCybernetics is the study of the communication and control of regulatory feedback both in living and lifeless systems (organisms, organizations, machines), and in combinations of those. Its focus is how anything (digital, mechanical or biological) controls its behavior, processes information, reacts to information, and changes or can be changed to better accomplish those three primary tasks.\nThe terms \"systems theory\" and \"cybernetics\" have been widely used as synonyms. Some authors use the term \"cybernetic\" systems to denote a proper subset of the class of general systems, namely those systems that include feedback loops. However, Gordon Pask's differences of eternal interacting actor loops (that produce finite products) makes general systems a proper subset of cybernetics. In cybernetics, complex systems have been examined mathematically by such researchers as W. Ross Ashby, Norbert Wiener, John von Neumann, and Heinz von Foerster.\nThreads of cybernetics began in the late 1800s that led toward the publishing of seminal works (such as Wiener's \"\" in 1948 and Bertalanffy's \"General System Theory\" in 1968). Cybernetics arose more from engineering fields and GST from biology. If anything, it appears that although the two probably mutually influenced each other, cybernetics had the greater influence. Bertalanffy specifically made the point of distinguishing between the areas in noting the influence of cybernetics:Systems theory is frequently identified with cybernetics and control theory. This again is incorrect. Cybernetics as the theory of control mechanisms in technology and nature is founded on the concepts of information and feedback, but as part of a general theory of systems... [T]he model is of wide application but should not be identified with 'systems theory' in general ... [and] warning is necessary against its incautious expansion to fields for which its concepts are not made.Cybernetics, catastrophe theory, chaos theory and complexity theory have the common goal to explain complex systems that consist of a large number of mutually interacting and interrelated parts in terms of those interactions. Cellular automata, neural networks, artificial intelligence, and artificial life are related fields, but do not try to describe general (universal) complex (singular) systems. The best context to compare the different \"C\"-Theories about complex systems is historical, which emphasizes different tools and methodologies, from pure mathematics in the beginning to pure computer science today. Since the beginning of chaos theory, when Edward Lorenz accidentally discovered a strange attractor with his computer, computers have become an indispensable source of information. One could not imagine the study of complex systems without the use of computers today.\nSystem types.\nComplex adaptive systems.\nComplex adaptive systems (CAS), coined by John H. Holland, Murray Gell-Mann, and others at the interdisciplinary Santa Fe Institute, are special cases of complex systems: they are \"complex\" in that they are diverse and composed of multiple, interconnected elements; they are \"adaptive\" in that they have the capacity to change and learn from experience.\nIn contrast to control systems, in which negative feedback dampens and reverses disequilibria, CAS are often subject to positive feedback, which magnifies and perpetuates changes, converting local irregularities into global features.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOrganizations"}
{"id": "29240", "revid": "50934368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29240", "title": "Lists of stars", "text": "The following are lists of stars. Stars are astronomical objects that spend some portion of their existence generating energy through thermonuclear fusion.\nOther star listings.\nOther stars.\nThe following is a list of particularly notable actual or hypothetical stars that have their own articles in Wikipedia, but are not included in the lists above.\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "29241", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29241", "title": "Tropical savanna", "text": ""}
{"id": "29245", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29245", "title": "Standard text editor", "text": ""}
{"id": "29247", "revid": "47563922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29247", "title": "Sulfuric acid", "text": "Chemical compound (H2SO4)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nSulfuric acid (American spelling and the preferred IUPAC name) or sulphuric acid (Commonwealth spelling), known in antiquity as oil of vitriol, is a mineral acid composed of the elements sulfur, oxygen, and hydrogen, with the molecular formula . It is a colorless, odorless, and viscous liquid that is miscible with water.\nPure sulfuric acid does not occur naturally due to its strong affinity to water vapor; it is hygroscopic and readily absorbs water vapor from the air. Concentrated sulfuric acid is a strong oxidant with powerful dehydrating properties, making it highly corrosive towards other materials, from rocks to metals. Phosphorus pentoxide is a notable exception in that it is not dehydrated by sulfuric acid but, to the contrary, dehydrates sulfuric acid to sulfur trioxide. Upon addition of sulfuric acid to water, a considerable amount of heat is released; thus, the reverse procedure of adding water to the acid is generally avoided since the heat released may boil the solution, spraying droplets of hot acid during the process. Upon contact with body tissue, sulfuric acid can cause severe acidic chemical burns and secondary thermal burns due to dehydration. Dilute sulfuric acid is substantially less hazardous without the oxidative and dehydrating properties; though, it is handled with care for its acidity.\nMany methods for its production are known, including the contact process, the wet sulfuric acid process, and the lead chamber process. Sulfuric acid is also a key substance in the chemical industry. It is most commonly used in fertilizer manufacture but is also important in mineral processing, oil refining, wastewater treating, and chemical synthesis. It has a wide range of end applications, including in domestic acidic drain cleaners, as an electrolyte in lead-acid batteries, as a dehydrating compound, and in various cleaning agents.\nSulfuric acid can be obtained by dissolving sulfur trioxide in water.\nPhysical properties.\nGrades of sulfuric acid.\nAlthough nearly 100% sulfuric acid solutions can be made, the subsequent loss of at the boiling point brings the concentration to 98.3% acid. The 98.3% grade, which is more stable in storage, is the usual form of what is described as \"concentrated sulfuric acid\". Other concentrations are used for different purposes. Some common concentrations are:\n\"Chamber acid\" and \"tower acid\" were the two concentrations of sulfuric acid produced by the lead chamber process, chamber acid being the acid produced in the lead chamber itself (&lt;70% to avoid contamination with nitrosylsulfuric acid) and tower acid being the acid recovered from the bottom of the Glover tower. They are now obsolete as commercial concentrations of sulfuric acid, although they may be prepared in the laboratory from concentrated sulfuric acid if needed. In particular, \"10 M\" sulfuric acid (the modern equivalent of chamber acid, used in many titrations) is prepared by slowly adding 98% sulfuric acid to an equal volume of water, with good stirring: the temperature of the mixture can rise to 80\u00a0\u00b0C (176\u00a0\u00b0F) or higher.\nSulfuric acid.\nSulfuric acid contains not only molecules, but is actually an equilibrium of many other chemical species, as it is shown in the table below.\nSulfuric acid is a colorless oily liquid, and has a vapor pressure of &lt;0.001 mmHg at 25\u00a0\u00b0C and 1 mmHg at 145.8\u00a0\u00b0C, and 98% sulfuric acid has a vapor pressure of &lt;1 mmHg at 40\u00a0\u00b0C.\nIn the solid state, sulfuric acid is a molecular solid that forms monoclinic crystals with nearly trigonal lattice parameters. The structure consists of layers parallel to the (010) plane, in which each molecule is connected by hydrogen bonds to two others. Hydrates are known for \"n\" = 1, 2, 3, 4, 6.5, and 8, although most intermediate hydrates are stable against disproportionation.\nPolarity and conductivity.\nAnhydrous is a very polar liquid, having a dielectric constant of around 100. It has a high electrical conductivity, a consequence of autoprotolysis, i.e. self-protonation:\nThe equilibrium constant for autoprotolysis (25\u00a0\u00b0C) is:\n = 2.7 \u00d7 10\u22124\nThe corresponding equilibrium constant for water, \"K\"w is 10\u221214, a factor of 1010 (10 billion) smaller.\nIn spite of the viscosity of the acid, the effective conductivities of the and ions are high due to an intramolecular proton-switch mechanism (analogous to the Grotthuss mechanism in water), making sulfuric acid a good conductor of electricity. It is also an excellent solvent for many reactions.\nChemical properties.\nAcidity.\nThe hydration reaction of sulfuric acid is highly exothermic.\nAs indicated by its acid dissociation constant, sulfuric acid is a strong acid:\n Ka1 = 1000 (pKa1 = \u22123)\nThe product of this ionization is , the bisulfate anion. Bisulfate is a far weaker acid:\n Ka2 = 0.01 (pKa2 = 2)\nThe product of this second dissociation is , the \"sulfate\" anion.\nDehydration.\nConcentrated sulfuric acid has a powerful dehydrating property, removing water () from other chemical compounds such as table sugar (sucrose) and other carbohydrates, to produce carbon, steam, and heat. Dehydration of table sugar (sucrose) is a common laboratory demonstration. The sugar darkens as carbon is formed, and a rigid column of black, porous carbon called a carbon snake may emerge.\nformula_1\nSimilarly, mixing starch into concentrated sulfuric acid gives elemental carbon and water. The effect of this can also be seen when concentrated sulfuric acid is spilled on paper. Paper is composed of cellulose, a polysaccharide related to starch. The cellulose reacts to give a burnt appearance in which the carbon appears much like soot that results from fire.\nAlthough less dramatic, the action of the acid on cotton, even in diluted form, destroys the fabric.\nformula_2\nThe reaction with copper(II) sulfate can also demonstrate the dehydration property of sulfuric acid. The blue crystals change into white powder as water is removed.\nformula_3\nReactions with salts.\nSulfuric acid reacts with most bases to give the corresponding sulfate or bisulfate.\nAluminium sulfate, also known as paper maker's alum, is made by treating bauxite with sulfuric acid:\nSulfuric acid can also be used to displace weaker acids from their salts. Reaction with sodium acetate, for example, displaces acetic acid, , and forms sodium bisulfate:\nSimilarly, treating potassium nitrate with sulfuric acid produces nitric acid. Sulfuric acid reacts with sodium chloride, and gives hydrogen chloride gas and sodium bisulfate:\nWhen combined with nitric acid, sulfuric acid acts both as an acid and a dehydrating agent, forming the nitronium ion , which is important in nitration reactions involving electrophilic aromatic substitution. This type of reaction, where protonation occurs on an oxygen atom, is important in many organic chemistry reactions, such as Fischer esterification and dehydration of alcohols.\nWhen allowed to react with superacids, sulfuric acid can act as a base and can be protonated, forming the ion. Salts of have been prepared (e.g. trihydroxyoxosulfonium hexafluoroantimonate(V) ) using the following reaction in liquid HF:\nThe above reaction is thermodynamically favored due to the high bond enthalpy of the Si\u2013F bond in the side product. Protonation using simply fluoroantimonic acid, however, has met with failure, as pure sulfuric acid undergoes self-ionization to give ions:\nwhich prevents the conversion of to by the HF/ system.\nReactions with metals.\nEven diluted sulfuric acid reacts with many metals via a single displacement reaction, like other typical acids, producing hydrogen gas and salts (the metal sulfate). It attacks reactive metals (metals at positions above copper in the reactivity series) such as iron, aluminium, zinc, manganese, magnesium, and nickel.\nConcentrated sulfuric acid can serve as an oxidizing agent, releasing sulfur dioxide:\nLead and tungsten, however, are resistant to sulfuric acid.\nReactions with carbon and sulfur.\nHot concentrated sulfuric acid oxidizes carbon (as bituminous coal) and sulfur:\n\nElectrophilic aromatic substitution.\nBenzene and many derivatives undergo electrophilic aromatic substitution with sulfuric acid to give the corresponding sulfonic acids:\nSulfur\u2013iodine cycle.\nSulfuric acid can be used to produce hydrogen from water:\nThe compounds of sulfur and iodine are recovered and reused, hence the process is called the sulfur\u2013iodine cycle. This process is endothermic and must occur at high temperatures, so energy in the form of heat has to be supplied. The sulfur\u2013iodine cycle has been proposed as a way to supply hydrogen for a hydrogen-based economy. It is an alternative to electrolysis, and does not require hydrocarbons like current methods of steam reforming. But note that all of the available energy in the hydrogen so produced is supplied by the heat used to make it.\nOccurrence.\nSulfuric acid is rarely encountered naturally on Earth in anhydrous form, due to its great affinity for water. Dilute sulfuric acid is a constituent of acid rain, which is formed by atmospheric oxidation of sulfur dioxide in the presence of water\u2014i.e. oxidation of sulfurous acid. When sulfur-containing fuels such as coal or oil are burned, sulfur dioxide is the main byproduct (besides the chief products carbon oxides and water).\nSulfuric acid is formed naturally by the oxidation of sulfide minerals, such as pyrite:\nThe resulting highly acidic water is called acid mine drainage (AMD) or acid rock drainage (ARD).\nThe can be further oxidized to :\nThe produced can be precipitated as the hydroxide or hydrous iron oxide:\nThe iron(III) ion (\"ferric iron\") can also oxidize pyrite:\nWhen iron(III) oxidation of pyrite occurs, the process can become rapid. pH values below zero have been measured in ARD produced by this process.\nARD can also produce sulfuric acid at a slower rate, so that the acid neutralizing capacity (ANC) of the aquifer can neutralize the produced acid. In such cases, the total dissolved solids (TDS) concentration of the water can be increased from the dissolution of minerals from the acid-neutralization reaction with the minerals.\nSulfuric acid is used as a defense by certain marine species, for example, the phaeophyte alga \"Desmarestia munda\" (order Desmarestiales) concentrates sulfuric acid in cell vacuoles.\nStratospheric aerosol.\nIn the stratosphere, the atmosphere's second layer that is generally between 10 and 50\u00a0km above Earth's surface, sulfuric acid is formed by the oxidation of volcanic sulfur dioxide by the hydroxyl radical:\n\nBecause sulfuric acid reaches supersaturation in the stratosphere, it can nucleate aerosol particles and provide a surface for aerosol growth via condensation and coagulation with other water-sulfuric acid aerosols. This results in the stratospheric aerosol layer.\nExtraterrestrial sulfuric acid.\nThe permanent Venusian clouds produce a concentrated acid rain, as the clouds in the atmosphere of Earth produce water rain. Sulfuric acid ice has been detected on Jupiter's moon Europa, where it forms when sulfur ions from Jupiter's magnetosphere implant into the icy surface.\nProduction.\nSulfuric acid is produced from sulfur, oxygen and water via the conventional contact process (DCDA) or the wet sulfuric acid process (WSA).\nContact process.\nIn the first step, sulfur is burned to produce sulfur dioxide.\nThe sulfur dioxide is oxidized to sulfur trioxide by oxygen in the presence of a vanadium(V) oxide catalyst. This reaction is reversible and the formation of the sulfur trioxide is exothermic.\nThe sulfur trioxide is absorbed into 97\u201398% to form oleum (), also known as fuming sulfuric acid or pyrosulphuric acid. The oleum is then diluted with water to form concentrated sulfuric acid.\n\nWet sulfuric acid process.\nDirectly dissolving in water, called the \"wet sulfuric acid process\", is rarely practiced because the reaction is extremely exothermic, resulting in a hot aerosol of sulfuric acid that requires condensation and separation.\nIn the first step, sulfur is burned to produce sulfur dioxide:\n (\u2212297\u00a0kJ/mol)\nor, alternatively, hydrogen sulfide () gas is incinerated to gas:\n (\u22121036\u00a0kJ/mol)\nThe sulfur dioxide then oxidized to sulfur trioxide using oxygen with vanadium(V) oxide as catalyst.\n (\u2212198\u00a0kJ/mol) (reaction is reversible)\nThe sulfur trioxide is hydrated into sulfuric acid :\n (\u2212101\u00a0kJ/mol)\nThe last step is the condensation of the sulfuric acid to liquid 97\u201398% :\n (\u221269\u00a0kJ/mol)\nOther methods.\nBurning sulfur together with saltpeter (potassium nitrate, ), in the presence of steam, has been used historically. As saltpeter decomposes, it oxidizes the sulfur to , which combines with water to produce sulfuric acid.\nPrior to 1900, most sulfuric acid was manufactured by the lead chamber process. As late as 1940, up to 50% of sulfuric acid manufactured in the United States was produced by chamber process plants.\nA wide variety of laboratory syntheses are known, and typically begin from sulfur dioxide or an equivalent salt. In the metabisulfite method, hydrochloric acid reacts with metabisulfite to produce sulfur dioxide vapors. The gas is bubbled through nitric acid, which will release brown/red vapors of nitrogen dioxide as the reaction proceeds. The completion of the reaction is indicated by the ceasing of the fumes. This method conveniently does not produce an inseparable mist.\nAlternatively, dissolving sulfur dioxide in an aqueous solution of an oxidizing metal salt such as copper(II) or iron(III) chloride:\n\nTwo less well-known laboratory methods of producing sulfuric acid, albeit in dilute form and requiring some extra effort in purification, rely on electrolysis. A solution of copper(II) sulfate can be electrolyzed with a copper cathode and platinum/graphite anode to give spongy copper at cathode and oxygen gas at the anode. The solution of dilute sulfuric acid indicates completion of the reaction when it turns from blue to clear (production of hydrogen at cathode is another sign):\nMore costly, dangerous, and troublesome is the electrobromine method, which employs a mixture of sulfur, water, and hydrobromic acid as the electrolyte. The sulfur is pushed to bottom of container under the acid solution. Then the copper cathode and platinum/graphite anode are used with the cathode near the surface and the anode is positioned at the bottom of the electrolyte to apply the current. This may take longer and emits toxic bromine/sulfur-bromide vapors, but the reactant acid is recyclable. Overall, only the sulfur and water are converted to sulfuric acid and hydrogen (omitting losses of acid as vapors): \n (electrolysis of aqueous hydrogen bromide)\n (initial tribromide production, eventually reverses as depletes)\n (bromine reacts with sulfur to form disulfur dibromide)\n (oxidation and hydration of disulfur dibromide)\nUses.\nSulfuric acid is a very important commodity chemical, and a nation's sulfuric acid production was as recently as 2002 believed to be a good indicator of its industrial strength. World production in the year 2004 was about 180 million tonnes, with the following geographic distribution: Asia 35%, North America (including Mexico) 24%, Africa 11%, Western Europe 10%, Eastern Europe and Russia 10%, Australia and Oceania 7%, South America 7%. World production in 2022 was estimated at 260 million tonnes.\nAs of the late 20th century, most of the produced amount (\u224860%) was consumed for fertilizers, particularly superphosphates, ammonium phosphate and ammonium sulfates. About 20% is used in chemical industry for production of detergents, synthetic resins, dyestuffs, pharmaceuticals, petroleum catalysts, insecticides and antifreeze, as well as in various processes such as oil well acidicizing, aluminium reduction, paper sizing, and water treatment. About 6% of uses are related to pigments and include paints, enamels, printing inks, coated fabrics and paper, while the rest is dispersed into a multitude of applications such as production of explosives, cellophane, acetate and viscose textiles, lubricants, non-ferrous metals, and batteries.\nIndustrial production of chemicals.\nThe dominant use for sulfuric acid is in the \"wet method\" for the production of phosphoric acid, used for manufacture of phosphate fertilizers. In this method, phosphate rock is used, and more than 100 million tonnes are processed annually. This raw material is shown below as fluorapatite, though the exact composition may vary. This is treated with 93% sulfuric acid to produce calcium sulfate, hydrogen fluoride (HF) and phosphoric acid. The HF is removed as hydrofluoric acid. The overall process can be represented as:\nformula_4\nAmmonium sulfate, an important nitrogen fertilizer, is most commonly produced as a byproduct from coking plants supplying the iron and steel making plants. Reacting the ammonia produced in the thermal decomposition of coal with waste sulfuric acid allows the ammonia to be crystallized out as a salt (often brown because of iron contamination) and sold into the agro-chemicals industry.\nSulfuric acid is also important in the manufacture of dyestuffs solutions.\nIndustrial cleaning agent.\nSulfuric acid is used in steelmaking and other metallurgical industries as a pickling agent for removal of rust and fouling. Used acid is often recycled using a spent acid regeneration (SAR) plant. These plants combust spent acid with natural gas, refinery gas, fuel oil or other fuel sources. This combustion process produces gaseous sulfur dioxide () and sulfur trioxide () which are then used to manufacture \"new\" sulfuric acid.\nHydrogen peroxide () can be added to sulfuric acid to produce piranha solution, a powerful but potentially hazardous cleaning solution with which substrate surfaces can be cleaned. Piranha solution is typically used in the microelectronics industry, and also in laboratory settings to clean glassware.\nCatalyst.\nSulfuric acid is used for a variety of other purposes in the chemical industry. For example, it is the usual acid catalyst for the conversion of cyclohexanone oxime to caprolactam, used for making nylon. It is used for making hydrochloric acid from salt via the Mannheim process. Much is used in petroleum refining, for example as a catalyst for the reaction of isobutane with isobutylene to give isooctane, a compound that raises the octane rating of gasoline (petrol). Sulfuric acid is also often used as a dehydrating or oxidizing agent in industrial reactions, such as the dehydration of various sugars to form solid carbon.\nElectrolyte.\nSulfuric acid acts as the electrolyte in lead\u2013acid batteries (lead-acid accumulator):\nAt anode:\nAt cathode:\nOverall:\nDomestic uses.\nSulfuric acid at high concentrations is frequently the major ingredient in domestic acidic drain cleaners which are used to remove lipids, hair, tissue paper, etc. Similar to their alkaline versions, such drain openers can dissolve fats and proteins via hydrolysis. Moreover, as concentrated sulfuric acid has a strong dehydrating property, it can remove tissue paper via dehydrating process as well. Since the acid may react with water vigorously, such acidic drain openers should be added slowly into the pipe to be cleaned.\nHistory.\nVitriols.\nThe study of vitriols (hydrated sulfates of various metals forming glassy minerals from which sulfuric acid can be derived) began in ancient times. Sumerians had a list of types of vitriol that they classified according to the substances' color. Some of the earliest discussions on the origin and properties of vitriol is in the works of the Greek physician Dioscorides (first century AD) and the Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder (23\u201379 AD). Galen also discussed its medical use. Metallurgical uses for vitriolic substances were recorded in the Hellenistic alchemical works of Zosimos of Panopolis, in the treatise \"Phisica et Mystica\", and the Leyden papyrus X. Medieval Islamic alchemists like the authors writing under the name of Jabir ibn Hayyan (died c. 806 \u2013 c. 816, known in Latin as Geber), Abu Bakr al-Razi (865\u2013925, known in Latin as Rhazes), Ibn Sina (980\u20131037, known in Latin as Avicenna), and Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Watwat (1234\u20131318) included vitriol in their mineral classification lists.\nJabir ibn Hayyan, Abu Bakr al-Razi, Ibn Sina, et al..\nThe Jabirian authors and al-Razi experimented extensively with the distillation of various substances, including vitriols. In one recipe recorded in his ('Book of Secrets'), al-Razi may have created sulfuric acid without being aware of it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nIn an anonymous Latin work variously attributed to Aristotle (under the title , 'Book of Aristotle'), to al-Razi (under the title , 'Great Light of Lights'), or to Ibn Sina, the author speaks of an 'oil' () obtained through the distillation of iron(II) sulfate (green vitriol), which was likely 'oil of vitriol' or sulfuric acid. The work refers multiple times to Jabir ibn Hayyan's \"Seventy Books\" (), one of the few Arabic Jabir works that were translated into Latin. The author of the version attributed to al-Razi also refers to the as his own work, showing that he erroneously believed the to be a work by al-Razi. There are several indications that the anonymous work was an original composition in Latin, although according to one manuscript it was translated by a certain Raymond of Marseilles, meaning that it may also have been a translation from the Arabic.\nAccording to Ahmad Y. al-Hassan, three recipes for sulfuric acid occur in an anonymous Garshuni manuscript containing a compilation taken from several authors and dating from before c.\u20091100 AD. One of them runs as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA recipe for the preparation of sulfuric acid is mentioned in , an Arabic treatise falsely attributed to the Shi'i Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (died 765). Julius Ruska dated this treatise to the 13th century, but according to Ahmad Y. al-Hassan it likely dates from an earlier period:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVincent of Beauvais, Albertus Magnus, and pseudo-Geber.\nSulfuric acid was called 'oil of vitriol' by medieval European alchemists because it was prepared by roasting iron(II) sulfate or green vitriol in an iron retort. The first allusions to it in works that are European in origin appear in the thirteenth century AD, as for example in the works of Vincent of Beauvais, in the ascribed to Albertus Magnus, and in pseudo-Geber's .\nProducing sulfuric acid from sulfur.\nA method of producing , or \"oil of sulfur by the bell\", was known by the 16th century: it involved burning sulfur under a glass bell in moist weather (or, later, under a moistened bell). However, it was very inefficient (according to Gesner, of sulfur converted into less than of acid), and the resulting product was contaminated by sulfurous acid (or rather, solution of sulfur dioxide) so most alchemists (including, for example, Isaac Newton) did not consider it equivalent to \"oil of vitriol\".\nIn the 17th century, Johann Rudolf Glauber discovered that adding saltpeter (potassium nitrate, ) significantly improves the output, also replacing moisture with steam. As saltpeter decomposes, it oxidizes the sulfur to , which combines with water to produce sulfuric acid. In 1736, Joshua Ward, a London pharmacist, used this method to begin the first large-scale production of sulfuric acid.\nLead chamber process.\nIn 1746 in Birmingham, John Roebuck adapted this method to produce sulfuric acid in lead-lined chambers, which were stronger, less expensive, and could be made larger than the previously used glass containers. This process allowed the effective industrialization of sulfuric acid production. After several refinements, this method, called the lead chamber process or \"chamber process\", remained the standard for sulfuric acid production for almost two centuries with a purity of 62% and a conversion of 75%.\nDistillation of pyrite.\nSulfuric acid created by John Roebuck's process approached a 65% concentration. Later refinements to the lead chamber process by French chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac and British chemist John Glover improved concentration to 78%. However, the manufacture of some dyes and other chemical processes require a more concentrated product. Throughout the 18th century, this could only be made by dry distilling minerals in a technique similar to the original alchemical processes. Pyrite (iron disulfide, ) was heated in air to yield iron(II) sulfate, , which was oxidized by further heating in air to form iron(III) sulfate, , which, when heated to 480\u00a0\u00b0C, decomposed to iron(III) oxide and sulfur trioxide, which could be passed through water to yield sulfuric acid in any concentration. However, the expense of this process prevented the large-scale use of concentrated sulfuric acid.\nContact process.\nIn 1831, British vinegar merchant Peregrine Phillips patented the contact process, which was a far more economical process for producing sulfur trioxide and concentrated sulfuric acid. Today, nearly all of the world's sulfuric acid is produced using this method.\nIn the early to mid 19th century \"vitriol\" plants existed, among other places, in Prestonpans in Scotland, Shropshire and the Lagan Valley in County Antrim, Northern Ireland, where it was used as a bleach for linen. Early bleaching of linen was done using lactic acid from sour milk but this was a slow process and the use of vitriol sped up the bleaching process.\nSafety.\nLaboratory hazards.\nSulfuric acid is capable of causing very severe burns, especially when it is at high concentrations. In common with other corrosive acids and alkali, it readily decomposes proteins and lipids through amide and ester hydrolysis upon contact with living tissues, such as skin and flesh. In addition, it exhibits a strong dehydrating property on carbohydrates, liberating extra heat and causing secondary thermal burns. Accordingly, it rapidly attacks the cornea and can induce permanent blindness if splashed onto eyes. If ingested, it damages internal organs irreversibly and may even be fatal. Personal protective equipment should hence always be used when handling it. Moreover, its strong oxidizing property makes it highly corrosive to many metals and may extend its destruction on other materials. Because of such reasons, damage caused by sulfuric acid is potentially more severe than that by other comparable strong acids, such as hydrochloric acid and nitric acid.\nSulfuric acid must be stored carefully in containers made of nonreactive material (such as glass). Solutions equal to or stronger than 1.5\u00a0M are labeled \"CORROSIVE\", while solutions greater than 0.5\u00a0M but less than 1.5\u00a0M are labeled \"IRRITANT\". However, even the normal laboratory \"dilute\" grade (approximately 1\u00a0M, 10%) will char paper if left in contact for a sufficient time.\nThe standard first aid treatment for acid spills on the skin is, as for other corrosive agents, irrigation with large quantities of water. Washing is continued for at least ten to fifteen minutes to cool the tissue surrounding the acid burn and to prevent secondary damage. Contaminated clothing is removed immediately and the underlying skin washed thoroughly.\nDilution hazards.\nPreparation of diluted acid can be dangerous due to the heat released in the dilution process. To avoid splattering, the concentrated acid is usually added to water and not the other way around. A saying used to remember this is \"Do like you oughta, add the acid to the water\". Water has a higher heat capacity than the acid, and so a vessel of cold water will absorb heat as acid is added.\nAlso, because the acid is denser than water, it sinks to the bottom. Heat is generated at the interface between acid and water, which is at the bottom of the vessel. Acid will not boil, because of its higher boiling point. Warm water near the interface rises due to convection, which cools the interface, and prevents boiling of either acid or water.\nIn contrast, addition of water to concentrated sulfuric acid results in a thin layer of water on top of the acid. Heat generated in this thin layer of water can boil, leading to the dispersal of a sulfuric acid aerosol, or worse, an explosion.\nPreparation of solutions greater than 6\u00a0M (35%) in concentration is dangerous, unless the acid is added slowly enough to allow the mixture sufficient time to cool. Otherwise, the heat produced may be sufficient to boil the mixture. Efficient mechanical stirring and external cooling (such as an ice bath) are essential.\nReaction rates double for about every 10-degree Celsius increase in temperature.[] Therefore, the reaction will become more violent as dilution proceeds, unless the mixture is given time to cool. Adding acid to warm water will cause a violent reaction.\nOn a laboratory scale, sulfuric acid can be diluted by pouring concentrated acid onto crushed ice made from de-ionized water. The ice melts in an endothermic process while dissolving the acid. The amount of heat needed to melt the ice in this process is greater than the amount of heat evolved by dissolving the acid so the solution remains cold. After all the ice has melted, further dilution can take place using water.\nIndustrial hazards.\nSulfuric acid is non-flammable.\nThe main occupational risks posed by this acid are skin contact leading to burns (see above) and the inhalation of aerosols. Exposure to aerosols at high concentrations leads to immediate and severe irritation of the eyes, respiratory tract and mucous membranes: this ceases rapidly after exposure, although there is a risk of subsequent pulmonary edema if tissue damage has been more severe. At lower concentrations, the most commonly reported symptom of chronic exposure to sulfuric acid aerosols is erosion of the teeth, found in virtually all studies: indications of possible chronic damage to the respiratory tract are inconclusive as of 1997. Repeated occupational exposure to sulfuric acid mists may increase the chance of lung cancer by up to 64 percent. In the United States, the permissible exposure limit (PEL) for sulfuric acid is fixed at 1\u00a0mg/m3: limits in other countries are similar. There have been reports of sulfuric acid ingestion leading to vitamin B12 deficiency with subacute combined degeneration. The spinal cord is most often affected in such cases, but the optic nerves may show demyelination, loss of axons and gliosis.\nLegal restrictions.\nInternational commerce of sulfuric acid is controlled under the United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, 1988, which lists sulfuric acid under Table II of the convention as a chemical frequently used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29248", "revid": "609725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29248", "title": "Space colonization", "text": "Concept of permanent human habitation outside of Earth\nSpace colonization\u00a0(or extraterrestrial colonization) is the settlement or colonization of outer space and astronomical bodies. The concept in its broad sense has been applied to any permanent human presence in space, such as a space habitat or other extraterrestrial settlements. It may involve a process of occupation or control for exploitation, such as extraterrestrial mining.\nMaking territorial claims in space is prohibited by international space law, defining space as a common heritage. International space law has had the goal to prevent colonial claims and militarization of space, and has advocated the installation of international regimes to regulate access to and sharing of space, particularly for specific locations such as the limited space of geostationary orbit or the Moon. To date, no permanent space settlement other than temporary space habitats have been established, nor has any extraterrestrial territory or land been internationally claimed. Currently there are also no plans for building a space colony by any government. However, many proposals, speculations, and designs, particularly for extraterrestrial settlements have been made through the years, and a considerable number of space colonization advocates and groups are active. Currently, the dominant private launch provider SpaceX, has been the most prominent organization planning space colonization on Mars, though having not reached a development stage beyond launch and landing systems.\nSpace colonization raises numerous socio-political questions. Many arguments for and against space settlement have been made. The two most common reasons in favor of colonization are the survival of humans and life independent of Earth, making humans a multiplanetary species, in the event of a planetary-scale disaster (natural or human-made), and the commercial use of space particularly for enabling a more sustainable expansion of human society through the availability of additional resources in space, reducing environmental damage on and exploitation of Earth. The most common objections include concerns that the commodification of the cosmos may be likely to continue pre-existing detrimental processes such as environmental degradation, economic inequality and wars, enhancing the interests of the already powerful, and at the cost of investing in solving existing major environmental and social issues.\nThe mere construction of an extraterrestrial settlement, with the needed infrastructure, presents daunting technological, economic and social challenges. Space settlements are generally conceived as providing for nearly all (or all) the needs of larger numbers of humans. The environment in space is very hostile to human life and not readily accessible, particularly for maintenance and supply. It would involve much advancement of currently primitive technologies, such as controlled ecological life-support systems. With the high cost of orbital spaceflight (around $1400 per kg, or $640 per pound, to low Earth orbit by SpaceX Falcon Heavy), a space settlement would currently be massively expensive, but ongoing progress in reusable launch systems aim to change that (possibly reaching $20 per kg to orbit), and in creating automated manufacturing and construction techniques.\nDefinition.\nSpace colonization has been in a broad sense referred to as space settlement, space humanization or space habitation. Space colonization in a narrow sense refers to space settlements, as envisioned by Gerard K. O'Neill. It is characterized by elements such as: settlement and exploitation, as well as territorial claim.\nThe concept in its broad sense has been applied to any permanent human presence, even robotic, particularly along with the term \"settlement\", being imprecisely applied to any human space habitat, from research stations to self-sustaining communities in space.\nThe words colony and colonization are terms rooted in colonial history on Earth, making them human geographic as well as particularly political terms. This broad use for any permanent human activity and development in space has been criticized, particularly as colonialist and undifferentiated (see below Objections).\nIn this sense, a colony is a settlement that claims territory and exploits it for the settlers or their metropole. Therefore, a human outpost, while possibly a space habitat or even a space settlement, does not automatically constitute a space colony.\nTherefore, any basing can be part of colonization, while colonization can be understood as a process that is open to more claims, beyond basing. The International Space Station, the longest-occupied extraterrestrial habitat thus far, does not claim territory and thus is not usually considered a colony.\nMoriba Jah has criticized existing approaches to orbital space as colonialist, such as for satellites, on the grounds that it involves claiming ownership instead of collaborative stewardship.\nSome advocates of peaceful human settlement of space have argued against use of the word \"colony\" and related terms, so as to avoid confusing their goals with colonialism on Earth.\nHistory.\nIn the first half of the 17th century John Wilkins suggested in \"A Discourse Concerning a New Planet\" that future adventurers like Francis Drake and Christopher Columbus might reach the Moon and allow people to live there. The first known work on space colonization was the 1869 novella \"The Brick Moon\" by Edward Everett Hale, about an inhabited artificial satellite. In 1897, Kurd Lasswitz also wrote about space colonies in his book \"Auf zwei Planeten\" (\"Two Planets\"). The Russian rocket science pioneer Konstantin Tsiolkovsky foresaw elements of the space community in his book \"Beyond Planet Earth\" written about 1900. Tsiolkovsky imagined his space travelers building greenhouses and raising crops in space. Tsiolkovsky believed that going into space would help perfect human beings, leading to immortality and peace. One of the first to speak about space colonization was Cecil Rhodes who in 1902 spoke about \"these stars that you see overhead at night, these vast worlds which we can never reach\", adding \"I would annex the planets if I could; I often think of that. It makes me sad to see them so clear and yet so far\". In the 1920s John Desmond Bernal, Hermann Oberth, Guido von Pirquet and Herman Noordung further developed the idea. Wernher von Braun contributed his ideas in a 1952 \"Colliers\" magazine article. In the 1950s and 1960s, Dandridge M. Cole published his ideas. \nWhen orbital spaceflight was achieved in the 1950s colonialism was still a strong international project, e.g. easing the United States to advance its space program and space in general as part of a \"New Frontier\". As the Space Age was developing, decolonization gained again in force, producing many newly independent countries. These newly independent countries confronted spacefaring countries, demanding an anti-colonial stance and regulation of space activity when space law was raised and negotiated internationally. Fears of confrontations because of land grabs and an arms race in space between the few countries with spaceflight capabilities grew and were ultimately shared by the spacefaring countries themselves. This produced the wording of the agreed on international space law, starting with the Outer Space Treaty of 1967, calling space a \"province of all mankind\" and securing provisions for international regulation and sharing of outer space.\nThe advent of geostationary satellites raised the case of limited space in outer space. In the 1960s and with an initial focus on communications spectrum management, the international community agreed to regulate the assignment of slots in the geosynchronous (GEO) belt through the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Today, any company or nation planning to launch a satellite to GEO must apply to the ITU for an orbital slot. A group of equatorial countries, all of which were countries that were once colonies of colonial empires, but without spaceflight capabilities, signed in 1976 the Bogota Declaration. These countries declared that geostationary orbit is a limited natural resource and belongs to the equatorial countries directly below, seeing it not as part of outer space, humanity's common. Through this, the declaration challenged the dominance of geostationary orbit by spacefaring countries through identifying their dominance as imperialistic. \nWriters continued to address space colonization concepts by publishing books in the mid-1970s such as \"The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space\" by Gerard K. O'Neill and \"Colonies in Space\" by T. A. Heppenheimer.\nIn 1975, the first international joint space mission occurred as a symbol of the policy of d\u00e9tente that the two superpowers were pursuing at the time. The U.S. Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft docked in earth orbit for almost two days. In 1977, the first sustained space habitat, the Salyut 6 station, was put into Earth's orbit. Eventually the first space stations were succeeded by the ISS, today's largest human outpost in space and closest to a space settlement. Built and operated under a multilateral regime, it has become a blueprint for future stations, such as around and possibly on the Moon.\nAdditional discourse on living in space was generated by writers including Marianne J. Dyson who wrote \"Home on the Moon; Living on a Space Frontier\" in 2003; Peter Eckart wrote \"Lunar Base Handbook\" in 2006 and then Harrison Schmitt's \"Return to the Moon\" written in 2007.\nAn international regime for lunar activity was demanded by the international Moon Treaty, but is currently developed multilaterally as with the Artemis Accords. Threats to existing treaties come in areas such as space debris because of the lack of regulation on disposition of assets by operators (and controlling sovereign power) once their mission is complete. The only habitation on a different celestial body so far have been the temporary habitats of the crewed lunar landers. Similar to the Artemis program, China is leading an effort to develop a lunar base called the International Lunar Research Station beginning in the 2030s.\nJustification and opposition to space colonization.\nJustification.\nSurvival of human civilization.\nA primary argument calling for space colonization is the long-term survival of human civilization and terrestrial life. By developing alternative locations off Earth, the planet's species, including humans, could live on in the event of natural or human-made disasters on Earth.\nOn two occasions, theoretical physicist and cosmologist Stephen Hawking argued for space colonization as a means of saving humanity. In 2001, Hawking predicted that the human race would become extinct within the next thousand years unless colonies could be established in space. In 2010, he stated that humanity faces two options: either we colonize space within the next two hundred years, or we will face the long-term prospect of extinction.\nIn 2005, then NASA Administrator Michael Griffin identified space colonization as the ultimate goal of current spaceflight programs, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0the goal isn't just scientific exploration\u00a0... it's also about extending the range of human habitat out from Earth into the solar system as we go forward in time\u00a0... In the long run, a single-planet species will not survive\u00a0... If we humans want to survive for hundreds of thousands of millions of years, we must ultimately populate other planets. Now, today the technology is such that this is barely conceivable. We're in the infancy of it.\u00a0... I'm talking about that one day, I don't know when that day is, but there will be more human beings who live off the Earth than on it. We may well have people living on the Moon. We may have people living on the moons of Jupiter and other planets. We may have people making habitats on asteroids\u00a0... I know that humans will colonize the solar system and one day go beyond.\nLouis J. Halle Jr., formerly of the United States Department of State, wrote in \"Foreign Affairs\" (Summer 1980) that the colonization of space will protect humanity in the event of global nuclear warfare. The physicist Paul Davies also supports the view that if a planetary catastrophe threatens the survival of the human species on Earth, a self-sufficient colony could \"reverse-colonize\" Earth and restore human civilization. The author and journalist William E. Burrows and the biochemist Robert Shapiro proposed a private project, the Alliance to Rescue Civilization, with the goal of establishing an off-Earth \"backup\" of human civilization.\nBased on his Copernican principle, J. Richard Gott has estimated that the human race could survive for another 7.8\u00a0million years, but it is not likely to ever colonize other planets. However, he expressed a hope to be proven wrong, because \"colonizing other worlds is our best chance to hedge our bets and improve the survival prospects of our species\".\nIn a theoretical study from 2019, a group of researchers have pondered the long-term trajectory of human civilization. It is argued that due to Earth's finitude as well as the limited duration of the Solar System, mankind's survival into the far future will very likely require extensive space colonization. This 'astronomical trajectory' of mankind, as it is termed, could come about in four steps: First step, space colonies could be established at various habitable locations \u2014 be it in outer space or on celestial bodies away from Earth \u2013 and allowed to remain temporarily dependent on support from Earth. In the second step, these colonies could gradually become self-sufficient, enabling them to survive if or when the mother civilization on Earth fails or dies. Third step, the colonies could develop and expand their habitation by themselves on their space stations or celestial bodies, for example via terraforming. In the fourth step, the colonies could self-replicate and establish new colonies further into space, a process that could then repeat itself and continue at an exponential rate throughout the cosmos. However, this astronomical trajectory may not be a lasting one, as it will most likely be interrupted and eventually decline due to resource depletion or straining competition between various human factions, bringing about some 'star wars' scenario.\nVast resources in space.\nResources in space, both in materials and energy, are enormous. The Solar System has enough material and energy to support anywhere from several thousand to over a billion times that of the current Earth-based human population, mostly from the Sun itself.\nAsteroid mining will likely be a key player in space colonization. Water and materials to make structures and shielding can be easily found in asteroids. Instead of resupplying on Earth, mining and fuel stations need to be established on asteroids to facilitate better space travel. Optical mining is the term NASA uses to describe extracting materials from asteroids. NASA believes by using propellant derived from asteroids for exploration to the moon, Mars, and beyond will save $100\u00a0billion. If funding and technology come sooner than estimated, asteroid mining might be possible within a decade.\nAlthough some items of the infrastructure requirements above can already be easily produced on Earth and would therefore not be very valuable as trade items (oxygen, water, base metal ores, silicates, etc.), other high-value items are more abundant, more easily produced, of higher quality, or can only be produced in space. These could provide (over the long-term) a high return on the initial investment in space infrastructure.\nSome of these high-value trade goods include precious metals, gemstones, power, solar cells, ball bearings, semi-conductors, and pharmaceuticals.\nThe mining and extraction of metals from a small asteroid the size of 3554 Amun or (6178) 1986 DA, both small near-Earth asteroids, may yield 30 times as much metal as humans have mined throughout history. A metal asteroid this size would be worth approximately US$20\u00a0trillion at 2001 market prices.\nThe main impediments to commercial exploitation of these resources are the very high cost of initial investment, the very long period required for the expected return on those investments (\"The Eros Project\" plans a 50-year development), and the fact that the venture has never been carried out before\u2014the high-risk nature of the investment.\nExpansion with fewer negative consequences.\nExpansion of humans and technological progress has usually resulted in some form of environmental devastation, and destruction of ecosystems and their accompanying wildlife. In the past, expansion has often come at the expense of displacing many indigenous peoples, the resulting treatment of these peoples ranging anywhere from encroachment to genocide. Because space has no known life, this need not be a consequence, as some space settlement advocates have pointed out. However, on some bodies of the Solar System, there is the potential for extant native lifeforms and so the negative consequences of space colonization cannot be dismissed.\nCounterarguments state that changing only the location but not the logic of exploitation will not create a more sustainable future.\nAlleviating overpopulation and resource demand.\nAn argument for space colonization is to mitigate proposed impacts of overpopulation of Earth, such as resource depletion. If the resources of space were opened to use and viable life-supporting habitats were built, Earth would no longer define the limitations of growth. Although many of Earth's resources are non-renewable, off-planet colonies could satisfy the majority of the planet's resource requirements. With the availability of extraterrestrial resources, demand on terrestrial ones would decline. Proponents of this idea include Stephen Hawking and Gerard K. O'Neill.\nOthers including cosmologist Carl Sagan and science fiction writers Arthur C. Clarke, and Isaac Asimov, have argued that shipping any excess population into space is not a viable solution to human overpopulation. According to Clarke, \"the population battle must be fought or won here on Earth\". The problem for these authors is not the lack of resources in space (as shown in books such as \"Mining the Sky\"), but the physical impracticality of shipping vast numbers of people into space to \"solve\" overpopulation on Earth.\nOther arguments.\nAdvocates for space colonization cite a presumed innate human drive to explore and discover, and call it a quality at the core of progress and thriving civilizations.\nNick Bostrom has argued that from a utilitarian perspective, space colonization should be a chief goal as it would enable a very large population to live for a very long time (possibly billions of years), which would produce an enormous amount of utility (or happiness). He claims that it is more important to reduce existential risks to increase the probability of eventual colonization than to accelerate technological development so that space colonization could happen sooner. In his paper, he assumes that the created lives will have positive ethical value despite the problem of suffering.\nIn a 2001 interview with Freeman Dyson, J.\u00a0Richard Gott and Sid Goldstein, they were asked for reasons why some humans should live in space. Their answers were:\nBiotic ethics is a branch of ethics that values life itself. For biotic ethics, and their extension to space as panbiotic ethics, it is a human purpose to secure and propagate life and to use space to maximize life.\nOpposition.\nSpace colonization has been seen as a relief to the problem of human overpopulation as early as 1758, and listed as one of Stephen Hawking's reasons for pursuing space exploration. Critics note, however, that a slowdown in population growth rates since the 1980s has alleviated the risk of overpopulation.\nCritics also argue that the costs of commercial activity in space are too high to be profitable against Earth-based industries, and hence that it is unlikely to see significant exploitation of space resources in the foreseeable future.\nOther objections include concerns that the forthcoming colonization and commodification of the cosmos is likely to enhance the interests of the already powerful, including major economic and military institutions e.g. the large financial institutions, the major aerospace companies and the military\u2013industrial complex, to lead to new wars, and to exacerbate pre-existing exploitation of workers and resources, economic inequality, poverty, social division and marginalization, environmental degradation, and other detrimental processes or institutions.\nAdditional concerns include creating a culture in which humans are no longer seen as human, but rather as material assets. The issues of human dignity, morality, philosophy, culture, bioethics, and the threat of megalomaniac leaders in these new \"societies\" would all have to be addressed in order for space colonization to meet the psychological and social needs of people living in isolated colonies.\nAs an alternative or addendum for the future of the human race, many science fiction writers have focused on the realm of the 'inner-space', that is the computer-aided exploration of the human mind and human consciousness\u2014possibly en route developmentally to a Matrioshka Brain.\nRobotic spacecraft are proposed as an alternative to gain many of the same scientific advantages without the limited mission duration and high cost of life support and return transportation involved in human missions.\nA corollary to the Fermi paradox\u2014\"nobody else is doing it\"\u2014is the argument that, because no evidence of alien colonization technology exists, it is statistically unlikely to even be possible to use that same level of technology ourselves.\nColonialism.\nSpace colonization has been discussed as postcolonial continuation of imperialism and colonialism, calling for decolonization instead of colonization. Critics argue that the present politico-legal regimes and their philosophic grounding, advantage imperialist development of space, that key decisionmakers in space colonization are often wealthy elites affiliated with private corporations, and that space colonization would primarily appeal to their peers rather than ordinary citizens. Furthermore, it is argued that there is a need for inclusive and democratic participation and implementation of any space exploration, infrastructure or habitation. According to space law expert Michael Dodge, existing space law, such as the Outer Space Treaty, guarantees access to space, but does not enforce social inclusiveness or regulate non-state actors.\nParticularly the narrative of the \"New Frontier\" has been criticized as unreflected continuation of settler colonialism and manifest destiny, continuing the narrative of exploration as fundamental to the assumed human nature. Joon Yun considers space colonization as a solution to human survival and global problems like pollution to be imperialist; others have identified space as a new sacrifice zone of colonialism.\nFurthermore, the understanding of space as empty and separate is considered a continuation of terra nullius.\nNatalie B. Trevino argues that not colonialism but coloniality will be carried into space if not reflected on.\nMore specifically the advocacy for territorial colonization of Mars has been called \"surfacism\", in contrast to habitation in the atmospheric space of Venus, a concept similar to Thomas Golds \"surface chauvinism\".\nMore generally space infrastructure such as the Mauna Kea Observatories have also been criticized and protested against as being colonialist. Guiana Space Centre has also been the site of anti-colonial protests, connecting colonization as an issue on Earth and in space.\nIn regard to the scenario of extraterrestrial first contact, it has been argued that the employment of colonial language would endanger such first impressions and encounters.\nFurthermore, spaceflight as a whole and space law more particularly has been criticized as a postcolonial project by being built on a colonial legacy and by not facilitating the sharing of access to space and its benefits, too often allowing spaceflight to be used to sustain colonialism and imperialism, most of all on Earth instead.\nPlanetary protection and risk of contamination.\nAgencies conducting interplanetary missions are guided by COSPAR's planetary protection policies, to have at most 300,000 spores on the exterior of the craft\u2014and more thoroughly sterilized if they contact \"special regions\" containing water, or it could contaminate life-detection experiments or the planet itself.\nIt is impossible to sterilize human missions to this level, as humans are host to typically a hundred trillion microorganisms of thousands of species of the human microbiome, and these cannot be removed while preserving the life of the human. Containment seems the only option, but it is a major challenge in the event of a hard landing (i.e. crash). There have been several planetary workshops on this issue, but with no final guidelines yet for a way forward. Human explorers could also inadvertently contaminate Earth if they return to the planet while carrying extraterrestrial microorganisms.\nChallenges to overcome.\nColonization beyond the Earth involves overcoming a number of difficult challenges.\nDistance from Earth.\nThe outer planets are much farther from Earth than the inner planets, and would therefore be harder and more time-consuming to reach. In addition, return voyages may well be prohibitive considering the time and distance. Even communication with Earth would be slow, with delays of 4 - 24 minutes for a message to Mars, and 35 - 52 minutes to Jupiter and its moons.\nExtreme environments.\nExtreme cold \u2013 due to the distance to the sun, temperatures are near absolute zero in many parts of the outer Solar System.\nSustainable power sources.\nPower \u2013 Solar power is many times less concentrated in the outer Solar System than in the inner Solar System. It is unclear as to whether it would be usable there, using some form of concentration mirrors, or whether nuclear power would be necessary. Use of geothermal systems to generate power may be practical on some of the planets and moons of the solar system.\nPhysical and mental health risks to colonists.\nThe health of the humans who may participate in a colonization venture would be subject to increased physical, mental and emotional risks.\nLocations to consider.\nSpace colonization has been envisioned at many different locations inside and outside the Solar System, but most commonly at Mars and the Moon.\nNear-Earth space.\nEarth orbit.\nGeostationary orbit was an early issue of discussion about space colonization, with equatorial countries argueing for special rights to the orbit (see Bogota Declaration).\nSpace debris, particularly in low Earth orbit, has been characterized as a product of colonization by occupying space and hindering access to space through excessive pollution with debris, with drastic increases in the course of military activity and without a lack of management.\nMost of the delta-\"v\" budget, and thus propellant, of a launch is used bringing a spacecraft to low Earth orbit.100 This is the main reason why Jerry Pournelle said \"If you can get your ship into orbit, you're halfway to anywhere\". Therefore, the main advantages to constructing a space settlement in Earth orbit are accessibility to the Earth and already-existing economic motives such as space hotels and space manufacturing. However, a big disadvantage is that orbit does not host any materials that is available for exploitation. Space colonization altogether might eventually demand lifting vast amounts of payload into orbit, making thousands of daily launches potentially unsustainable. Various theoretical concepts, such as orbital rings and skyhooks, have been proposed to reduce the cost of accessing space.\nMoon.\nThe Moon is discussed as a target for colonization, due to its proximity to Earth and lower escape velocity. The Moon is reachable from Earth in three days, has a near-instant communication to Earth, with minable minerals, no atmosphere, and low gravity, making it extremely easy to ship materials and products to orbit. Abundant ice is trapped in permanently shadowed craters near the poles, which could provide support for the water needs of a lunar colony, though indications that mercury is also similarly trapped there may pose health concerns. Native precious metals, such as gold, silver, and probably platinum, are also concentrated at the lunar poles by electrostatic dust transport. There are only a few materials on the Moon which have been identified to make economic sense to ship directly back to the Earth, which are helium-3 (for fusion power) and rare-earth minerals (for electronics). Instead, it makes more sense for these materials to be used in-space or being turned into valuable products for export. However, the Moon's lack of atmosphere provides no protection from space radiation or meteoroids, so lunar lava tubes have been proposed sites to gain protection. The Moon's low surface gravity is also a concern, as it is unknown whether 1/6g is enough to maintain human health for long periods.\nSince the Moon has extreme temperature swings and toxic lunar regolith, it is argued by some that the Moon will not become a place of habitation, but instead attract polluting extraction and manufacturing industries. Furthermore, it has been argued that moving these industries to the Moon could help protect the Earth's environment and allow poorer countries to be released from the shackles of neocolonialism by wealthier countries. In the space colonization framework, the Moon will be transformed into an industrial hub of the Solar System.\nInterest in establishing a moonbase has increased in the 21st century as an intermediate to Mars colonization.\nThe European Space Agency (ESA) head Jan Woerner at the International Astronautical Congress in Bremen, Germany, in October, 2018 proposed cooperation among countries and companies on lunar capabilities, a concept referred to as \"Moon Village\".\nIn a December 2017 directive, the first Trump administration steered NASA to include a lunar mission on the pathway to other beyond Earth orbit (BEO) destinations.\nIn 2023, the U.S. Defense Department started a study of the necessary infrastructure and capabilities required to develop a moon-based economy over the following ten years.\nAs of 2024, on one side, China, along with other partner countries, has announced its intention to establish the International Lunar Research Station. On the other side, the United States, in collaboration with international partners, is advancing its Artemis program, which includes plans to build Moonbases near the lunar poles, close to permanently shadowed craters, in the 2030s. The Chinese Lunar Exploration Program is seen as a means to bolster China's political influence and support its aspirations for superpower status, while the United States aims to maintain its position as the leading space power.\nLagrange points.\nAnother near-Earth possibility are the stable Earth\u2013Moon Lagrange points L4 and L5, at which point a space colony can float indefinitely. The L5 Society was founded to promote settlement by building space stations at these points. Gerard K. O'Neill suggested in 1974 that the stable region around L5 could fit several thousand floating colonies, and would allow easy travel to and from the colonies due to the shallow effective potential at this point.\nMars.\nThe hypothetical colonization of Mars has received interest from public space agencies and private corporations and has received extensive treatment in science fiction writing, film, and art.\nWhile there have been many plans for a human Mars mission, including affordable ones such as Mars Direct, none has been realized as of 2025. Both the United States and China have plans to send humans to Mars sometime in the 2040s, but these plans are not backed with hardware and funding. However, SpaceX is currently developing Starship, a super-heavy-lift reusable launch vehicle, with a vision of sending humans to Mars. As of November 2024, the company plans to send five uncrewed Starships to Mars in either 2026 or 2028\u20132029 launch windows and SpaceX's CEO Elon Musk has repeatingly stated his support for the Mars efforts, both financially and politically.\nMars is more suitable for habitation than the Moon, with a stronger gravity, rich amount of materials needed for life, day/night cycle nearly identical to Earth, and a thin atmosphere to protect from micrometeroids. The main disadvantage of Mars compared to the Moon is the six-to-nine-month transit time and the lengthy launch window, which occurs approximately every two years. Without in situ resource utilization, Mars colonization would be nearly impossible as it would require bringing thousands of tons of payload to sustain a handful of astronauts. If Martian materials can be used to make propellant (such as methane with the Sabatier process) and supplies (such as oxygen for crews), the amount of supplies needed to bring to Mars can be greatly reduced. Even then, Mars colonies will not be economically viable in the near term, thus reasons for colonizing Mars will be mostly ideological and prestige-based, such as a desire for freedom.\nOther inner Solar System bodies.\nMercury.\nMercury is rich in metals and volatiles, as well as solar energy. However, Mercury is the most energy-consuming body on the Solar System to land for spacecraft launching from Earth, and astronauts there must contend with the extreme temperature differential and radiation.\nOnce thought to be a volatile-depleted body like the Moon, Mercury is now known to be volatile-rich, surprisingly richer in volatiles than any other terrestrial body in the inner Solar System. The planet also receives six and a half times the solar flux as the Earth/Moon system, making solar energy an effective energy source; it could be harnessed through orbital solar arrays and beamed to the surface or exported to other planets.\nGeologist Stephen Gillett suggested in 1996, that this could make Mercury an ideal place to build and launch solar sail spacecraft, which could launch as folded \"chunks\" by a mass driver from Mercury's surface. Once in space, the solar sails would deploy. Solar energy for the mass driver should be easy to produce, and solar sails near Mercury would have 6.5 times the thrust they do near Earth. This could make Mercury an ideal place to acquire materials useful in building hardware to send to (and terraform) Venus. Vast solar collectors could also be built on or near Mercury to produce power for large-scale engineering activities such as laser-pushed light sails to nearby star systems.\nAs Mercury has essentially no axial tilt, crater floors near its poles lie in eternal darkness, never seeing the Sun. They function as cold traps, trapping volatiles for geological periods. It is estimated that the poles of Mercury contain 1014\u20131015\u00a0kg of water, likely covered by about 5.65\u00d7109 m3 of hydrocarbons. This would make agriculture possible. It has been suggested that plant varieties could be developed to take advantage of the high light intensity and the long day of Mercury. The poles do not experience the significant day-night variations the rest of Mercury do, making them the best place on the planet to begin a colony.\nAnother option is to live underground, where day-night variations would be damped enough that temperatures would stay roughly constant. There are indications that Mercury contains lava tubes, like the Moon and Mars, which would be suitable for this purpose. Underground temperatures in a ring around Mercury's poles can reach room temperature on Earth, 22\u00b11\u00a0\u00b0C; and this is achieved at depths starting from about 0.7\u00a0m. This presence of volatiles and abundance of energy has led Alexander Bolonkin and James Shifflett to consider Mercury preferable to Mars for colonization.\nYet a third option could be to continually move to stay on the night side, as Mercury's 176-day-long day-night cycle means that the terminator travels very slowly.\nBecause Mercury is very dense, its surface gravity is 0.38g like Mars, even though it is a smaller planet. This would be easier to adjust to than lunar gravity (0.16g), but presents advantages regarding lower escape velocity from Mercury than from Earth. Mercury's proximity gives it advantages over the asteroids and outer planets, and its low synodic period means that launch windows from Earth to Mercury are more frequent than those from Earth to Venus or Mars.\nOn the downside, a Mercury colony would require significant shielding from radiation and solar flares, and since Mercury is airless, decompression and temperature extremes would be constant risks.\nVenus.\nThough the surface of Venus is extremely hostile, habitats high above the atmosphere of Venus are fairly habitable, with temperatures ranging from 30\u00a0\u00b0C to 70\u00a0\u00b0C (86 to 158\u00a0\u00b0F) and a pressure similar to the Earth's sea level at an altitude of 50 kilometers (30 miles). However, beside tourism opportunities, the economic benefit of a Venusian colony is minimal.\nAsteroid belt.\nAsteroids can provide enough material in the form of water, air, fuel, metal, soil, and nutrients to support ten to a hundred trillion humans in space. Many asteroids contain minerals that are inheriently valuable, such as rare earths and precious metals. However, low gravity, distance from Earth and disperse nature of their orbits make it difficult to settle on small asteroids.\nGiant planets.\nThere have also been proposals to place robotic aerostats in the upper atmospheres of the Solar System's giant planets for exploration and possibly mining of helium-3, which could have a very high value per unit mass as a thermonuclear fuel.\nRobert Zubrin identified Saturn, Uranus and Neptune as \"the Persian Gulf of the Solar System\", as the largest sources of deuterium and helium-3 to drive a fusion economy, with Saturn the most important and most valuable of the three, because of its relative proximity, low radiation, and large system of moons. On the other hand, planetary scientist John Lewis in his 1997 book \"Mining the Sky\", insists that Uranus is the likeliest place to mine helium-3 because of its significantly shallower gravity well, which makes it easier for a laden tanker spacecraft to thrust itself away. Furthermore, Uranus is an ice giant, which would likely make it easier to separate the helium from the atmosphere.\nBecause Uranus has the lowest escape velocity of the four giant planets, it has been proposed as a mining site for helium-3. As Uranus is a gas giant without a viable surface, one of Uranus's natural satellites might serve as a base.\nIt is hypothesized that one of Neptune's satellites could be used for colonization. Triton's surface shows signs of extensive geological activity that implies a subsurface ocean, perhaps composed of ammonia/water. If technology advanced to the point that tapping such geothermal energy was possible, it could make colonizing a cryogenic world like Triton feasible, supplemented by nuclear fusion power.\nMoons of outer planets.\nHuman missions to the outer planets would need to arrive quickly due to the effects of space radiation and microgravity along the journey. In 2012, Thomas B. Kerwick wrote that the distance to the outer planets made their human exploration impractical for now, noting that travel times for round trips to Mars were estimated at two years, and that the closest approach of Jupiter to Earth is over ten times farther than the closest approach of Mars to Earth. However, he noted that this could change with \"significant advancement on spacecraft design\". Nuclear-thermal or nuclear-electric engines have been suggested as a way to make the journey to Jupiter in a reasonable amount of time. Another possibility would be plasma magnet sails, a technology already suggested for rapidly sending a probe to Jupiter. The cold would also be a factor, necessitating a robust source of heat energy for spacesuits and bases. Most of the larger moons of the outer planets contain water ice, liquid water, and organic compounds that might be useful for sustaining human life.\nRobert Zubrin has suggested Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune as advantageous locations for colonization because their atmospheres are good sources of fusion fuels, such as deuterium and helium-3. Zubrin suggested that Saturn would be the most important and valuable as it is the closest and has an extensive satellite system. Jupiter's high gravity makes it difficult to extract gases from its atmosphere, and its strong radiation belt makes developing its system difficult. On the other hand, fusion power has yet to be achieved, and fusion power from helium-3 is more difficult to achieve than conventional deuterium\u2013tritium fusion. Jeffrey Van Cleve, Carl Grillmair, and Mark Hanna instead focus on Uranus, because the delta-v required to get helium-3 from the atmosphere into orbit is half that needed for Jupiter, and because Uranus' atmosphere is five times richer in helium than Saturn's.\nJupiter's Galilean moons (Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto) and Saturn's Titan are the only moons that have gravities comparable to Earth's Moon. The Moon has a 0.17g gravity; Io, 0.18g; Europa, 0.13g; Ganymede, 0.15g; Callisto, 0.13g; and Titan, 0.14g. Neptune's Triton has about half the Moon's gravity (0.08g); other round moons provide even less (starting from Uranus' Titania and Oberon at about 0.04g).\nJovian moons.\nThe Jovian system in general has particular disadvantages for colonization, including a deep gravity well. The magnetosphere of Jupiter bombards the moons of Jupiter with intense ionizing radiation delivering about 36 Sv per day to unshielded colonists on Io and about 5.40 Sv per day on Europa. Exposure to about 0.75 Sv over a few days is enough to cause radiation poisoning, and about 5\u00a0Sv over a few days is fatal.\nJupiter itself, like the other gas giants, has further disadvantages. There is no accessible surface on which to land, and the light hydrogen atmosphere would not provide good buoyancy for some kind of aerial habitat as has been proposed for Venus.\nRadiation levels on Io and Europa are extreme, enough to kill unshielded humans within an Earth day. Therefore, only Callisto and perhaps Ganymede could reasonably support a human colony. Callisto orbits outside Jupiter's radiation belt. Ganymede's low latitudes are partially shielded by the moon's magnetic field, though not enough to completely remove the need for radiation shielding. Both of them have available water, silicate rock, and metals that could be mined and used for construction.\nAlthough Io's volcanism and tidal heating constitute valuable resources, exploiting them is probably impractical. Europa is rich in water (its subsurface ocean is expected to contain over twice as much water as all Earth's oceans together) and likely oxygen, but metals and minerals would have to be imported. If alien microbial life exists on Europa, human immune systems may not protect against it. Sufficient radiation shielding might, however, make Europa an interesting location for a research base. The private \"Artemis Project\" drafted a plan in 1997 to colonize Europa, involving surface igloos as bases to drill down into the ice and explore the ocean underneath, and suggesting that humans could live in \"air pockets\" in the ice layer. Ganymede and Callisto are also expected to have internal oceans. It might be possible to build a surface base that would produce fuel for further exploration of the Solar System.\nIn 2003, NASA performed a study called \"HOPE\" (Revolutionary Concepts for Human Outer Planet Exploration) regarding the future exploration of the Solar System. The target chosen was Callisto due to its distance from Jupiter, and thus the planet's harmful radiation. It could be possible to build a surface base that would produce fuel for further exploration of the Solar System. HOPE estimated a round trip time for a crewed mission of about 2\u20135 years, assuming significant progress in propulsion technologies.\nIo is not ideal for colonization, due to its hostile environment. The moon is under influence of high tidal forces, causing high volcanic activity. Jupiter's strong radiation belt overshadows Io, delivering 36 Sv a day to the moon. The moon is also extremely dry. Io is the least ideal place for the colonization of the four Galilean moons.\nDespite this, its volcanoes could be energy resources for the other moons, which are better suited to colonization.\nGanymede is the largest moon in the Solar System. Ganymede is the only moon with a magnetosphere, albeit overshadowed by Jupiter's magnetic field. Because of this magnetic field, Ganymede is one of only two Jovian moons where surface settlements would be feasible because it receives about 0.08 Sv of radiation per day. Ganymede could be terraformed.\nThe Keck Observatory announced in 2006 that the binary Jupiter trojan 617 Patroclus, and possibly many other Jupiter trojans, are likely composed of water ice, with a layer of dust. This suggests that mining water and other volatiles in this region and transporting them elsewhere in the Solar System, perhaps via the proposed Interplanetary Transport Network, may be feasible in the not-so-distant future. This could make colonization of the Moon, Mercury and main-belt asteroids more practical.\nSaturn.\nSaturn's radiation belt is much weaker than Jupiter's, so radiation is less of an issue here. Dione, Rhea, Titan, and Iapetus all orbit outside the radiation belt, and Titan's thick atmosphere would adequately shield against cosmic radiation.\nSaturn has seven moons large enough to be round: in order of increasing distance from Saturn, they are Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys, Dione, Rhea, Titan, and Iapetus.\nEnceladus.\nThe small moon Enceladus is also of interest, having a subsurface ocean that is separated from the surface by only tens of meters of ice at the south pole, compared to kilometers of ice separating the ocean from the surface on Europa. Volatile and organic compounds are present there, and the moon's high density for an ice world (1.6\u00a0g/cm3) indicates that its core is rich in silicates.\nOn 9 March 2006, NASA's \"Cassini\" space probe found possible evidence of liquid water on Enceladus. According to that article, \"pockets of liquid water may be no more than tens of meters below the surface.\" These findings were confirmed in 2014 by NASA. This means liquid water could be collected much more easily and safely on Enceladus than, for instance, on Europa (see above). Discovery of water, especially liquid water, generally makes a celestial body a much more likely candidate for colonization. An alternative model of Enceladus's activity is the decomposition of methane/water clathrates \u2013 a process requiring lower temperatures than liquid water eruptions. The higher density of Enceladus indicates a larger than Saturnian average silicate core that could provide materials for base operations.\nTitan.\nAuthors like Robert Zubrin have offered that Saturn is the most important and valuable of the four gas giants in the Solar System, because of its relative proximity, low radiation, and excellent system of moons. He named Titan as the best candidate on which to establish a base to exploit the resources of the Saturn system. He pointed out that Titan possesses an abundance of all the elements necessary to support life, saying \"In certain ways, Titan is the most hospitable extraterrestrial world within our solar system for human colonization.\"\nTo consider a colony on Saturn's largest moon Titan, protection against the extreme cold must be a primary consideration. Titan offers a gravity of approximately 1/7 of Earth gravity, in the same range as Earth's Moon. Atmospheric pressure at the surface of the planet is about 1.5x that of the surface of the Earth; there is however, no oxygen present in the environment. The atmosphere is about 95% nitrogen and 5% methane. Some estimates suggest that abundant energy resources on Titan could power a colony with a population size of the United States.\nThe dense atmosphere of Titan shields the surface from radiation and would make any structural failures problematic, rather than catastrophic. With an oxygen mask and thermal clothing protection, humans could roam Titan's surface in the dim sunlight. Or, given the low gravity and dense atmosphere, they could float above it in a balloon or on personal wings.\nBeyond the Solar System.\nBeyond the Solar System colonization targets might be identified in the surrounding stars. The main difficulty is the vast distances to other stars.\nTo reach such targets travel times of millennia would be necessary, with current technology. At average speeds of even 0.1% of the speed of light (\"c\") interstellar expansion across the entire Milky Way galaxy would take up to one-half of the Sun's galactic orbital period of ~240,000,000 years, which is comparable to the timescale of other galactic processes. Due to fundamental energy and reaction mass consideration such speeds would be with current technology limited to small spaceships. If humanity would gain access to a large amount of energy, on the order of the mass-energy of entire planets, it may become possible to construct spaceships with Alcubierre drives.\nThe following are plausible approaches with current technology:\nIntergalactic travel.\nThe distances between galaxies are on the order of a million times farther than those between the stars, and thus intergalactic colonization would involve voyages of millions of years via special self-sustaining methods.\nImplementation.\nBuilding colonies in space would require access to water, food, space, people, construction materials, energy, transportation, communications, life support, simulated gravity, radiation protection, migration, governance and capital investment. It is likely the colonies would be located near the necessary physical resources. The practice of space architecture seeks to transform spaceflight from a heroic test of human endurance to a normality within the bounds of comfortable experience. As is true of other frontier-opening endeavors, the capital investment necessary for space colonization would probably come from governments, an argument made by John Hickman and Neil deGrasse Tyson.\nLife support.\nIn space settlements, a life support system must recycle or import all the nutrients without \"crashing.\" The closest terrestrial analogue to space life support is possibly that of a nuclear submarine. Nuclear submarines use mechanical life support systems to support humans for months without surfacing, and this same basic technology could presumably be employed for space use. However, nuclear submarines run \"open loop\"\u2014extracting oxygen from seawater, and typically dumping carbon dioxide overboard, although they recycle existing oxygen. Another commonly proposed life-support system is a closed ecological system such as Biosphere 2.\nSolutions to health risks.\nAlthough there are many physical, mental, and emotional health risks for future colonists and pioneers, solutions have been proposed to correct these problems. Mars500, HI-SEAS, and SMART-OP represent efforts to help reduce the effects of loneliness and confinement for long periods of time. Keeping contact with family members, celebrating holidays, and maintaining cultural identities all had an impact on minimizing the deterioration of mental health. There are also health tools in development to help astronauts reduce anxiety, as well as helpful tips to reduce the spread of germs and bacteria in a closed environment. Radiation risk may be reduced for astronauts by frequent monitoring and focusing work to minimize time away from shielding. Future space agencies can also ensure that every colonist would have a mandatory amount of daily exercise to prevent degradation of muscle.\nRadiation protection.\nCosmic rays and solar flares create a lethal radiation environment in space. In orbit around certain planets with magnetospheres (including Earth), the Van Allen belts make living above the atmosphere difficult. To protect life, settlements must be surrounded by sufficient mass to absorb most incoming radiation, unless magnetic or plasma radiation shields are developed. In the case of Van Allen belts, these could be drained using orbiting tethers or radio waves.\nPassive mass shielding of four metric tons per square meter of surface area will reduce radiation dosage to several mSv or less annually, well below the rate of some populated high natural background areas on Earth. This can be leftover material (slag) from processing lunar soil and asteroids into oxygen, metals, and other useful materials. However, it represents a significant obstacle to manoeuvering vessels with such massive bulk (mobile spacecraft being particularly likely to use less massive active shielding). Inertia would necessitate powerful thrusters to start or stop rotation, or electric motors to spin two massive portions of a vessel in opposite senses. Shielding material can be stationary around a rotating interior.\nPsychological adjustment.\nThe monotony and loneliness that comes from a prolonged space mission can leave astronauts susceptible to cabin fever or having a psychotic break. Moreover, lack of sleep, fatigue, and work overload can affect an astronaut's ability to perform well in an environment such as space where every action is critical.\nLaw, governance, and sovereignty.\nA range of different models of transplanetary or extraterrestrial governance have been sketched or proposed. Often envisioning the need for a fresh or independent extraterrestrial governance, particularly in the void left by the contemporarily criticized lack of space governance and inclusivity.\nIt has been argued that space colonialism would, similarly to terrestrial settler colonialism, produce colonial national identities.\nFederalism has been studied as a remedy of such distant and autonomous communities.\nSpace activity is legally based on the Outer Space Treaty, the main international treaty. But space law has become a larger legal field, which includes other international agreements such as the significantly less ratified Moon Treaty and diverse national laws.\nMany articles of the Outer Space Treaty prevent the legal colonization of outer space. The Outer Space Treaty established the basic ramifications for space activity in article one: \"The exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, shall be carried out for the benefit and in the interests of all countries, irrespective of their degree of economic or scientific development, and shall be the province of all mankind.\" And continued in article two by stating: \"Outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, is not subject to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty, by means of use or occupation, or by any other means.\"\nThe development of international space law has revolved much around outer space being defined as common heritage of mankind. The \"Magna Carta of Space\" presented by William A. Hyman in 1966 framed outer space explicitly not as \"terra nullius\" but as \"res communis\", which subsequently influenced the work of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.\nEconomics.\nSpace colonization can roughly be said to be possible when the necessary methods of space colonization become cheap enough (such as space access by cheaper launch systems) to meet the cumulative funds that have been gathered for the purpose, in addition to estimated profits from commercial use of space.\nOvercoming access-to-space barriers.\nAlthough there are no immediate prospects for the large amounts of money required for space colonization to be available given traditional launch costs, there is some prospect of a radical reduction to launch costs in the 2010s, which would consequently lessen the cost of any efforts in that direction. With a published price of US$million per launch of up to payload to low Earth orbit, SpaceX Falcon 9 rockets are already the \"cheapest in the industry\". Advancements currently being developed as part of the SpaceX reusable launch system development program to enable reusable Falcon 9s \"could drop the price by an order of magnitude, sparking more space-based enterprise, which in turn would drop the cost of access to space still further through economies of scale.\" If SpaceX is successful in developing the reusable technology, it would be expected to \"have a major impact on the cost of access to space\", and change the increasingly competitive market in space launch services.\nThe President's Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy suggested that an inducement prize should be established, perhaps by government, for the achievement of space colonization, for example by offering the prize to the first organization to place humans on the Moon and sustain them for a fixed period before they return to Earth.\nMoney and currency.\nExperts have debated on the possible use of money and currencies in societies that will be established in space. The Quasi Universal Intergalactic Denomination, or QUID, is a physical currency made from a space-qualified polymer PTFE for inter-planetary travelers. QUID was designed for the foreign exchange company Travelex by scientists from Britain's National Space Centre and the University of Leicester. Other possibilities include the incorporation of cryptocurrency as the primary form of currency, as suggested by Elon Musk.\nSocio-economic issues.\nHuman spaceflight has enabled only temporarily relocating a few privileged people and no permanent space migrants.\nThe societal motivation for space migration has been questioned as rooted in colonialism, questioning the fundamentals and inclusivity of space colonization. Highlighting the need to reflect on such socio-economic issues beside the technical challenges for implementation.\nResources.\nRaw materials.\nColonies on the Moon, Mars, asteroids, or the metal-rich planet Mercury, could extract local materials. The Moon is deficient in volatiles such as argon, helium and compounds of carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen. The LCROSS impacter was targeted at the Cabeus crater which was chosen as having a high concentration of water for the Moon. A plume of material erupted in which some water was detected. Mission chief scientist Anthony Colaprete estimated that the Cabeus crater contains material with 1% water or possibly more. Water ice should also be in other permanently shadowed craters near the lunar poles. Although helium is present only in low concentrations on the Moon, where it is deposited into regolith by the solar wind, an estimated million tons of He-3 exists over all. It also has industrially significant oxygen, silicon, and metals such as iron, aluminium, and titanium.\nLaunching materials from Earth is expensive, so bulk materials for colonies could come from the Moon, a near-Earth object (NEO), Phobos, or Deimos. The benefits of using such sources include: a lower gravitational force, no atmospheric drag on cargo vessels, and no biosphere to damage. Many NEOs contain substantial amounts of metals. Underneath a drier outer crust (much like oil shale), some other NEOs are inactive comets which include billions of tons of water ice and kerogen hydrocarbons, as well as some nitrogen compounds.\nFarther out, Jupiter's Trojan asteroids are thought to be rich in water ice and other volatiles.\nRecycling of some raw materials would almost certainly be necessary.\nEnergy.\nSolar energy in orbit is abundant, reliable, and is commonly used to power satellites today. There is no night in free space, and no clouds or atmosphere to block sunlight. Light intensity obeys an inverse-square law. So the solar energy available at distance \"d\" from the Sun is \"E\" = 1367/\"d\"2 W/m2, where \"d\" is measured in astronomical units (AU) and 1367 watts/m2 is the energy available at the distance of Earth's orbit from the Sun, 1 AU.\nIn the weightlessness and vacuum of space, high temperatures for industrial processes can easily be achieved in solar ovens with huge parabolic reflectors made of metallic foil with very lightweight support structures. Flat mirrors to reflect sunlight around radiation shields into living areas (to avoid line-of-sight access for cosmic rays, or to make the Sun's image appear to move across their \"sky\") or onto crops are even lighter and easier to build.\nLarge solar power photovoltaic cell arrays or thermal power plants would be needed to meet the electrical power needs of the settlers' use. In developed parts of Earth, electrical consumption can average 1 kilowatt/person (or roughly 10 megawatt-hours per person per year.) These power plants could be at a short distance from the main structures if wires are used to transmit the power, or much farther away with wireless power transmission.\nA major export of the initial space settlement designs was anticipated to be large solar power satellites (SPS) that would use wireless power transmission (phase-locked microwave beams or lasers emitting wavelengths that special solar cells convert with high efficiency) to send power to locations on Earth, or to colonies on the Moon or other locations in space. For locations on Earth, this method of getting power is extremely benign, with zero emissions and far less ground area required per watt than for conventional solar panels. Once these satellites are primarily built from lunar or asteroid-derived materials, the price of SPS electricity could be lower than energy from fossil fuel or nuclear energy; replacing these would have significant benefits such as the elimination of greenhouse gases and nuclear waste from electricity generation.\nTransmitting solar energy wirelessly from the Earth to the Moon and back is also an idea proposed for the benefit of space colonization and energy resources. Physicist Dr. David Criswell, who worked for NASA during the Apollo missions, proposed the idea of using power beams to transfer energy from space. These beams, microwaves with a wavelength of about 12\u00a0cm, would be almost untouched as they travel through the atmosphere. They could also be aimed at more industrial areas to keep away from humans or animal activities. This would allow for safer and more reliable methods of transferring solar energy.\nIn 2008, scientists were able to send a 20 watt microwave signal from a mountain on the island of Maui to the island of Hawaii. Since then JAXA and Mitsubishi have been working together on a $21\u00a0billion project to place satellites in orbit which could generate up to 1 gigawatt of energy. These are the next advancements being done today to transmit energy wirelessly for space-based solar energy.\nHowever, the value of SPS power delivered wirelessly to other locations in space will typically be far higher than to Earth. Otherwise, the means of generating the power would need to be included with these projects and pay the heavy penalty of Earth launch costs. Therefore, other than proposed demonstration projects for power delivered to Earth, the first priority for SPS electricity is likely to be locations in space, such as communications satellites, fuel depots or \"orbital tugboat\" boosters transferring cargo and passengers between low Earth orbit (LEO) and other orbits such as geosynchronous orbit (GEO), lunar orbit or highly-eccentric Earth orbit (HEEO). The system will also rely on satellites and receiving stations on Earth to convert the energy into electricity. Because this energy can be transmitted easily from dayside to nightside, power would be reliable 24/7.\nNuclear power is sometimes proposed for colonies located on the Moon or on Mars, as the supply of solar energy is too discontinuous in these locations; the Moon has nights of two Earth weeks in duration. Mars has nights, relatively high gravity, and an atmosphere featuring large dust storms to cover and degrade solar panels. Also, Mars' greater distance from the Sun (1.52 astronomical units, AU) means that only \"1/1.522\" or about 43% of the solar energy is available at Mars compared with Earth orbit. Another method would be transmitting energy wirelessly to the lunar or Martian colonies from solar power satellites (SPSs) as described above; the difficulties of generating power in these locations make the relative advantages of SPSs much greater there than for power beamed to locations on Earth. In order to also be able to fulfill the requirements of a Moon base and energy to supply life support, maintenance, communications, and research, a combination of both nuclear and solar energy may be used in the first colonies.\nFor both solar thermal and nuclear power generation in airless environments, such as the Moon and space, and to a lesser extent the very thin Martian atmosphere, one of the main difficulties is dispersing the inevitable heat generated. This requires fairly large radiator areas.\nSelf-sustainment.\nIn situ manufacturing.\nSpace manufacturing could enable self-replication. Some consider it the ultimate goal because it would allow an exponential increase in colonies, while eliminating costs to, and dependence on, Earth. It could be argued that the establishment of such a colony would be Earth's first act of self-replication. Intermediate goals include colonies that expect only information from Earth (science, engineering, entertainment) and colonies that just require periodic supply of light weight objects, such as integrated circuits, medicines, genetic material and tools.\nSustaining a population.\nIn 2002, the anthropologist John H. Moore estimated that a population of 150\u2013180 would permit a stable society to exist for 60 to 80 generations\u2014equivalent to 2,000 years.\nAssuming a journey of 6,300 years, the astrophysicist Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Marin and the particle physicist Camille Beluffi calculated that the minimum viable population for a generation ship to reach Proxima Centauri would be 98 settlers at the beginning of the mission (then the crew will breed until reaching a stable population of several hundred settlers within the ship).\nIn 2020, Jean-Marc Salotti proposed a method to determine the minimum number of settlers to survive on an extraterrestrial world. It is based on the comparison between the required time to perform all activities and the working time of all human resources. For Mars, 110 individuals would be required.\nAdvocacy.\nSeveral private companies have announced plans toward the colonization of Mars. Among entrepreneurs leading the call for space colonization are Elon Musk, Dennis Tito and Bas Lansdorp.\nInvolved organizations.\nOrganizations that advocate for space colonization include:\nExperiments with terrestrial analogues.\nMany space agencies build \"testbeds\", which are facilities on Earth for testing advanced life support systems, but these are designed for long duration human spaceflight, not permanent colonization.\nInfluence of science fiction.\n \nSpace colonization is a recurring theme in science fiction. NASA began to assess space colonization issues as early as 1975 with their Space Settlements Design Study. The report directly acknowledges the foundation of various ideas for colonization in science fiction. It quotes author Robert Salkeld and highlights the role of the precursors of science fiction alongside the founders of astronautics, where for example Jules Verne rubs shoulders with Constantin Tsiolkovsky.\nIndeed, colonization as a fictional theme and colonization as a research project are not independent. Research feeds fiction and fiction sometimes inspires research. Many of the most fascinating ideas in science originated not in the laboratory but in the minds of such science fiction writers as Arthur C. Clarke and Ray Bradbury. Clarke's 1945 article on communications satellites was the original idea behind modern communications satellites. Bradbury's The Martian Chronicles explores the exploration and settlement of Mars and has been attributed as the main inspiration behind NASA's many missions to Mars. Communicators and tricorders from the science fiction of Star Trek are said to be inspirations for cell phones and wireless medical triage devices. Fiction inspired innovation and invention to develop new technologies. Communications, governance principles, and advanced technological devices, all speculated by science fiction, are all precursors to survival of an extraterrestrial colony. The European Space Agency ITSF project (Innovative Technologies in Science Fiction for Space Applications) study offers similar consideration for the cross-fertilization between fiction and science.\nScience fiction writer Norman Spinrad highlights the role of science fiction as a visionary force that spawned the conquest of space, a term he believes betrays its imperialist tendencies, and the colonization of space. \nHe also shows that political scientist and science fiction writer Jerry Pournelle, in wanting to revive the conquest of space for this purpose in the early 1980s, actually launched the Reagan administration's Strategic Defense Initiative project, which he considers a failure, because instead of the military program reviving the space program, the opposite happens: the $40 billion cost of the program is actually taken away from the construction of a base on the Moon.\nOne of the great names in science fiction, Arthur C. Clarke, a supporter of Marshall Savage's ideas, announced in a 2001 article, the date appearing in one of his most famous titles , that by 2057 there would be humans on the Moon, Mars , Europa, Ganymede, Titan and in orbit around Venus, Neptune and Pluto. Contemporary science fiction has extended the colonization vision further. The TV series The Expanse which is based on a series of novels of the same name by James S. A. Corey, addresses the politics and conflict of humanity hundreds of years in the future after it has colonized the solar system and Mars has become an independent military power. In Theresa Hutchin's essay on the series in 2021, comparisons are drawn between the fiction of the story and the reality of current corporate led development of space exploration activities.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29250", "revid": "50576733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29250", "title": "Second Council of Nicaea", "text": "Ecumenical council of the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Catholic Church (787 AD)\nThe Second Council of Nicaea is recognized as the last of the first seven ecumenical councils by the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Catholic Church. In addition, it is also recognized as such by Old Catholics and others. Protestant opinions on it are varied.\nThe Council assembled in 787 AD in Nicaea (site of the First Council of Nicaea; present-day \u0130znik, Bursa, in Turkey), to restore the use and veneration of icons (or holy images), which had been suppressed by imperial edict inside the Byzantine Empire during the reign of Leo III (717\u2013741). His son, Constantine V (741\u2013775), had held the Council of Hieria to make the suppression official.\nThe Council determined that the honorary veneration (\"tim\u0113tik\u0113 proskyn\u0113sis\") of icons was permitted, and that the true adoration (\"al\u0113thin\u0113 latreia\") was reserved for God alone. It further stated that honor given to an icon passes through to its subject and therefore is not idolatrous as the iconoclasts believed. The iconodule position was not justified by Christological arguments (as in the Council of Hieria), rather, the antiquity of iconodulia and the Incarnation of Christ, which was said to make acceptable the depiction of Christ, were emphasized.\nBackground.\nThe veneration of icons had been banned by Byzantine Emperor Constantine V and supported by his Council of Hieria (754 AD), which had described itself as the seventh ecumenical council. The Council of Hieria was overturned by the Second Council of Nicaea only 33 years later, and has also been rejected by Catholic and Orthodox churches, since none of the five major patriarchs were represented. The emperor's vigorous enforcement of the ban included persecution of those who venerated icons and of monks in general. There were also political overtones to the persecution\u2014images of emperors were still allowed by Constantine, which some opponents saw as an attempt to give wider authority to imperial power than to the saints and bishops. Constantine's iconoclastic tendencies were shared by Constantine's son, Leo IV. After the latter's early death, his widow, Irene of Athens, as regent for her son, began its restoration for personal inclination and political considerations.\nOn Christmas Day 784, the head of the imperial chancellery, Tarasios, was appointed successor to the iconoclast Patriarch of Constantinople, Paul IV, by Irene. Together they were attempting to solemnize the iconodule reversal of imperial policy with an ecumenical council. Pope Adrian I was invited to participate, and gladly accepted, sending two legates.\nIn 786, the council met in the Church of the Holy Apostles in Constantinople. However, soldiers in collusion with iconoclast bishops entered the church, and broke up the assembly. As a result, Irene resorted to a stratagem. Under the pretext of responding to an alleged Arab attack in Asia Minor, the iconoclastic bodyguard was sent away from the capital\u2014then disarmed and disbanded. Tarasios dealt with the episcopal opposition by allowing notoriously iconoclast bishops to retain their positions so long as they made a public admission of error, and also by disguising two eastern monks as envoys of the patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem, to justify the council's claim to ecumenical status.\nThe Council was again assembled, this time in the symbolic location of Nicaea, the site of the first ecumenical council. The council opened on 24 September 787 at the Hagia Sophia. It numbered about 350 members; 308 bishops or their representatives signed. Tarasios presided, and seven sessions were held in Nicaea.\nProceedings.\nThe twenty-two canons drawn up in Constantinople also served ecclesiastical reform. Careful maintenance of the ordinances of the earlier councils, knowledge of the scriptures on the part of the clergy, and care for Christian conduct are required, and the desire for a renewal of ecclesiastical life is awakened.\nThe council also decreed that every altar should contain a relic, which remains the case in modern Catholic and Orthodox regulations (Canon VII), and made a number of decrees on clerical discipline, especially for monks when mixing with women.\nReception.\nThe papal legates voiced their approval of the restoration of the veneration of icons in no uncertain terms, and the Patriarch sent a full account of the proceedings of the council to Pope Adrian I, who had it translated (Pope Anastasius III later replaced the translation with a better one). While Adrian's legates were returning from Constantinople to Rome with a copy of the \"Acts\" of the Council, the deposed Lombard king Adalgis along with a Byzantine expeditionary force were disembarking in Italy to drive out the Franks. The proceedings of the Council proclaimed the unity of the Byzantine emperor and pope on iconodulia, intentionally neglecting to mention Charlemagne, King of the Franks, which enraged the Franks who the Pope was attempting to align himself with. However, the Franks successfully repelled the Byzantine expedition, and Adrian's relations with Charlemagne were restored despite his diplomatic blunder. \nThe Frankish clergy initially rejected the Council at a synod in 794. Charlemagne supported the composition of the \"Libri Carolini\", which was most likely composed in summer 793 by the influential Carolingian theologian, Theodulf of Orl\u00e9ans, in Saint Emmeram's Abbey, Regensburg. The main purpose of the work was to rebut the decrees of the Council, especially the \"errors of the Greeks\". Some modern scholars judge the Latin translation of the \"Acts\", which Theodulf used, to be very poor: \"a monument of inadequate translation. Its garbled nature gave rise to outrage among the court theologians\"; it is also said to be, \"bedeviled by inaccurate and in some cases intentionally incorrect translations\". Other scholas, such as Thomas Noble, note that \"the Carolingians themselves exhibited for some fifty or sixty years an essential familiarity with all the basic elements in discussions about sacred art.\" Theodulf's judgment was that Irene's aim was to \"promote the superstitious adoration of images\" through the council. Theodulf cited Church Fathers such as Augustine of Hippo as iconoclast witnesses. A copy was sent to Pope Adrian, who responded with a refutation of the Frankish arguments. The \"Libri\" would thereafter remain unpublished until the Reformation, and the Council was subsequently accepted as the Seventh Ecumenical Council by the Catholic Church. According to the \"Libri\", the ruling of the council against iconoclasm led to \"civil war\" within the Empire, and other ninth-century iconodule sources condemn clergymen and laymen who remained iconoclasts.\nThe Council, or rather the final defeat of iconoclasm in 843, is celebrated in the Eastern Orthodox Church, and Eastern Catholic Churches of Byzantine Rite as \"The Sunday of the Triumph of Orthodoxy\" each year on the first Sunday of Great Lent, the fast that leads up to Pascha (Easter), and again on the Sunday closest to 11 October (the Sunday on or after 8 October). The former celebration commemorates the defeat of iconoclasm, while the latter commemorates the council itself. The Papacy did not formally confirm the decrees of the council until 880.\nMany Protestants who follow the French reformer John Calvin generally agree in rejecting the canons of the Council, which they believe promoted idolatry. He rejected the distinction between veneration (\"douleia\", \"proskyn\u0113sis\") and adoration (\"latreia\") as unbiblical \"sophistry\" and condemned even the decorative use of images. In subsequent editions of the \"Institutes\", he cited the \"Libri Carolini\".\nClassical Anglicanism also rejected the decrees of the Council. The official Anglican Homily against the Peril of Idolatry singles it out several times as justifying idolatry: \u201cAnd at the second Council Nicene, the Bishops and Clergy decreed, that images should be worshipped: and so by occasion of these stumbling blocks, not only the unlearned and simple, but the learned and wise, not the people only, but the Bishops, not the sheep, but also the shepherds themselves (who should have been guides in the right way, and light to shine in darkness) being blinded by the bewitching of images, as blind guides of the blind, fell both into the pit of damnable Idolatry.\u201d The Thirty-Nine Articles also states: \u201c\u2026de veneratione tum Imaginum\u2026 res est futilis, inaniter conflicta, et nullis Scripturarum testimoniis innititur; imo verbo Dei contradicit.\u201d \nBishops of Dalmatia.\nIt is particularly interesting that four Dalmatian bishops are among the signatories of the synod, whose cities were no longer under Byzantine rule. These Dalmatian bishoprics had been dissolved earlier. So the question arises of when these bishoprics were re-established in these medieval Dalmatian cities.\nThe four Dalmatian bishops who signed the synod were the following, in order.\nThis suggests that new bishoprics was founded or old (Early Christian) episcopal seats were re-established in this area. The founding of these bishoprics is attested by the 8th century \"Chronicon Gradense\". The chronicle reports the foundation of several Dalmatian bishoprics, such as the bishopric of Rab as \"Avoriciensis/Avonciensis ecclesia\", the foundation of the bishopric of Krk as \"episcopatus in Vegla\", the foundation of the bishopric of Osor as \"episcopatus in Asparo\", and the bishopric of Pi\u0107an as \"episcopus Pathensis\". As the chronicle reports a Dalmatian provincial synod held in the city of Grado.\nTranslations.\nThere are only a few translations of the above Acts in the modern languages.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29252", "revid": "42964511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29252", "title": "Sexual orientation", "text": "Pattern of romantic or sexual attraction\nSexual orientation is an enduring personal pattern of romantic attraction or sexual attraction (or a combination of these) to persons of the opposite sex or gender, the same sex or gender, or to both sexes or more than one gender. Patterns are generally categorized under heterosexuality, homosexuality, and bisexuality, while asexuality (experiencing no sexual attraction to others) is sometimes identified as the fourth category.\nThese categories are aspects of the more nuanced nature of sexual identity and terminology. For example, people may use other labels, such as \"pansexual\" or \"polysexual\", or none at all. According to the American Psychological Association, sexual orientation \"also refers to a person's sense of identity based on those attractions, related behaviors, and membership in a community of others who share those attractions\". \"Androphilia\" and \"gynephilia\" are terms used in behavioral science to describe sexual orientation as an alternative to a gender binary conceptualization. \"Androphilia\" describes sexual attraction to masculinity; \"gynephilia\" describes the sexual attraction to femininity. The term \"sexual preference\" largely overlaps with sexual orientation, but is generally distinguished in psychological research. A person who identifies as bisexual, for example, may sexually prefer one sex over the other. \"Sexual preference\" may also suggest a degree of voluntary choice, whereas sexual orientation is not a choice.\nAlthough no single theory on the cause of sexual orientation has yet gained widespread support, scientists favor biological theories. There is considerably more evidence supporting nonsocial, biological causes of sexual orientation than social ones, especially for males. A major hypothesis implicates the prenatal environment, specifically the organizational effects of hormones on the fetal brain. There is no substantive evidence which suggests parenting or early childhood experiences play a role in developing a sexual orientation. Across cultures, most people are heterosexual, with a minority of people having a homosexual or bisexual orientation. A person's sexual orientation can be anywhere on a continuum, from exclusive attraction to the opposite sex to exclusive attraction to the same sex.\nSexual orientation is studied primarily within biology, anthropology, and psychology (including sexology), but it is also a subject area in sociology, history (including social constructionist perspectives), and law.\nDefinitions and distinguishing from sexual identity and behavior.\nGeneral.\nSexual orientation is traditionally defined as including heterosexuality, bisexuality, and homosexuality, while asexuality is considered the fourth category of sexual orientation by some researchers and has been defined as the absence of a traditional sexual orientation. An asexual has little to no sexual attraction to people. It may be considered a lack of a sexual orientation, and there is significant debate over whether or not it is a sexual orientation.\nMost definitions of sexual orientation include a psychological component, such as the direction of an individual's erotic desires, or a behavioral component, which focuses on the sex of the individual's sexual partners. Some people prefer simply to follow an individual's self-definition or identity. Scientific and professional understanding is that \"the core attractions that form the basis for adult sexual orientation typically emerge between middle childhood and early adolescence\". Sexual orientation differs from sexual identity in that it encompasses relationships with others, while sexual identity is a concept of self.\nThe American Psychological Association states that \"[s]exual orientation refers to an enduring pattern of emotional, romantic, and/or sexual attractions to men, women, or both sexes\" and that \"[t]his range of behaviors and attractions has been described in various cultures and nations throughout the world. Many cultures use identity labels to describe people who express these attractions. In the United States, the most frequent labels are lesbians (women attracted to women), gay men (men attracted to men), and bisexuals (people attracted to both sexes). However, some people may use different labels or none at all\". They additionally state that sexual orientation \"is distinct from other components of sex and gender, including biological sex (the anatomical, physiological, and genetic characteristics associated with being male or female), gender identity (the psychological sense of being male or female), and social gender role (the cultural norms that define feminine and masculine behavior)\".\nSexual identity and sexual behavior are closely related to sexual orientation, but they are distinguished, with sexual identity referring to an individual's conception of themselves, behavior referring to actual sexual acts performed by the individual, and orientation referring to \"fantasies, attachments and longings.\" Individuals may or may not express their sexual orientation in their behaviors. People who have a non-heterosexual sexual orientation that does not align with their sexual identity are sometimes referred to as 'closeted'. The term may, however, reflect a certain cultural context and particular stage of transition in societies which are gradually dealing with integrating sexual minorities. In studies related to sexual orientation, when dealing with the degree to which a person's sexual attractions, behaviors and identity match, scientists usually use the terms \"concordance\" or \"discordance\". Thus, a woman who is attracted to other women, but calls herself heterosexual and only has sexual relations with men, can be said to experience discordance between her sexual orientation (homosexual or lesbian) and her sexual identity and behaviors (heterosexual).\n\"Sexual identity\" may also be used to describe a person's perception of their own \"sex\", rather than sexual orientation. The term \"sexual preference\" has a similar meaning to \"sexual orientation\", and the two terms are often used interchangeably, but the American Psychological Association states \"sexual preference\" suggests a degree of voluntary choice. The term has been listed by the American Psychological Association's Committee on Gay and Lesbian Concerns as a wording that advances a \"heterosexual bias\". The term \"sexual orientation\" was introduced by sexologist John Money in place of \"sexual preference\", arguing that attraction is not necessarily a matter of free choice.\nAndrophilia, gynephilia, and other terms.\n\"Androphilia\" and \"gynephilia\" (or \"gynecophilia\") are terms used in behavioral science to describe sexual attraction, as an alternative to a homosexual and heterosexual conceptualization. They are used for identifying a subject's object of attraction without attributing a sex assignment or gender identity to the subject. Related terms such as \"pansexual\" and \"polysexual\" do not make any such assignations to the subject. People may also use terms such as \"queer\", \"pansensual,\" \"polyfidelitous,\" \"ambisexual,\" or personalized identities such as \"byke\" or \"biphilic\".\nUsing \"androphilia\" and \"gynephilia\" can avoid confusion and offense when describing people in non-western cultures, as well as when describing intersex and transgender people. Psychiatrist Anil Aggrawal explains that androphilia, along with gynephilia,is needed to overcome immense difficulties in characterizing the sexual orientation of trans men and trans women. For instance, it is difficult to decide whether a trans man erotically attracted to males is a heterosexual female or a homosexual male; or a trans woman erotically attracted to females is a heterosexual male or a lesbian female. Any attempt to classify them may not only cause confusion but arouse offense among the affected subjects. In such cases, while defining sexual attraction, it is best to focus on the object of their attraction rather than on the sex or gender of the subject.Sexologist Milton Diamond writes, \"The terms heterosexual, homosexual, and bisexual are better used as adjectives, not nouns, and are better applied to behaviors, not people. This usage is particularly advantageous when discussing the partners of transsexual or intersexed individuals. These newer terms also do not carry the social weight of the former ones.\"\nSome researchers advocate use of the terminology to avoid bias inherent in Western conceptualizations of human sexuality. Writing about the Samoan \"fa'afafine\" demographic, sociologist Johanna Schmidt writes that in cultures where a third gender is recognized, a term like \"homosexual transsexual\" does not align with cultural categories.\nSome researchers, such as Bruce Bagemihl, have criticized certain ways the labels \"heterosexual\" and \"homosexual\" have been used for transgender people, writing, \"...the point of reference for 'heterosexual' or 'homosexual' orientation in this nomenclature is solely the individual's genetic sex prior to reassignment (see for example, Blanchard et al. 1987, Coleman and Bockting, 1988, Blanchard, 1989). These labels thereby ignore the individual's personal sense of gender identity taking precedence over biological sex, rather than the other way around.\" Bagemihl goes on to take issue with the way this terminology makes it easy to claim transsexuals are really homosexual males seeking to escape from stigma.\nTerms have been proposed for sexual attraction to a person born male with a feminine gender expression, including \"gynandromorphophilia\" (adjective: \"gynandromorphophilic\") and \"gynemimetophilia\" (adj.: \"gynemimetophilic\").\nGender, transgender, cisgender, and conformance.\nThe earliest writers on sexual orientation usually understood it to be intrinsically linked to the subject's own sex. For example, it was thought that a typical female-bodied person who is attracted to female-bodied persons would have masculine attributes, and vice versa. This understanding was shared by most of the significant theorists of sexual orientation from the mid nineteenth to early twentieth century, such as Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Magnus Hirschfeld, Havelock Ellis, Carl Jung, and Sigmund Freud, as well as many gender-variant homosexual people themselves. However, this understanding of homosexuality as sexual inversion was disputed at the time, and, through the second half of the twentieth century, gender identity came to be increasingly seen as a phenomenon distinct from sexual orientation. Transgender and cisgender people may be attracted to men, women, or both, although the prevalence of different sexual orientations is quite different in these two populations. An individual homosexual, heterosexual, or bisexual person may be masculine, feminine, or androgynous. Nevertheless, an analysis by J. Michael Bailey and Kenneth Zucker found a majority of the gay men and lesbians sampled in multiple studies reported \"substantially more\" cross-sex-typed behavior in childhood than heterosexual subjects.\nSexual orientation sees greater intricacy when non-binary understandings of both sex and gender are considered. Sociologist Paula Rodriguez Rust (2000) argues for a more multifaceted definition of sexual orientation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Most alternative models of sexuality... define sexual orientation in terms of dichotomous biological sex or gender... Most theorists would not eliminate the reference to sex or gender, but instead advocate incorporating more complex nonbinary concepts of sex or gender, more complex relationships between sex, gender, and sexuality, and/or additional nongendered dimensions into models of sexuality.\nRelationships outside of orientation.\nGay and lesbian people can have sexual relationships with someone of the opposite sex for a variety of reasons, including the desire for a perceived traditional family and concerns of discrimination and religious ostracism. While some LGBTQ people hide their respective orientations from their spouses, others develop positive gay and lesbian identities while maintaining successful heterosexual marriages. Coming out of the closet to oneself, a spouse of the opposite sex, and children can present challenges that are not faced by gay and lesbian people who are not married to people of the opposite sex or do not have children.\nFluidity.\nOften, sexual orientation and sexual orientation identity are not distinguished, which can impact accurately assessing sexual identity and whether or not sexual orientation is able to change; sexual orientation identity can change throughout an individual's life, and may or may not align with biological sex, sexual behavior, or actual sexual orientation.&lt;ref name=\"Concordance/discordance in SO\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Sexual orientation is stable and unchanging for the vast majority of people, but some research indicates that some people may experience change in their sexual orientation, and this is more likely for women than for men. The American Psychological Association distinguishes between sexual orientation (an innate attraction) and sexual orientation identity (which may change at any point in a person's life).\nCauses.\nThe exact causes for the development of a particular sexual orientation have yet to be established. To date, much research has been conducted to determine the influence of genetics, hormonal action, development dynamics, social and cultural influences\u2014which has led many to think that biology and environment factors play a complex role in forming it.\nBiology.\nResearch has identified several biological factors which may be related to the development of sexual orientation, including genes, prenatal hormones, and brain structure. No single controlling cause has been identified, and research is continuing in this area.\nAlthough researchers generally believe that sexual orientation is not determined by any one factor but by a combination of genetic, hormonal, and environmental influences, with biological factors involving a complex interplay of genetic factors and the early uterine environment, they favor biological models for the cause. There is considerably more evidence supporting nonsocial, biological causes of sexual orientation than social ones, especially for males. Scientists do not believe that sexual orientation is a choice, and some of them believe that it is established at conception. Current scientific investigation usually seeks to find biological explanations for the adoption of a particular sexual orientation. Scientific studies have found a number of statistical biological differences between gay people and heterosexuals, which may result from the same underlying cause as sexual orientation itself.\nGenetic factors.\nGenes may be related to the development of sexual orientation. A twin study from 2001 appears to exclude genes as a major factor, while a twin study from 2010 found that homosexuality was explained by both genes and environmental factors. However, experimental design of the available twin studies has made their interpretation difficult.\nIn 2012, a large, comprehensive\u00a0genome-wide linkage study\u00a0of male sexual orientation was conducted by several independent groups of researchers. Significant linkage to homosexuality was found with genes on chromosome Xq28 and chromosome 8 in the pericentromeric region. The authors concluded that \"our findings, taken in context with previous work, suggest that genetic variation in each of these regions contributes to development of the important psychological trait of male sexual orientation.\" It was the largest study of the genetic basis of homosexuality to date and was published online in November 2014.\nHowever, in August 2019, a genome-wide association study of 493,001 individuals concluded that hundreds or thousands of genetic variants underlie homosexual behavior in both sexes, with 5 variants in particular being significantly associated. They stated that in contrast to linkage studies that found substantial association of sexual orientation with variants on the X-chromosome, they found no excess of signal (and no individual genome-wide significant variants) on Xq28 or the rest of the X chromosome.\nHormones.\nThe hormonal theory of sexuality holds that just as exposure to certain hormones plays a role in fetal sex differentiation, hormonal exposure also influences the sexual orientation that emerges later in the adult. Fetal hormones may be seen as either the primary influence upon adult sexual orientation or as a co-factor interacting with genes or environmental and social conditions.\nFor humans, the norm is that females possess two X sex chromosomes, while males have one X and one Y. The default developmental pathway for a human fetus being female, the Y chromosome is what induces the changes necessary to shift to the male developmental pathway. This differentiation process is driven by androgen hormones, mainly testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT). The newly formed testicles in the fetus are responsible for the secretion of androgens, which will cooperate in driving the sexual differentiation of the developing fetus, including its brain. This results in sexual differences between males and females. This fact has led some scientists to test in various ways the result of modifying androgen exposure levels in mammals during fetus and early life.\nBirth order.\nA significant volume of research has demonstrated that the probability of a male growing up to be gay increases with each older brother he has from the same mother. Known as the \"fraternal birth order\" (FBO) effect, scientists attribute this to a prenatal biological mechanism \u2013 specifically a maternal immune response to male fetuses \u2013 since the effect is only present in men with older biological brothers, and not present among men with older step-brothers and adoptive brothers. This process, known as the \"maternal immunization hypothesis\" (MIH), would begin when cells from a male fetus enter the mother's circulation during pregnancy. These cells carry Y-proteins, which are thought to play a role in brain masculinisation (sex-differentiation) during fetal development. The mother's immune system builds antibodies to these Y-proteins. These antibodies are later released on future male fetuses and interfere with the masculinization role of Y-proteins, leaving regions of the brain responsible for sexual orientation in the 'default' female-typical arrangement, causing the exposed son to be more attracted to men over women. Biochemical evidence for this hypothesis was identified in 2017, finding that mothers with a gay son, especially those with older brothers, had significantly higher levels of anti-bodies to the NLGN4Y Y-protein than mothers with heterosexual sons.\nThe effect becomes stronger with each successive male pregnancy, meaning the odds of the next son being gay increase by 38\u201348%. This does not mean that all or most sons will be gay after several male pregnancies, but rather, the odds of having a gay son increase from approximately 2% for the first born son, to 4% for the second, 6% for the third and so on. Scientists have estimated between 15% and 29% of gay men may owe their sexual orientation to this effect, but the number may be higher, as prior miscarriages and terminations of male pregnancies may have exposed their mothers to Y-linked antigens. The fraternal birth order effect would not likely apply to first born gay sons; instead, scientists say they may owe their orientation to genes, prenatal hormones and other maternal immune responses which also influence brain development. This effect is nullified if the man is left-handed. Ray Blanchard and Anthony Bogaert are credited with discovering the effect in the 1990s. J. Michael Bailey and Jacques Balthazart say the FBO effect demonstrates that sexual orientation is heavily influenced by prenatal biological mechanisms rather than unidentified factors in socialization.\nSocial hypotheses.\nIn the field of genetics, any factor which is non-genetic is considered an \"environmental influence\". However, environmental influence does not automatically imply that the social environment influences or contributes to the development of sexual orientation. There is a vast non-social environment that is non-genetic yet still biological, such as prenatal development, that likely helps shape sexual orientation.\nThere is no substantive evidence to support the suggestion that early childhood experiences, parenting, sexual abuse, or other adverse life events influence sexual orientation. Hypotheses for the impact of the post-natal social environment on sexual orientation are weak, especially for males. Parental attitudes may affect whether or not children openly identify with their sexual orientation. Though it has since been found to be based on prejudice and misinformation, it was once thought that homosexuality was the result of faulty psychological development, resulting from childhood experiences and troubled relationships, including childhood sexual abuse. Such hypotheses \"have been associated with highly charged political, moral and theological grounds for wanting to believe that it can\".\nInfluences: professional organizations' statements.\nThe American Academy of Pediatrics in 2004 stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The mechanisms for the development of a particular sexual orientation remain unclear, but the current literature and most scholars in the field state that one's sexual orientation is not a choice; that is, individuals do not choose to be homosexual or heterosexual. A variety of theories about the influences on sexual orientation have been proposed. Sexual orientation probably is not determined by any one factor but by a combination of genetic, hormonal, and environmental influences. In recent decades, biologically based theories have been favored by experts. Although there continues to be controversy and uncertainty as to the genesis of the variety of human sexual orientations, there is no scientific evidence that abnormal parenting, sexual abuse, or other adverse life events influence sexual orientation. Current knowledge suggests that sexual orientation is usually established during early childhood.\nThe American Psychological Association, the American Psychiatric Association, and the National Association of Social Workers in 2006 stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Currently, there is no scientific consensus about the specific factors that cause an individual to become heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual \u2013 including possible biological, psychological, or social effects of the parents' sexual orientation. However, the available evidence indicates that the vast majority of lesbian and gay adults were raised by heterosexual parents and the vast majority of children raised by lesbian and gay parents eventually grow up to be heterosexual.\nThe Royal College of Psychiatrists in 2007 stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Despite almost a century of psychoanalytic and psychological speculation, there is no substantive evidence to support the suggestion that the nature of parenting or early childhood experiences play any role in the formation of a person's fundamental heterosexual or homosexual orientation. It would appear that sexual orientation is biological in nature, determined by a complex interplay of genetic factors and the early uterine environment. Sexual orientation is therefore not a choice, though sexual behaviour clearly is.\nThe American Psychiatric Association stated in 2011:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No one knows what causes heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality. Homosexuality was once thought to be the result of troubled family dynamics or faulty psychological development. Those assumptions are now understood to have been based on misinformation and prejudice.\nA legal brief dated September 26, 2007, and presented on behalf of the American Psychological Association, California Psychological Association, American Psychiatric Association, National Association of Social Workers, and National Association of Social Workers, California Chapter, stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although much research has examined the possible genetic, hormonal, developmental, social, and cultural influences on sexual orientation, no findings have emerged that permit scientists to conclude that sexual orientation \u2013 heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality \u2013 is determined by any particular factor or factors. The evaluation of \"amici\" is that, although some of this research may be promising in facilitating greater understanding of the development of sexual orientation, it does not permit a conclusion based in sound science at the present time as to the cause or causes of sexual orientation, whether homosexual, bisexual, or heterosexual.\nEfforts to change sexual orientation.\nSexual orientation change efforts are methods that aim to change a same-sex sexual orientation. They may include behavioral techniques, cognitive behavioral therapy, reparative therapy, psychoanalytic techniques, medical approaches, and religious and spiritual approaches.\nNo major mental health professional organization sanctions efforts to change sexual orientation and virtually all of them have adopted policy statements cautioning the profession and the public about treatments that purport to change sexual orientation. These include the American Psychiatric Association, American Psychological Association, American Counseling Association, National Association of Social Workers in the US, the Royal College of Psychiatrists, and the Australian Psychological Society.\nIn 2009, the American Psychological Association Task Force on Appropriate Therapeutic Responses to Sexual Orientation conducted a systematic review of the peer-reviewed journal literature on sexual orientation change efforts (SOCE) and concluded:\nEfforts to change sexual orientation are unlikely to be successful and involve some risk of harm, contrary to the claims of SOCE practitioners and advocates. Even though the research and clinical literature demonstrate that same-sex sexual and romantic attractions, feelings, and behaviors are normal and positive variations of human sexuality, regardless of sexual orientation identity, the task force concluded that the population that undergoes SOCE tends to have strongly conservative religious views that lead them to seek to change their sexual orientation. Thus, the appropriate application of affirmative therapeutic interventions for those who seek SOCE involves therapist acceptance, support, and understanding of clients and the facilitation of clients' active coping, social support, and identity exploration and development, without imposing a specific sexual orientation identity outcome.\nIn 2012, the Pan American Health Organization (the North and South American branch of the World Health Organization) released a statement cautioning against services that purport to \"cure\" people with non-heterosexual sexual orientations, as they lack medical justification, and represent a threat to the health and well-being of affected people. They noted that the global scientific and professional consensus is that homosexuality is a normal and natural variation of human sexuality and cannot be regarded as a pathological condition. The Pan American Health Organization further called on governments, academic institutions, professional associations and the media to expose these practices and to promote respect for diversity. The World Health Organization affiliate further noted that gay minors have sometimes been forced to attend these \"therapies\" involuntarily, being deprived of their liberty and sometimes kept in isolation for several months. Additionally, the Pan American Health Organization recommended that such malpractices be denounced and subject to sanctions and penalties under national legislation, as they constitute a violation of the ethical principles of health care and violate human rights that are protected by international and regional agreements.\nThe National Association for Research &amp; Therapy of Homosexuality (NARTH), which described itself as a \"professional, scientific organization that offers hope to those who struggle with unwanted homosexuality\", disagreed with the mainstream mental health community's position on conversion therapy, both on its effectiveness and by describing sexual orientation not as a binary immutable quality, or as a disease, but as a continuum of intensities of sexual attractions and emotional affect. The American Psychological Association and the Royal College of Psychiatrists expressed concerns that the positions espoused by NARTH are not supported by the science and create an environment in which prejudice and discrimination can flourish.\nAssessment and measurement.\nVarying definitions and strong social norms about sexuality can make sexual orientation difficult to quantify.\nEarly classification schemes.\nOne of the earliest sexual orientation classification schemes was proposed in the 1860s by Karl Heinrich Ulrichs in a series of pamphlets he published privately. The classification scheme, which was meant only to describe males, separated them into three basic categories: \"dionings, urnings\" and \"uranodionings\". An \"urning\" can be further categorized by degree of effeminacy. These categories directly correspond with the categories of sexual orientation used today: \"heterosexual\", \"homosexual\", and \"bisexual\". In the series of pamphlets, Ulrichs outlined a set of questions to determine if a man was an \"urning\". The definitions of each category of Ulrichs' classification scheme are as follows:\n* Dioning \u2013 Comparable to the modern term \"heterosexual\"\n*Urning \u2013 Comparable to the modern term \"homosexual\"\nMannling \u2013 A manly \"urning\"\nWeibling \u2013 An effeminate \"urning\"\nZwischen \u2013 A somewhat manly and somewhat effeminate \"urning\"\nVirilised \u2013 An \"urning\" that sexually behaves like a \"dioning\"\n*Urano-Dioning \u2013 Comparable to the modern term \"bisexual\"\nFrom at least the late nineteenth century in Europe, there was speculation that the range of human sexual response looked more like a continuum than two or three discrete categories. Berlin sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld published a scheme in 1896 that measured the strength of an individual's sexual desire on two independent 10-point scales, A (homosexual) and B (heterosexual). A heterosexual individual may be A0, B5; a homosexual individual may be A5, B0; an asexual would be A0, B0; and someone with an intense attraction to both sexes would be A9, B9.\nKinsey scale.\nThe Kinsey scale, also called the Heterosexual-Homosexual Rating Scale, was first published in \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Male\" (1948) by Alfred Kinsey, Wardell Pomeroy, and Clyde Martin and also featured in \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\" (1953). The scale was developed to combat the assumption at the time that people are either heterosexual or homosexual and that these two types represent antitheses in the sexual world. Recognizing that a significant portion of the population is not completely heterosexual or homosexual and that such people can experience both heterosexual and homosexual behavior and psychic responses, Kinsey et al., stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Males do not represent two discrete populations, heterosexual and homosexual. The world is not to be divided into sheep and goats. Not all things are black nor all things white... The living world is a continuum in each and every one of its aspects. The sooner we learn this concerning human sexual behavior, the sooner we shall reach a sound understanding of the realities of sex.\u2014\u200a\nThe Kinsey scale provides a classification of sexual orientation based on the relative amounts of heterosexual and homosexual experience or psychic response in one's history at a given time. The classification scheme works such that individuals in the same category show the same balance between the heterosexual and homosexual elements in their histories. The position on the scale is based on the relation of heterosexuality to homosexuality in one's history, rather than the actual amount of overt experience or psychic response. An individual can be assigned a position on the scale in accordance with the following definitions of the points of the scale:\nThe Kinsey scale has been praised for dismissing the dichotomous classification of sexual orientation and allowing for a new perspective on human sexuality. Despite seven categories being able to provide a more accurate description of sexual orientation than a dichotomous scale, it is still difficult to determine which category individuals should be assigned to. In a major study comparing sexual response in homosexual males and females, Masters and Johnson discuss the difficulty of assigning the Kinsey ratings to participants. Particularly, they found it difficult to determine the relative amount heterosexual and homosexual experience and response in a person's history when using the scale. They report finding it difficult to assign ratings 2\u20134 for individuals with a large number of heterosexual and homosexual experiences. When there are a substantial number of heterosexual and homosexual experiences in one's history, it becomes difficult for that individual to be fully objective in assessing the relative amount of each.\nWeinrich et al. (1993) and Weinberg et al. (1994) criticized the scale for lumping individuals who are different based on different dimensions of sexuality into the same categories. When applying the scale, Kinsey considered two dimensions of sexual orientation: overt sexual experience and psychosexual reactions. Valuable information was lost by collapsing the two values into one final score. A person who has only predominantly same sex reactions is different from someone with relatively little reaction but much same sex experience. It would have been quite simple for Kinsey to have measured the two dimensions separately and report scores independently to avoid loss of information. Furthermore, there are more than two dimensions of sexuality to be considered. Beyond behavior and reactions, one could also assess attraction, identification, lifestyle, etc. This is addressed by the Klein Sexual Orientation Grid.\nA third concern with the Kinsey scale is that it inappropriately measures heterosexuality and homosexuality on the same scale, making one a tradeoff of the other. Research in the 1970s on masculinity and femininity found that concepts of masculinity and femininity are more appropriately measured as independent concepts on a separate scale rather than as a single continuum, with each end representing opposite extremes. When compared on the same scale, they act as tradeoffs such, whereby to be more feminine one had to be less masculine and vice versa. However, if they are considered as separate dimensions one can be simultaneously very masculine and very feminine. Similarly, considering heterosexuality and homosexuality on separate scales would allow one to be both very heterosexual and very homosexual or not very much of either. When they are measured independently, the degree of heterosexual and homosexual can be independently determined, rather than the balance between heterosexual and homosexual as determined using the Kinsey Scale.\nKlein Sexual Orientation Grid.\nIn response to the criticism of the Kinsey scale only measuring two dimensions of sexual orientation, Fritz Klein developed the Klein sexual orientation grid (KSOG), a multidimensional scale for describing sexual orientation. Introduced in Klein's book \"The Bisexual Option\" (1978), the KSOG uses a 7-point scale to assess seven different dimensions of sexuality at three different points in an individual's life: past (from early adolescence up to one year ago), present (within the last 12 months), and ideal (what the individual would choose if it were completely their choice).\nThe Sell Assessment of Sexual Orientation.\nThe Sell Assessment of Sexual Orientation (SASO) was developed to address the major concerns with the Kinsey Scale and Klein Sexual Orientation Grid and as such, measures sexual orientation on a continuum, considers various dimensions of sexual orientation, and considers homosexuality and heterosexuality separately. Rather than providing a final solution to the question of how to best measure sexual orientation, the SASO is meant to provoke discussion and debate about measurements of sexual orientation.\nThe SASO consists of 12 questions. Six of these questions assess sexual attraction, four assess sexual behavior, and two assess sexual orientation identity. For each question on the scale that measures homosexuality there is a corresponding question that measures heterosexuality giving six matching pairs of questions. Taken all together, the six pairs of questions and responses provide a profile of an individual's sexual orientation. However, results can be further simplified into four summaries that look specifically at responses that correspond to either homosexuality, heterosexuality, bisexuality or asexuality.\nOf all the questions on the scale, Sell considered those assessing sexual attraction to be the most important as sexual attraction is a better reflection of the concept of sexual orientation which he defined as \"extent of sexual attractions toward members of the other, same, both sexes or neither\" than either sexual identity or sexual behavior. Identity and behavior are measured as supplemental information because they are both closely tied to sexual attraction and sexual orientation. Major criticisms of the SASO have not been established, but a concern is that the reliability and validity remains largely unexamined.\nDifficulties with assessment.\nResearch focusing on sexual orientation uses scales of assessment to identify who belongs in which sexual population group. It is assumed that these scales will be able to reliably identify and categorize people by their sexual orientation. However, it is difficult to determine an individual's sexual orientation through scales of assessment, due to ambiguity regarding the definition of sexual orientation. Generally, there are three components of sexual orientation used in assessment. Their definitions and examples of how they may be assessed are as follows:\nThough sexual attraction, behavior, and identity are all components of sexual orientation, if a person defined by one of these dimensions were congruent with those defined by another dimension it would not matter which was used in assessing orientation, but this is not the case. There is \"little coherent relationship between the amount and mix of homosexual and heterosexual behavior in a person's biography and that person's choice to label himself or herself as bisexual, homosexual, or heterosexual\". Individuals typically experience diverse attractions and behaviors that may reflect curiosity, experimentation, social pressure and is not necessarily indicative of an underlying sexual orientation. For example, a woman may have fantasies or thoughts about sex with other women but never act on these thoughts and only have sex with opposite gender partners. If sexual orientation was being assessed based on one's sexual attraction then this individual would be considered homosexual, but her behavior indicates heterosexuality.\nAs there is no research indicating which of the three components is essential in defining sexual orientation, all three are used independently and provide different conclusions regarding sexual orientation. Savin Williams (2006) discusses this issue and notes that by basing findings regarding sexual orientation on a single component, researchers may not actually capture the intended population. For example, if homosexual is defined by same sex behavior, gay virgins are omitted, heterosexuals engaging in same sex behavior for other reasons than preferred sexual arousal are miscounted, and those with same sex attraction who only have opposite-sex relations are excluded. Because of the limited populations that each component captures, consumers of research should be cautious in generalizing these findings.\nOne of the uses for scales that assess sexual orientation is determining what the prevalence of different sexual orientations are within a population. Depending on subject's age, culture and sex, the prevalence rates of homosexuality vary depending on which component of sexual orientation is being assessed: sexual attraction, sexual behavior, or sexual identity. Assessing sexual attraction will yield the greatest prevalence of homosexuality in a population whereby the proportion of individuals indicating they are same sex attracted is two to three times greater than the proportion reporting same sex behavior or identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual. Furthermore, reports of same sex behavior usually exceed those of gay, lesbian, or bisexual identification. The following chart demonstrates how widely the prevalence of homosexuality can vary depending on what age, location and component of sexual orientation is being assessed:\nThe variance in prevalence rates is reflected in people's inconsistent responses to the different components of sexual orientation within a study and the instability of their responses over time. Laumann et al. (1994) found that among U.S. adults 20% of those who would be considered homosexual on one component of orientation were homosexual on the other two dimensions and 70% responded in a way that was consistent with homosexuality on only one of the three dimensions. Furthermore, sexuality may be fluid; for example, a person's sexual orientation identity is not necessarily stable or consistent over time but is subject to change throughout life. Diamond (2003) found that over seven years, two-thirds of the women changed their sexual identity at least once, with many reporting that the label was not adequate in capturing the diversity of their sexual or romantic feelings. Furthermore, women who relinquished bisexual and lesbian identification did not relinquish same sex sexuality and acknowledged the possibility for future same sex attractions or behaviour. One woman stated \"I'm mainly straight but I'm one of those people who, if the right circumstance came along, would change my viewpoint\". Therefore, individuals classified as homosexual in one study might not be identified the same way in another depending on which components are assessed and when the assessment is made making it difficult to pin point who is homosexual and who is not and what the overall prevalence within a population may be.\nImplications.\nDepending on which component of sexual orientation is being assessed and referenced, different conclusions can be drawn about the prevalence rate of homosexuality which has real world consequences. Knowing how much of the population is made up of homosexual individuals influences how this population may be seen or treated by the public and government bodies. For example, if homosexual individuals constitute only 1% of the general population they are politically easier to ignore or than if they are known to be a constituency that surpasses most ethnic and minority groups. If the number is relatively minor then it is difficult to argue for community based same sex programs and services, mass media inclusion of gay role models, or Gay/Straight Alliances in schools. For this reason, in the 1970s, Bruce Voeller, the chair of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, perpetuated a common myth that the prevalence of homosexuality is 10% for the whole population by averaging a 13% number for men and a 7% number for women. Voeller generalized this finding and used it as part of the modern gay rights movement to convince politicians and the public that \"we [gays and lesbians] are everywhere\".\nProposed solutions.\nIn the paper \"Who's Gay? Does It Matter?\", psychologist Ritch Savin-Williams proposes two different approaches to assessing sexual orientation until well positioned and psychometrically sound and tested definitions are developed that would allow research to reliably identify the prevalence, causes, and consequences of homosexuality.\nHe first suggests that greater priority should be given to sexual arousal and attraction over behaviour and identity because it is less prone to self- and other-deception, social conditions and variable meanings. To measure attraction and arousal he proposed that biological measures should be developed and used. There are numerous biological/physiological measures that exist that can measure sexual orientation such as sexual arousal, brain scans, eye tracking, body odour preference, and anatomical variations such as digit-length ratio and right or left-handedness.\nSecondly, Savin-Williams suggests that researchers should forsake the general notion of sexual orientation altogether and assess only those components that are relevant to the research question being investigated. For example:\nMeans of assessment.\nMeans typically used include surveys, interviews, cross-cultural studies, physical arousal measurements sexual behavior, sexual fantasy, or a pattern of erotic arousal. The most common is verbal self-reporting or self-labeling, which depend on respondents being accurate about themselves.\nSexual arousal.\nStudying human sexual arousal has proved a fruitful way of understanding how men and women differ as genders and in terms of sexual orientation. A clinical measurement may use penile or vaginal photoplethysmography, where genital engorgement with blood is measured in response to exposure to different erotic material.\nSome researchers who study sexual orientation argue that the concept may apply differently for men and women. A study of sexual arousal patterns found that women, when viewing erotic films which show female-female, male-male and male-female sexual activity (oral sex or penetration), have patterns of arousal which do not match their declared sexual orientations as well as men's. That is, heterosexual and lesbian women's sexual arousal to erotic films do not differ significantly by the genders of the participants (male or female) or by the type of sexual activity (heterosexual or homosexual). Men's sexual arousal patterns tend to be more in line with their stated orientations, with heterosexual men showing more penis arousal to female-female sexual activity and less arousal to female-male and male-male sexual stimuli, and homosexual and bisexual men being more aroused by films depicting male-male intercourse and less aroused by other stimuli.\nAnother study on men and women's patterns of sexual arousal confirmed that men and women have different patterns of arousal, independent of their sexual orientations. The study found that women's genitals become aroused to both human and nonhuman stimuli from movies showing humans of both genders having sex (heterosexual and homosexual) and from videos showing non-human primates (bonobos) having sex. Men did not show any sexual arousal to non-human visual stimuli, their arousal patterns being in line with their specific sexual interest (women for heterosexual men and men for homosexual men).\nThese studies suggest that men and women are different in terms of sexual arousal patterns and that this is also reflected in how their genitals react to sexual stimuli of both genders or even to non-human stimuli. Sexual orientation has many dimensions (attractions, behavior, identity), of which sexual arousal is the only product of sexual attractions which can be measured at present with some degree of physical precision. Thus, the fact that women are aroused by seeing non-human primates having sex does not mean that women's sexual orientation includes this type of sexual interest. Some researchers argue that women's sexual orientation depends less on their patterns of sexual arousal than men's and that other components of sexual orientation (like emotional attachment) must be taken into account when describing women's sexual orientations. In contrast, men's sexual orientations tend to be primarily focused on the physical component of attractions and, thus, their sexual feelings are more exclusively oriented according to sex.\nMore recently, scientists have started to focus on measuring changes in brain activity related to sexual arousal, by using brain-scanning techniques. A study on how heterosexual and homosexual men's brains react to seeing pictures of naked men and women has found that both hetero- and homosexual men react positively to seeing their preferred sex, using the same brain regions. The only significant group difference between these orientations was found in the amygdala, a brain region known to be involved in regulating fear.\nCulture.\nResearch suggests that sexual orientation is independent of cultural and other social influences, but that open identification of one's sexual orientation may be hindered by homophobic/heterosexist settings. Social systems such as religion, language and ethnic traditions can have a powerful impact on realization of sexual orientation. Influences of culture may complicate the process of measuring sexual orientation. The majority of empirical and clinical research on LGBT populations are done with largely white, middle-class, well-educated samples; however, there are pockets of research that document various other cultural groups, although these are frequently limited in diversity of gender and sexual orientation of the subjects. Integration of sexual orientation with sociocultural identity may be a challenge for LGBT individuals. Individuals may or may not consider their sexual orientation to define their sexual identity, as they may experience various degrees of fluidity of sexuality, or may simply identify more strongly with another aspect of their identity such as family role. American culture puts a great emphasis on individual attributes, and views the self as unchangeable and constant. In contrast, East Asian cultures put a great emphasis on a person's social role within social hierarchies, and view the self as fluid and malleable. These differing cultural perspectives have many implications on cognition of the self, including perception of sexual orientation.\nLanguage.\nTranslation is a major obstacle when comparing different cultures. Many English terms lack equivalents in other languages, while concepts and words from other languages fail to be reflected in the English language. Translation and vocabulary obstacles are not limited to the English language. Language can force individuals to identify with a label that may or may not accurately reflect their true sexual orientation. Language can also be used to signal sexual orientation to others. The meaning of words referencing categories of sexual orientation are negotiated in the mass media in relation to social organization. New words may be brought into use to describe new terms or better describe complex interpretations of sexual orientation. Other words may pick up new layers or meaning. For example, the heterosexual Spanish terms \"marido\" and \"mujer\" for \"husband\" and \"wife\", respectively, have recently been replaced in Spain by the gender-neutral terms \"c\u00f3nyuges\" or \"consortes\" meaning \"spouses\".\nPerceptions.\nOne person may presume knowledge of another person's sexual orientation based upon perceived characteristics, such as appearance, clothing, voice (cf. Gay male speech), and accompaniment by and behavior with other people. The attempt to detect sexual orientation in social situations is sometimes colloquially known as gaydar; some studies have found that guesses based on face photos perform better than chance. 2015 research suggests that \"gaydar\" is an alternate label for using LGBT stereotypes to infer orientation, and that face-shape is not an accurate indication of orientation.\nPerceived sexual orientation may affect how a person is treated. For instance, in the United States, the FBI reported that 15.6% of hate crimes reported to police in 2004 were \"because of a sexual-orientation bias\". Under the UK Employment Equality (Sexual Orientation) Regulations 2003, as explained by Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service, \"workers or job applicants must not be treated less favourably because of their sexual orientation, their perceived sexual orientation or because they associate with someone of a particular sexual orientation\".\nIn Euro-American cultures, norms, values, traditions and laws facilitate heterosexuality, including constructs of marriage and family. Efforts are being made to change prejudiced attitudes, and legislation is being passed to promote equality.\nSome other cultures do not recognize a homosexual/heterosexual/bisexual distinction. It is common to distinguish a person's sexuality according to their sexual role (active/passive; insertive/penetrated). In this distinction, the passive role is typically associated with femininity or inferiority, while the active role is typically associated with masculinity or superiority. For example, an investigation of a small Brazilian fishing village revealed three sexual categories for men: men who have sex only with men (consistently in a passive role), men who have sex only with women, and men who have sex with women and men (consistently in an active role). While men who consistently occupied the passive role were recognized as a distinct group by locals, men who have sex with only women, and men who have sex with women and men, were not differentiated. Little is known about same-sex attracted females, or sexual behavior between females in these cultures.\nRacism and ethnically relevant support.\nIn the United States, non-Caucasian LGBT individuals may find themselves in a double minority, where they are neither fully accepted or understood by mainly Caucasian LGBT communities, nor are they accepted by their own ethnic group. Many people experience racism in the dominant LGBT community where racial stereotypes merge with gender stereotypes, such that Asian-American LGBTs are viewed as more passive and feminine, while African-American LGBTs are viewed as more masculine and aggressive. There are a number of culturally specific support networks for LGBT individuals active in the United States. For example, \"\u00d4-M\u00f4i\" for Vietnamese American queer females.\nReligion.\nSexuality in the context of religion is often a controversial subject, especially that of sexual orientation. In the past, various sects have viewed homosexuality from a negative point of view and had punishments for same-sex relationships. In modern times, an increasing number of religions and religious denominations accept homosexuality. It is possible to integrate sexual identity and religious identity, depending on the interpretation of religious texts.\nSome religious organizations object to the concept of sexual orientation entirely. In the 2014 revision of the code of ethics of the American Association of Christian Counselors, members are forbidden to \"describe or reduce human identity and nature to sexual orientation or reference,\" even while counselors must acknowledge the client's fundamental right to self-determination.\nInternet and media.\nThe Internet has influenced sexual orientation in two ways: it is a common mode of discourse on the subject of sexual orientation and sexual identity, and therefore shapes popular conceptions; and it allows anonymous attainment of sexual partners, as well as facilitates communication and connection between greater numbers of people.\nDemographics.\nModern scientific surveys find that, across cultures, most people report a heterosexual orientation. Bisexuality comes in varying degrees of relative attraction to the same or opposite sex. Men are more likely to be exclusively homosexual than to be equally attracted to both sexes, while the opposite is true for women.\nSurveys in Western cultures find, on average, that about 93% of men and 87% of women identify as completely heterosexual, 4% of men and 10% of women as mostly heterosexual, 0.5% of men and 1% of women as evenly bisexual, 0.5% of men and 0.5% of women as mostly homosexual, and 2% of men and 0.5% of women as completely homosexual. An analysis of 67 studies found that the lifetime prevalence of sex between men (regardless of orientation) was 3-5% for East Asia, 6-12% for South and South East Asia, 6-15% for Eastern Europe, and 6-20% for Latin America. The International HIV/AIDS Alliance estimates a worldwide prevalence of men who have sex with men between 3 and 16%.&lt;ref name=\"International HIV/AIDS Alliance 2003\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe relative percentage of the population that reports a homosexual or bisexual orientation can vary with different methodologies and selection criteria. A 1998 report stated that these statistical findings are in the range of 2.8 to 9% for males, and 1 to 5% for females for the United States \u2013 this figure can be as high as 12% for some large cities and as low as 1% for rural areas.\nA small percentage of people are not sexually attracted to anyone (asexuality). A study in 2004 placed the prevalence of asexuality at 1%.\nKinsey data.\nIn \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Male\" (1948) and \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\" (1953), by Alfred C. Kinsey et al., people were asked about their sexual behaviors and then assigned a rating by the researchers on a scale from completely heterosexual to completely homosexual. Kinsey reported that when the individuals' behavior, as well as their identity, are analyzed, a significant number of people appeared to be at least somewhat bisexual \u2013 i.e., they have some attraction to either sex, although usually one sex is preferred. Kinsey's methods have been criticized as flawed, particularly with regard to the randomness of his sample population, which included prison inmates, male prostitutes and those who willingly participated in discussion of previously taboo sexual topics. Nevertheless, Paul Gebhard, subsequent director of the Kinsey Institute for Sex Research, reexamined the data in the Kinsey Reports and concluded that removing the prison inmates and prostitutes barely affected the results. More recent researchers believe that Kinsey overestimated the rate of same-sex attraction because of flaws in his sampling methods.\nSocial constructionism.\nBecause sexual orientation is complex, some academics and researchers, especially in queer studies, have argued that it is a historical and social construction. In 1976, philosopher and historian Michel Foucault argued in \"The History of Sexuality\" that homosexuality as an identity did not exist in the eighteenth century; that people instead spoke of \"sodomy\", which referred to sexual acts. Sodomy was a crime that was often ignored, but sometimes punished severely under sodomy laws. He wrote, \"'Sexuality' is an invention of the modern state, the industrial revolution, and capitalism.\" Other scholars argue that there are significant continuities between ancient and modern homosexuality. The philosopher of science Michael Ruse has stated that the social constructionist approach, which is influenced by Foucault, is based on a selective reading of the historical record that confuses the existence of homosexual people with the way in which they are labelled or treated.\nIn much of the modern world, sexual identity is defined based on the sex of one's partner. In some parts of the world, however, sexuality is often socially defined based on sexual roles, whether one is a penetrator or is penetrated. In Western cultures, people speak meaningfully of gay, lesbian, and bisexual identities and communities. In some other cultures, homosexuality and heterosexual labels do not emphasize an entire social identity or indicate community affiliation based on sexual orientation.\nSome historians and researchers argue that the emotional and affectionate activities associated with sexual-orientation terms such as \"gay\" and \"heterosexual\" change significantly over time and across cultural boundaries. For example, in many English-speaking nations, it is assumed that same-sex kissing, particularly between men, is a sign of homosexuality, whereas various types of same-sex kissing are common expressions of friendship in other nations. Also, many modern and historic cultures have formal ceremonies expressing long-term commitment between same-sex friends, even though homosexuality itself is taboo within the cultures.\nLaw, politics and theology.\nProfessor Michael King stated, \"The conclusion reached by scientists who have investigated the origins and stability of sexual orientation is that it is a human characteristic that is formed early in life, and is resistant to change. Scientific evidence on the origins of homosexuality is considered relevant to theological and social debate because it undermines suggestions that sexual orientation is a choice.\"\nIn 1999, law professor David Cruz wrote that \"sexual orientation (and the related concept homosexuality) might plausibly refer to a variety of different attributes, singly or in combination. What is not immediately clear is whether one conception is most suited to all social, legal, and constitutional purposes.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29253", "revid": "47822643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29253", "title": "Spandrel", "text": "Space between a curved figure and a rectangular boundary\nA spandrel is a roughly triangular space, usually found in pairs, between the top of an arch and a rectangular frame, between the tops of two adjacent arches, or one of the four spaces between a circle within a square. They are frequently filled with decorative elements.\nMeaning.\nThere are four or five accepted and cognate meanings of the term \"spandrel\" in architectural and art history, mostly relating to the space between a curved figure and a rectangular boundary \u2013 such as the space between the curve of an arch and a rectilinear bounding moulding, or the wallspace bounded by adjacent arches in an arcade and the stringcourse or moulding above them, or the space between the central medallion of a carpet and its rectangular corners, or the space between the circular face of a clock and the corners of the square revealed by its hood. Also included is the space under a flight of stairs, if it is not occupied by another flight of stairs.\nIn a building with more than one floor, the term spandrel is also used to indicate the space between the top of the window in one story and the sill of the window in the story above. The term is typically employed when there is a sculpted panel or other decorative element in this space, or when the space between the windows is filled with opaque or translucent glass, in this case called \"spandrel glass\". In concrete or steel construction, an exterior beam extending from column to column usually carrying an exterior wall load is known as a \"spandrel beam\".\nIn architectural ornamentation, the horizontal decorative elements that are hung over interior and exterior openings between the posts are called spandrels. They can be made of sawn out wood, ball-and-dowels, and spindles. Wooden ornamental spandrels are known as gingerbread spandrels. If they are in an arch form, they are called gingerbread arch spandrels. The spandrels over doorways in perpendicular work are generally richly decorated. At Magdalen College, Oxford, is one which is perforated. The spandrel of doors is sometimes ornamented in the Decorated period, but seldom forms part of the composition of the doorway itself, being generally over the label.\nDomes.\nSpandrels can also occur in the construction of domes and are typical in grand architecture from the medieval period onwards. Where a dome needed to rest on a square or rectangular base, the dome was raised above the level of the supporting pillars, with three-dimensional spandrels called pendentives taking the weight of the dome and concentrating it onto the pillars.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29257", "revid": "12136076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29257", "title": "SimpleText", "text": "Native text editor for the Apple classic Mac OS\nSimpleText is the native text editor for the Apple classic Mac OS. SimpleText allows text editing and text formatting (underline, italic, bold, etc.), fonts, and sizes. It was developed to integrate the features included in the different versions of TeachText that were created by various software development groups within Apple Computer.\nIt can be considered similar to Windows' WordPad application. In later versions, it also gained additional read-only display capabilities for PICT files, as well as other Mac OS built-in formats like Quickdraw GX and QTIF, 3DMF and even QuickTime movies. SimpleText can even record short sound samples and, using Apple's PlainTalk speech system, read out text in English. Users wanting to add sounds longer than 24\u00a0seconds, however, needed to use a separate program to create the sound and then paste the desired sound into the document using ResEdit.\nSimpleText superseded TeachText, which was included in System Software up until it was replaced in 1994 (shipped with System Update 3.0 and System 7.1.2). The need for TeachText arose after Apple stopped bundling MacWrite, to ensure that every user could open and read Readme documents.\nThe key improvement of SimpleText over TeachText was the addition of text styling. The underlying OS required by SimpleText implemented a standard styled text format, which meant that SimpleText could support multiple fonts and font sizes. Prior Macintosh OS versions lacked this feature, so TeachText supported only a single font per document. Adding text-styling features made SimpleText WorldScript-savvy, meaning that it could use Simplified and Traditional Chinese characters. Like TeachText, SimpleText was also limited to only 32\u00a0kB of text in a document, although images could increase the total file size beyond this limit. SimpleText style information was stored in the file's resource fork in such a way that if the resource fork was stripped (such as by uploading to a non-Macintosh server), the text information would be retained.\nIn Mac OS X, SimpleText is replaced by the more powerful TextEdit application, which reads and writes more document formats as well as including word processor-like features such as a ruler and spell checking. TextEdit's styled text format is RTF, which is able to survive a single-forked file system intact.\nApple has released the source code for a Carbon version of SimpleText in the Mac OS X Panther (10.3) Developer Tools. If the 10.3 Developer Tools are installed, it can be found at /Developer/Examples/Carbon/SimpleText. Alternatively, the sample code can be found in Apple's https://: https://.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29260", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29260", "title": "List of popular misconceptions about science", "text": ""}
{"id": "29263", "revid": "38627444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29263", "title": "Statute of Westminster 1931", "text": "British law granting greater autonomy to Imperial Dominions\nThe Statute of Westminster 1931 is an act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that significantly increased the autonomy of the Dominions of the British Commonwealth.\nPassed on 11 December 1931, the statute increased the sovereignty of the self-governing Dominions of the British Empire from the United Kingdom. It also bound them all to seek each other's approval for changes to monarchical titles and the common line of succession. The statute was effective either immediately or upon ratification. It thus became a statutory embodiment of the principles of equality and common allegiance to the Crown set out in the Balfour Declaration of 1926. As the statute removed nearly all of the British parliament's authority to legislate for the Dominions, it was a crucial step in the development of the Dominions as separate, independent, and sovereign states.\nIts modified versions are now domestic law in Australia and Canada; it has been repealed in New Zealand and implicitly in former Dominions that are no longer Commonwealth realms.\nHistory.\nEngland, and Britain after 1707, had colonies outside of Europe since the late 16th century. These early colonies were largely run by private companies rather than the Crown directly, but by the end of the century had (except for India) been subsumed under Crown control. Oversight of these colonies oscillated between relatively lax enforcement of laws and centralization of power depending on the politics of the day, but the Parliament in Westminster always remained supreme. Most colonies in North America broke away from British rule and became independent as the United States in the late 18th century, where after British attention turned towards Australia and Asia.\nBritish policy with regards to the colonies began to be rationalized and streamlined in the 19th century. Responsible government, wherein colonial governments were held accountable to legislatures just as the British cabinet was responsible to the British Parliament, was granted to colonies beginning with Nova Scotia in 1848. Confusion existed as to what extent British legislation applied to the colonies; in South Australia, justice Benjamin Boothby caused a nuisance by striking down several local laws as contrary (\"repugnant\") to the legislation in Britain. Westminster rectified this situation by passing the Colonial Laws Validity Act 1865, which allowed the colonies to pass legislation different from that in Britain provided that it was not repugnant to any law expressly passed by the Imperial Parliament to extend to that colony. This had the dual effect of granting colonies autonomy within their borders while subordinating them to the British Parliament otherwise.\nMost of the remaining colonies in North America\u00a0\u2013 everything north of the United States with the exception of Newfoundland\u00a0\u2013 were merged into a federal polity known as \"Canada\" in the late 1860s and early 1870s. Canada was termed a \"dominion\", a term previously used in slightly different contexts in English history, and granted a broad array of powers between the federal government and the provincial governments. Australia was similarly deemed a dominion when it federated in 1901, as were Newfoundland, New Zealand, South Africa, and the Irish Free State in the first decades of the 20th century.\nDominions did not possess full sovereignty on an equal footing with the United Kingdom. The parliament of Canada passed a law barring appeals from its Supreme Court to the imperial Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in 1888, but in 1925 a judgement of the Privy Council determined that this law was invalid. Combined with the King\u2013Byng affair the following year, this bred resentment in Canada and led to its insistence on full sovereignty. The leadership of the Irish Free State, meanwhile, was dominated by those who had fought a war of independence against Britain and who had agreed to dominion status as a compromise; they took a maximalist view of the autonomy they had secured in the Anglo-Irish Treaty and pushed for recognition of their state's sovereignty, which would have implications for the other dominions as well. The 1926 Imperial Conference led to the Balfour declaration that dominions were equal in status to one another and to the United Kingdom. Further conferences in 1929 and 1930 worked out a substantive framework to implement this declaration. This became the Statute of Westminster 1931.\nApplication.\nThe Statute of Westminster gave effect to certain political resolutions passed by the Imperial Conferences of 1926 and 1930; in particular, the Balfour Declaration of 1926. The main effect was the removal of the ability of the British parliament to legislate for the Dominions, part of which also required the repeal of the Colonial Laws Validity Act 1865 in its application to the Dominions. King George V expressed his desire that the laws of royal succession be exempt from the statute's provisions, but it was determined that this would be contrary to the principles of equality set out in the Balfour Declaration. Both Canada and the Irish Free State pushed for the ability to amend the succession laws themselves and section 2(2) (allowing a Dominion to amend or repeal laws of paramount force, such as the succession laws, insofar as they are part of the law of that Dominion) was included in the Statute of Westminster at Canada's insistence. After the statute was passed, the British parliament could no longer make laws for the Dominions, other than with the request and consent of the government of that Dominion.\nThe statute provides in section 4:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom passed after the commencement of this Act shall extend, or be deemed to extend, to a Dominion as part of the law of that Dominion, unless it is expressly declared in that Act that that Dominion has requested, and consented to, the enactment thereof.\nIt also provides in section 2(1):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No law and no provision of any law made after the commencement of this Act by the Parliament of a Dominion shall be void or inoperative on the ground that it is repugnant to the Law of England, or to the provisions of any existing or future Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom, or to any order, rule or regulation made under any such Act, and the powers of the Parliament of a Dominion shall include the power to repeal or amend any such Act, order, rule or regulation in so far as the same is part of the law of the Dominion.\nThe whole statute applied to the Dominion of Canada, the Irish Free State, and the Union of South Africa without the need for any acts of ratification; the governments of those countries gave their consent to the application of the law to their respective jurisdictions. Section 10 of the statute provided that sections 2 to 6 would apply in the other three Dominions \u2014Australia, New Zealand, and Newfoundland \u2013 only after the respective parliament of that Dominion had legislated to adopt them.\nSince 1931, over a dozen new Commonwealth realms have been created, all of which now hold the same powers as the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand over matters of change to the monarchy, though the Statute of Westminster is not part of their laws. Ireland and South Africa are now republics and Newfoundland is now part of Canada as a province.\nAustralia.\nAustralia adopted sections 2 to 6 of the Statute of Westminster with the Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942, in order to clarify the validity of certain Australian legislation relating to the Second World War; the adoption was backdated to 3 September 1939, the date that Britain and Australia joined the war.\nAdopting section 2 of the statute clarified that the Parliament of Australia was able to legislate inconsistently with British legislation, adopting section 3 clarified that it could legislate with extraterritorial effect. Adopting section 4 clarified that Britain could legislate with effect on Australia as a whole only with Australia's request and consent.\nNonetheless, under section 9 of the statute, on matters not within Commonwealth power Britain could still legislate with effect in all or any of the Australian states, without the agreement of the Commonwealth although only to the extent of \"the constitutional practice existing before the commencement\" of the statute. However, this capacity had never been used. In particular, it was not used to implement the result of the 1933 Western Australian secession referendum, as it did not have the support of the Australian government.\nAll British power to legislate with effect in Australia ended with the Australia Act 1986, the British version of which says that it was passed with the request and consent of the Australian Parliament, which had obtained the concurrence of the parliaments of the Australian states.\nCanada.\nThis statute limited the legislative authority of the British parliament over Canada, effectively giving the country legal autonomy as a self-governing Dominion, though the British parliament retained the power to amend Canada's constitution at the request of Canada. That authority remained in effect until the Constitution Act, 1982, which transferred it to Canada, the final step to achieving full sovereignty.\nThe British North America Acts\u2014the written elements (in 1931) of the Canadian constitution\u2014were excluded from the application of the statute because of disagreements between the Canadian provinces and the federal government over how the British North America Acts could be otherwise amended. These disagreements were resolved only in time for the passage of the Canada Act 1982, thus completing the patriation of the Canadian constitution to Canada.\nAt that time, the Parliament of the United Kingdom also repealed ss 4 and 7(1) of the Statute of Westminster as applied to Canada. The Statute of Westminster, as amended, remains a part of the constitution of Canada by virtue of section 52(2)(\"b\") of and the schedule to the Constitution Act, 1982. The Newfoundland Terms of Union expressly provide for the application of the Statute of Westminster to the province of Newfoundland and Labrador.\nAs a consequence of the statute's adoption, the Parliament of Canada gained the ability to abolish appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Criminal appeals were abolished in 1933, while civil appeals continued until 1949. The passage of the Statute of Westminster meant that changes in British legislation governing the succession to the throne no longer automatically applied to Canada.\nIrish Free State.\nThe Irish Free State never formally adopted the Statute of Westminster, its Executive Council (cabinet) taking the view that the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921 had already ended Westminster's right to legislate for the Irish Free State. The Free State's constitution gave the Oireachtas \"sole and exclusive power of making laws\". Hence, even before 1931, the Irish Free State did not arrest deserters from the British Army and Royal Air Force on its territory, even though the UK believed post-1922 British laws gave the Free State's Garda S\u00edoch\u00e1na the power to do so. The UK's Irish Free State Constitution Act 1922 said, however, \"[n]othing in the [Free State] Constitution shall be construed as prejudicing the power of [the British] Parliament to make laws affecting the Irish Free State in any case where, in accordance with constitutional practice, Parliament would make laws affecting other self-governing Dominions\". In 1924, Kevin O'Higgins, the Free State's Vice-President of the Executive Council, declared that \"Ireland secured by that 'surrender' [the Treaty] a constitutional status equal to that of Canada. 'Canada,' said the late Mr. Bonar Law,' is by the full admission of British statesmen equal in status to Great Britain and as free as Great Britain'. The constitutional status of Ireland, therefore, as determined by the Treaty of 1921, is a status of co-equality with Britain within the British Commonwealth. The second Article of the Constitution of the Free State\", he added, \"declares that 'All powers of Government and all authority, legislative, executive and judicial, in Ireland are derived from the people of Ireland' \".\nMotions of approval of the Report of the Commonwealth Conference had been passed by the D\u00e1il and Seanad in May 1931 and the final form of the Statute of Westminster included the Irish Free State among the Dominions the British Parliament could not legislate for without the Dominion's request and consent. Originally, the UK government had wanted to exclude from the Statute of Westminster the legislation underpinning the 1921 treaty, from which the Free State's constitution had emerged. Executive Council President (Prime Minister) W. T. Cosgrave objected, although he promised that the Executive Council would not amend the legislation unilaterally. The other Dominions backed Cosgrave and, when an amendment to similar effect was proposed at Westminster by John Gretton, parliament duly voted it down. When the statute became law in the UK, Patrick McGilligan, the Free State Minister for External Affairs, stated: \"It is a solemn declaration by the British people through their representatives in Parliament that the powers inherent in the Treaty position are what we have proclaimed them to be for the last ten years.\" He went on to present the statute as largely the fruit of the Irish Free State's efforts to secure for the other Dominions the same benefits it already enjoyed under the treaty. The Statute of Westminster had the effect of granting the Irish Free State internationally recognised independence.\n\u00c9amon de Valera led Fianna F\u00e1il to victory in the Irish Free State election of 1932 on a platform of republicanising the Irish Free State from within. Upon taking office, de Valera began removing the monarchical elements of the Constitution, beginning with the Oath of Allegiance. De Valera initially considered invoking the Statute of Westminster in making these changes, but John J. Hearne advised him not to. Abolishing the Oath of Allegiance in effect abrogated the 1921 treaty. Generally, the British thought that this was morally objectionable but legally permitted by the Statute of Westminster. Robert Lyon Moore, a Southern Unionist from County Donegal, challenged the legality of the abolition in the Irish Free State's courts and then appealed to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (JCPC) in London. However, the Irish Free State had also abolished the right of appeal to the JCPC. In 1935, the JCPC ruled that both abolitions were valid under the Statute of Westminster. The Irish Free State, which in 1937 was renamed \"Ireland\", left the Commonwealth on 18 April 1949 upon the coming into force of The Republic of Ireland Act 1948.\nNew Zealand.\nThe Parliament of New Zealand adopted the Statute of Westminster by passing its Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1947 in November 1947. The New Zealand Constitution Amendment Act, passed the same year, empowered the New Zealand Parliament to change the constitution, but did not remove the ability of the British Parliament to legislate regarding the New Zealand constitution. The remaining role of the British Parliament was removed by the New Zealand Constitution Act 1986 and the Statute of Westminster was repealed in its entirety.\nNewfoundland.\nThe Dominion of Newfoundland never adopted the Statute of Westminster, especially because of financial troubles and corruption there. By request of the Dominion's government, the United Kingdom established the Commission of Government in 1934, resuming direct rule of Newfoundland. That arrangement remained until Newfoundland became a province of Canada in 1949 following referendums on the issue in 1948. The Statute of Westminster became applicable to Newfoundland when it was admitted to Canada.\nUnion of South Africa.\nAlthough the Union of South Africa was not among the Dominions that needed to adopt the Statute of Westminster for it to take effect, two laws \u2014 the Status of the Union Act, 1934, and the Royal Executive Functions and Seals Act, 1934 \u2014 were passed to confirm South Africa's status as a fully sovereign state.\nImplications for succession to the throne.\nThe preamble to the Statute of Westminster sets out a guideline for changing the rules of succession to the Crown. The second paragraph of the preamble to the statute reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And whereas it is meet and proper to set out by way of preamble to this act that, inasmuch as the Crown is the symbol of the free association of the members of the British Commonwealth of Nations, and as they are united by a common allegiance to the Crown, it would be in accord with the established constitutional position of all the members of the Commonwealth in relation to one another that any alteration in the law touching the succession to the throne or the royal style and titles shall hereafter require the assent as well of the parliaments of all the Dominions as of the Parliament of the United Kingdom:\nThough a preamble is not considered to have the force of statute law, that of the Statute of Westminster has come to be a constitutional convention, which \"has always been treated in practice as though it were a binding requirement\". The convention was then adopted by every country that subsequently gained its independence from Britain and became a Commonwealth realm.\nAbdication of King Edward VIII.\nDuring the abdication crisis in 1936, British Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin consulted the Commonwealth prime ministers at the request of King Edward VIII. The King wanted to marry Wallis Simpson, whom Baldwin and other British politicians considered unacceptable as Queen, as she was an American divorc\u00e9e. Baldwin was able to get the then-five Dominion prime ministers to agree with this and, thus, register their official disapproval at the King's planned marriage. The King later requested the Commonwealth prime ministers be consulted on a compromise plan, in which he would wed Simpson under a morganatic marriage, pursuant to which she would not become queen. Under Baldwin's pressure, this plan was also rejected by the Dominions. All of these negotiations occurred at a diplomatic level and never went to the Commonwealth parliaments. The enabling legislation that allowed for the actual abdication (His Majesty's Declaration of Abdication Act 1936) did require the assent of each Dominion parliament to be passed and the request and consent of the Dominion governments so as to allow it to be part of the law of each Dominion. For expediency and to avoid embarrassment, the British government had suggested the Dominion governments regard whoever is monarch of the UK to automatically be their monarch, but the Dominions rejected this. Prime Minister of Canada William Lyon Mackenzie King pointed out that the Statute of Westminster required Canada's request and consent to any legislation passed by the British Parliament before it could become part of Canada's laws and affect the line of succession in Canada. The text of the British act states that Canada requested and consented (the only Dominion to formally do both) to the act applying in Canada under the Statute of Westminster, while Australia, New Zealand, and the Union of South Africa simply assented.\nIn February 1937, the Parliament of South Africa formally gave its assent by passing His Majesty King Edward the Eighth's Abdication Act, 1937, which declared that Edward VIII had abdicated on 10 December 1936; that he and his descendants, if any, would have no right of succession to the throne; and that the Royal Marriages Act 1772 would not apply to him or his descendants, if any. The move was largely done for symbolic purposes, in an attempt by Prime Minister J.\u00a0B.\u00a0M. Hertzog to assert South Africa's independence from Britain. In Canada, the federal Parliament passed the Succession to the Throne Act, 1937, to assent to His Majesty's Declaration of Abdication Act and ratify the government's request and consent to it.\nIn the Irish Free State, President \u00c9amon de Valera used the abdication of King Edward VIII as an opportunity to remove all explicit mention of the monarch from the Constitution of the Irish Free State, through the Constitution (Amendment No. 27) Act 1936, passed on 11 December 1936. The following day, the External Relations Act provided for the King to carry out certain diplomatic functions, if authorised by law; the same act also brought Edward VIII's Instrument of Abdication into effect for the purposes of Irish law (s. 3(2)). A new Constitution of Ireland, with a president, was approved by Irish voters in 1937, with the Irish Free State becoming simply \"Ireland\", or, in the Irish language, . The position of head of state of Ireland remained unclear until 1949, when Ireland unambiguously became a republic outside the Commonwealth of Nations by enacting The Republic of Ireland Act 1948. Between 1937 and 1949, King George VI was recognised under the External Relations Act as the external head of state, while the President of Ireland served as the internal head of state as a replacement for the Governor-General of the Irish Free State as from 1938, when Douglas Hyde was elected. Ireland was both a Dominion and a de-facto republic, as it was still within the British Commonwealth.\nCommemoration in Canada.\nIn Canada, 11 December is commemorated Statute of Westminster Day. The Royal Union Flag (as the Union Jack is called by law in Canada) is flown by federal buildings where a second flagpole is available to mark the day.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29265", "revid": "50415535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29265", "title": "Serbia", "text": "Country in Southeast and Central Europe\nSerbia, officially the Republic of Serbia, is a landlocked country in Southeast and Central Europe. Located in the Balkans, it borders Hungary to the north, Romania to the northeast, Bulgaria to the southeast, North Macedonia to the south, Croatia to the northwest, Bosnia and Herzegovina to the west, and Montenegro to the southwest. Serbia also claims to share a border with Albania through the disputed territory of Kosovo. Serbia has about 6.6 million inhabitants, excluding Kosovo. Serbia's capital, Belgrade, is also the largest city in the country.\nContinuously inhabited since the Paleolithic age, the territory of modern-day Serbia faced Slavic migrations in the 6th century. Several regional states were founded in the Early Middle Ages and were at times recognised as tributaries to the Byzantine, Frankish and Hungarian kingdoms. The Serbian Kingdom obtained recognition by the Holy See and Constantinople in 1217, reaching its territorial apex in 1346 as the Serbian Empire. By the mid-16th century, the Ottoman Empire annexed the entirety of modern-day Serbia; their rule was at times interrupted by the Habsburg Empire, which began expanding towards Central Serbia from the end of the 17th century while maintaining a foothold in Vojvodina. In the early 19th century, the Serbian Revolution established the nation-state as the region's first constitutional monarchy, which subsequently expanded its territory.\nIn 1918, in the aftermath of World War I, the Kingdom of Serbia united with the former Habsburg crownland of Vojvodina; later in the same year it joined with other South Slavic nations in the foundation of Yugoslavia, which existed in various political formations until the Yugoslav Wars of the 1990s. During the breakup of Yugoslavia, Serbia formed a union with Montenegro, which was peacefully dissolved in 2006, restoring Serbia's independence as a sovereign state. In 2008, representatives of the Assembly of Kosovo unilaterally declared independence, with mixed responses from the international community while Serbia continues to claim it as part of its own sovereign territory.\nSerbia is an upper-middle income economy and provides universal health care and free primary and secondary education to its citizens. It is a unitary parliamentary constitutional republic, member of the UN, Council of Europe, OSCE, PfP, BSEC, CEFTA, and is acceding to the WTO. Since 2014, the country has been negotiating its EU accession, with the possibility of joining the European Union by 2030. Serbia formally adheres to the policy of military neutrality.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the name \"Serbia\" is unclear. Historically, authors have mentioned the Serbs ( / \u0421\u0440\u0431\u0438) and the Sorbs of Eastern Germany (Upper Sorbian: \"Serbja\"; Lower Sorbian: \"Serby\") in a variety of ways: Triballi, C\"ervetiis\" (\"Servetiis\"), \"gentis (S)urbiorum\", \"Suurbi\", \"Sorabi\", \"Soraborum\", \"Sorabos\", \"Surpe\", \"Sorabici\", \"Sorabiet\", \"Sarbin\", \"Swrbjn\", \"Servians\", \"Sorbi\", \"Sirbia, Sribia, Zirbia, Zribia\", \"Suurbelant\", \"Surbia\", \"Serbulia\" / \"Sorbulia\" among others. These authors used these names to refer to Serbs and Sorbs in areas where their historical and current presence is not disputable (notably in the Balkans and Lusatia). However, there are also sources that have used similar names in other parts of the world (most notably in the Asiatic Sarmatia in the Caucasus).\nThere exist two prevailing theories about the origin of the ethnonym \"*S\u0155b\u044a\" (plur. \"*S\u0155by\"), one from a Proto-Slavic language with an appellative meaning of a \"family kinship\" and \"alliance\", while another from an Iranian-Sarmatian language with various meanings. In his work, \"De Administrando Imperio\", Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus suggests that the Serbs originated from White Serbia near Francia.\nFrom 1815 to 1882, the official name for Serbia was the Principality of Serbia. From 1882 to 1918, it was renamed to the Kingdom of Serbia, later from 1945 to 1963, the official name for Serbia was the People's Republic of Serbia. This was again renamed the Socialist Republic of Serbia from 1963 to 1990. Since 1990, the official name of the country has been the Republic of Serbia.\nHistory.\nPrehistory and antiquity.\nArchaeological evidence of Paleolithic settlements on the territory of present-day Serbia is scarce. A fragment of a hominid jaw found in Si\u0107evo (Mala Balanica) is believed to be up to 525,000\u2013397,000 years old.\nApproximately 6,500 BC, during the Neolithic, the Star\u010devo and Vin\u010da cultures existed in the region of modern-day Belgrade. They dominated much of Southeast Europe as well as parts of Central Europe and Anatolia. Several important archaeological sites from this era, including Lepenski Vir and Vin\u010da-Belo Brdo, still exist near the Danube.\nDuring the Iron Age, local tribes of Triballi, Dardani, and Autariatae were encountered by the Ancient Greeks during their cultural and political expansion into the region, from the 5th up to the 2nd century BC. The Celtic tribe of Scordisci settled throughout the area in the 3rd century BC. It formed a tribal state, building several fortifications, including their capital at Singidunum (present-day Belgrade) and Naissos (present-day Ni\u0161).\nThe Romans conquered much of the territory in the 2nd century BC. In 167 BC, the Roman province of Illyricum was established; the remainder was conquered around 75 BC, forming the Roman province of Moesia Superior; the modern-day Srem region was conquered in 9 BC; and Ba\u010dka and Banat in 106 AD after the Dacian Wars. As a result of this, contemporary Serbia extends fully or partially over several former Roman provinces, including Moesia, Pannonia, Praevalitana, Dalmatia, Dacia, and Macedonia. Seventeen Roman Emperors were born in the area of modern-day Serbia, second only to contemporary Italy. The most famous of these was Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor, who issued an edict ordering religious tolerance throughout the Empire.\nWhen the Roman Empire was divided in 395, most of Serbia remained under the Byzantine Empire, and its northwestern parts were included in the Western Roman Empire. By the 6th century, South Slavs migrated into the Byzantine territory in large numbers. They merged with the local Romanised population that was gradually assimilated.\nMiddle Ages.\nWhite Serbs, an early Slavic tribe from White Serbia eventually settled in an area between the Sava river and the Dinaric Alps. By the beginning of the 9th century, Serbia achieved a level of statehood. Christianisation of Serbia was a gradual process, finalised by the middle of the 9th century. In the mid-10th-century, the Serbian state experienced a fall. During the 11th and 12th century, Serbian state frequently fought with the neighbouring Byzantine Empire. Between 1166 and 1371, Serbia was ruled by the Nemanji\u0107 dynasty, under whom the state was elevated to a kingdom in 1217, and an empire in 1346, under Stefan Du\u0161an. The Serbian Orthodox Church was organised as an autocephalous archbishopric in 1219, through the effort of Sava, the country's patron saint, and in 1346 it was raised to the Patriarchate. Monuments of the Nemanji\u0107 period survive in many monasteries (several being World Heritage sites) and fortifications.\nDuring these centuries the Serbian state (and influence) expanded significantly. The northern part (modern Vojvodina), was ruled by the Kingdom of Hungary. The period after 1371, known as the Fall of the Serbian Empire saw the once-powerful state fragmented into several principalities, culminating in the Battle of Kosovo (1389) against the rising Ottoman Empire. By the end of the 14th century, the Turks had conquered and ruled the territories south of the \u0160ar Mountains. The political stronghold of Serbia shifted northwards, when the capital of the newly established Serbian Despotate was transferred to Belgrade in 1403, before moving to Smederevo in 1430. The Despotate was then under the double vassalage of Hungary and the Ottoman Empire. The fall of Smederevo on 20 June 1459, which marked the full conquest of the Serbian Despotate by the Ottomans, also symbolically signified the end of the Serbian state.\nOttoman and Habsburg rule.\nIn all Serbian lands conquered by the Ottomans, the native nobility was eliminated and the peasantry was enserfed to Ottoman rulers, while much of the clergy fled or were confined to the isolated monasteries. Under the Ottoman system, Serbs and Christians were considered an inferior class and subjected to heavy taxes, and a portion of the Serbian population experienced Islamisation. Many Serbs were recruited during the devshirme system, a form of slavery, in which boys from Balkan Christian families were forcibly converted to Islam and trained for infantry units of the Ottoman army known as the Janissaries. The Serbian Patriarchate of Pe\u0107 was extinguished in 1463, but reestablished in 1557, providing for limited continuation of Serbian cultural traditions within the Ottoman Empire, under the Millet system.\nAfter the loss of statehood to the Ottoman Empire, Serbian resistance continued in northern regions (modern Vojvodina), under titular despots (until 1537), and popular leaders like Jovan Nenad (1526\u20131527). From 1521 to 1552, Ottomans conquered Belgrade and regions of Syrmia, Ba\u010dka, and Banat. Wars and rebellions constantly challenged Ottoman rule. One of the most significant was the Banat Uprising in 1594 and 1595, which was part of the Long War (1593\u20131606) between the Habsburgs and the Ottomans. The area of modern Vojvodina endured a century-long Ottoman occupation before being ceded to the Habsburg monarchy, partially by the Treaty of Karlovci (1699), and fully by the Treaty of Po\u017earevac (1718).\nDuring the Habsburg-Ottoman war (1683\u20131699), much of Serbia switched from Ottoman rule to Habsburg control from 1688 to 1690. However, the Ottoman army reconquered a large part of Serbia in the winter of 1689/1690, leading to a brutal massacre of the civilian population by uncontrolled Albanian and Tatar units. As a result of the persecutions, several tens of thousands of Serbs, led by the patriarch, Arsenije III Crnojevi\u0107, fled northwards to settle in Hungary, an event known as the Great Migration of 1690. In August 1690, following several petitions, the Emperor Leopold I formally granted Serbs from the Habsburg monarchy a first set of \"privileges\", primarily to guarantee them freedom of religion. As a consequence, the ecclesiastical centre of the Serbs also moved northwards, to the Metropolitanate of Karlovci, and the Serbian Patriarchate of Pe\u0107 was once-again abolished by the Ottomans in 1766.\nIn 1718\u201339, the Habsburg monarchy occupied much of Central Serbia and established the Kingdom of Serbia as crownland. Those gains were lost by the Treaty of Belgrade in 1739, when the Ottomans retook the region. Apart from territory of modern-day Vojvodina which remained under the Habsburg Empire, central regions of Serbia were occupied once again by the Habsburgs in 1788\u20131792.\nRevolution and independence.\nThe Serbian Revolution for independence from the Ottoman Empire lasted eleven years, from 1804 until 1815. During the First Serbian Uprising (1804\u20131813), led by vo\u017ed Kara\u0111or\u0111e Petrovi\u0107, Serbia was independent for almost a decade before the Ottoman army was able to reoccupy the country. The Second Serbian Uprising began in 1815, led by Milo\u0161 Obrenovi\u0107; it ended with a compromise between Serbian revolutionaries and Ottoman authorities. Serbia was one of the first nations in the Balkans to abolish feudalism. The Akkerman Convention in 1826, the Treaty of Adrianople in 1829 and finally, the Hatt-i Sharif, recognised the suzerainty of Serbia. The First Serbian Constitution was adopted on 15 February 1835, making the country one of the first to adopt a democratic constitution in Europe. 15 February is now commemorated as Statehood Day, a public holiday.\nFollowing the clashes between the Ottoman army and Serbs in Belgrade in 1862, and under pressure from the Great Powers, by 1867 the last Turkish soldiers left the Principality, making the country \"de facto\" independent. By enacting a new constitution in 1869, without consulting the Porte, Serbian diplomats confirmed the \"de facto\" independence of the country. In 1876, Serbia declared war on the Ottoman Empire, siding with the ongoing Christian uprisings in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Bulgaria.\nThe formal independence of the country was internationally recognised at the Congress of Berlin in 1878, which ended the Russo-Turkish War; this treaty, however, prohibited Serbia from uniting with other Serbian regions by placing Bosnia and Herzegovina under Austro-Hungarian occupation, alongside the occupation of the region of Ra\u0161ka. From 1815 to 1903, the principality was ruled by the House of Obrenovi\u0107, save for the rule of Prince Aleksandar Kara\u0111or\u0111evi\u0107 between 1842 and 1858. In 1882, Principality of Serbia became the Kingdom of Serbia, ruled by King Milan I. The House of Kara\u0111or\u0111evi\u0107, descendants of the revolutionary leader Kara\u0111or\u0111e Petrovi\u0107, assumed power in 1903 following the May Overthrow.\nThe 1848 revolution in Austria led to the establishment of the autonomous territory of Serbian Vojvodina; by 1849, the region was transformed into the Voivodeship of Serbia and Banat of Temeschwar.\nBalkan Wars and World War I.\nIn the First Balkan War in 1912, the Balkan League defeated the Ottoman Empire and captured its European territories, which enabled territorial expansion of the Kingdom of Serbia into regions of Ra\u0161ka, Kosovo, Metohija, and Vardarian Macedonia. The Second Balkan War soon ensued when Bulgaria turned on its former allies, but was defeated, resulting in the Treaty of Bucharest. In two years, Serbia enlarged its territory by 80% and its population by 50%, it also suffered high casualties on the eve of World War I, with more than 36,000 dead. Austria-Hungary became wary of the rising regional power on its borders and its potential to become an anchor for unification of Serbs and other South Slavs, and the relationship between the two countries became tense.\nThe assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria on 28 June 1914 in Sarajevo by Gavrilo Princip, a member of the Young Bosnia organisation, led to Austria-Hungary declaring war on Serbia, on 28 July 1914, setting off World War I. \nSerbia won the first major battles of the war, including the Battle of Cer, and the Battle of Kolubara. Despite initial success, it was eventually overpowered by the Central Powers in 1915 and Austro-Hungarian occupation of Serbia followed. Most of its army and some people retreated to Greece and Corfu, suffering immense losses on the way. After the Central Powers' military situation on other fronts worsened, the remains of the Serb army returned east and led a final breakthrough through enemy lines on 15 September 1918, liberating Serbia and defeating Bulgaria and Austria-Hungary. Serbia, with its campaign, was a major Balkan Entente Power which contributed significantly to the Allied victory in the Balkans in November 1918, especially by helping France force Bulgaria's capitulation.\nSerbia's casualties accounted for 8% of the total Entente military deaths; 58% (243,600) soldiers of the Serbian army perished in the war. The total number of casualties is placed around 700,000, more than 16% of Serbia's prewar size, and a majority (57%) of its overall male population. Serbia suffered the biggest casualty rate in World War I.\nKingdom of Yugoslavia.\nThe Corfu Declaration was a formal agreement between the government-in-exile of the Kingdom of Serbia and the Yugoslav Committee (anti-Habsburg South Slav \u00e9migr\u00e9s) that pledged to unify Kingdom of Serbia and Kingdom of Montenegro with Austria-Hungary's South Slav autonomous crown lands: Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia, Kingdom of Dalmatia, Slovenia, Vojvodina (then part of the Kingdom of Hungary) and Bosnia and Herzegovina in a post-war Yugoslav state. It was signed on 20 July 1917 on Corfu.\nAs the Austro-Hungarian Empire collapsed, the territory of Syrmia united with Serbia on 24 November 1918. Just a day later, the Great People's Assembly of Serbs, Bunjevci and other Slavs in Banat, Ba\u010dka and Baranja declared the unification of these regions (Banat, Ba\u010dka, and Baranja) with Serbia.\nOn 26 November 1918, the Podgorica Assembly deposed the House of Petrovi\u0107-Njego\u0161 and united Montenegro with Serbia. On 1 December 1918, in Belgrade, Serbian Prince Regent Alexander Kara\u0111or\u0111evi\u0107 proclaimed the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, under King Peter I of Serbia. King Peter was succeeded by his son, Alexander, in August 1921. Serb centralists and Croat autonomists clashed in the parliament, and most governments were fragile and short-lived. Nikola Pa\u0161i\u0107, a conservative prime minister, headed or dominated most governments until his death. King Alexander established a dictatorship in 1929 with the aim of establishing the Yugoslav ideology and single Yugoslav nation, changed the name of the country to Yugoslavia. The effect of Alexander's dictatorship was to further alienate the non-Serbs living in Yugoslavia from the idea of unity.\nAlexander was assassinated in Marseille, during an official visit in 1934 by Vlado Chernozemski, member of the IMRO. Alexander was succeeded by his eleven-year-old son Peter II. In August 1939 the Cvetkovi\u0107\u2013Ma\u010dek Agreement established an autonomous Banate of Croatia as a solution to Croatian concerns.\nWorld War II.\nIn 1941, in spite of Yugoslav attempts to remain neutral, the Axis powers invaded Yugoslavia. The territory of modern Serbia was divided between Hungary, Bulgaria, the Independent State of Croatia, Greater Albania and Montenegro, while the remainder was placed under the military administration of Nazi Germany, with Serbian puppet governments led by Milan A\u0107imovi\u0107 and Milan Nedi\u0107 assisted by Dimitrije Ljoti\u0107's fascist organisation Yugoslav National Movement (Zbor).\nThe Yugoslav territory was the scene of a civil war between royalist Chetniks commanded by Dra\u017ea Mihailovi\u0107 and communist partisans commanded by Josip Broz Tito. Axis auxiliary units of the Serbian Volunteer Corps and the Serbian State Guard fought against both of these forces. The siege of Kraljevo was a major battle of the uprising in Serbia, led by Chetnik forces against the Nazis. Several days after the battle began the German forces committed a massacre of approximately 2,000 civilians in an event known as the Kraljevo massacre, in a reprisal for the attack.\nDraginac and Loznica massacre of 2,950 villagers in Western Serbia in 1941 was the first large execution of civilians in occupied Serbia by Germans, with Kragujevac massacre and Novi Sad Raid of Jews and Serbs by Hungarian fascists being the most notorious, with over 3,000 victims in each case. After one year of occupation, around 16,000 Serbian Jews were murdered in the area, or around 90% of its pre-war Jewish population during The Holocaust in Serbia.\nMany concentration camps were established across the area. Banjica concentration camp was the largest concentration camp and jointly run by the German army and Nedi\u0107's regime, with primary victims being Serbian Jews, Roma, and Serb political prisoners.\nHundreds of thousands of ethnic Serbs fled the Axis puppet state known as the Independent State of Croatia and sought refuge in German-occupied Serbia, seeking to escape the large-scale persecution and Genocide of Serbs, Jews, and Roma being committed by the Usta\u0161e regime. The number of Serb victims was approximately 300,000 to 350,000. According to Tito himself, Serbs made up the vast majority of anti-fascist fighters and Yugoslav Partisans for the whole course of World War II.\nThe Republic of U\u017eice was a short-lived liberated territory established by the Partisans and the first liberated territory in World War II Europe, organised as a military mini-state that existed in the autumn of 1941 in the west of occupied Serbia. By late 1944, the Belgrade Offensive swung in favour of the partisans in the civil war; the partisans subsequently gained control of Yugoslavia. Following the Belgrade Offensive, the Syrmian Front was the last major military action of World War II in Serbia. A study by Vladimir \u017derjavi\u0107 estimates total war-related deaths in Yugoslavia at 1,027,000, including 273,000 in Serbia.\nSocialist Yugoslavia.\nThe victory of the Communist Partisans resulted in the abolition of the monarchy and a subsequent constitutional referendum. A one-party state was soon established in Yugoslavia by the Communist Party of Yugoslavia. It is claimed between 60,000 and 70,000 people died in Serbia during the 1944\u201345 communist purge. Serbia became a constituent republic within the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia known as the People's Republic of Serbia, and had a republic-branch of the federal communist party, the League of Communists of Serbia.\nSerbia's most powerful and influential politician in Tito-era Yugoslavia was Aleksandar Rankovi\u0107, one of the \"big four\" Yugoslav leaders. Rankovi\u0107 was later removed from the office because of the disagreements regarding Kosovo's nomenklatura and the unity of Serbia. Rankovi\u0107's dismissal was highly unpopular among Serbs. Pro-decentralisation reformers in Yugoslavia succeeded in the late 1960s in attaining substantial decentralisation of powers, creating substantial autonomy in Kosovo and Vojvodina, and recognising a distinctive \"Muslim\" nationality. As a result of these reforms, there was a massive overhaul of Kosovo's nomenklatura and police, that shifted from being Serb-dominated to ethnic Albanian-dominated through firing Serbs on a large scale. Further concessions were made to the ethnic Albanians of Kosovo in response to unrest, including the creation of the University of Pristina as an Albanian language institution. These changes created widespread fear among Serbs of being treated as second-class citizens.\nBelgrade, the capital of FPR Yugoslavia and PR Serbia, hosted the first Non-Aligned Movement Summit in September 1961, as well as the first major gathering of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) with the aim of implementing the Helsinki Accords from October 1977 to March 1978. The 1972 smallpox outbreak in SAP Kosovo and other parts of SR Serbia was the last major outbreak of smallpox in Europe since World War II.\nBreakup of Yugoslavia and political transition.\nIn 1989, Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107 rose to power in Serbia. Milo\u0161evi\u0107 promised a reduction of powers for the autonomous provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina, where his allies subsequently took over power, during the Anti-bureaucratic revolution. This ignited tensions between the communist leadership of the other republics of Yugoslavia and awoke ethnic nationalism across Yugoslavia that eventually resulted in its breakup, with Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Macedonia declaring independence during 1991 and 1992. Serbia and Montenegro remained together as the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY). However, according to the Badinter Commission, the country was not legally considered a continuation of the former SFRY, but a new state.\nFuelled by ethnic tensions, the Yugoslav Wars (1991\u20132001) erupted, with the most severe conflicts taking place in Croatia and Bosnia, where the large ethnic Serb communities opposed independence from Yugoslavia. The FRY remained outside the conflicts, but provided logistic, military and financial support to Serb forces in the wars. In response, the UN imposed sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro which led to political isolation and the collapse of the economy (GDP decreased from $24 billion in 1990 to under $10 billion in 1993). Serbia was in the 2000s sued on the charges of alleged genocide by neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia but in both cases the main charges against Serbia were dismissed.\nMulti-party democracy was introduced in Serbia in 1990, officially dismantling the one-party system. Despite constitutional changes, Milo\u0161evi\u0107 maintained strong political influence over the state media and security apparatus. When the ruling Socialist Party of Serbia refused to accept its defeat in municipal elections in 1996, Serbians engaged in large protests against the government.\nIn 1998, continued clashes between the Albanian guerilla Kosovo Liberation Army and Yugoslav security forces led to the short Kosovo War (1998\u201399), in which NATO intervened, leading to the withdrawal of Serbian forces and the establishment of UN administration in the province. After the Yugoslav Wars, Serbia became home to highest number of refugees and internally displaced persons in Europe.\nAfter presidential elections in September 2000, opposition parties accused Milo\u0161evi\u0107 of electoral fraud. A campaign of civil resistance followed, led by the Democratic Opposition of Serbia (DOS), a broad coalition of anti-Milo\u0161evi\u0107 parties. This culminated on 5 October when half a million people from all over the country congregated in Belgrade, compelling Milo\u0161evi\u0107 to concede defeat. The fall of Milo\u0161evi\u0107 ended Yugoslavia's international isolation. Milo\u0161evi\u0107 was sent to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. The DOS announced that FR Yugoslavia would seek to join the European Union. In 2003, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was renamed Serbia and Montenegro; the EU opened negotiations with the country for the Stabilisation and Association Agreement.\nSerbia's political climate remained tense and in 2003, Prime Minister Zoran \u0110in\u0111i\u0107 was assassinated as result of a plot originating from organised crime and former security officials. In 2004 unrest in Kosovo took place, leaving 19 people dead and a number of Serbian Orthodox churches and monasteries destroyed or damaged.\nContemporary period.\nOn 21 May 2006, Montenegro held a referendum which showed 55.4% of voters in favour of independence, just above the 55% required by the referendum. This was followed on 5 June 2006 by Serbia's declaration of independence, marking the re-emergence of Serbia as an independent state. The National Assembly of Serbia declared Serbia to be the legal successor to the former state union.\nThe Assembly of Kosovo unilaterally declared independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008. Serbia immediately condemned the declaration and continues to deny any statehood to Kosovo. The declaration has sparked varied responses from the international community. Status-neutral talks between Serbia and Kosovo-Albanian authorities are held in Brussels, mediated by the EU.\nSerbia officially applied for membership in the European Union on 22 December 2009, and received candidate status on 1 March 2012, following a delay in December 2011. Following a positive recommendation of the European Commission and European Council in June 2013, negotiations to join the EU commenced in January 2014.\nIn 2012 Aleksandar Vu\u010di\u0107 and his Serbian Progressive Party came to power. According to a number of international analysts, Serbia has suffered from democratic backsliding into authoritarianism, followed by a decline in media freedom and civil liberties. After the COVID-19 pandemic spread to Serbia in March 2020, a state of emergency was declared and a curfew was introduced for the first time in Serbia since World War II. In April 2022, President Aleksandar Vu\u010di\u0107 was re-elected. In December 2023, President Vu\u010di\u0107 won a snap parliamentary election. The election resulted in protests, with opposition supporters claiming that the election result was fraudulent. On 16 January 2022, a Serbian constitutional referendum took place in which citizens chose to amend the Constitution concerning the judiciary. The changes were presented as a step towards reducing political influence in the judicial system. The country was chosen to host international specialised exposition Expo 2027. The Serbian government is working with Rio Tinto corporation on a project which aims to develop Europe's biggest lithium mine. Mining lithium became a matter of debate in the society and several protests against mining took place. In 2024\u20132025, large-scale anti-corruption protests, some violent, erupted.\nGeography.\nA landlocked country situated at the crossroads between Central and Southeastern Europe, Serbia is located in the Balkan peninsula and the Pannonian Plain. Serbia lies between latitudes 41\u00b0 and 47\u00b0 N, and longitudes 18\u00b0 and 23\u00b0 E. The country covers a total of ; with Kosovo excluded, the total area is . Its total border length amounts to : Albania , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Bulgaria , Croatia , Hungary , North Macedonia , Montenegro and Romania . All of Kosovo's border with Albania (), North Macedonia () and Montenegro () are under control of the Kosovo border police. Serbia treats the border with Kosovo as an \"administrative line\"; it is under shared control of Kosovo border police and Serbian police forces.\nThe Pannonian Plain covers the northern third of the country (Vojvodina and Ma\u010dva) while the easternmost tip of Serbia extends into the Wallachian Plain.\nThe terrain of the central part of the country consists chiefly of hills traversed by rivers. Mountains dominate the southern third of Serbia. Dinaric Alps stretch in the west and the southwest, following the flow of the rivers Drina and Ibar. The Carpathian Mountains and Balkan Mountains stretch in a north\u2013south direction in eastern Serbia.\nAncient mountains in the southeast corner of the country belong to the Rilo-Rhodope Mountain system. Elevation ranges from the Mid\u017eor peak of the Balkan Mountains at (the highest peak in Serbia, excluding Kosovo) to the lowest point of just near the Danube river at Prahovo. The largest lake is \u0110erdap Lake () and the longest river passing through Serbia is the Danube ().\nClimate.\nThe climate of Serbia is under the influences of the landmass of Eurasia and the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea. With mean January temperatures around , and mean July temperatures of , it can be classified as a warm-humid continental or humid subtropical climate. In the north, the climate is more continental, with cold winters, and hot, humid summers along with well-distributed rainfall patterns. In the south, summers and autumns are drier, and winters are relatively cold, with heavy inland snowfall in the mountains.\nDifferences in elevation, proximity to the Adriatic Sea and large river basins, as well as exposure to the winds account for climate variations. Southern Serbia is subject to Mediterranean influences. The Dinaric Alps and other mountain ranges contribute to the cooling of most of the warm air masses. Winters are quite harsh in the Pe\u0161ter plateau, because of the mountains which encircle it. One of the climatic features of Serbia is Ko\u0161ava, a cold and very squally southeastern wind which starts in the Carpathian Mountains and follows the Danube northwest through the Iron Gate where it gains a jet effect and continues to Belgrade and can spread as far south as Ni\u0161.\nThe average annual air temperature for the period 1961\u20131990 for the area with an elevation of up to is . The areas with an elevation of have an average annual temperature of around , and over of elevation around . The lowest recorded temperature in Serbia was on 13 January 1985, Karajuki\u0107a Bunari in Pe\u0161ter, and the highest was , on 24 July 2007, recorded in Smederevska Palanka.\nSerbia is one of few European countries with very high risk of natural hazards (earthquakes, storms, floods, droughts). It is estimated that potential floods, particularly in areas of Central Serbia, threaten over 500 larger settlements and an area of 16,000 square kilometres. The most disastrous were the floods in May 2014, when 57 people died and a damage of over 1.5 billion euros was inflicted.\nHydrology.\nAlmost all of Serbia's rivers drain to the Black Sea, by way of the Danube river. The Danube, the second largest European river, passes through Serbia with 588 kilometres (21% of its overall length) and represents the major source of fresh water. It is joined by its biggest tributaries, the Great Morava (longest river entirely in Serbia with of length), Sava and Tisza rivers. One notable exception is the P\u010dinja which flows into the Aegean. Drina river forms the natural border between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, and represents the main kayaking and rafting attraction in both countries.\nDue to configuration of the terrain, natural lakes are sparse and small; most of them are located in the lowlands of Vojvodina, like the aeolian lake Pali\u0107 or numerous oxbow lakes along river flows (like Zasavica and Carska Bara). However, there are numerous artificial lakes, mostly due to hydroelectric dams, the biggest being \u0110erdap (Iron Gates) on the Danube with on the Serbian side (a total area of is shared with Romania); Peru\u0107ac on the Drina, and Vlasina. The largest waterfall, Jelovarnik, located in Kopaonik, is 71 m high. Abundance of relatively unpolluted surface waters and numerous underground natural and mineral water sources of high water quality presents a chance for export and economy improvement.\nEnvironment.\nSerbia is a country of rich ecosystem and species diversity\u2014covering only 1.9% of the whole European territory, Serbia is home to 39% of European vascular flora, 51% of European fish fauna, 40% of European reptiles and amphibian fauna, 74% of European bird fauna, and 67% European mammal fauna. Its abundance of mountains and rivers make it an ideal environment for a variety of animals, many of which are protected including wolves, lynx, bears, foxes, and stags. There are 17 snake species living all over the country; 8 of them are venomous.\nMountain of Tara in western Serbia is one of the last regions in Europe where bears can still live in absolute freedom. Serbia is home to about 380 species of birds. In Carska Bara, there are over 300 bird species on just a few square\nkilometres. Uvac Gorge is considered one of the last habitats of the Griffon vulture in Europe. In area around the city of Kikinda, in the northernmost part of the country, some 145 endangered long-eared owls are noted, making it the world's biggest settlement of these species. The country is considerably rich with threatened species of bats and butterflies as well.\nThere are 380 protected areas of Serbia, encompassing 4,947 square kilometres or 6.4% of the country. Those protected areas include 5 national parks (\u0110erdap, Tara, Kopaonik, Fru\u0161ka Gora and \u0160ar Mountain), 15 nature parks, 15 \"landscapes of outstanding features\", 61 nature reserves, and 281 natural monuments.\nWith 29.1% of its territory covered by forest, Serbia is considered to be a middle-forested country, compared on a global scale to world forest coverage at 30%, and European average of 35%. The total forest area in Serbia is 2,252,000 ha (1,194,000 ha or 53% are state-owned, and 1,058,387 ha or 47% are privately owned) or 0.3 ha per inhabitant. It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.29/10, ranking it 105th globally out of 172 countries. The most common trees are oak, beech, pines, and firs.\nAir pollution is a significant problem in the Bor area due to copper mining and smelting, and in the petrochemical industrial region of Pan\u010devo. Some cities suffer from water supply problems, due to mismanagement and low investments in the past, as well as water pollution (like the pollution of the Ibar River from the Trep\u010da zinc-lead combinate, affecting the city of Kraljevo, or the presence of natural arsenic in underground waters in Zrenjanin).\nPoor waste management has been identified as one of the most important environmental problems in Serbia and the recycling is a fledgling activity, with only 15% of its waste being turned back for reuse. The 1999 NATO bombing caused serious damage to the environment, with several thousand tonnes of toxic chemicals stored in targeted factories and refineries released into the soil and water basins.\nGovernment and politics.\nSerbia is a parliamentary republic, with the government divided into legislative, executive, and judiciary branches. The current constitution was adopted in 2006 in the aftermath of the Montenegro independence referendum. The Constitutional Court rules on matters regarding the Constitution.\nThe President of the Republic is the head of state, is elected by popular vote to a five-year term and is limited by the Constitution to a maximum of two terms. In addition to being the commander in chief of the armed forces, the president has the procedural duty of appointing the prime minister with the consent of the parliament, and has some influence on foreign policy. Aleksandar Vu\u010di\u0107 of the Serbian Progressive Party is the current president following the 2017 presidential election. Seat of the presidency is Novi Dvor.\nThe Government is composed of the prime minister and cabinet ministers. The Government is responsible for proposing legislation and a budget, executing the laws, and guiding the foreign and internal policies. The current prime minister is \u0110uro Macut, nominated by the Serbian Progressive Party.\nThe National Assembly is a unicameral legislative body. The National Assembly has the power to enact laws, approve the budget, schedule presidential elections, select and dismiss the Prime Minister and other ministers, declare war, and ratify international treaties and agreements. It is composed of 250 proportionally elected members who serve four-year terms. Following the 2020 parliamentary election, the largest political parties in the National Assembly are the populist Serbian Progressive Party and Socialist Party of Serbia, that with its partners, hold more than a supermajority number of seats.\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Serbia performs in the mid- range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in the absence of corruption.\nLaw and criminal justice.\nSerbia has a three-tiered judicial system, made up of the Supreme Court of Cassation as the court of the last resort, Courts of Appeal as the appellate instance, and Basic and High courts as the general jurisdictions at first instance.\nCourts of special jurisdictions are the Administrative Court, commercial courts (including the Commercial Court of Appeal at second instance) and misdemeanor courts (including High Misdemeanor Court at second instance). The judiciary is overseen by the Ministry of Justice. Serbia has a typical civil law legal system.\nLaw enforcement is the responsibility of the Serbian Police, which is subordinate to the Ministry of the Interior. Serbian Police fields 27,363 uniformed officers.\nNational security and counterintelligence are the responsibility of the Security Intelligence Agency (BIA).\nForeign relations.\nSerbia has established diplomatic relations with 191 UN member states, the Holy See, the Sovereign Military Order of Malta and the European Union. Foreign relations are conducted through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Serbia has a network of 74 embassies and 25 consulates internationally. There are 69 foreign embassies, 5 consulates and 4 liaison offices in Serbia. Serbian foreign policy is focused on achieving the strategic goal of becoming a member state of the European Union (EU). Serbia officially applied for membership in the European Union on 22 December 2009. It received a full candidate status on 1 March 2012 and started accession talks on 21 January 2014. As of 2018[ [update]], the European Commission considered accession possible by 2025.\nOn 17 February 2008, Kosovo unilaterally declared independence from Serbia. In protest, Serbia initially recalled its ambassadors from countries that recognised Kosovo's independence. The resolution of 26 December 2007 by the National Assembly stated that both the Kosovo declaration of independence and recognition thereof by any state would be gross violation of international law.\nSerbia began cooperation and dialogue with NATO in 2006, when the country joined the Partnership for Peace programme and the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council. The country's military neutrality was formally proclaimed by a resolution adopted by Serbia's parliament in December 2007, which makes joining any military alliance contingent on a popular referendum, a stance acknowledged by NATO. On the other hand, Serbia's relations with Russia are habitually described by mass media as a \"centuries-old religious, ethnic and political alliance\" and Russia is said to have sought to solidify its relations with Serbia since the imposition of sanctions against Russia in 2014. \nFollowing the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Serbia drew international scrutiny for not joining EU sanctions against Russia and maintaining bilateral relations, citing its own past suffering with sanctions. It is one of the only countries in Europe not to sanction Russia. However, Serbia voted to condemn the invasion, supporting the adoption of the United Nations draft resolution demanding Russia to withdraw its military forces from Ukraine, as well as supporting the suspension of Russia from the UN Human Rights Council.\nMilitary.\nThe Serbian Armed Forces are subordinate to the Ministry of Defence, and are composed of the Army and the Air Force. Although a landlocked country, Serbia operates a River Flotilla which patrols on the Danube, Sava and Tisa rivers. The Serbian Chief of the General Staff reports to the Defence Minister. The Chief of Staff is appointed by the president, who is the commander-in-chief. As of 2019[ [update]], Serbian defence budget amounts to $804 million.\nTraditionally having relied on a large number of conscripts, Serbian Armed Forces went through a period of downsizing, restructuring and professionalisation. Conscription was abolished in 2011. Serbian Armed Forces have 28,000 active troops, supplemented by the \"active reserve\" which numbers 20,000 members and \"passive reserve\" with about 170,000.\nThe country participates in the NATO Individual Partnership Action Plan programme, but has no intention of joining NATO, due to significant popular rejection, largely a legacy of the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999. It is an observer member of the Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) as of 2013. The country also signed the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe. The Serbian Armed Forces take part in several multinational peacekeeping missions, including deployments in Lebanon, Cyprus, Ivory Coast, and Liberia.\nSerbia is a major producer and exporter of military equipment in the region. Defence exports totalled around $600 million in 2018. The defence industry has seen significant growth over the years and it continues to grow on a yearly basis.\nIn 2024 the Serbian president approved the reintroduction of mandatory military service, which was abolished in 2011. If the Government adopts this decision, military service will last 75 days, starting with 2025.\nAdministrative divisions.\nSerbia is a unitary state composed of municipalities/cities, districts, and two autonomous provinces. In Serbia, excluding Kosovo, there are 145 municipalities (\"op\u0161tine\") and 29 cities (\"gradovi\"), which form the basic units of local self-government. Apart from municipalities/cities, there are 24 districts (\"okruzi\", 10 most populated listed below), with the City of Belgrade constituting an additional district. Except for Belgrade, which has an elected local government, districts are regional centres of state authority, but have no powers of their own; they present purely administrative divisions.\nThe Constitution of Serbia recognises two autonomous provinces, Vojvodina in the north, and the disputed territory of Kosovo and Metohija in the south, while the remaining area of Central Serbia has never had its own regional authority. Following the Kosovo War, UN peacekeepers entered Kosovo and Metohija, as per UNSC Resolution 1244. The government of Serbia does not recognise Kosovo's February 2008 declaration of independence, considering it illegal and illegitimate.\nEconomy.\nSerbia has an emerging market economy in upper-middle income range. According to the International Monetary Fund, Serbian nominal GDP in 2024 is officially estimated at $81.873 billion or $12,385 per capita while purchasing power parity GDP stood at $185.014 billion or $27,985 per capita. The economy is dominated by services which accounts for 67.9% of GDP, followed by industry with 26.1% of GDP, and agriculture at 6% of GDP. Serbia's arms industry, a legacy of Cold War Yugoslavia, is the leading weapons manufacturer in the Western Balkans and ranked 25th worldwide in arms exports, surpassing $1.6 billion in 2023 and employing 20,000 people. The official currency is Serbian dinar, and the central bank is National Bank of Serbia. The Belgrade Stock Exchange is the only stock exchange in the country, with market capitalisation of $8.65 billion and BELEX15 as the main index representing the 15 most liquid stocks. The country is ranked 52nd on the Social Progress Index as well as 54th on the Global Peace Index.\nThe economy has been affected by the global economic crisis. After almost a decade of strong economic growth (average of 4.45% per year), Serbia entered the recession in 2009 with negative growth of \u22123% and again in 2012 and 2014 with \u22121% and \u22121.8%, respectively. As the government was fighting effects of crisis the public debt has more than doubled: from pre-crisis level of just under 30% to about 70% of GDP and trending downwards recently to around 50%. Labour force stands at 3.2 million, with 56% employed in services sector, 28.1% in industry and 15.9% in the agriculture. The average monthly net salary in May 2019 stood at 47,575 dinars or $525. The unemployment remains an acute problem, with rate of 11% as of 2021[ [update]].\nSince 2000, Serbia has attracted over $40 billion in foreign direct investment (FDI). Blue-chip corporations making investments include: Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, Siemens, Bosch, Philip Morris, Michelin, Coca-Cola, Carlsberg and others. In the energy sector, Russian energy giants, Gazprom and Lukoil have made large investments. In metallurgy sector, Chinese steel and copper giants, Hesteel and Zijin Mining have acquired key complexes.\nSerbia has an unfavourable trade balance: imports exceed exports by 25%. Serbia's exports, however, recorded a steady growth in the 2010s reaching $19.2 billion in 2018. The country has free trade agreements with the EFTA and CEFTA, a preferential trade regime with the European Union, a Generalised System of Preferences with the United States, and individual free trade agreements with Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Turkey.\nAgriculture.\nSerbia has very favourable natural conditions (land and climate) for varied agricultural production. It has 5,056,000 ha of agricultural land (0.7 ha per capita), out of which 3,294,000 ha is arable land (0.45 ha per capita). In 2016, Serbia exported agricultural and food products worth $3.2 billion, and the export-import ratio was 178%. Agricultural exports constitute more than a fifth of all Serbia's sales on the world market. Serbia is one of the largest provider of frozen fruit to the EU (largest to the French market, and 2nd largest to the German market).\nAgricultural production is most prominent in Vojvodina on the fertile Pannonian Plain. Other agricultural regions include Ma\u010dva, Pomoravlje, Tamnava, Rasina, and Jablanica.\nIn the structure of the agricultural production, 70% is from the crop field production and 30% is from the livestock production. Serbia is world's second largest producer of plums (582,485 tonnes; second to China), second largest of raspberries (89,602 tonnes, second to Poland), it is also a significant producer of maize (6.48 million tonnes, ranked 32nd in the world) and wheat (2.07 million tonnes, ranked 35th in the world). Other important agricultural products are: sunflower, sugar beet, soybean, potato, apple, pork meat, beef, poultry and dairy.\nThe country has a long tradition of winemaking, with several autochthonous grape varieties still cultivated today. There are around 20,000 hectares of vineyards in Serbia, with approximately 80,000 agricultural households engaged in grape production and an annual wine output of about 30 million litres. The most famous viticulture regions are located in Vojvodina and \u0160umadija.\nIndustry.\nThe industry was the economic sector hardest hit by the UN sanctions and trade embargo and NATO bombing during the 1990s and transition to market economy during the 2000s. The industrial output saw dramatic downsizing: in 2013 it was expected to be only a half of that of 1989. Main industrial sectors include: automotive, mining, non-ferrous metals, food-processing, electronics, pharmaceuticals, clothes. Serbia has 14 free economic zones as of September 2017, in which many foreign direct investments are realised.\nThe automotive industry is dominated by cluster located in Kragujevac and its vicinity, and contributes to export with about $2 billion. Country is a leading steel producer in the wider region of Southeast Europe and had production of nearly 2 million tonnes of raw steel in 2018, coming entirely from Smederevo steel mill, owned by the Chinese Hesteel. Serbia's mining industry is comparatively strong: Serbia is the 18th largest producer of coal (7th in Europe) extracted from large deposits in Kolubara and Kostolac basins; it is also world's 23rd largest (3rd in Europe) producer of copper which is extracted by Zijin Bor Copper, a large copper mining company, acquired by Chinese Zijin Mining in 2018; significant gold extraction is developed around Majdanpek. Serbia notably manufactures intel smartphones named Tesla smartphones.\nFood industry is well known both regionally and internationally and is one of the strong points of the economy. Some of the international brand-names established production in Serbia: PepsiCo and Nestl\u00e9 in food-processing sector; Coca-Cola (Belgrade), Heineken (Novi Sad) and Carlsberg (Ba\u010dka Palanka) in beverage industry; Nordzucker in sugar industry. Serbia's electronics industry had its peak in the 1980s and the industry today is only a third of what it was back then, but has witnessed a something of revival in last decade with investments of companies such as Siemens (wind turbines) in Subotica, Panasonic (lighting devices) in Svilajnac, and Gorenje (electrical home appliances) in Valjevo. The pharmaceutical industry in Serbia comprises a dozen manufacturers of generic drugs, of which Hemofarm in Vr\u0161ac and Galenika in Belgrade, account for 80% of production volume. Domestic production meets over 60% of the local demand.\nEnergy.\nThe energy sector is one of the largest and most important sectors to the country's economy. Serbia is a net exporter of electricity and importer of key fuels (such as oil and gas).\nSerbia has an abundance of coal, and significant reserves of oil and gas. Serbia's proven reserves of 5.5 billion tonnes of coal lignite are the fifth largest in the world (second in Europe, after Germany).\nCoal is found in two large deposits: Kolubara (4 billion tonnes of reserves) and Kostolac (1.5 billion tonnes). Despite being small on a world scale, Serbia's oil and gas resources (77.4 million tonnes of oil equivalent and 48.1 billion cubic metres, respectively) have a certain regional importance since they are largest in the region of former Yugoslavia as well as the Balkans (excluding Romania). Almost 90% of the discovered oil and gas are to be found in Banat and those oil and gas fields are by size among the largest in the Pannonian basin but are average on a European scale.\nThe production of electricity in 2015 in Serbia was 36.5 billion kilowatt-hours (KWh), while the final electricity consumption amounted to 35.5 billion kilowatt-hours (KWh). Most of the electricity produced comes from thermal-power plants (72.7% of all electricity) and to a lesser degree from hydroelectric-power plants (27.3%). There are 6 lignite-operated thermal-power plants with an installed power of 3,936 MW. Total installed power of 9 hydroelectric-power plants is 2,831 MW. In addition to this, there are mazute and gas-operated thermal-power plants with an installed power of 353 MW. The entire production of electricity is concentrated in Elektroprivreda Srbije (EPS), public electric-utility power company.\nThe current oil production in Serbia amounts to over 1.1 million tonnes of oil equivalent and satisfies some 43% of country's needs while the rest is imported. National petrol company, Naftna Industrija Srbije (NIS), was acquired in 2008 by Gazprom Neft. The company's refinery in Pan\u010devo (capacity of 4.8 million tonnes) is one of the most modern oil-refineries in Europe; it also operates network of 334 filling stations in Serbia (74% of domestic market) and additional 36 stations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 31 in Bulgaria, and 28 in Romania. There are 155 kilometres of crude oil pipelines connecting Pan\u010devo and Novi Sad refineries as a part of trans-national Adria oil pipeline.\nSerbia is heavily dependent on foreign sources of natural gas, with only 17% coming from domestic production (totalling 491 million cubic metres in 2012) and the rest is imported, mainly from Russia (via gas pipelines that run through Ukraine and Hungary). Srbijagas, public company, operates the natural gas transportation system which comprise of trunk and regional natural gas pipelines and a 450 million cubic metre underground gas storage facility at Banatski Dvor. In 2021, Balkan Stream gas pipeline opened through Serbia.\nTransport.\nSerbia has a strategic transportation location since the country's backbone, Morava Valley, represents the easiest land route from continental Europe to Asia Minor and the Near East.\nSerbian road network carries the bulk of traffic in the country. Total length of roads is of which are \"class-IA state roads\" (i.e. motorways); are \"class-IB state roads\" (national roads); are \"class-II state roads\" (regional roads) and are \"municipal roads\". The road network, except for the most of class-IA roads, are of comparatively lower quality to the Western European standards because of lack of financial resources for their maintenance in the last 20 years.\nOver of new motorways were constructed in the last decade and additional are currently under construction: A5 motorway (from north of Kru\u0161evac to \u010ca\u010dak) and -long segment of A2 (between \u010ca\u010dak and Po\u017eega). Coach transport is very extensive: almost every place in the country is connected by bus, from largest cities to the villages; in addition there are international routes (mainly to countries of Western Europe with large Serb diaspora). Routes, both domestic and international, are served by more than hundred intercity coach services, biggest of which are Lasta and Ni\u0161-Ekspres. As of 2025[ [update]], there were 2,476,419 registered passenger cars in the country.\nSerbia has of rail tracks, of which are electrified and are double-track railway. The major rail hub is Belgrade (and to a lesser degree Ni\u0161), while the most important railways include: Belgrade\u2013Subotica\u2013Budapest (Hungary) (currently upgraded to high-speed status), Belgrade\u2013Bar (Montenegro), Belgrade\u2013\u0160id\u2013Zagreb (Croatia)/Belgrade\u2013Ni\u0161\u2013Sofia (Bulgaria) (part of Pan-European Corridor X), and Ni\u0161\u2013Thessaloniki (Greece). The continuation of the line, which will connect Belgrade with Budapest, Hungary, is currently under construction and is expected to open in 2026. Construction work for 212\u00a0km-long prolongation of the high-speed rail line to the south, to the city of Ni\u0161, is set to commence in 2024 and with its planned completion by the end of the decade four of country's five largest cities will be connected by the high-speed rail lines. Rail services are operated by Srbija Voz (passenger transport) and Srbija Kargo (freight transport).\nThere are three airports with regular passenger services reaching over 6 million passengers in 2022 with Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport serving bulk of it, being a hub of flagship carrier Air Serbia which flies to 80 destinations in 32 countries (including intercontinental flights to New York City, Chicago and Tianjin) and carried 2.75 million passengers in 2022.\nSerbia has a developed inland water transport since there are of navigable inland waterways ( of navigable rivers and of navigable canals), which are almost all located in northern third of the country. The most important inland waterway is the Danube. Other navigable rivers include Sava, Tisza, Begej and Timi\u015f Rivers, all of which connect Serbia with Northern and Western Europe through the Rhine\u2013Main\u2013Danube Canal and North Sea route, to Eastern Europe via the Tisza, Begej and Danube Black Sea routes, and to Southern Europe via the Sava river. More than 8 million tonnes of cargo were transported on Serbian rivers and canals in 2018 while the largest river ports are: Novi Sad, Belgrade, Pan\u010devo, Smederevo, Prahovo and \u0160abac.\nTelecommunications.\nFixed telephone lines connect 81% of households in Serbia, and with about 9.1 million users the number of cellphones surpasses the total population of by 28%. The largest mobile operator is Telekom Srbija with 4.2 million subscribers, followed by Yettel with 2.8 million users and A1 with about 2 million. Some 58% of households have fixed-line (non-mobile) broadband Internet connection while 67% are provided with pay television services (i.e. 38% cable television, 17% IPTV, and 10% satellite). Digital television transition has been completed in 2015 with DVB-T2 standard for signal transmission.\nTourism.\nSerbia is not a mass-tourism destination but nevertheless has a diverse range of touristic products. In 2019, total of over 3.6 million tourists were recorded in accommodations, of which half were foreign. Foreign exchange earnings from tourism were estimated at $1.5 billion.\nTourism is mainly focused on the mountains and spas of the country, which are mostly visited by domestic tourists, as well as Belgrade and, to a lesser degree, Novi Sad, which are preferred choices of foreign tourists (almost two-thirds of all foreign visits are made to these two cities). The most famous mountain resorts are Kopaonik, Stara Planina and Zlatibor. There are also many spas in Serbia, the biggest of which are Vrnja\u010dka Banja, Soko Banja, and Banja Kovilja\u010da. City-break and conference tourism is developed in Belgrade and Novi Sad. Other touristic products that Serbia offer are natural wonders like \u0110avolja varo\u0161, Christian pilgrimage to the many Orthodox monasteries across the country and the river cruising along the Danube. There are several internationally popular music festivals held in Serbia, such as EXIT and the Gu\u010da trumpet festival.\nDemographics.\nAs of the 2022 census, Serbia (excluding Kosovo) has a total population of 6,647,003 and the overall population density is medium as it stands at 85.8 inhabitants per square kilometre. The census was not conducted in Kosovo which held its own census that numbered their total population at 1,586,659. Serbia has been enduring a demographic crisis since the beginning of the 1990s, with a death rate that has continuously exceeded its birth rate. It is estimated that 500,000 people left Serbia during the 1990s, 20% of whom had a higher education. Serbia has one of the oldest populations in the world, with the average age of 43.3 years, and its population is shrinking at one of the fastest rates in the world. A fifth of all households consist of only one person, and just one-fourth of four and more persons. The average life expectancy in Serbia is 76.1 years.\nDuring the 1990s, Serbia had the largest refugee population in Europe. Refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Serbia formed between 7% and 7.5% of its population at the time \u2013 about half a million refugees sought refuge in the country following the series of Yugoslav wars, mainly from Croatia (and to a lesser extent from Bosnia and Herzegovina) and the IDPs from Kosovo.\nSerbs with 5,360,239 are the largest ethnic group in Serbia, representing 81% of the total population (excluding Kosovo). Serbia is one of the European countries with the highest number of registered national minorities, while the province of Vojvodina is recognisable for its multi-ethnic and multi-cultural identity. Despite a decline in recent years, with a population of 184,442, Hungarians remain the largest ethnic minority in Serbia, concentrated predominantly in northern Vojvodina and representing 2.8% of the country's population (10.5% in Vojvodina). The official Romani population was 131,936 according to the 2022 census, though unofficial estimates indicate a higher population. Bosniaks with 153,801 and Muslims by nationality with 13,011 are concentrated in Ra\u0161ka (Sand\u017eak), in the southwest. Other minority groups include Albanians, Croats and Bunjevci, Slovaks, Yugoslavs, Montenegrins, Romanians and Vlachs, Macedonians and Bulgarians. Chinese, estimated at 15,000, are the only significant non-European immigrant minority. Most recently, tens of thousands of Russians and Ukrainians have immigrated to Serbia following the Russian Invasion of Ukraine.\nAs of January 2024, more than 300,000 Russians had emigrated to Serbia since the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022. About one in 10 have been issued a residence permit, though integration issues have been reported, with Russian immigrants living in a \"parallel society\".\nAccording to World Happiness Report 2024, Serbia is on 37th rank amount 140 countries.\nThe majority of the population, or 62%, reside in urban areas and some 18% in Belgrade alone. Belgrade is the only city with more than a million inhabitants and there are four more with over 100,000 inhabitants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguage.\nThe official language is Serbian, native to 88% of the population. Serbian is the only European language with active digraphia, using both Cyrillic and Latin alphabets. Serbian Cyrillic is designated in the Constitution as the \"official script\". A survey from 2014 showed that 47% of Serbians favour the Latin alphabet, 36% favour the Cyrillic one and 17% have no preference.\nStandard Serbian is mutually intelligible with recognised minority languages of Bosnian and Croatian, as all three are based on the most widespread Shtokavian dialect from Eastern Herzegovina. Other recognised minority languages are: Hungarian, Slovak, Albanian, Romanian, Bulgarian, Rusyn, and Macedonian. All these languages are in official use in municipalities or cities where the ethnic minority exceeds 15% of the total population. In Vojvodina, the provincial administration co-officially uses, besides Serbian, five other languages (Slovak, Hungarian, Croatian, Romanian and Rusyn).\nReligion.\nThe Constitution of Serbia defines it as a secular state with guaranteed religious freedom. Orthodox Christians with 6,079,396 comprise 84.5% of country's population. The Serbian Orthodox Church is the largest and traditional church of the country, adherents of which are overwhelmingly Serbs. Other Orthodox Christian communities in Serbia include Montenegrins, Romanians, Vlachs, Macedonians and Bulgarians. Roma in Serbia are both Christians and Muslim, depending on where they live, in Vojvodina they are mostly Christians.\nIn 2011, Roman Catholics numbered 356,957 in Serbia, or roughly 6% of the population, mostly in northern Vojvodina which is home to ethnic minority groups such as Hungarians, Croats, and Bunjevci, as well as to some Slovaks and Czechs. Greek Catholic Church is adhered by around 25,000 citizens (0.37% of the population), mostly Rusyns in Vojvodina.\nProtestantism accounts for 0.8% of the country's population, chiefly Lutheranism among Slovaks in Vojvodina as well as Calvinism among Reformed Hungarians.\nMuslims, with 222,282 or 3% of the population, form the third largest religious group. Islam has a strong historic following in the southern regions of Serbia, primarily in southern Ra\u0161ka. Bosniaks are the largest Islamic community in Serbia, followed by Albanians. \nIn 2011, there were only 578 Jews in Serbia, compared to over 30,000 prior to World War II. Atheists numbered 80,053, or 1.1% of the population, and an additional 4,070 declared themselves to be agnostics.\nEducation.\nAccording to 2011 census, literacy in Serbia stands at 98% of population while computer literacy is at 49% (complete computer literacy is at 34.2%). Same census showed the following levels of education: 16.2% of inhabitants have higher education (10.6% have bachelors or master's degrees, 5.6% have an associate degree), 49% have a secondary education, 20.7% have an elementary education, and 13.7% have not completed elementary education.\nEducation in Serbia is regulated by the Ministry of Education and Science. Education starts in either preschools or elementary schools. Children enroll in elementary schools at the age of seven. Compulsory education consists of eight grades of elementary school. Students have the opportunity to attend gymnasiums and vocational schools for another four years, or to enroll in vocational training for two to three years.\nFollowing the completion of gymnasiums or vocational schools, students have the opportunity to attend university. Elementary and secondary education are also available in languages of recognised minorities in Serbia, where classes are held in Hungarian, Slovak, Albanian, Romanian, Rusyn, Bulgarian as well as Bosnian and Croatian languages. Petnica Science Centre is a notable institution for extracurricular science education focusing on gifted students.\nThere are 19 universities in Serbia (nine public universities with a total number of 86 faculties and ten private universities with 51 faculties). In 2018/2019 academic year, 210,480 students attended 19 universities (181,310 at public universities and some 29,170 at private universities) while 47,169 attended 81 \"higher schools\". Public universities in Serbia are: the University of Belgrade, University of Novi Sad, University of Ni\u0161, University of Kragujevac, University of Pri\u0161tina, Public University of Novi Pazar as well as three specialist universities \u2013 University of Arts, University of Defence and University of Criminal Investigation and Police Studies. The largest private universities include Megatrend University and Singidunum University, both in Belgrade, and Educons University in Novi Sad. The University of Belgrade (placed in 401\u2013500 bracket on 2024 Shanghai Ranking of World Universities) and University of Novi Sad are generally considered the best institutions of higher learning in the country.\nSerbia spent 0.9% of GDP on scientific research in 2017, which is slightly below the European average. Serbia was ranked 54th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.Since 2018, Serbia is a full member of CERN. Serbia has a long history of excellence in maths and computer sciences which has created a strong pool of engineering talent, although economic sanctions during the 1990s and chronic underinvestment in research forced many scientific professionals to leave the country. Nevertheless, there are several areas in which Serbia still excels such as growing information technology sector, which includes software development as well as outsourcing. It generated over $1.2 billion in exports in 2018, both from international investors and a significant number of dynamic homegrown enterprises. Serbia is one of the countries with the highest proportion of women in science.\nAmong the scientific institutes operating in Serbia, the largest are the Mihajlo Pupin Institute and Vin\u010da Nuclear Institute, both in Belgrade. The Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts is a learned society promoting science and arts from its inception in 1841.\nHealth.\nThe healthcare system in Serbia is organised and managed by the two primary institutions: The Ministry of Health and the Institute of Public Health of Serbia \"Dr Milan Jovanovi\u0107 Batut\". The Serbian public health system is based on the principles of equity and solidarity, organised on the model of compulsory health insurance contributions. Private health care is not integrated into the public health system, but certain services may be included by contracting.\nThe Ministry of Health determines the healthcare policy and adopts standards for the work of the healthcare service. The Ministry is also in charge of the health care system, health insurance, preservation and improvement of health of citizens, health inspection, supervision over the work of the healthcare service and other tasks in the field of health care.\nThe Institute of Public Health of Serbia \"Dr Milan Jovanovi\u0107 Batut\" is responsible for medical statistics, epidemiology and hygiene. This central, tertiary institution manages and coordinates a dense network of municipal and regional Centres of Public Health that provide epidemiological and hygiene services at primary and secondary levels. The National Health Insurance Fund finances the functioning of health care at all levels, and also provides and implements the compulsory health insurance.\nThe Universiry Clinical Centre of Serbia spreads over 34 hectares in Belgrade and consists of about 50 buildings, while also has 3,150 beds considered to be the highest number in Europe, and among highest in the world.\nOther important medical centres include Clinical Center of Vojvodina, Clinical Centre of Kragujevac, Clinical Centre of Ni\u0161 Military Medical Academy and others.\nCulture.\nFor centuries straddling the boundaries between East and West, the territory of Serbia had been divided among the Eastern and Western halves of the Roman Empire; then between Byzantium and the Kingdom of Hungary; and in the early modern period between the Ottoman Empire and the Habsburg Empire. These overlapping influences have resulted in cultural varieties throughout Serbia; its north leans to the profile of Central Europe, while the south is characteristic of the wider Balkans and even the Mediterranean. Serbia was influenced by the Republic of Venice as well, mainly though trade, literature and romanesque architecture.\nSerbia has five cultural monuments inscribed in the list of UNESCO World Heritage: the early medieval capital Stari Ras (including three nearby medieval monasteries: Sopo\u0107ani, \u0110ur\u0111evi Stupovi, and the Church of Saint Peter); the 12th-century Studenica monastery; the Roman complex of Gamzigrad\u2013Felix Romuliana; medieval tombstones Ste\u0107ci; and finally the endangered Medieval Monuments in Kosovo (the monasteries of Visoki De\u010dani, Our Lady of Ljevi\u0161, Gra\u010danica and Patriarchal Monastery of Pe\u0107).\nThere are four literary works on UNESCO's Memory of the World International Register: the 12th-century \"Miroslav Gospel\", the electrical engineer and inventor Nikola Tesla's archive, the telegram of Austria-Hungary's declaration of war on Serbia, and the 1st Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement archives. The \"slava\" (patron saint veneration), kolo (traditional folk dance), singing to the accompaniment of the gusle, Zlakusa pottery, slivovitz (plum brandy) and na\u00efve painting practices of Kova\u010dica are inscribed on UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists. The Ministry of Culture and Information is tasked with preserving the nation's cultural heritage and overseeing its development, with further activities undertaken by local governments.\nArt and architecture.\nTraces of Roman and early Byzantine Empire architectural heritage are found in many royal cities and palaces in Serbia, such as Sirmium, Viminacium, Mediana, Felix Romuliana and Justiniana Prima, since 535 the seat of the Archbishopric of Justiniana Prima.\nSerbian monasteries were under the influence of Byzantine art, particularly after the fall of Constantinople in 1204 when many Byzantine artists fled to Serbia. The monasteries include Studenica (built around 1190), which was a model for such later monasteries as Mile\u0161eva, Sopo\u0107ani, \u017di\u010da, Gra\u010danica and Visoki De\u010dani. Numerous monuments and cultural sites were destroyed at various stages of Serbian history, including destruction in Kosovo. In the late 14th and the 15th centuries, an autochthonous architectural style known as Morava style evolved in the area around Morava Valley. A characteristic of this style was the wealthy decoration of the frontal church walls. Examples of this include Manasija, Ravanica and Kaleni\u0107 monasteries.\nFrescos include White Angel (Mile\u0161eva monastery), \"Crucifixion\" (Studenica monastery) and \"Dormition of the Virgin\" (Sopo\u0107ani).\nThe country is dotted with many well-preserved medieval fortifications and castles such as Smederevo Fortress (largest lowland fortress in Europe), Golubac, Magli\u010d, Soko grad, Belgrade Fortress, Ostrvica and Ram.\nUnder Ottoman occupation, Serbian art was virtually non-existent outside the lands ruled by the Habsburg monarchy. Traditional Serbian art showed Baroque influences at the end of the 18th century as shown in the works of Nikola Ne\u0161kovi\u0107, Teodor Kra\u010dun, Zaharije Orfelin and Jakov Orfelin. Serbian painting showed the influence of Biedermeier and Neoclassicism as seen in works by Konstantin Danil, Arsenije Teodorovi\u0107 and Pavel \u0110urkovi\u0107. Many painters followed the artistic trends set in the 19th century Romanticism, notably \u0110ura Jak\u0161i\u0107, Stevan Todorovi\u0107, Katarina Ivanovi\u0107 and Novak Radoni\u0107. Serbian painters of the first half of the 20th century include Paja Jovanovi\u0107 and Uro\u0161 Predi\u0107 of Realism, Cubist Sava \u0160umanovi\u0107, Milena Pavlovi\u0107-Barili and Nade\u017eda Petrovi\u0107 of Impressionism, Expressionist Milan Konjovi\u0107. Painters of the second half of 20th century include Marko \u010celebonovi\u0107, Petar Lubarda, Milo Milunovi\u0107, Ljubomir Popovi\u0107 and Vladimir Veli\u010dkovi\u0107.\nAnastas Jovanovi\u0107 was one of the earliest photographers in the world. Marina Abramovi\u0107 is a performance artist. Pirot carpet is a traditional handicraft in Serbia.\nThere are around 180 museums in Serbia, including the National Museum of Serbia, founded in 1844, houses one of the largest art collections in the Balkans. Other art museums include the Museum of Contemporary Art in Belgrade, the Museum of Vojvodina and the Gallery of Matica Srpska in Novi Sad.\nLiterature.\nSerbian uses the Cyrillic alphabet created by the students of the brothers Cyril and Methodius at the Preslav Literary School in Bulgaria. Serbian works from the early 11th century are written in Glagolitic. Starting in the 12th century, books were written in Cyrillic. The Miroslav Gospels from 1186 are considered to be the oldest book of Serbian medieval history and are listed in UNESCO's Memory of the World Register.\nThere are 551 public libraries, the largest of which are the National Library of Serbia in Belgrade with about 6 million items, and Matica Srpska (the oldest matica and Serbian cultural institution, founded in 1826) in Novi Sad with nearly 3.5 million volumes. In 2010, there were 10,989 books and brochures published. The book publishing market is dominated by several major publishers such as Laguna and Vulkan. The industry's centrepiece event, annual Belgrade Book Fair, is the most visited cultural event in Serbia with 158,128 visitors in 2013. The highlight of the literary scene is awarding of NIN Prize, given every January since 1954 for the best newly published novel in Serbian.\nMedieval authors include Saint Sava, Jefimija, Stefan Lazarevi\u0107, Constantine of Kostenets and others. Under Ottoman occupation, when Serbia was not part of the European Renaissance, the tradition of oral story-telling through epic poetry was inspired by the Kosovo battle and folk tales rooted in Slavic mythology. Serbian epic poetry in those times was seen as the most effective way in preserving the national identity. The oldest known, entirely fictional poems, make up the \"Non-historic cycle\", which is followed by poems inspired by events before, during and after the Battle of Kosovo. Folk ballads include \"The Death of the Mother of the Jugovi\u0107 Family\" and \"The Mourning Song of the Noble Wife of the Asan Aga\" (1646), translated into European languages by Goethe, Walter Scott, Pushkin and M\u00e9rim\u00e9e. A tale from Serbian folklore is The Nine Peahens and the Golden Apples.\nBaroque trends in Serbian literature emerged in the late 17th century. Baroque-influenced authors include Gavril Stefanovi\u0107 Venclovi\u0107, Jovan Raji\u0107, Zaharije Orfelin and Andrija Zmajevi\u0107. Dositej Obradovi\u0107 was a prominent figure of the Age of Enlightenment, while Jovan Sterija Popovi\u0107 was a Classicist writer whose works also contained elements of Romanticism. In the era of national revival, in the first half of the 19th century, Vuk Stefanovi\u0107 Karad\u017ei\u0107 collected Serbian folk literature, and reformed the Serbian language and spelling, paving the way for Serbian Romanticism. The first half of the 19th century was dominated by Romanticist writers, including Petar II Petrovi\u0107-Njego\u0161, Branko Radi\u010devi\u0107, \u0110ura Jak\u0161i\u0107, Jovan Jovanovi\u0107 Zmaj and Laza Kosti\u0107, while the second half of the century was marked by Realist writers such as Milovan Gli\u0161i\u0107, Laza Lazarevi\u0107, Simo Matavulj, Stevan Sremac, Vojislav Ili\u0107, Branislav Nu\u0161i\u0107, Radoje Domanovi\u0107 and Borisav Stankovi\u0107.\nThe 20th century was dominated by the prose writers Me\u0161a Selimovi\u0107 (\"Death and the Dervish\"), Milo\u0161 Crnjanski (\"Migrations\"), Isidora Sekuli\u0107 (\"The Chronicle of a Small Town Cemetery\"), Branko \u0106opi\u0107 (\"Eagles Fly Early\"), Borislav Peki\u0107 (\"The Time of Miracles\"), Danilo Ki\u0161 (\"The Encyclopedia of the Dead\"), Dobrica \u0106osi\u0107 (\"The Roots\"), Aleksandar Ti\u0161ma (\"The Use of Man\"), Milorad Pavi\u0107 and others. Notable poets include Milan Raki\u0107, Jovan Du\u010di\u0107, Vladislav Petkovi\u0107 Dis, Rastko Petrovi\u0107, Stanislav Vinaver, Du\u0161an Mati\u0107, Branko Miljkovi\u0107, Vasko Popa, Oskar Davi\u010do, Miodrag Pavlovi\u0107, and Stevan Rai\u010dkovi\u0107.\nPavi\u0107 is a 21st-century Serbian author whose \"Dictionary of the Khazars\" has been translated into 38 languages. Contemporary authors include David Albahari, Svetislav Basara, Goran Petrovi\u0107, Gordana Kui\u0107, Vuk Dra\u0161kovi\u0107 and Vladislav Bajac. Serbian comics emerged in the 1930s and the medium remains popular today.\nIvo Andri\u0107 (\"The Bridge on the Drina\") is a Serbian author who won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1961. Another writer was Desanka Maksimovi\u0107, who for seven decades was the leading lady of Yugoslav poetry.\nMusic.\nComposer and musicologist Stevan Stojanovi\u0107 Mokranjac is considered the founder of modern Serbian music. The Serbian composers of the first generation Petar Konjovi\u0107, Stevan Hristi\u0107, and Miloje Milojevi\u0107 maintained the national expression and modernised the romanticism into the direction of impressionism. Other famous classical Serbian composers include Isidor Baji\u0107, Stanislav Bini\u010dki and Josif Marinkovi\u0107. There are three opera houses in Serbia: Opera of the National Theatre and Madlenianum Opera, both in Belgrade, and Opera of the Serbian National Theatre in Novi Sad. Four symphonic orchestra operate in the country: Belgrade Philharmonic Orchestra, Ni\u0161 Symphony Orchestra, Novi Sad Philharmonic Orchestra and Symphonic Orchestra of Radio Television of Serbia. The Choir of Radio Television of Serbia is a leading vocal ensemble in the country. The BEMUS is one of the most prominent classical music festivals in the Southeastern Europe.\nTraditional Serbian music includes various kinds of bagpipes, flutes, horns, trumpets, lutes, psalteries, drums and cymbals. The \"kolo\" is the traditional collective folk dance, which has a number of varieties throughout the regions. The most popular are those from U\u017eice and Morava region. Sung epic poetry has been an integral part of Serbian and Balkan music for centuries. In the highlands of Serbia these long poems are typically accompanied on a one-string fiddle called the \"gusle\", and concern themselves with themes from history and mythology. There are records of \"gusle\" being played at the court of the 13th-century king Stefan the First-Crowned.\nBalkan Brass, or \"truba\" (\"trumpet\") is a popular genre, especially in Central and Southern Serbia where Balkan Brass originated. There are two main varieties of this genre, one from Western Serbia and the other from Southern Serbia, with brass musician Boban Markovi\u0107 being one of the most respected names in the world of modern brass band bandleaders.\nThe most popular music festivals are Gu\u010da Trumpet Festival, with over 300,000 annual visitors, and Exit in Novi Sad (won the Best Major Festival award at the European Festivals Awards for 2013 and 2017.), with 200,000 visitors in 2013. Other festivals include Ni\u0161ville Jazz Festival in Ni\u0161 and Gitarijada rock festival in Zaje\u010dar.\nPop music artist \u017deljko Joksimovi\u0107 won second place at the 2004 Eurovision Song Contest and Marija \u0160erifovi\u0107 won the 2007 Eurovision Song Contest with the song \"Molitva\", and Serbia was the host of the 2008 edition of the contest. Pop singers include Zdravko \u010coli\u0107, Vlado Georgiev, Aleksandra Radovi\u0107, Jelena Toma\u0161evi\u0107, Nata\u0161a Bekvalac, Jelena Karleu\u0161a and Teya Dora among others.\nSerbian rock was part of the former Yugoslav rock scene during the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s. During the 1990s and 2000s, the popularity of rock music declined in Serbia, and although several major mainstream acts managed to sustain their popularity, an underground and independent music scene developed. The 2000s saw a revival of the mainstream scene and the appearance of a large number of notable acts. Serbian rock acts include Atheist Rap, Bajaga i Instruktori, \u0110or\u0111e Bala\u0161evi\u0107, Bjesovi, Block Out, Crni Biseri, Darkwood Dub, Disciplina Ki\u010dme, Elipse, Ekatarina Velika, Elektri\u010dni Orgazam, Eva Braun, Galija, Generacija 5, Goblini, Idoli, Kanda, Kod\u017ea i Neboj\u0161a, Kerber, Korni Grupa, Laboratorija Zvuka, Sla\u0111ana Milo\u0161evi\u0107, Neverne Bebe, Obojeni Programme, Orthodox Celts, Partibrejkers, Pekin\u0161ka Patka, Piloti, Riblja \u010corba, Ritam Nereda, Rambo Amadeus, S.A.R.S., Siluete, S Vremena Na Vreme, \u0160arlo Akrobata, Pop Ma\u0161ina, Smak, U \u0160kripcu, Van Gogh, YU Grupa, Zana and others.\nFolk music in its original form has been a prominent music style since World War I following the early success of Sofka Nikoli\u0107. The music has been further promoted by Danica Obreni\u0107, An\u0111elija Mili\u0107, Nada Mamula, and during the 60s and 70s with performers like Silvana Armenuli\u0107, Toma Zdravkovi\u0107, Lepa Luki\u0107, Vasilija Radoj\u010di\u0107, Vida Pavlovi\u0107 and Gordana Stoji\u0107evi\u0107.\nTurbo-folk music is a subgenre that was developed in Serbia in the late 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s and has since enjoyed an immense popularity through acts of Dragana Mirkovi\u0107, Zorica Brunclik, \u0160aban \u0160auli\u0107, Ana Bekuta, Sinan Saki\u0107, Vesna Zmijanac, Mile Kiti\u0107, Sne\u017eana \u0110uri\u0161i\u0107, \u0160emsa Suljakovi\u0107, and Nada Top\u010dagi\u0107. It is a blend of folk music with pop and dance elements and can be seen as a result of the urbanisation of folk music. In recent years, turbo-folk has featured even more pop music elements, and some of the performers have been labeled as pop-folk. The most famous among them are Ceca (often considered to be the biggest music star of Serbia), Jelena Karleu\u0161a, Aca Lukas, Seka Aleksi\u0107, Dara Bubamara, Indira Radi\u0107, Sa\u0161a Mati\u0107, Viki Miljkovi\u0107, Stoja and Lepa Brena, arguably the most prominent performer of former Yugoslavia.\nTheatre and cinema.\nSerbia has a well-established theatrical tradition with Joakim Vuji\u0107 considered the founder of modern Serbian theatre. Serbia has 38 professional theatres and 11 theatres for children, the most important of which are National Theatre in Belgrade, Serbian National Theatre in Novi Sad, National Theatre in Subotica, National Theatre in Ni\u0161 and Knja\u017eevsko-srpski teatar in Kragujevac (the oldest theatre in Serbia, established in 1835). The Belgrade International Theatre Festival \u2013 BITEF, founded in 1967, is one of the oldest theatre festivals in the world, and it has become one of the five biggest European festivals. Sterijino pozorje is, on the other hand, a festival showcasing national drama plays. The most important Serbian playwrights were Jovan Sterija Popovi\u0107 and Branislav Nu\u0161i\u0107, while recent renowned names are Du\u0161an Kova\u010devi\u0107 and Biljana Srbljanovi\u0107.\nThe country has a rich cinematic legacy. Serbia's film scene is one of the most dynamic smaller European cinemas. The film industry is heavily subsidised by the government, mainly through grants approved by the Film Centre of Serbia. As of 2019, there were 26 feature films produced in Serbia, of which 14 were domestic films. There are 23 operating cinemas in the country, with total attendance reaching 4.8 million. A comparatively high percentage of 20% of total tickets sold were for domestic films. Modern PFI Studios located in \u0160imanovci is nowadays Serbia's only major film studio complex. The Yugoslav Film Archive used to be former Yugoslavia's and now is Serbia's national film archive \u2013 with over 100 thousand film prints, it is among the five largest film archives in the world.\nFamous Serbian filmmaker Emir Kusturica won two Palmes d'Or for Best Feature Film at the Cannes Film Festival, for \"When Father Was Away on Business\" in 1985 and then again for \"Underground\" in 1995; he has also won a Silver Bear at the Berlin Film Festival for \"Arizona Dream\" and a Silver Lion at the Venice Film Festival for \"Black Cat, White Cat\". Other renowned directors include Du\u0161an Makavejev, \u017delimir \u017dilnik (Golden Berlin Bear winner), Aleksandar Petrovi\u0107, \u017divojin Pavlovi\u0107, Goran Paskaljevi\u0107, Goran Markovi\u0107, Sr\u0111an Dragojevi\u0107, Srdan Golubovi\u0107 and Mila Turajli\u0107 among others. Serbian-American screenwriter Steve Tesich won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay in 1979.\nProminent movie stars in Serbia have left a celebrated heritage in the cinematography of Yugoslavia as well. Notable mentions are Zoran Radmilovi\u0107, Pavle Vuisi\u0107, Ljubi\u0161a Samard\u017ei\u0107, Olivera Markovi\u0107, Mija Aleksi\u0107, Miodrag Petrovi\u0107 \u010ckalja, Ru\u017eica Soki\u0107, Velimir Bata \u017divojinovi\u0107, Danilo Bata Stojkovi\u0107, Seka Sabli\u0107, Dragan Nikoli\u0107, Mira Stupica, Nikola Simi\u0107, Bora Todorovi\u0107, Neboj\u0161a Glogovac, Milo\u0161 Bikovi\u0107 and others. Milena Dravi\u0107 was one of the most celebrated actresses in Serbian cinematography, winning the Best Actress Award at the Cannes Film Festival in 1980.\nMedia.\nFreedom of the press and freedom of speech are guaranteed by the constitution of Serbia. Serbia is ranked 98th out of 180 countries in the 2024 Press Freedom Index report compiled by Reporters Without Borders. The report noted that media outlets and journalists continue to face partisan and government pressure over editorial policies.\nAccording to EBU research in 2018, Serbs on average watch five and a half hours of television per day, making it the second highest average in Europe. There are seven nationwide free-to-air television channels, with public broadcaster Radio Television of Serbia (RTS) operating three (RTS1, RTS2 and RTS3) and private broadcasters operating four (Pink, Prva, Happy, and O2). There are 28 regional television channels and 74 local television channels. Besides terrestrial channels there are dozens of Serbian television channels available only on cable or satellite. These include regional news N1, commercial channel Nova S, and regional sports channels Sport Klub and Arena Sport, among others.\nThere are 247 radio stations in Serbia. Out of these, six are radio stations with national coverage, including two of public broadcaster Radio Television of Serbia (Radio Belgrade 1 and Radio Belgrade 2/Radio Belgrade 3) and four private ones (Radio S1, Radio S2, Play Radio, and Radio Hit FM). Also, there are 34 regional stations and 207 local stations.\nThere are 305 newspapers published in Serbia of which 12 are daily newspapers. Dailies and \"Danas\" are Serbia's papers of record, the former being the oldest newspaper in the Balkans, founded in 1904. Highest circulation newspapers are tabloids \"Ve\u010dernje Novosti\", \"Blic\", \"Kurir\", and \"Informer\", all with more than 100,000 copies sold. There is one daily newspaper devoted to sports (\"Sportski \u017eurnal\"), one business daily (\"Privredni pregled\"), two regional newspapers (\"Dnevnik\" published in Novi Sad and \"Narodne novine\" from Ni\u0161), and one minority-language daily (\"Magyar Szo\" in Hungarian, published in Subotica).\nThere are 1,351 magazines published in the country. These include: weekly news magazines \"NIN\", \"Vreme\" and \"Nedeljnik\"; popular science magazine \"Politikin Zabavnik\"; women's magazine \"Lepota &amp; Zdravlje\"; auto magazine \"SAT revija\"; and IT magazine \"Svet kompjutera\". In addition, there is a wide selection of Serbian editions of international magazines, such as \"Cosmopolitan\", \"Elle\", \"Men's Health\", \"National Geographic\", \"Le Monde diplomatique\", \"Playboy\", and \"Hello!\", among others.\nThe main news agencies are Tanjug, Beta and Fonet.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], out of 432 web-portals (mainly on the .rs domain) the most visited are online editions of printed dailies Blic and Kurir, news web-portal B92 and classifieds KupujemProdajem.\nCuisine.\n Serbian cuisine is largely heterogeneous in a way characteristic of the Balkans and, especially, the former Yugoslavia. It features foods characteristic of lands formerly under Turkish suzerainty as well as cuisine originating from other parts of Central Europe (especially Austria and Hungary). Food is very important in Serbian social life, particularly during religious holidays such as Christmas, Easter and feast days i.e. slava.\nStaples of the Serbian diet include bread, meat, fruits, vegetables, and dairy products. Bread plays an important role in Serbian cuisine and can be found in religious rituals. A traditional Serbian welcome is to offer bread and salt to guests. Meat is widely consumed, as is fish. The southern Serbian city of Leskovac is host to Ro\u0161tiljijada, considered the biggest barbecue festival in the Balkans.\nOther Serbian specialties include \u0107evap\u010di\u0107i (grilled and seasoned caseless sausages made from minced meat), pljeskavica (grilled spiced meat patty made from a mixture of pork, beef and lamb), gibanica (cheese pie), burek (baked pastry made from a thin flaky dough that is stuffed with meat, cheese or vegetables), sarma (stuffed cabbage), punjena paprika (stuffed pepper), moussaka (casserole made from minced meat, eggs, and potatoes), Kara\u0111or\u0111eva \u0161nicla (veal or pork schnitzel that is stuffed with kajmak), \u0111uve\u010d (meat and vegetable stew), pasulj (bean soup), podvarak (roast meat with sauerkraut), ajvar (roasted red pepper spread), kajmak (dairy product similar to clotted cream), \u010dvarci (variant of pork rinds), proja (cornbread) and ka\u010damak (maize porridge).\nSerbians claim their country as the birthplace of rakia (\"rakija\"), a highly alcoholic drink primarily distilled from fruit. Rakia in various forms is found throughout the Balkans, notably in Bulgaria, Croatia, Slovenia, Montenegro, Hungary and Turkey. Slivovitz (\"\u0161ljivovica\"), a plum brandy, is a type of rakia which is considered the national drink of Serbia. In 2021, Serbia's sljivovica was added to the United Nations Intangible Cultural Heritage List as a \"cherished tradition to be preserved by humanity\".\nSerbian wines are produced in 22 different geographical regions, with white wine dominating the total amount. Besides rakia and wine, beer is a very popular alcoholic beverage in the country. Pale lagers are currently and have been the traditional beer choice for Serbians. The most popular domestic brands of beer are Jelen, followed by Lav.\nAs in the rest of the former Yugoslavia, coffee drinking is an important cultural and social practice and Serbian coffee (a local variant of Turkish coffee) is the most commonly consumed non-alcoholic beverage.\nSports.\nSerbia has hosted a number of major international sport competitions. The most important annual sporting events in the country are the Belgrade Marathon and the Tour de Serbie cycling race.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Serbia, with the Football Association of Serbia being the largest sporting association, with 146,845 registered players. Dragan D\u017eaji\u0107 was recognised as \"the best Serbian player of all time\" by the association. More recently, players like Nemanja Vidi\u0107, Dejan Stankovi\u0107, Branislav Ivanovi\u0107, Aleksandar Kolarov, Nemanja Mati\u0107, Du\u0161an Tadi\u0107 and Aleksandar Mitrovi\u0107 have achieved significant success in the UEFA Champions League, boosting Serbia's reputation as a leading exporter of footballers. The national team has qualified for three of the last four FIFA World Cups but lacks significant success. Serbia's two main football clubs, Red Star Belgrade and Partizan, have storied histories, with Red Star winning the 1990\u201391 European Cup and Partizan reaching the 1965\u201366 European Cup final. Their rivalry is known as the \"Eternal Derby\".\nThe country is a powerhouse in world basketball, with the men's national team winning two World Championships, three EuroBasket titles, two Olympic silver medals, and a bronze medal in 2024. The women's team has won two EuroBasket Women titles and an Olympic bronze medal. Serbia's men's 3x3 team has won six FIBA 3x3 World Cups and five FIBA 3x3 Europe Cups. A total of 34 Serbian players have played in the NBA over the last three decades, including Nikola Joki\u0107, a three-time NBA MVP and 2023 NBA Finals MVP. The \"Serbian coaching school\" has produced many of Europe's most successful basketball coaches, including \u017deljko Obradovi\u0107, who has won a record 9 Euroleague titles. KK Partizan won the 1992 EuroLeague, and KK Crvena zvezda won the 1974 FIBA Saporta Cup.\nThe Serbia men's national water polo team is one of the most successful, with three Olympic gold medals, three World Championships, and seven European Championships. VK Partizan has won seven Champions League titles.\nThe recent success of Serbian tennis players, especially Novak Djokovic, who holds a record 24 Grand Slam singles titles, has led to a surge in the sport's popularity in Serbia. Djokovic has held the No. 1 ATP ranking for a record 428 weeks and achieved a Career Super Slam with his Olympic gold in 2024. Ana Ivanovic, Jelena Jankovi\u0107 and Nenad Zimonji\u0107 have also been ranked No. 1 in the WTA rankings. The men's national tennis team won the 2010 Davis Cup and 2020 ATP Cup.\nSerbia's men's national volleyball team won the 2000 Olympic gold medal, three European Championships, and the 2016 FIVB Volleyball World League. The women's team has won two World Championships, three European Championships, and two Olympic medals.\nSerbian chess players excelled from 1950 to 1980, winning 15 Olympic medals. The men's team won the 2023 European Team Competition, and women's clubs have won the European Champions Cup five times. Svetozar Gligori\u0107 and Ljubomir Ljubojevi\u0107 were among the world's best players outside the USSR. \nNotable Serbian athletes include sport shooters Jasna \u0160ekari\u0107 and Damir Mikec, handball player Svetlana Kiti\u0107, volleyball player Nikola Grbi\u0107, swimmer Milorad \u010cavi\u0107, track and field athlete Ivana \u0160panovi\u0107, wrestler Davor \u0160tefanek, and taekwondoist Milica Mandi\u0107.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29266", "revid": "47822643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29266", "title": "Relationship between science and religion", "text": "The relationship between science and religion involves discussions that interconnect the study of the natural world, history, philosophy, and theology. Even though the ancient and medieval worlds did not have conceptions resembling the modern understandings of \"science\" or of \"religion\", certain elements of modern ideas on the subject recur throughout history. The pair-structured phrases \"religion and science\" and \"science and religion\" first emerged in the literature during the 19th century. This coincided with the refining of \"science\" (from the studies of \"natural philosophy\") and of \"religion\" as distinct concepts in the preceding few centuries\u2014partly due to professionalization of the sciences, the Protestant Reformation, colonization, and globalization. Since then the relationship between science and religion has been characterized in terms of \"conflict\", \"harmony\", \"complexity\", and \"mutual independence\", among others.\nBoth science and religion are complex social and cultural endeavors that may vary across cultures and change over time. Most scientific and technical innovations until the scientific revolution were achieved by societies organized by religious traditions. Ancient pagan, Islamic, and Christian scholars pioneered individual elements of the scientific method. Roger Bacon, often credited with formalizing the scientific method, was a Franciscan friar and medieval Christians who studied nature emphasized natural explanations. Confucian thought, whether religious or non-religious in nature, has held different views of science over time. Many 21st-century Buddhists view science as complementary to their beliefs, although the philosophical integrity of such Buddhist modernism has been challenged. While the classification of the material world by the ancient Indians and Greeks into air, earth, fire, and water was more metaphysical, and figures like Anaxagoras questioned certain popular views of Greek divinities, medieval Middle Eastern scholars empirically classified materials.\nEvents in Europe such as the Galileo affair of the early 17th century, associated with the scientific revolution and the Age of Enlightenment, led scholars such as John William Draper to postulate (c.\u20091874) a conflict thesis, suggesting that religion and science have been in conflict methodologically, factually, and politically throughout history. Some contemporary philosophers and scientists, such as Richard Dawkins, Lawrence Krauss, Peter Atkins, and Donald Prothero subscribe to this thesis; however, such views have not been held by historians of science for a very long time.\nMany scientists, philosophers, and theologians throughout history, from Augustine of Hippo to Thomas Aquinas to Francisco Ayala, Kenneth R. Miller, and Francis Collins, have seen compatibility or interdependence between religion and science. Biologist Stephen Jay Gould regarded religion and science as \"non-overlapping magisteria\", addressing fundamentally separate forms of knowledge and aspects of life. Some historians of science and mathematicians, including John Lennox, Thomas Berry, and Brian Swimme, propose an interconnection between science and religion, while others such as Ian Barbour believe there are even parallels. Public acceptance of scientific facts may sometimes be influenced by religious beliefs such as in the United States, where some reject the concept of evolution by natural selection, especially regarding Human beings. Nevertheless, the American National Academy of Sciences has written that \"the evidence for evolution can be fully compatible with religious faith\",\na view endorsed by many religious denominations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nConcepts of science and religion.\nThe concepts of \"science\" and \"religion\" are a recent invention: \"religion\" emerged in the 17th century in the midst of colonization, globalization and as a consequence of the Protestant reformation. \"Science\" emerged in the 19th century in the midst of attempts to narrowly define those who studied nature. Originally what is now known as \"science\" was pioneered as \"natural philosophy\".\nIt was in the 19th century that the terms \"Buddhism\", \"Hinduism\", \"Taoism\", \"Confucianism\" and \"World Religions\" first emerged. In the ancient and medieval world, the etymological Latin roots of both science (\"scientia\") and religion (\"religio\") were understood as inner qualities of the individual or virtues, never as doctrines, practices, or actual sources of knowledge.\nThe 19th century also experienced the concept of \"science\" receiving its modern shape with new titles emerging such as \"biology\" and \"biologist\", \"physics\", and \"physicist\", among other technical fields and titles; institutions and communities were founded, and unprecedented applications to and interactions with other aspects of society and culture occurred. The term \"scientist\" was coined by the naturalist-theologian William Whewell in 1834 and it was applied to those who sought knowledge and understanding of nature. From the ancient world, starting with Aristotle, to the 19th century, the practice of studying nature was commonly referred to as \"natural philosophy\". Isaac Newton's book Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (1687), whose title translates to \"Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy\", reflects the then-current use of the words \"natural philosophy\", akin to \"systematic study of nature\". Even in the 19th century, a treatise by Lord Kelvin and Peter Guthrie Tait's, which helped define much of modern physics, was titled Treatise on Natural Philosophy (1867).\nIt was in the 17th century that the concept of \"religion\" received its modern shape despite the fact that ancient texts like the Bible, the Quran, and other texts did not have a concept of religion in the original languages and neither did the people or the cultures in which these texts were written. In the 19th century, Max M\u00fcller noted that what is called ancient religion today, would have been called \"law\" in antiquity. For example, there is no precise equivalent of \"religion\" in Hebrew, and Judaism does not distinguish clearly between religious, national, racial, or ethnic identities. The Sanskrit word \"dharma\", sometimes translated as \"religion\", also means law or duty. Throughout classical India, the study of law consisted of concepts such as penance through piety and ceremonial as well as practical traditions. Medieval Japan at first had a similar union between \"imperial law\" and universal or \"Buddha law\", but these later became independent sources of power. Throughout its long history, Japan had no concept of \"religion\" since there was no corresponding Japanese word, nor anything close to its meaning, but when American warships appeared off the coast of Japan in 1853 and forced the Japanese government to sign treaties demanding, among other things, freedom of religion, the country had to contend with this Western idea.\nMiddle Ages and Renaissance.\nThe development of sciences (especially natural philosophy) in Western Europe during the Middle Ages, has a considerable foundation in the works of the Arabs who translated Greek and Latin compositions. The works of Aristotle played a major role in the institutionalization, systematization, and expansion of reason. Christianity accepted reason within the ambit of faith. In Christendom, ideas articulated via divine revelation were assumed to be true, and thus via the law of non-contradiction, it was maintained that the natural world must accord with this revealed truth. Any apparent contradiction would indicate either a misunderstanding of the natural world or a misunderstanding of revelation. The prominent scholastic Thomas Aquinas writes in the Summa Theologica concerning apparent contradictions:\n\"In discussing questions of this kind two rules are to observed, as Augustine teaches (\"Gen. ad lit.\" i, 18). The first is, to hold the truth of Scripture without wavering. The second is that since Holy Scripture can be explained in a multiplicity of senses, one should adhere to a particular explanation, only in such measure as to be ready to abandon it, if it be proved with certainty to be false; lest Holy Scripture be exposed to the ridicule of unbelievers, and obstacles be placed to their believing.\" (\"Summa\" 1a, 68, 1)\nwhere the referenced text from Augustine of Hippo reads:\n\"In matters that are obscure and far beyond our vision, even in such as we may find treated in Holy Scripture, different interpretations are sometimes possible without prejudice to the faith we have received. In such a case, we should not rush in headlong and so firmly take our stand on one side that, if further progress in the search of truth justly undermines this position, we too fall with it. That would be to battle not for the teaching of Holy Scripture but for our own, wishing its teaching to conform to ours, whereas we ought to wish ours to conform to that of Sacred Scripture.\" (\"Gen. ad lit.\" i, 18)\nIn medieval universities, the faculty for natural philosophy and theology were separate, and discussions pertaining to theological issues were often not allowed to be undertaken by the faculty of philosophy. Natural philosophy, as taught in the arts faculties of the universities, was seen as an essential area of study in its own right and was considered necessary for almost every area of study. It was an independent field, separated from theology, and enjoyed a good deal of intellectual freedom as long as it was restricted to the natural world. In general, there was religious support for natural science by the late Middle Ages and a recognition that it was an important element of learning.\nThe extent to which medieval science led directly to the new philosophy of the scientific revolution remains a subject for debate, but it certainly had a significant influence.\nThe Middle Ages laid ground for the developments that took place in science, during the Renaissance which immediately succeeded it. By 1630, ancient authority from classical literature and philosophy, as well as their necessity, started eroding, although scientists were still expected to be fluent in Latin, the international language of Europe's intellectuals. With the sheer success of science and the steady advance of rationalism, the individual scientist gained prestige. Along with the inventions of this period, especially the printing press by Johannes Gutenberg, allowing for the dissemination of the Bible in vernacular languages. This allowed more people to read and learn from the scripture, leading to the Evangelical movement. The people who spread this message concentrated more on individual agency rather than the structures of the Church.\nMedieval Contributors.\nSome medieval contributors to science included: Boethius (c. 477\u2013524), John Philoponus (c. 490\u2013570), Bede the Venerable (c. 672\u2013735), Alcuin of York (c. 735\u2013804), Leo the Mathematician (c. 790\u2013869), Gerbert of Aurillac (c. 946\u20131003), Constantine the African (c. 1020\u20131087), Adelard of Bath (c. 1080\u20131152), Robert Grosseteste (c. 1168\u20131253), St. Albert the Great (c. 1200\u20131280), Roger Bacon (c. 1214\u20131294), William of Ockham (c. 1287\u20131347), Jean Burdian (c. 1301\u20131358), Thomas Bradwardine (1300\u20131349), Nicole Oresme (c. 1320\u20131382), Nicholas of Cusa (c. 1401\u20131464).\nModern period.\nIn the 17th century, founders of the Royal Society largely held conventional and orthodox religious views, and a number of them were prominent Churchmen. While theological issues that had the potential to be divisive were typically excluded from formal discussions of the early Society, many of its fellows nonetheless believed that their scientific activities provided support for traditional religious belief. Clerical involvement in the Royal Society remained high until the mid-nineteenth century when science became more professionalized.\nAlbert Einstein supported the compatibility of some interpretations of religion with science. In \"Science, Philosophy and Religion, A Symposium\" published by the Conference on Science, Philosophy and Religion in Their Relation to the Democratic Way of Life, Inc., New York in 1941, Einstein stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Accordingly, a religious person is devout in the sense that he has no doubt of the significance and loftiness of those superpersonal objects and goals which neither require nor are capable of rational foundation. They exist with the same necessity and matter-of-factness as he himself. In this sense religion is the age-old endeavor of mankind to become clearly and completely conscious of these values and goals and constantly to strengthen and extend their effect. If one conceives of religion and science according to these definitions then a conflict between them appears impossible. For science can only ascertain what is, but not what should be, and outside of its domain value judgments of all kinds remain necessary. Religion, on the other hand, deals only with evaluations of human thought and action: it cannot justifiably speak of facts and relationships between facts. According to this interpretation the well-known conflicts between religion and science in the past must all be ascribed to a misapprehension of the situation which has been described.\nEinstein thus expresses views of ethical non-naturalism (contrasted to ethical naturalism).\nProminent modern scientists who are atheists include evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins and Nobel Prize\u2013winning physicist Steven Weinberg. Prominent scientists advocating religious belief include Nobel Prize\u2013winning physicist and United Church of Christ member Charles Townes, evangelical Christian and past head of the Human Genome Project Francis Collins, and climatologist John T. Houghton.\nPerspectives.\nThe kinds of interactions that might arise between science and religion have been categorized by theologian, Anglican priest, and physicist John Polkinghorne: (1) conflict between the disciplines, (2) independence of the disciplines, (3) dialogue between the disciplines where they overlap and (4) integration of both into one field.\nThis typology is similar to ones used by theologians Ian Barbour and John Haught. More typologies that categorize this relationship can be found among the works of other science and religion scholars such as theologian and biochemist Arthur Peacocke.\nIncompatibility.\nAccording to Guillermo Paz-y-Mi\u00f1o-C and Avelina Espinosa, the historical conflict between evolution and religion is intrinsic to the incompatibility between scientific rationalism/empiricism and the belief in supernatural causation/faith. According to evolutionary biologist Jerry Coyne, views on evolution and levels of religiosity in some countries, along with the existence of books explaining reconciliation between evolution and religion, indicate that people have trouble in believing both at the same time, thus implying incompatibility. According to physical chemist Peter Atkins, \"whereas religion scorns the power of human comprehension, science respects it.\" Planetary scientist Carolyn Porco describes a hope that \"the confrontation between science and formal religion will come to an end when the role played by science in the lives of all people is the same played by religion today.\"\nGeologist and paleontologist Donald Prothero has stated that religion is the reason \"questions about evolution, the age of the earth, cosmology, and human evolution nearly always cause Americans to flunk science literacy tests compared to other nations.\" However, Jon Miller, who studies science literacy across nations, states that Americans in general are slightly more scientifically literate than Europeans and the Japanese.\nAccording to cosmologist and astrophysicist Lawrence Krauss, compatibility or incompatibility is a theological concern, not a scientific concern. In Lisa Randall's view, questions of incompatibility or otherwise are not answerable, since by accepting revelations one is abandoning rules of logic which are needed to identify if there are indeed contradictions between holding certain beliefs. Daniel Dennett holds that incompatibility exists because religion is not problematic to a certain point before it collapses into a number of excuses for keeping certain beliefs, in light of evolutionary implications.\nAccording to theoretical physicist Steven Weinberg, teaching cosmology and evolution to students should decrease their self-importance in the universe, as well as their religiosity. Evolutionary developmental biologist PZ Myers' view is that all scientists should be atheists, and that science should never accommodate any religious beliefs. Physicist Sean M. Carroll claims that since religion makes claims that are supernatural, both science and religion are incompatible.\nEvolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins is openly hostile to religion because he believes it actively debauches the scientific enterprise and education involving science. According to Dawkins, religion \"subverts science and saps the intellect\". He believes that when science teachers attempt to expound on evolution, there is hostility aimed towards them by parents who are skeptical because they believe it conflicts with their own religious beliefs, and that even in some textbooks have had the word 'evolution' systematically removed. He has worked to argue the negative effects that he believes religion has on education of science.\nAccording to Renny Thomas' study on Indian scientists, atheistic scientists in India called themselves atheists even while accepting that their lifestyle is very much a part of tradition and religion. Thus, they differ from Western atheists in that for them following the lifestyle of a religion is not antithetical to atheism.\nCriticism.\nOthers such as Francis Collins, George F. R. Ellis, Kenneth R. Miller, Katharine Hayhoe, George Coyne and Simon Conway Morris argue for compatibility since they do not agree that science is incompatible with religion and vice versa. They argue that science provides many opportunities to look for and find God in nature and to reflect on their beliefs. According to Kenneth Miller, he disagrees with Jerry Coyne's assessment and argues that since significant portions of scientists are religious and the proportion of Americans believing in evolution is much higher, it implies that both are indeed compatible. Elsewhere, Miller has argued that when scientists make claims on science and theism or atheism, they are not arguing scientifically at all and are stepping beyond the scope of science into discourses of meaning and purpose. What he finds particularly odd and unjustified is in how atheists often come to invoke scientific authority on their non-scientific philosophical conclusions like there being no point or no meaning to the universe as the only viable option when the scientific method and science never have had any way of addressing questions of meaning or God in the first place. Furthermore, he notes that since evolution made the brain and since the brain can handle both religion and science, there is no natural incompatibility between the concepts at the biological level.\nKarl Giberson argues that when discussing compatibility, some scientific intellectuals often ignore the viewpoints of intellectual leaders in theology and instead argue against less informed masses, thereby, defining religion by non-intellectuals and slanting the debate unjustly. He argues that leaders in science sometimes trump older scientific baggage and that leaders in theology do the same, so once theological intellectuals are taken into account, people who represent extreme positions like Ken Ham and Eugenie Scott will become irrelevant. Cynthia Tolman notes that religion does not have a method per se partly because religions emerge through time from diverse cultures, but when it comes to Christian theology and ultimate truths, she notes that people often rely on scripture, tradition, reason, and experience to test and gauge what they experience and what they should believe.\nConflict thesis.\nThe conflict thesis, which holds that religion and science have been in conflict continuously throughout history, was popularized in the 19th century by John William Draper's and Andrew Dickson White's accounts. It was in the 19th century that relationship between science and religion became an actual formal topic of discourse, while before this no one had pitted science against religion or vice versa, though occasional complex interactions had been expressed before the 19th century. Most contemporary historians of science now reject the conflict thesis in its original form and no longer support it. Instead, it has been superseded by subsequent historical research which has resulted in a more nuanced understanding. Historian of science, Gary Ferngren, has stated: \"Although popular images of controversy continue to exemplify the supposed hostility of Christianity to new scientific theories, studies have shown that Christianity has often nurtured and encouraged scientific endeavour, while at other times the two have co-existed without either tension or attempts at harmonization. If Galileo and the Scopes trial come to mind as examples of conflict, they were the exceptions rather than the rule.\"\nMost historians today have moved away from a conflict model, which is based mainly on two historical episodes (Galileo and Darwin), toward compatibility theses (either the integration thesis or non-overlapping magisteria) or toward a \"complexity\" model, because religious figures were on both sides of each dispute and there was no overall aim by any party involved to discredit religion.\nAn often cited example of conflict, that has been clarified by historical research in the 20th century, was the Galileo affair, whereby interpretations of the Bible were used to attack ideas by Copernicus on heliocentrism. By 1616 Galileo went to Rome to try to persuade Catholic Church authorities not to ban Copernicus' ideas. In the end, a decree of the Congregation of the Index was issued, declaring that the ideas that the Sun stood still and that the Earth moved were \"false\" and \"altogether contrary to Holy Scripture\", and suspending Copernicus's \"De Revolutionibus\" until it could be corrected. Galileo was found \"vehemently suspect of heresy\", namely of having held the opinions that the Sun lies motionless at the center of the universe, that the Earth is not at its centre and moves. He was required to \"abjure, curse and detest\" those opinions. However, before all this, Pope Urban VIII had personally asked Galileo to give arguments for and against heliocentrism in a book, and to be careful not to advocate heliocentrism as physically proven since the scientific consensus at the time was that the evidence for heliocentrism was very weak. The Church had merely sided with the scientific consensus of the time. Pope Urban VIII asked that his own views on the matter be included in Galileo's book. Only the latter was fulfilled by Galileo. Whether unknowingly or deliberately, Simplicio, the defender of the Aristotelian/Ptolemaic geocentric view in \"Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems\", was often portrayed as an unlearned fool who lacked mathematical training. Although the preface of his book claims that the character is named after a famous Aristotelian philosopher (Simplicius in Latin, Simplicio in Italian), the name \"Simplicio\" in Italian also has the connotation of \"simpleton\". Unfortunately for his relationship with the Pope, Galileo put the words of Urban VIII into the mouth of Simplicio. Most historians agree Galileo did not act out of malice and felt blindsided by the reaction to his book. However, the Pope did not take the suspected public ridicule lightly, nor the physical Copernican advocacy. Galileo had alienated one of his biggest and most powerful supporters, the Pope, and was called to Rome to defend his writings.\nThe actual evidences that finally proved heliocentrism came centuries after Galileo: the stellar aberration of light by James Bradley in the 18th century, the orbital motions of binary stars by William Herschel in the 19th century, the accurate measurement of the stellar parallax in the 19th century, and Newtonian mechanics in the 17th century. According to physicist Christopher Graney, Galileo's own observations did not actually support the Copernican view, but were more consistent with Tycho Brahe's hybrid model where that Earth did not move and everything else circled around it and the Sun.\nBritish philosopher A. C. Grayling, still believes there is competition between science and religions in areas related to the origin of the universe, the nature of human beings and the possibility of miracles.\nIndependence.\nA modern view, described by Stephen Jay Gould as \"non-overlapping magisteria\" (NOMA), is that science and religion deal with fundamentally separate aspects of human experience and so, when each stays within its own domain, they co-exist peacefully. While Gould spoke of independence from the perspective of science, W. T. Stace viewed independence from the perspective of the philosophy of religion. Stace felt that science and religion, when each is viewed in its own domain, are both consistent and complete. They originate from different perceptions of reality, as Arnold O. Benz points out, but meet each other, for example, in the feeling of amazement and in ethics.\nThe USA's National Academy of Sciences supports the view that science and religion are independent.\nScience and religion are based on different aspects of human experience. In science, explanations must be based on evidence drawn from examining the natural world. Scientifically based observations or experiments that conflict with an explanation eventually must lead to modification or even abandonment of that explanation. Religious faith, in contrast, does not depend on empirical evidence, is not necessarily modified in the face of conflicting evidence, and typically involves supernatural forces or entities. Because they are not a part of nature, supernatural entities cannot be investigated by science. In this sense, science and religion are separate and address aspects of human understanding in different ways. Attempts to put science and religion against each other create controversy where none needs to exist.\nAccording to Archbishop John Habgood, both science and religion represent distinct ways of approaching experience and these differences are sources of debate. He views science as descriptive and religion as prescriptive. He stated that if science and mathematics concentrate on what the world \"ought to be\", in the way that religion does, it may lead to improperly ascribing properties to the natural world as happened among the followers of Pythagoras in the sixth century B.C. In contrast, proponents of a normative moral science take issue with the idea that science has \"no\" way of guiding \"oughts\". Habgood also stated that he believed that the reverse situation, where religion attempts to be descriptive, can also lead to inappropriately assigning properties to the natural world. A notable example is the now defunct belief in the Ptolemaic (geocentric) planetary model that held sway until changes in scientific and religious thinking were brought about by Galileo and proponents of his views.\nIn the view of the Lubavitcher rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, non-Euclidean geometry such as Lobachevsky's hyperbolic geometry and Riemann's elliptic geometry proved that Euclid's axioms, such as, \"there is only one straight line between two points\", are in fact arbitrary. Therefore, science, which relies on arbitrary axioms, can never refute Torah, which is absolute truth.\nParallels in method.\nAccording to Ian Barbour, Thomas S. Kuhn asserted that science is made up of paradigms that arise from cultural traditions, which is similar to the secular perspective on religion.\nMichael Polanyi asserted that it is merely a commitment to universality that protects against subjectivity and has nothing at all to do with personal detachment as found in many conceptions of the scientific method. Polanyi further asserted that all knowledge is personal and therefore the scientist must be performing a very personal if not necessarily subjective role when doing science. Polanyi added that the scientist often merely follows intuitions of \"intellectual beauty, symmetry, and 'empirical agreement'\". Polanyi held that science requires moral commitments similar to those found in religion.\nTwo physicists, Charles A. Coulson and Harold K. Schilling, both claimed that \"the methods of science and religion have much in common.\" Schilling asserted that both fields\u2014science and religion\u2014have \"a threefold structure\u2014of experience, theoretical interpretation, and practical application.\" Coulson asserted that science, like religion, \"advances by creative imagination\" and not by \"mere collecting of facts,\" while stating that religion should and does \"involve critical reflection on experience not unlike that which goes on in science.\" Religious language and scientific language also show parallels (cf. rhetoric of science).\nDialogue.\nThe \"religion and science community\" consists of those scholars who involve themselves with what has been called the \"religion-and-science dialogue\" or the \"religion-and-science field.\" The community belongs to neither the scientific nor the religious community, but is said to be a third overlapping community of interested and involved scientists, priests, clergymen, theologians and engaged non-professionals. Institutions interested in the intersection between science and religion include the Center for Theology and the Natural Sciences, the Institute on Religion in an Age of Science, the Ian Ramsey Centre, and the Faraday Institute. Journals addressing the relationship between science and religion include \"Theology and Science\" and \"Zygon\". Eugenie Scott has written that the \"science and religion\" movement is, overall, composed mainly of theists who have a healthy respect for science and may be beneficial to the public understanding of science. She contends that the \"Christian scholarship\" movement is not a problem for science, but that the \"Theistic science\" movement, which proposes abandoning methodological materialism, does cause problems in understanding of the nature of science. The Gifford Lectures were established in 1885 to further the discussion between \"natural theology\" and the scientific community. This annual series continues and has included William James, John Dewey, Carl Sagan, and many other professors from various fields.\nThe modern dialogue between religion and science is rooted in Ian Barbour's 1966 book \"Issues in Science and Religion\". Since that time it has grown into a serious academic field, with academic chairs in the subject area, and two dedicated academic journals, \"Zygon\" and \"Theology and Science\". Articles are also sometimes found in mainstream science journals such as \"American Journal of Physics\"\nand \"Science\".\nPhilosopher Alvin Plantinga has argued that there is superficial conflict but deep concord between science and religion, and that there is deep conflict between science and naturalism. Plantinga, in his book \"Where the Conflict Really Lies: Science, Religion, and Naturalism\", heavily contests the linkage of naturalism with science, as conceived by Richard Dawkins, Daniel Dennett and like-minded thinkers; while Daniel Dennett thinks that Plantinga stretches science to an unacceptable extent. Philosopher Maarten Boudry, in reviewing the book, has commented that he resorts to creationism and fails to \"stave off the conflict between theism and evolution.\" Cognitive scientist Justin L. Barrett, by contrast, reviews the same book and writes that \"those most needing to hear Plantinga's message may fail to give it a fair hearing for rhetorical rather than analytical reasons.\"\nIntegration.\nAs a general view, this holds that while interactions are complex between influences of science, theology, politics, social, and economic concerns, the productive engagements between science and religion throughout history should be duly stressed as the norm.\nScientific and theological perspectives often coexist peacefully. Christian and non-Christian religions have historically integrated well with scientific ideas, as in the ancient Egyptian technological mastery applied to monotheistic ends, the scientific advances made by Muslim scholars during the Ottoman Empire and mathematics under Hinduism and Buddhism. Even many 19th-century Christian communities welcomed scientists who claimed that science was not at all concerned with discovering the ultimate nature of reality. According to Lawrence M. Principe, the Johns Hopkins University Drew Professor of the Humanities, from a historical perspective this points out that much of the current-day clashes occur between limited extremists\u2014both religious and scientistic fundamentalists\u2014over a very few topics, and that the movement of ideas back and forth between scientific and theological thought has been more usual. To Principe, this perspective would point to the fundamentally common respect for written learning in religious traditions of rabbinical literature, Christian theology, and the Islamic Golden Age, including a Transmission of the Classics from Greek to Islamic to Christian traditions which helped spark the Renaissance. Religions have also given key participation in development of modern universities and libraries; centers of learning &amp; scholarship were coincident with religious institutions\u2014whether pagan, Muslim, or Christian.\nIndividual religions.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nA fundamental principle of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith is the harmony of religion and science. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed scripture asserts that true science and true religion can never be in conflict. `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1, the son of the founder of the religion, stated that religion without science is superstition and that science without religion is materialism. He also admonished that true religion must conform to the conclusions of science.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhism and science have been regarded as compatible by numerous authors. Some philosophic and psychological teachings found in Buddhism share points in common with modern Western scientific and philosophic thought. For example, Buddhism encourages the impartial investigation of nature (an activity referred to as \"Dhamma-Vicaya\" in the Pali Canon)\u2014the principal object of study being oneself. Buddhism and science both show a strong emphasis on causality. However, Buddhism does not focus on materialism.\nTenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, mentions that empirical scientific evidence supersedes the traditional teachings of Buddhism when the two are in conflict. In his book \"The Universe in a Single Atom\" he wrote, \"My confidence in venturing into science lies in my basic belief that as in science, so in Buddhism, understanding the nature of reality is pursued by means of critical investigation.\" He also stated, \"If scientific analysis were conclusively to demonstrate certain claims in Buddhism to be false,\" he says, \"then we must accept the findings of science and abandon those claims.\"\nChristianity.\nAmong early Christian teachers, Tertullian (c. 160\u2013220) held a generally negative opinion of Greek philosophy, while Origen (c. 185\u2013254) regarded it much more favorably and required his students to read nearly every work available to them.\nEarlier attempts at reconciliation of Christianity with Newtonian mechanics appear quite different from later attempts at reconciliation with the newer scientific ideas of evolution or relativity. Many early interpretations of evolution polarized themselves around a \"struggle for existence.\" These ideas were significantly countered by later findings of universal patterns of biological cooperation. According to John Habgood, the universe seems to be a mix of good and evil, beauty and pain, and that suffering may somehow be part of the process of creation. Habgood holds that Christians should not be surprised that suffering may be used creatively by God, given their faith in the symbol of the Cross. \nRobert John Russell has examined consonance and dissonance between modern physics, evolutionary biology, and Christian theology.\nChristian philosophers Augustine of Hippo (354\u2013430) and Thomas Aquinas (1225\u20131274) held that scriptures can have multiple interpretations on certain areas where the matters were far beyond their reach, therefore one should leave room for future findings to shed light on the meanings. The \"Handmaiden\" tradition, which saw secular studies of the universe as a very important and helpful part of arriving at a better understanding of scripture, was adopted throughout Christian history from early on. Also the sense that God created the world as a self operating system is what motivated many Christians throughout the Middle Ages to investigate nature.\nModern historians of science such as J.L. Heilbron, Alistair Cameron Crombie, David Lindberg, Edward Grant, Thomas Goldstein, and Ted Davis have reviewed the popular notion that medieval Christianity was a negative influence in the development of civilization and science. In their views, not only did the monks save and cultivate the remnants of ancient civilization during the barbarian invasions, but the medieval church promoted learning and science through its sponsorship of many universities which, under its leadership, grew rapidly in Europe in the 11th and 12th centuries. Saint Thomas Aquinas, the Church's \"model theologian\", not only argued that reason is in harmony with faith, he even recognized that reason can contribute to understanding revelation, and so encouraged intellectual development. He was not unlike other medieval theologians who sought out reason in the effort to defend his faith. Some modern scholars, such as Stanley Jaki, have claimed that Christianity with its particular worldview, was a crucial factor for the emergence of modern science.\nDavid C. Lindberg states that the widespread popular belief that the Middle Ages was a time of ignorance and superstition due to the Christian church is a \"caricature\". According to Lindberg, while there are some portions of the classical tradition which suggest this view, these were exceptional cases. It was common to tolerate and encourage critical thinking about the nature of the world. The relation between Christianity and science is complex and cannot be simplified to either harmony or conflict, according to Lindberg. Lindberg reports that \"the late medieval scholar rarely experienced the coercive power of the church and would have regarded himself as free (particularly in the natural sciences) to follow reason and observation wherever they led. There was no warfare between science and the church.\" Ted Peters in \"Encyclopedia of Religion\" writes that although there is some truth in the \"Galileo's condemnation\" story but through exaggerations, it has now become \"a modern myth perpetuated by those wishing to see warfare between science and religion who were allegedly persecuted by an atavistic and dogma-bound ecclesiastical authority\". In 1992, the Catholic Church's seeming vindication of Galileo attracted much comment in the media.\nA degree of concord between science and religion can be seen in religious belief and empirical science. The belief that God created the world and therefore humans, can lead to the view that he arranged for humans to know the world. This is underwritten by the doctrine of imago dei. In the words of Thomas Aquinas, \"Since human beings are said to be in the image of God in virtue of their having a nature that includes an intellect, such a nature is most in the image of God in virtue of being most able to imitate God\".\nDuring the Enlightenment, a period \"characterized by dramatic revolutions in science\" and the rise of Protestant challenges to the authority of the Catholic Church via individual liberty, the authority of Christian scriptures became strongly challenged. As science advanced, acceptance of a literal version of the Bible became \"increasingly untenable\" and some in that period presented ways of interpreting scripture according to its spirit on its authority and truth.\nAfter the Black Death in Europe, there occurred a generalized decrease in faith in the Catholic Church. The \"Natural Sciences\" during the Medieval Era focused largely on scientific arguments. The Copernicans, who were generally a small group of privately sponsored individuals, were deemed Heretics by the Church in some instances. Copernicus and his work challenged the view held by the Catholic Church and the common scientific view at the time, yet according to scholar J. L. Heilbron, the Roman Catholic Church sometimes provided financial support to the Copernicans. In doing so, the Church did support and promote scientific research when the goals in question were in alignment with those of the faith, so long as the findings were in line with the rhetoric of the Church. A case example is the Catholic need for an accurate calendar. Calendar reform was a touchy subject: civilians doubted the accuracy of the mathematics and were upset that the process unfairly selected curators of the reform. The Roman Catholic Church needed a precise date for the Easter Sabbath, and thus the Church was highly supportive of calendar reform. The need for the correct date of Easter was also the impetus of cathedral construction. Cathedrals essentially functioned as massive scale sun dials and, in some cases, camera obscuras. They were efficient scientific devices because they rose high enough for their naves to determine the summer and winter solstices. Heilbron contends that as far back as the twelfth century, the Roman Catholic Church was funding scientific discovery and the recovery of ancient Greek scientific texts. However, the Copernican revolution challenged the view held the Catholic Church and placed the Sun at the center of the Solar System.\nPerspectives on evolution.\nIn recent history, the theory of evolution has been at the center of some controversy between Christianity and science. Christians who accept a literal interpretation of the biblical account of creation find incompatibility between Darwinian evolution and their interpretation of the Christian faith. Creation science or scientific creationism is a branch of creationism that attempts to provide scientific support for a literal reading of the Genesis creation narrative in the Book of Genesis and attempts to disprove generally accepted scientific facts, theories and scientific paradigms about the geological history of the Earth, cosmology of the early universe, \nthe chemical origins of life and biological evolution. It began in the 1960s as a fundamentalist Christian effort in the United States to prove Biblical inerrancy and falsify the scientific evidence for evolution. It has since developed a sizable religious following in the United States, with creation science ministries branching worldwide. In 1925, The State of Tennessee passed the Butler Act, which prohibited the teaching of the theory of evolution in all schools in the state. Later that year, a similar law was passed in Mississippi, and likewise, Arkansas in 1927. In 1968, these \"anti-monkey\" laws were struck down by the Supreme Court of the United States as unconstitutional, \"because they established a religious doctrine violating both the First and Fourth Amendments to the Constitution.\"\nMost scientists have rejected creation science for several reasons, including that its claims do not refer to natural causes and cannot be tested. In 1987, the United States Supreme Court ruled that creationism is religion, not science, and cannot be advocated in public school classrooms. In 2018, the \"Orlando Sentinel\" reported that \"Some private schools in Florida that rely on public funding teach students\" Creationism.\nTheistic evolution attempts to reconcile Christian beliefs and science by accepting the scientific understanding of the age of the Earth and the process of evolution. It includes a range of beliefs, including views described as evolutionary creationism, which accepts some findings of modern science but also upholds classical religious teachings about God and creation in Christian context.\nRoman Catholicism.\nWhile refined and clarified over the centuries, the Roman Catholic position on the relationship between science and religion is one of harmony, and has maintained the teaching of natural law as set forth by Thomas Aquinas. For example, regarding scientific study such as that of evolution, the church's unofficial position is an example of theistic evolution, stating that faith and scientific findings regarding human evolution are not in conflict, though humans are regarded as a special creation, and that the existence of God is required to explain both monogenism and the spiritual component of human origins. Catholic schools have included all manners of scientific study in their curriculum for many centuries.\nGalileo once stated that \"The intention of the Holy Spirit is to teach us how to go to heaven, not how the heavens go.\" In 1981, Pope John Paul II, then leader of the Roman Catholic Church, spoke of the relationship this way: \"The Bible itself speaks to us of the origin of the universe and its make-up, not in order to provide us with a scientific treatise, but in order to state the correct relationships of man with God and with the universe. Sacred Scripture wishes simply to declare that the world was created by God, and in order to teach this truth it expresses itself in the terms of the cosmology in use at the time of the writer\".\nPope Francis, in his encyclical letter Laudato si', affirms his opinion that \"science and religion, with their distinctive approaches to understanding reality, can \nenter into an intense dialogue fruitful for both\".\nInfluence of a biblical worldview on early modern science.\nAccording to Andrew Dickson White's 1896 book \"A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom\", a biblical world view affected negatively the progress of science through time. Dickinson also argues that immediately following the Reformation matters were even worse. The interpretations of Scripture by Luther and Calvin became as sacred to their followers as the Scripture itself. For instance, when Georg Calixtus ventured, in interpreting the Psalms, to question the accepted belief that \"the waters above the heavens\" were contained in a vast receptacle upheld by a solid vault, he was bitterly denounced as heretical. Today, much of the scholarship in which the conflict thesis was originally based is considered to be inaccurate. For instance, the claim that early Christians rejected scientific findings by the Greco-Romans is false, since the \"handmaiden\" view of secular studies was seen to shed light on theology. This view was widely adapted throughout the early medieval period and afterwards by theologians (such as Augustine) and ultimately resulted in fostering interest in knowledge about nature through time. Also, the claim that people of the Middle Ages widely believed that the Earth was flat was first propagated in the same period that originated the conflict thesis and is still very common in popular culture. Modern scholars regard this claim as mistaken, as the contemporary historians of science David C. Lindberg and Ronald L. Numbers write: \"there was scarcely a Christian scholar of the Middle Ages who did not acknowledge [earth's] sphericity and even know its approximate circumference.\" From the fall of Rome to the time of Columbus, all major scholars and many vernacular writers interested in the physical shape of the earth held a spherical view with the exception of Lactantius and Cosmas.\nH. Floris Cohen argued for a biblical Protestant, but not excluding Catholicism, influence on the early development of modern science. He presented Dutch historian R. Hooykaas' argument that a biblical world-view holds all the necessary antidotes for the hubris of Greek rationalism: a respect for manual labour, leading to more experimentation and empiricism, and a supreme God that left nature open to emulation and manipulation. It supports the idea early modern science rose due to a combination of Greek and biblical thought.\nOxford historian Peter Harrison is another who has argued that a biblical worldview was significant for the development of modern science. Harrison contends that Protestant approaches to the book of scripture had significant, if largely unintended, consequences for the interpretation of the book of nature. Harrison has also suggested that literal readings of the Genesis narratives of the Creation and Fall motivated and legitimated scientific activity in seventeenth-century England. For many of its seventeenth-century practitioners, science was imagined to be a means of restoring a human dominion over nature that had been lost as a consequence of the Fall.\nHistorian and professor of religion Eugene M. Klaaren holds that \"a belief in divine creation\" was central to an emergence of science in seventeenth-century England. The philosopher Michael Foster has published analytical philosophy connecting Christian doctrines of creation with empiricism. Historian William B. Ashworth has argued against the historical notion of distinctive mind-sets and the idea of Catholic and Protestant sciences. Historians James R. Jacob and Margaret C. Jacob have argued for a linkage between seventeenth-century Anglican intellectual transformations and influential English scientists (e.g., Robert Boyle and Isaac Newton). John Dillenberger and Christopher B. Kaiser have written theological surveys, which also cover additional interactions occurring in the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries. Philosopher of Religion, Richard Jones, has written a philosophical critique of the \"dependency thesis\" which assumes that modern science emerged from Christian sources and doctrines. Though he acknowledges that modern science emerged in a religious framework, that Christianity greatly elevated the importance of science by sanctioning and religiously legitimizing it in the medieval period, and that Christianity created a favorable social context for it to grow; he argues that direct Christian beliefs or doctrines were not primary sources of scientific pursuits by natural philosophers, nor was Christianity, in and of itself, exclusively or directly necessary in developing or practicing modern science.\nOxford University historian and theologian John Hedley Brooke wrote that \"when natural philosophers referred to \"laws\" of nature, they were not glibly choosing that metaphor. Laws were the result of legislation by an intelligent deity. Thus the philosopher Ren\u00e9 Descartes (1596\u20131650) insisted that he was discovering the \"laws that God has put into nature.\" Later Newton would declare that the regulation of the solar system presupposed the \"counsel and dominion of an intelligent and powerful Being.\" Historian Ronald L. Numbers stated that this thesis \"received a boost\" from mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead's \"Science and the Modern World\" (1925). Numbers has also argued, \"Despite the manifest shortcomings of the claim that Christianity gave birth to science\u2014most glaringly, it ignores or minimizes the contributions of ancient Greeks and medieval Muslims\u2014it too, refuses to succumb to the death it deserves.\" The sociologist Rodney Stark of Baylor University, argued in contrast that \"Christian theology was essential for the rise of science.\"\nProtestantism had an important influence on science. According to the Merton Thesis there was a positive correlation between the rise of Puritanism and Protestant Pietism on the one hand and early experimental science on the other. The Merton Thesis has two separate parts: Firstly, it presents a theory that science changes due to an accumulation of observations and improvement in experimental techniques and methodology; secondly, it puts forward the argument that the popularity of science in 17th-century England and the religious demography of the Royal Society (English scientists of that time were predominantly Puritans or other Protestants) can be explained by a correlation between Protestantism and the scientific values. In his theory, Robert K. Merton focused on English Puritanism and German Pietism as having been responsible for the development of the scientific revolution of the 17th and 18th centuries. Merton explained that the connection between religious affiliation and interest in science was the result of a significant synergy between the ascetic Protestant values and those of modern science. Protestant values encouraged scientific research by allowing science to study God's influence on the world and thus providing a religious justification for scientific research.\nSome scholars have noted a direct tie between \"particular aspects of traditional Christianity\" and the rise of science. Other scholars and historians attribute Christianity to having contributed to the rise of the Scientific Revolution.\nReconciliation in Britain in the early 20th century.\nIn \"Reconciling Science and Religion: The Debate in Early-twentieth-century Britain\", historian of biology Peter J. Bowler argues that in contrast to the conflicts between science and religion in the U.S. in the 1920s (most famously the Scopes Trial), during this period Great Britain experienced a concerted effort at reconciliation, championed by intellectually conservative scientists, supported by liberal theologians but opposed by younger scientists and secularists and conservative Christians. These attempts at reconciliation fell apart in the 1930s due to increased social tensions, moves towards neo-orthodox theology and the acceptance of the modern evolutionary synthesis.\nIn the 20th century, several ecumenical organizations promoting a harmony between science and Christianity were founded, most notably the American Scientific Affiliation, The Biologos Foundation, Christians in Science, The Society of Ordained Scientists, and The Veritas Forum.\nConfucianism and traditional Chinese religion.\nThe historical process of Confucianism has largely been antipathic towards scientific discovery. However the religio-philosophical system itself is more neutral on the subject than such an analysis might suggest. In his writings On Heaven, Xunzi espoused a proto-scientific world view. However, during the Han Synthesis the more anti-empirical Mencius was favored and combined with Daoist skepticism regarding the nature of reality. Likewise, during the medieval period, Zhu Xi argued against technical investigation and specialization proposed by Chen Liang. After contact with the West, scholars such as Wang Fuzhi would rely on Buddhist/Daoist skepticism to denounce all science as a subjective pursuit limited by humanity's fundamental ignorance of the true nature of the world.\nThe Jesuits from Europe taught Western math and science to the Chinese bureaucrats in hopes of religious conversion. This process saw several challenges of both European and Chinese spiritual and scientific beliefs. The keynote text of Chinese scientific philosophy, \"The Book of Changes\" (or Yi Jing) was initially mocked and disregarded by the Westerners. In return, Confucian scholars Dai Zhen and Ji Yun found the concept of phantoms laughable and ridiculous. \"The Book of Changes\" outlined orthodoxy cosmology in the Qing, including \"yin\" and \"yang\" and the five cosmic phases. Sometimes the missionary exploits proved dangerous for the Westerners. Jesuit missionaries and scholars Ferdinand Vervbiest and Adam Schall were punished after using scientific methods to determine the exact time of the 1664 eclipse. However, the European mission eastward did not only cause conflict. Joachim Bouvet, a theologian who held equal respect for both the Bible and the Book of Changes, was productive in his mission of spreading the Christian faith.\nAfter the May Fourth Movement, attempts to modernize Confucianism and reconcile it with scientific understanding were attempted by many scholars including Feng Youlan and Xiong Shili. Given the close relationship that Confucianism shares with Buddhism, many of the same arguments used to reconcile Buddhism with science also readily translate to Confucianism. However, modern scholars have also attempted to define the relationship between science and Confucianism on Confucianism's own terms and the results have usually led to the conclusion that Confucianism and science are fundamentally compatible.\nHinduism.\nIn Hinduism, the dividing line between objective sciences and spiritual knowledge (\"adhyatma vidya\") is a linguistic paradox. Hindu scholastic activities and ancient Indian scientific advancements were so interconnected that many Hindu scriptures are also ancient scientific manuals and vice versa. In 1835, English was made the primary language for teaching in higher education in India, exposing Hindu scholars to Western secular ideas; this started a renaissance regarding religious and philosophical thought. Hindu sages maintained that logical argument and rational proof using Nyaya is the way to obtain correct knowledge. The scientific level of understanding focuses on how things work and from where they originate, while Hinduism strives to understand the ultimate purposes for the existence of living things. To obtain and broaden the knowledge of the world for spiritual perfection, many refer to the Bh\u0101gavata for guidance because it draws upon a scientific and theological dialogue. Hinduism offers methods to correct and transform itself in course of time. For instance, Hindu views on the development of life include a range of viewpoints in regards to evolution, creationism, and the origin of life within the traditions of Hinduism. For instance, it has been suggested that Wallace-Darwininan evolutionary thought was a part of Hindu thought centuries before modern times. The Shankara and the S\u0101mkhya did not have a problem with the theory of evolution, but instead, argued about the existence of God and what happened after death. These two distinct groups argued among each other's philosophies because of their texts, not the idea of evolution. With the publication of Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\", many Hindus were eager to connect their scriptures to Darwinism, finding similarities between Brahma's creation, Vishnu's incarnations, and evolution theories.\nSamkhya, the oldest school of Hindu philosophy prescribes a particular method to analyze knowledge. According to Samkhya, all knowledge is possible through three means of valid knowledge \u2013\nNyaya, the Hindu school of logic, accepts all these 3 means and in addition accepts one more \u2013 \"Upam\u0101na\" (comparison).\nThe accounts of the emergence of life within the universe vary in description, but classically the deity called Brahma, from a Trimurti of three deities also including Vishnu and Shiva, is described as performing the act of 'creation', or more specifically of 'propagating life within the universe' with the other two deities being responsible for 'preservation' and 'destruction' (of the universe) respectively. In this respect some Hindu schools do not treat the scriptural creation myth literally and often the creation stories themselves do not go into specific detail, thus leaving open the possibility of incorporating at least some theories in support of evolution. Some Hindus find support for, or foreshadowing of evolutionary ideas in scriptures, namely the Vedas.\nThe incarnations of Vishnu (Dashavatara) is almost identical to the scientific explanation of the sequence of biological evolution of man and animals. The sequence of avatars starts from an aquatic organism (Matsya), to an amphibian (Kurma), to a land-animal (Varaha), to a humanoid (Narasimha), to a dwarf human (Vamana), to 5 forms of well developed human beings (Parashurama, Rama, Balarama/Buddha, Krishna, Kalki) who showcase an increasing form of complexity (Axe-man, King, Plougher/Sage, wise Statesman, mighty Warrior). In fact, many Hindu gods are represented with features of animals as well as those of humans, leading many Hindus to easily accept evolutionary links between animals and humans. In India, the home country of Hindus, educated Hindus widely accept the theory of biological evolution. In a survey of 909 people, 77% of respondents in India agreed with Charles Darwin's Theory of Evolution, and 85 per cent of God-believing people said they believe in evolution as well.\nAs per Vedas, another explanation for the creation is based on the five elements: earth, water, fire, air and aether.\nThe Hindu religion traces its beginnings to the Vedas. Everything that is established in the Hindu faith such as the gods and goddesses, doctrines, chants, spiritual insights, etc. flow from the poetry of Vedic hymns. The Vedas offer an honor to the sun and moon, water and wind, and to the order in Nature that is universal. This naturalism is the beginning of what further becomes the connection between Hinduism and science.\nIslam.\nFrom an Islamic standpoint, science, the study of nature, is considered to be linked to the concept of \"Tawhid\" (the Oneness of God), as are all other branches of knowledge. In Islam, nature is not seen as a separate entity, but rather as an integral part of Islam's holistic outlook on God, humanity, and the world. The Islamic view of science and nature is continuous with that of religion and God. This link implies a sacred aspect to the pursuit of scientific knowledge by Muslims, as nature itself is viewed in the Qur'an as a compilation of signs pointing to the Divine. It was with this understanding that science was studied and understood in Islamic civilizations, specifically during the eighth to sixteenth centuries, prior to the colonization of the Muslim world. Robert Briffault, in \"The Making of Humanity\", asserts that the very existence of science, as it is understood in the modern sense, is rooted in the scientific thought and knowledge that emerged in Islamic civilizations during this time. Ibn al-Haytham, an Arab Muslim, was an early proponent of the concept that a hypothesis must be proved by experiments based on confirmable procedures or mathematical evidence\u2014hence understanding the scientific method 200 years before Renaissance scientists. Ibn al-Haytham described his theology: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I constantly sought knowledge and truth, and it became my belief that for gaining access to the and closeness to God, there is no better way than that of searching for truth and knowledge.\nWith the decline of Islamic Civilizations in the late Middle Ages and the rise of Europe, the Islamic scientific tradition shifted into a new period. Institutions that had existed for centuries in the Muslim world looked to the new scientific institutions of European powers. This changed the practice of science in the Muslim world, as Islamic scientists had to confront the western approach to scientific learning, which was based on a different philosophy of nature. From the time of this initial upheaval of the Islamic scientific tradition to the present day, Muslim scientists and scholars have developed a spectrum of viewpoints on the place of scientific learning within the context of Islam, none of which are universally accepted or practiced. However, most maintain the view that the acquisition of knowledge and scientific pursuit in general is not in disaccord with Islamic thought and religious belief.\nDuring the thirteenth century, the Caliphate system in the Islamic Empire fell, and scientific discovery thrived. The Islamic Civilization has a long history of scientific advancement; and their theological practices catalyzed a great deal of scientific discovery. In fact, it was due to necessities of Muslim worship and their vast empire that much science and philosophy was created. People needed to know in which direction they needed to pray toward to face Mecca. Many historians through time have asserted that all modern science originates from ancient Greek scholarship; but scholars like Martin Bernal have claimed that most ancient Greek scholarship relied heavily on the work of scholars from ancient Egypt and the Levant. Ancient Egypt was the foundational site of the Hermetic School, which believed that the sun represented an invisible God. Amongst other things, Islamic civilization was key because it documented and recorded Greek scholarship.\nAhmadiyya.\nThe Ahmadiyya movement emphasize that \"there is no contradiction between Islam and science\". For example, Ahmadi Muslims universally accept in principle the process of evolution, albeit divinely guided, and actively promote it. Over the course of several decades the movement has issued various publications in support of the scientific concepts behind the process of evolution, and frequently engages in promoting how religious scriptures, such as the Qur'an, supports the concept. For general purposes, the second Khalifa of the community, Mirza Basheer-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad says:\nThe Holy Quran directs attention towards science, time and again, rather than evoking prejudice against it. The Quran has never advised against studying science, lest the reader should become a non-believer; because it has no such fear or concern. The Holy Quran is not worried that if people will learn the laws of nature its spell will break. The Quran has not prevented people from science, rather it states, \"Say, 'Reflect on what is happening in the heavens and the earth.'\" (Al Younus)\nJainism.\nBiology.\nJainism classifies life into two main divisions those who are static by nature (sthavar) and those who are mobile (trasa).\nJain texts describes life in plant long before Jagdish Chandra Bose proved that plants have life. In the Jain philosophy the plant lives are termed as 'Vanaspatikaya'.\nJainism and non-creationism.\nJain theory of causality holds that a cause and its effect are always identical in nature and an immaterial entity like a creator God cannot be the cause of a material entity like the universe. According to Jain belief, it is not possible to create matter out of nothing.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[a] The universe and its constituents\u2013 soul, matter, space, time, and natural laws have always existed (a static universe, similar to that proposed by the steady state cosmological model).\nSurveys on scientists and the general public.\nScientists.\nBetween 1901 and 2000, 654 Nobel prize laureates belonged to 28 different religions. Most (65%) have identified Christianity in its various forms as their religious preference. Specifically on the science-related prizes, Christians have won a total of 73% of all the Chemistry, 65% in Physics, 62% in Medicine, and 54% in all Economics awards. Jewish descent (including Jewish atheists) have won 17% of the prizes in Chemistry, 26% in Medicine, and 23% in Physics. Atheists, Agnostics, and Freethinkers (does not include Jewish atheists) have won 7% of the prizes in Chemistry, 9% in Medicine, and 5% in Physics. Muslims have won 13 prizes (three were in scientific categories).\nAccording to scholar Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi, between 1901\u20132001, about 57% of laureates in scientific fields were Christians, and 26% were of Jewish descent (including Jewish atheists).\nGlobal.\nAccording to a global study on scientists, a significant portion of scientists around the world have religious identities, beliefs, and practices overall. Furthermore, the majority of scientists do not believe there is inherent conflict in being religious and a scientist and stated that \"the conflict perspective on science and religion is an invention of the West\" since such a view is not prevalent among most of scientists around the world. Instead of seeing religion and science as 'always in conflict' they rather view it through the lenses of various cultural dimensions to the relations between religion and science. In an international study, very few scientists stated that scientific training or knowledge played a role in any declines in personal religiosity.\nEurope.\nAccording to a study from 2023 \"30\u201339% of Western-European researchers identify with \"some religious affiliation\". \"30\u201337% of scientists identify as non-believers or atheists, and an additional 10\u201328% as agnostic (with wide geographical differences)\".\nUnited States.\nIn 1916, 1,000 leading American scientists were randomly chosen from \"American Men of Science\" and 42% believed God existed, 42% disbelieved, and 17% had doubts/did not know; however, when the study was replicated 80 years later using \"American Men and Women of Science\" in 1996, the results were very much the same with 39% believing God exists, 45% disbelieved, and 15% had doubts/did not know. In the same 1996 survey, for scientists in the fields of biology, mathematics, and physics/astronomy, belief in a god that is \"in intellectual and affective communication with humankind\" was most popular among mathematicians (about 45%) and least popular among physicists (about 22%).\nIn terms of belief in God among elite scientists, such as \"great scientists\" in the \"American Men of Science\" or members of the National Academies of Science; 53% disbelieved, 21% were agnostic, and 28% believed in 1914; 68% disbelieved, 17% were agnostic, and 15% believed in 1933; and 72% disbelieved, 21% were agnostic, and 7% believed in 1998. However Eugenie Scott argued that there are methodological issues in the study, including ambiguity in the questions such using a personal definition of God instead of broader definitions of God. A study with simplified wording to include impersonal or non-interventionist ideas of God concluded that 40% of \"prominent scientists\" in the US believe in a god.\nOthers have also observed some methodological issues which impacted the results.\nA survey conducted between 2005 and 2007 by Elaine Howard Ecklund of University at Buffalo, The State University of New York of 1,646 natural and social science professors at 21 US research universities found that, in terms of belief in God or a higher power, more than 60% expressed either disbelief or agnosticism and more than 30% expressed belief. More specifically, nearly 34% answered \"I do not believe in God\" and about 30% answered \"I do not know if there is a God and there is no way to find out.\" In the same study, 28% said they believed in God and 8% believed in a higher power that was not God. Ecklund stated that scientists were often able to consider themselves spiritual without religion or belief in god. Ecklund and Scheitle concluded, from their study, that the individuals from non-religious backgrounds disproportionately had self-selected into scientific professions and that the assumption that becoming a scientist necessarily leads to loss of religion is untenable since the study did not strongly support the idea that scientists had dropped religious identities due to their scientific training. Instead, factors such as upbringing, age, and family size were significant influences on religious identification since those who had religious upbringing were more likely to be religious and those who had a non-religious upbringing were more likely to not be religious. The authors also found little difference in religiosity between social and natural scientists.\nIn terms of perceptions, most social and natural scientists from 21 American universities did not perceive conflict between science and religion, while 37% did. However, in the study, scientists who had experienced limited exposure to religion tended to perceive conflict. In the same study they found that nearly one in five atheist scientists who are parents (17%) are part of religious congregations and have attended a religious service more than once in the past year. Some of the reasons for doing so are their scientific identity (wishing to expose their children to all sources of knowledge so they can make up their own minds), spousal influence, and desire for community.\nA 2009 report by the Pew Research Center found that members of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) were \"much less religious than the general public,\" with 51% believing in some form of deity or higher power. Specifically, 33% of those polled believe in God, 18% believe in a universal spirit or higher power, and 41% did not believe in either God or a higher power. 48% say they have a religious affiliation, equal to the number who say they are not affiliated with any religious tradition. 17% were atheists, 11% were agnostics, 20% were nothing in particular, 8% were Jewish, 10% were Catholic, 16% were Protestant, 4% were Evangelical, 10% were other religion. The survey also found younger scientists to be \"substantially more likely than their older counterparts to say they believe in God\". Among the surveyed fields, chemists were the most likely to say they believe in God.\nElaine Ecklund conducted a study from 2011 to 2014 involving the general US population, including rank and file scientists, in collaboration with the AAAS. The study noted that 76% of the scientists identified with a religious tradition. 85% of evangelical scientists had no doubts about the existence of God, compared to 35% of the whole scientific population. In terms of religion and science, 85% of evangelical scientists saw no conflict (73% collaboration, 12% independence), while 75% of the whole scientific population saw no conflict (40% collaboration, 35% independence).\nReligious beliefs of US professors were examined using a nationally representative sample of more than 1,400 professors. They found that in the social sciences: 23% did not believe in God, 16% did not know if God existed, 43% believed God existed, and 16% believed in a higher power. Out of the natural sciences: 20% did not believe in God, 33% did not know if God existed, 44% believed God existed, and 4% believed in a higher power. Overall, out of the whole study: 10% were atheists, 13% were agnostic, 19% believe in a higher power, 4% believe in God some of the time, 17% had doubts but believed in God, 35% believed in God and had no doubts.\nIn 2005, Farr Curlin, a University of Chicago Instructor in Medicine and a member of the MacLean Center for Clinical Medical Ethics, noted in a study that doctors tend to be science-minded religious people. He helped author a study that \"found that 76 percent of doctors believe in God and 59 percent believe in some sort of afterlife.\" Furthermore, \"90 percent of doctors in the United States attend religious services at least occasionally, compared to 81 percent of all adults.\" He reasoned, \"The responsibility to care for those who are suffering and the rewards of helping those in need resonate throughout most religious traditions.\". A study from 2017 showed 65% of physicians believe in God.\nOther or multiple countries.\nAccording to the Study of Secularism in Society and Culture's report on 1,100 scientists in India: 66% are Hindu, 14% did not report a religion, 10% are atheist/no religion, 3% are Muslim, 3% are Christian, 4% are Buddhist, Sikh or other. 39% have a belief in a god, 6% have belief in a god sometimes, 30% do not believe in a god but believe in a higher power, 13% do not know if there is a god, and 12% do not believe in a god. 49% believe in the efficacy of prayer, 90% strongly agree or somewhat agree with approving degrees in Ayurvedic medicine. Furthermore, the term \"secularism\" is understood to have diverse and simultaneous meanings among Indian scientists: 93% believe it to be tolerance of religions and philosophies, 83% see it as involving separation of church and state, 53% see it as not identifying with religious traditions, 40% see it as absence of religious beliefs, and 20% see it as atheism. Accordingly, 75% of Indian scientists had a \"secular\" outlook in terms of being tolerant of other religions.\nAccording to the Religion Among Scientists in International Context (RASIC) study on 1,581 scientists from the United Kingdom and 1,763 scientists from India, along with 200 interviews: 65% of U.K. scientists identified as nonreligious and only 6% of Indian scientists identify as nonreligious, 12% of scientists in the U.K. attend religious services on a regular basis and 32% of scientists in India do. In terms of the Indian scientists, 73% of scientists responded that there are basic truths in many religions, 27% said they believe in God and 38% expressed belief in a higher power of some kind. In terms of perceptions of conflict between science and religion, less than half of both U.K. scientists (38%) and Indian scientists (18%) perceived conflict between religion and science.\nAccording to Elaine Ecklund's research on 1,293 atheist scientists from the US and UK, a majority of atheist scientists came from a nonreligious upbringing and never had a religious affiliation. Also, fewer than half of the atheist scientists who were exposed to religion in their youth said science played a role in them becoming an atheist.\nGeneral public.\nGlobal studies which have pooled data on religion and science from 1981 to 2001, have noted that countries with greater faith in science also often have stronger religious beliefs, while less religious countries have more skepticism of the impact of science and technology.\nOther research cites the National Science Foundation's finding that America has more favorable public attitudes towards science than Europe, Russia, and Japan despite differences in levels of religiosity in these cultures.\nOther cross-national studies have found no correlations supporting the contention that religiosity undermines interest in science topics or activities among the general populations globally.\nCross-cultural studies indicate that people tend to use both natural and supernatural explanations for explaining numerous things about the world such as illness, death, and origins. In other words, they do not think of natural and supernatural explanations as antagonistic or dichotomous, but instead see them as coexisting and complementary. The reconciliation of natural and supernatural explanations is normal and pervasive from a psychological standpoint across cultures.\nEurope.\nA study conducted on adolescents from Christian schools in Northern Ireland, noted a positive relationship between attitudes towards Christianity and science once attitudes towards scientism and creationism were accounted for.\nA study on people from Sweden concludes that though the Swedes are among the most non-religious, paranormal beliefs are prevalent among both the young and adult populations. This is likely due to a loss of confidence in institutions such as the Church and Science.\nConcerning specific topics like creationism, it is not an exclusively American phenomenon. A poll on adult Europeans revealed that 40% believed in naturalistic evolution, 21% in theistic evolution, 20% in special creation, and 19% are undecided; with the highest concentrations of young earth creationists in Switzerland (21%), Austria (20%), Germany (18%). Other countries such as Netherlands, Britain, and Australia have experienced growth in such views as well.\nUnited States.\nAccording to a 2015 Pew Research Center Study on the public perceptions on science, people's perceptions on conflict with science have more to do with their perceptions of other people's beliefs than their own personal beliefs. For instance, the majority of people with a religious affiliation (68%) saw no conflict between their own personal religious beliefs and science while the majority of those without a religious affiliation (76%) perceived science and religion to be in conflict. The study noted that people who are not affiliated with any religion, also known as \"religiously unaffiliated\", often have supernatural beliefs and spiritual practices despite them not being affiliated with any religion and also that \"just one-in-six religiously unaffiliated adults (16%) say their own religious beliefs conflict with science.\" Furthermore, the study observed, \"The share of all adults who perceive a conflict between science and their own religious beliefs has declined somewhat in recent years, from 36% in 2009 to 30% in 2014. Among those who are affiliated with a religion, the share of people who say there is a conflict between science and their personal religious beliefs dropped from 41% to 34% during this period.\"\nIn a 2024 Pew research center report, only 35% of \"nones\" (atheist, agnostics, and nothing in particular on religious affiliation) believe that the natural world is all there is, while the majority of nones (63%) believe there are spiritual things beyond the world; and the majority of nones (56%) also believe there are some things that science cannot explain.\nThe 2013 MIT Survey on Science, Religion and Origins examined the views of religious people in America on origins science topics like evolution, the Big Bang, and perceptions of conflicts between science and religion. It found that a large majority of religious people see no conflict between science and religion and only 11% of religious people belong to religions openly rejecting evolution. The fact that the gap between personal and official beliefs of their religions is so large suggests that part of the problem, might be defused by people learning more about their own religious doctrine and the science it endorses, thereby bridging this belief gap. The study concluded that \"mainstream religion and mainstream science are neither attacking one another nor perceiving a conflict.\" Furthermore, they note that this conciliatory view is shared by most leading science organizations such as the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS).\nA study was made in collaboration with the AAAS collecting data on the general public from 2011 to 2014, with the focus on evangelicals and evangelical scientists. Even though evangelicals make up only 26% of the US population, the study found that nearly 70 percent of all evangelical Christians do not view science and religion as being in conflict with each other (48% saw them as complementary and 21% saw them as independent) while 73% of the general US population saw no conflict either.\nAccording to Elaine Ecklund's 2018 study, the majority of religious groups see religion and science in collaboration or independent of each other, while the majority of groups without religion see science and religion in conflict.\nOther lines of research on perceptions of science among the American public conclude that most religious groups see no general epistemological conflict with science and they have no differences with nonreligious groups in the propensity of seeking out scientific knowledge, although there may be subtle epistemic or moral conflicts when scientists make counterclaims to religious tenets. Findings from the Pew Center note similar findings and also note that the majority of Americans (80\u201390%) show strong support for scientific research, agree that science makes society and individual's lives better, and 8 in 10 Americans would be happy if their children were to become scientists. Even strict creationists tend to have very favorable views on science.\nAccording to a 2007 poll by the Pew Forum, \"while large majorities of Americans respect science and scientists, they are not always willing to accept scientific findings that squarely contradict their religious beliefs.\" The Pew Forum states that specific factual disagreements are \"not common today\", though 40% to 50% of Americans do not accept the evolution of humans and other living things, with the \"strongest opposition\" coming from evangelical Christians at 65% saying life did not evolve. 51% of the population believes humans and other living things evolved: 26% through natural selection only, 21% somehow guided, 4% do not know. In the U.S., biological evolution is the only concrete example of conflict where a significant portion of the American public denies scientific consensus for religious reasons. In terms of advanced industrialized nations, the United States is the most religious.\nA 2009 study from the Pew Research Center on Americans perceptions of science, showed a broad consensus that most Americans, including most religious Americans, hold scientific research and scientists themselves in high regard. The study showed that 84% of Americans say they view science as having a mostly positive impact on society. Among those who attend religious services at least once a week, the number is roughly the same at 80%. Furthermore, 70% of U.S. adults think scientists contribute \"a lot\" to society.\nA 2011 study on a national sample of US college students examined whether these students viewed the science / religion relationship as reflecting primarily conflict, collaboration, or independence. The study concluded that the majority of undergraduates in both the natural and social sciences do not see conflict between science and religion. Another finding in the study was that it is more likely for students to move away from a conflict perspective to an independence or collaboration perspective than towards a conflict view.\nIn the US, people who had no religious affiliation were no more likely than the religious population to have New Age beliefs and practices.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "29268", "revid": "39079878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29268", "title": "Stephen Sondheim", "text": "American composer and lyricist (1930\u20132021)\nStephen Joshua Sondheim (; March22, 1930\u00a0\u2013 November26, 2021) was an American composer and lyricist. Regarded as one of the most important figures in 20th-century musical theater, he is credited with reinventing the American musical. He received numerous accolades, including eight Tony Awards, an Academy Award, eight Grammy Awards, five Olivier Awards, and the Pulitzer Prize. He was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame in 1982 and awarded the Kennedy Center Honor in 1993 and the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2015.\nSondheim was mentored at an early age by Oscar Hammerstein II and later frequently collaborated with Harold Prince and James Lapine. His Broadway musicals tackle themes that range beyond the genre's traditional subjects, while addressing darker elements of the human experience. His music and lyrics are characterized by their complexity, sophistication, and ambivalence.\nSondheim began his career by writing the lyrics for both \"West Side Story\" (1957) and \"Gypsy\" (1959). He transitioned to writing both music and lyrics, including for five works that earned Tony Awards for Best Musical: \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" (1962), \"Company\" (1970), \"A Little Night Music\" (1973), \"\" (1979), and \"Passion\" (1994). He is also known for \"Follies\" (1971), \"Pacific Overtures\" (1976), \"Merrily We Roll Along\" (1981), \"Sunday in the Park with George\" (1984), \"Into the Woods\" (1987), and \"Assassins\" (1990).\nTheaters are named after him both on Broadway and in the West End of London. He won the Academy Award for Best Original Song for \"Sooner or Later\" from \"Dick Tracy\" (1990). Many of his works have been adapted for film, including \"West Side Story\" (1961), \"Gypsy\" (1962), \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" (1966), \"A Little Night Music\" (1977), \"\" (2007), \"Into the Woods\" (2014), and \"West Side Story\" (2021). He published three books, including two involving his collected lyrics.\nEarly life and education.\nSondheim was born on March 22, 1930, into a Jewish family in New York City, the son of Etta Janet (\"Foxy\"; n\u00e9e Fox; 1897\u20131992) and Herbert Sondheim (1895\u20131966). His paternal grandparents, Isaac and Rosa, were German Jews, and his maternal grandparents, Joseph and Bessie, were Lithuanian Jews from Vilnius. His father manufactured dresses designed by his mother. Sondheim grew up on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where he began taking piano lessons at age 7. After his parents divorced, he lived on a farm near Doylestown, Pennsylvania. The only child of affluent parents living in the San Remo at 145 Central Park West, he was described in Meryle Secrest's biography \"Stephen Sondheim: A Life\" as an isolated, emotionally neglected child. When he lived in New York City, Sondheim attended the Ethical Culture Fieldston School. He spent several summers at Camp Androscoggin, where Tom Lehrer was a counselor.&lt;ref name=\"newyorker/Gopnik/daniel-levin-becker\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nHis mother sent him to New York Military Academy in 1940. From 1942 to 1947, he attended George School, a private Quaker preparatory school in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, where he wrote his first musical, \"By George\", in 1946. After graduating from high school, Sondheim attended Williams College, where he initially majored in mathematics but switched to music after taking a music elective during his first year. During his time at Williams, he participated in Cap &amp; Bells, the college's student-run theater group, and wrote his first two full musicals. Sondheim graduated \"magna cum laude\" in 1950, was inducted into Phi Beta Kappa, and received the Hubbard Hutchinson Prize, which included a two-year fellowship to study music.\nSondheim traced his interest in musical theater to \"Very Warm for May\", a Broadway musical he saw when he was nine. \"The curtain went up and revealed a piano\", Sondheim recalled. \"A butler took a duster and brushed it up, tinkling the keys. I thought that was thrilling.\"\nSondheim detested his mother, who was said to be psychologically abusive and to have projected her anger from her failed marriage onto her son: \"When my father left her, she substituted me for him. And she used me the way she used him, to come on to and to berate, beat up on, you see. What she did for five years was treat me like dirt, but come on to me at the same time.\" She once wrote him a letter saying that the only regret she ever had was giving birth to him. When she died in 1992, Sondheim did not attend her funeral. He had been estranged from her for nearly 20 years.\nMentorship by Oscar Hammerstein II.\nWhen Sondheim was about ten years old (around the time of his parents' divorce), he formed a close friendship with James Hammerstein, son of lyricist and playwright Oscar Hammerstein II, who were neighbors in Bucks County. The elder Hammerstein became Sondheim's surrogate father, influencing him profoundly and developing his love of musical theater. Sondheim met Hal Prince, who later directed many of his shows, at the opening of \"South Pacific,\" Hammerstein's musical with Richard Rodgers. The comic musical Sondheim wrote at George School, \"By George\", was a success among his peers and buoyed his self-esteem. When he asked Hammerstein to evaluate it as though he had no knowledge of its author, he said it was the worst thing he had ever seen: \"But if you want to know why it's terrible, I'll tell you.\" They spent the rest of the day going over the musical, and Sondheim later said, \"In that afternoon I learned more about songwriting and the musical theater than most people learn in a lifetime.\"\nHammerstein designed a course of sorts for Sondheim on constructing a musical. He had the young composer write four musicals, each with one of the following conditions:\nNone of the \"assignment\" musicals were produced professionally. \"High Tor\" and \"Mary Poppins\" have never been produced: the rights holder for the original \"High Tor\" refused permission (though a musical version by Arthur Schwartz was produced for television in 1956), and \"Mary Poppins\" was unfinished.\nHammerstein's death\nHammerstein died of stomach cancer on August 23, 1960, aged 65. Sondheim later recalled that Hammerstein had given him a portrait of himself. Sondheim asked him to inscribe it, and said later of the request that it was \"weird... it's like asking your father to inscribe something.\" Reading the inscription (\"For Stevie, My Friend and Teacher\") choked up the composer, who said, \"That describes Oscar better than anything I could say.\"\nEducation and early career.\nSondheim began attending Williams College, a liberal arts college in Williamstown, Massachusetts, whose theater program attracted him. His first teacher there was Robert Barrow:\neverybody hated him because he was very dry, and I thought he was wonderful because he was very dry. And Barrow made me realize that all my romantic views of art were nonsense. I had always thought an angel came down and sat on your shoulder and whispered in your ear \"dah-dah-dah-DUM.\" It never occurred to me that art was something worked out. And suddenly it was skies opening up. As soon as you find out what a leading tone is, you think, Oh my God. What a diatonic scale is\u2014Oh my God! The logic of it. And, of course, what that meant to me was: Well, I can do that. Because you just don't know. You think it's a talent, you think you're born with this thing. What I've found out and what I believed is that everybody is talented. It's just that some people get it developed and some don't.\nThe composer told Meryle Secrest: \"I just wanted to study composition, theory, and harmony without the attendant musicology that comes in graduate school. But I knew I wanted to write for the theater, so I wanted someone who did not disdain theater music.\" Barrow suggested that Sondheim study with Milton Babbitt, whom Sondheim called \"a frustrated show composer\" with whom he formed \"a perfect combination\". When they met, Babbitt was working on a musical for Mary Martin based on the myth of Helen of Troy. The two met once a week in New York City for four hours. (At the time, Babbitt was teaching at Princeton University.) According to Sondheim, they spent the first hour dissecting Rodgers and Hart or George Gershwin or studying Babbitt's favorites (Buddy DeSylva, Lew Brown, and Ray Henderson). They then proceeded to other forms of music (such as Mozart's Jupiter Symphony), critiquing them the same way. Fascinated by mathematics, Babbitt and Sondheim studied songs by a variety of composers (especially Jerome Kern). Sondheim told Secrest that Kern had the ability \"to develop a single motif through tiny variations into a long and never boring line and his maximum development of the minimum of material\". He said of Babbitt, \"I am his maverick, his one student who went into the popular arts with all his serious artillery\". At Williams, Sondheim wrote a musical adaption of \"Beggar on Horseback\" (a 1924 play by George S. Kaufman and Marc Connelly, with Kaufman's permission) that had three performances. A member of the Beta Theta Pi fraternity, he graduated \"magna cum laude\" in 1950.\n\"A few painful years of struggle\" followed, when Sondheim auditioned songs, lived in his father's dining room to save money, and spent time in Hollywood writing for the television series \"Topper\". He devoured 1940s and 1950s films, and called cinema his \"basic language\"; his film knowledge got him through \"The $64,000 Question\" contestant tryouts. Sondheim disliked movie musicals, favoring classic dramas such as \"Citizen Kane\", \"The Grapes of Wrath\", and \"A Matter of Life and Death\": \"Studio directors like Michael Curtiz and Raoul Walsh ... were heroes of mine. They went from movie to movie to movie, and every third movie was good and every fifth movie was great. There wasn't any cultural pressure to make art\".\nAt age 22, Sondheim had finished the four shows Hammerstein requested. Screenwriters Julius and Philip Epstein's \"Front Porch in Flatbush\", unproduced at the time, was being shopped around by designer and producer Lemuel Ayers. Ayers approached Frank Loesser and another composer; both turned him down. Ayers and Sondheim met as ushers at a wedding, and Ayers commissioned Sondheim for three songs for the show; Julius Epstein flew in from California and hired Sondheim, who worked with him in California for four or five months. After eight auditions for backers, half the money needed was raised. The show, retitled \"Saturday Night\", was intended to open during the 1954\u201355 Broadway season, but Ayers died of leukemia in his early forties. The production rights transferred to his widow, Shirley, and due to her inexperience the show did not continue as planned; it opened off-Broadway in 2000. Sondheim later said, \"I don't have any emotional reaction to \"Saturday Night\" at all\u2014except fondness. It's not bad stuff for a 23-year-old. There are some things that embarrass me so much in the lyrics\u2014the missed accents, the obvious jokes. But I decided, leave it. It's my baby pictures. You don't touch up a baby picture\u2014you're a baby!\"\nCareer.\n1954\u20131959: Early Broadway success.\n\"West Side Story\".\nBurt Shevelove invited Sondheim to a party where Sondheim arrived before him but knew no one else well. He saw a familiar face, Arthur Laurents, who had seen one of the auditions of \"Saturday Night\", and they began talking. Laurents told him he was working on a musical version of \"Romeo and Juliet\" with Leonard Bernstein, but they needed a lyricist; Betty Comden and Adolph Green, who were supposed to write the lyrics, were under contract in Hollywood. He said that although he was not a big fan of Sondheim's music, he enjoyed the lyrics from \"Saturday Night\" and he could audition for Bernstein. The next day, Sondheim met and played for Bernstein, who said he would let him know. Sondheim wanted to write music and lyrics; he consulted with Hammerstein, who said, as Sondheim related in a 2008 \"New York Times\" video interview, \"Look, you have a chance to work with very gifted professionals on a show that sounds interesting, and you could always write your own music eventually. My advice would be to take the job.\" \"West Side Story\", directed by Jerome Robbins, opened in 1957 and ran for 732 performances. Sondheim expressed dissatisfaction with his lyrics, saying they did not always fit the characters and were sometimes too consciously poetic. Initially Bernstein was also credited as a co-writer of the lyrics, but he later offered Sondheim solo credit, as Sondheim had essentially done all of them. \"The New York Times\" review of the show did not mention the lyrics. Sondheim described the division of the royalties, saying that Bernstein received 3% and he received 1%. Bernstein suggested evening the percentage at 2% each, but Sondheim refused because he was satisfied with just getting the credit. Sondheim later said he wished \"someone stuffed a handkerchief in my mouth because it would have been nice to get that extra percentage\".\nAfter \"West Side Story\" opened, Shevelove lamented the lack of \"lowbrow comedy\" on Broadway and mentioned a possible musical based on Plautus's Roman comedies. Sondheim was interested in the idea and called a friend, Larry Gelbart, to co-write the script. The show went through a number of drafts, and was interrupted briefly by Sondheim's next project.\n\"Gypsy\".\nIn 1959, Laurents and Robbins approached Sondheim for a musical version of Gypsy Rose Lee's memoir after Irving Berlin and Cole Porter turned it down. Sondheim agreed, but Ethel Merman \u2013 cast as Mama Rose \u2013 had just finished \"Happy Hunting\" with an unknown composer (Harold Karr) and lyricist (Matt Dubey). Although Sondheim wanted to write the music and lyrics, Merman refused to let another first-time composer write for her and demanded that Jule Styne write the music. Sondheim, concerned that writing lyrics again would pigeonhole him as a lyricist, called his mentor for advice. Hammerstein told him he should take the job, because writing a vehicle for a star would be a good learning experience. Sondheim agreed; \"Gypsy\" opened on May 21, 1959, and ran for 702 performances.\n1962\u20131966: Music and lyrics.\n\"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\".\nThe first Broadway production for which Sondheim wrote the music and lyrics was \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\", which opened in 1962 and ran for 964 performances. The book, based on farces by Plautus, was by Burt Shevelove and Larry Gelbart. The show won six Tony Awards (including Best Musical) and had the longest Broadway run of any show for which Sondheim wrote both music and lyrics.\n\"Anyone Can Whistle\".\nSondheim had participated in three straight hits, but his next show\u20141964's \"Anyone Can Whistle\"\u2014was a nine-performance bomb (although it introduced Angela Lansbury to musical theater).\n\"Do I Hear a Waltz?\".\n\"Do I Hear a Waltz?\", based on Laurents's 1952 play \"The Time of the Cuckoo\", was intended as another Rodgers and Hammerstein musical with Mary Martin in the lead. A new lyricist was needed, and Laurents and Mary Rodgers, Rodgers's daughter, asked Sondheim to fill in. Although Richard Rodgers and Sondheim agreed that the original play did not lend itself to musicalization, they began writing a musical version. The project had many difficulties, including Rodgers's alcoholism. Sondheim later called it the one project he truly regretted writing, given that the reasons he wrote it\u2014as a favor to Mary, as a favor to Hammerstein, as an opportunity to work again with Laurents, and as an opportunity to make money\u2014were not reasons to write a musical. He then decided to work only when he could write both music and lyrics.\nSondheim asked author and playwright James Goldman to join him as bookwriter for a new musical inspired by a gathering of former Ziegfeld Follies showgirls: initially titled \"The Girls Upstairs\", it became \"Follies\".\n\"Evening Primrose\" and other work.\nIn 1966, Sondheim semi-anonymously provided lyrics for \"The Boy From...\", a parody of \"The Girl from Ipanema\" in the off-Broadway revue \"The Mad Show\". The song was credited to \"Esteban R\u00edo Nido\", Spanish for \"Stephen River Nest\", and in the show's playbill the lyrics were credited to \"Nom De Plume\". That year Goldman and Sondheim hit a creative wall on \"The Girls Upstairs\", and Goldman asked Sondheim about writing a TV musical. The result was \"Evening Primrose\", with Anthony Perkins and Charmian Carr. Written for the anthology series \"ABC Stage 67\" and produced by Hubbell Robinson, it was broadcast on November 16, 1966. According to Sondheim and director Paul Bogart, the musical was written only because Goldman needed money for rent. The network disliked the title and Sondheim's alternative, \"A Little Night Music\".\nAfter Sondheim finished \"Evening Primrose\", Jerome Robbins asked him to adapt Bertolt Brecht's \"The Measures Taken\" despite the composer's general dislike of Brecht's work. Robbins wanted to adapt another Brecht play, \"The Exception and the Rule\", and asked John Guare to adapt the book. Leonard Bernstein had not written for the stage in some time, and his contract as conductor of the New York Philharmonic was ending. Sondheim was invited to Robbins's house in the hope that Guare would convince him to write the lyrics for a musical version of \"The Exception and the Rule\"; according to Robbins, Bernstein would not work without Sondheim. When Sondheim agreed, Guare asked: \"Why haven't you all worked together since \"West Side Story\"?\" Sondheim answered, \"You'll see\". Guare said that working with Sondheim was like being with an old college roommate, and he depended on him to \"decode and decipher their crazy way of working\"; Bernstein worked only after midnight, and Robbins only in the early morning. Bernstein's score, which was supposed to be light, was influenced by his need to make a musical statement. Stuart Ostrow, who worked with Sondheim on \"The Girls Upstairs\", agreed to produce the musical, initially titled \"A Pray by Blecht\", then \"The Race to Urga\". An opening night was scheduled, but during auditions Robbins asked to be excused for a moment. When he did not return, a doorman said he had gotten into a limousine to go to John F. Kennedy International Airport. Bernstein burst into tears and said, \"It's over\". Sondheim later said of this experience: \"I was ashamed of the whole project. It was arch and didactic in the worst way.\" He wrote one and a half songs and threw them away, the only time he ever did that. Eighteen years later, Sondheim refused Bernstein's and Robbins's request to retry the show.\nSondheim lived in a Turtle Bay, Manhattan brownstone from his writing of \"Gypsy\" in 1959. Ten years later, he heard a knock on the door. His neighbor, Katharine Hepburn, was in \"bare feet\u2014this angry, red-faced lady\" and told him, \"You have been keeping me awake all night!\" (she was practicing for her musical debut in \"Coco\"). \"I remember asking Hepburn why she didn't just call me, but she claimed not to have my phone number. My guess is that she wanted to stand there in her bare feet, suffering for her art\".\n1970\u20131981: Collaborations with Hal Prince.\n\"Company\".\nAfter \"Do I Hear a Waltz?\", Sondheim devoted himself solely to writing both music and lyrics for the theater\u2014and in 1970, he began a collaboration with director Harold Prince resulting in a body of work that is considered one of the high water marks of musical theater history, with critic Howard Kissel writing that the duo had set \"Broadway's highest standards\".\nThe first Sondheim show with Prince as director was 1970's \"Company\". A show about a single man and his married friends, \"Company\" (with a book by George Furth) lacked a straightforward plot, instead centering on themes such as marriage and the difficulty of making an emotional connection with another person. It opened on April 26, 1970, at the Alvin Theatre, running for 705 performances after seven previews, and won Tony Awards for Best Musical, Best Music, and Best Lyrics. The original cast included Dean Jones, Elaine Stritch, and Charles Kimbrough. Popular songs include \"Company\", \"The Little Things You Do Together\", \"Sorry-Grateful\", \"You Could Drive a Person Crazy\", \"Another Hundred People\", \"Getting Married Today\", \"Side by Side\", \"The Ladies Who Lunch\", and \"Being Alive\". Walter Kerr of \"The New York Times\" praised the production, the performances, and the score, writing, \"Sondheim has never written a more sophisticated, more pertinent, or\u2014this is the surprising thing in the circumstances\u2014more melodious score\".\nDocumentary filmmaker D. A. Pennebaker captured the making of the original cast recording shortly after the show opened on Broadway in his 1970 film \"\". Stritch, Sondheim, and producer Thomas Z. Shepard are featured prominently. \"Company\" was revived on Broadway in 1995, 2006, and 2020/2021 (the last revival began previews in March 2020, but shut down before resuming in November 2021 due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic; in this revival, the main character was a woman, Bobbie, portrayed by Katrina Lenk). The 2006 and 2021 productions won the Tony Award for Best Revival of a Musical.\n\"Follies\".\n\"Follies\" (1971), with a book by James Goldman, opened on April 4, 1971, at the Winter Garden Theatre and ran for 522 performances after 12 previews. The plot centers on a reunion, in a crumbling Broadway theater scheduled for demolition, of performers in \"Weismann's\" \"Follies\" (a musical revue, based on the \"Ziegfeld Follies\", that played in that theater between the world wars). The production also featured choreography and co-direction by Michael Bennett\",\" who later created \"A Chorus Line\".\nThe original production starred Dorothy Collins, John McMartin, Alexis Smith, and Gene Nelson. It included the songs \"I'm Still Here\", \"Could I Leave You?\", and \"Losing My Mind\". The production earned 11 Tony Award nominations, including Best Musical. It won 7 Tony Awards, including Best Original Score. The show was revived on Broadway in 2001 and 2011.\n\"A Little Night Music\".\n\"A Little Night Music\" (1973), based on Ingmar Bergman's \"Smiles of a Summer Night\" and with a score primarily in waltz time, was among Sondheim's greatest commercial successes. \"Time\" magazine called it his \"most brilliant accomplishment to date\". The original cast included Glynis Johns, Len Cariou, Hermione Gingold, and Judy Kahan. The show opened on Broadway at the Shubert Theatre on February 25, 1973, and ran for 601 performances and 12 previews. Clive Barnes of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"\"A Little Night Music\" is soft on the ears, easy on the eyes, and pleasant on the mind. It is less than brash, but more than brassy, and it should give a lot of pleasure. It is the remembrance of a few things past, and all to the sound of a waltz and the understanding smile of a memory. Good God!\u2014[an] adult musical!\"\nThe production earned 12 Tony Award nominations and won 6 awards, including Best Musical and Best Original Score. \"Send in the Clowns\", a song from the musical, was a hit for Judy Collins and became Sondheim's best-known song. It has since been covered by Frank Sinatra, Barbra Streisand, and Judi Dench. The production was adapted to screen in the 1977 film of the same name starring Elizabeth Taylor, Dianna Rigg, Len Cariou, and Hermione Gingold. It was revived on Broadway in 2009 in a production starring Catherine Zeta-Jones and Angela Lansbury.\n\"Pacific Overtures\".\n\"Pacific Overtures\" (1976), with a book by John Weidman, was one of Sondheim's most unconventional efforts: it explored the westernization of Japan, and was originally presented in a mock-Kabuki style. The show closed after a run of 193 performances, and was revived on Broadway in 2004.\n\"Sweeney Todd\".\n\"\" (1979), with a score by Sondheim and a book by Hugh Wheeler, is based on Christopher Bond's 1973 stage play derived from the Victorian original. The original production starred Angela Lansbury, Len Cariou, Victor Garber, and Edmund Lyndeck. Popular songs from the musical include \"The Ballad of Sweeney Todd\", \"The Worst Pies in London\", \"Pretty Women\", \"A Little Priest\", \"Not While I'm Around\", \"By the Sea\", and \"Johanna\". The production earned 9 Tony Award nominations and won 8 awards, including Best Musical, Best Original Score, Best Actress, and Best Actor. Richard Eder of \"The New York Times\" wrote: \"Mr. Sondheim's lyrics can be endlessly inventive. There is a hugely amusing recitation of the attributes given by the different professions\u2014priest, lawyer, and so on\u2014to the pies they contribute to. At other times the lyrics have a black, piercing poetry to them.\"\nLansbury's performance was captured alongside George Hearn in the Los Angeles production, which was filmed and shown on PBS as part of \"Masterpiece Theatre\". It later earned five Primetime Emmy Award nominations. It has been revived on Broadway in 1989, 2005, and 2023. The 2023 production starred Josh Groban, Annaleigh Ashford, Jordan Fisher, and Gaten Matarazzo. A was made in 2007 directed by Tim Burton and starring Johnny Depp, Helena Bonham Carter, and Alan Rickman.\n\"Merrily We Roll Along\".\n\"Merrily We Roll Along\" (1981), with a book by George Furth, is one of Sondheim's most traditional scores; songs from the musical were recorded by Frank Sinatra and Carly Simon. According to Sondheim's music director Paul Gemignani, \"Part of Steve's ability is this extraordinary versatility\". The show was not the success their previous collaborations had been: after a chaotic series of preview performances, it opened to widely negative reviews, and closed after a run of less than two weeks. Due to the high quality of Sondheim's score, the show has been repeatedly revised and produced in the ensuing years. Martin Gottfried wrote, \"Sondheim had set out to write traditional songs ... But [despite] that there is nothing ordinary about the music.\" Sondheim later said: \"Did I feel betrayed? I'm not sure I would put it like that. What did surprise me was the feeling around the Broadway community\u2014if you can call it that, though I guess I will for lack of a better word\u2014that they wanted Hal and me to fail.\" Sondheim and Furth continued to revise the show in subsequent years. An acclaimed feature documentary on the show and its aftermath, \"Best Worst Thing That Ever Could Have Happened\", directed by \"Merrily\" cast member Lonny Price, and produced by Bruce David Klein, Kitt Lavoie, and Ted Schillinger, premiered at the New York Film Festival on November 18, 2016. A film adaptation of \"Merrily We Roll Along\", directed by Richard Linklater, began production in 2019 and is planned to continue for the next two decades to allow the actors to age in real time. An off-Broadway revival starring Jonathan Groff, Daniel Radcliffe, and Lindsay Mendez ran from November 2022 to January 2023 at the New York Theatre Workshop; it moved to Broadway in fall 2023. \"Merrily\" won 2024 Tony Awards for Best Revival of a Musical, Best Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in a Musical (Jonathan Groff), Best Performance by an Actor in a Featured Role in a Musical (Daniel Radcliffe), and Best Orchestrations (Jonathan Tunick).\n\"Merrily\"'s failure greatly affected Sondheim; he was ready to quit theater and do movies, create video games or write mysteries: \"I wanted to find something to satisfy myself that does not involve Broadway and dealing with all those people who hate me and hate Hal.\" After \"Merrily\", Sondheim and Prince did not collaborate again until their 2003 production of \"Bounce\".\n1984\u20131994: Collaborations with James Lapine.\n\"Sunday in the Park with George\".\nSondheim decided \"that there are better places to start a show\" and found a new collaborator in James Lapine after he saw Lapine's \"Twelve Dreams\" off-Broadway in 1981: \"I was discouraged, and I don't know what would have happened if I hadn't discovered \"Twelve Dreams\" at the Public Theatre\"; Lapine has a taste \"for the avant-garde and for visually oriented theater in particular\". Their first collaboration was \"Sunday in the Park with George\" (1984), with Sondheim's music evoking Georges Seurat's pointillism. Sondheim and Lapine won the 1985 Pulitzer Prize for Drama for the play, and it was revived on Broadway in 2008, and again in a limited run in 2017.\n\"Into the Woods\".\nThey collaborated on \"Into the Woods\" (1987), a musical based on several Brothers Grimm fairy tales. Although Sondheim has been called the first composer to bring rap music to Broadway (with the Witch in the opening number of \"Into the Woods\"), he attributed the first rap in theater to Meredith Willson's \"Rock Island\" from \"The Music Man\" (1957). \"Into the Woods\" was revived on Broadway in 2002 and at the St. James Theatre in 2022.\n\"Passion\".\nSondheim's and Lapine's last collaboration on a musical was the rhapsodic \"Passion\" (1994), adapted from Ettore Scola's Italian film \"Passione D'Amore\". With a run of 280 performances, \"Passion\" was the shortest-running show to win a Tony Award for Best Musical.\n1990\u20132021: Later work.\n\"Assassins\".\n\"Assassins\" opened off-Broadway at Playwrights Horizons on December 18, 1990, with a book by John Weidman. The show explored, in revue form, a group of historical figures who tried (with varying success) to assassinate the President of the United States. The musical closed on February 16, 1991, after 73 performances. The \"Los Angeles Times\" reported the show \"has been sold out since previews began, reflecting the strong appeal of Sondheim's work among the theater crowd.\" In his review for \"The New York Times\", Frank Rich wrote, \"\"Assassins\" will have to fire with sharper aim and fewer blanks if it is to shoot to kill.\" \"Assassins\" was eventually staged on Broadway in 2004. In \"Look, I Made a Hat: Collected Lyrics (1981\u20132011)\", Sondheim wrote, \"\"Assassins\" has only one moment I'd like to improve. . . . Otherwise, as far as I'm concerned, the show is perfect. Immodest that may sound, but I'm ready to argue it with anybody.\"\n\"Saturday Night\" was shelved until its 1997 production at London's Bridewell Theatre. The next year, its score was recorded; a revised version, with two new songs, ran off-Broadway at Second Stage Theatre in 2000 and at London's Jermyn Street Theatre in 2009.\n\"Road Show\".\nSondheim and Weidman reunited during the late 1990s for \"Wise Guys\", a musical comedy based on the lives of colorful businessmen Addison and Wilson Mizner. A Broadway production starring Nathan Lane and Victor Garber, directed by Sam Mendes, and planned for spring 2000, was delayed. Renamed \"Bounce\" in 2003, the show premiered at the Goodman Theatre in Chicago and the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C., in a production directed by Harold Prince, his first collaboration with Sondheim since 1981. Poor reviews prevented \"Bounce\" from reaching Broadway, but a revised version opened off-Broadway as \"Road Show\" at the Public Theater on October 28, 2008. Directed by John Doyle, it closed December 28, 2008. The production won the 2009 Obie Award for Music and Lyrics and the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Lyrics.\n\"Sondheim on Sondheim\" and \"Six by Sondheim\".\nAsked about writing new work, Sondheim replied in 2006: \"No ... It's age. It's a diminution of energy and the worry that there are no new ideas. It's also an increasing lack of confidence. I'm not the only one. I've checked with other people. People expect more of you and you're aware of it and you shouldn't be.\" In December 2007, he said that in addition to continuing work on \"Bounce\", he was \"nibbling at a couple of things with John Weidman and James Lapine\".\nLapine prepared the multimedia production \"iSondheim: aMusical Revue\", which was scheduled to open in April 2009 at the Alliance Theatre in Atlanta; it was canceled due to \"difficulties encountered by the commercial producers attached to the project\u00a0... in raising the necessary funds\". Later revised as \"Sondheim on Sondheim\", the revue was produced at Studio 54 by the Roundabout Theatre Company; previews began on March 19, 2010, and ran from April 22 to June 13. The revue's cast included Barbara Cook, Vanessa L. Williams, Tom Wopat, Norm Lewis, and Leslie Kritzer.\nIn 2013, Lapine directed the HBO feature-length documentary \"Six by Sondheim\", which he executive produced with former \"New York Times\" theater critic Frank Rich, a longtime champion of Sondheim's work. Sondheim himself acts and sings in the documentary as Joe, the cynical theater producer in the song \"Opening Doors\".\nSondheim collaborated with Wynton Marsalis on \"A Bed and a Chair: A New York Love Affair\", an Encores! concert on November 13\u201317, 2013, at New York City Center. Directed by John Doyle with choreography by Parker Esse, it consisted of \"more than two dozen Sondheim compositions, each piece newly reimagined by Marsalis\". The concert featured Bernadette Peters, Jeremy Jordan, Norm Lewis, Cyrille Aim\u00e9e, four dancers, and the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra conducted by David Loud. In \"Playbill\", Steven Suskin called the concert \"neither a new musical, a revival, nor a standard songbook revue; it is, rather, a staged-and-sung chamber jazz rendition of a string of songs\u00a0... Half of the songs come from \"Company\" and \"Follies\"; most of the other Sondheim musicals are represented, including the lesser-known \"Passion\" and \"Road Show\"\".\nFor the 2014 film adaptation of \"Into the Woods\", Sondheim wrote the new song \"She'll Be Back\", sung by The Witch, which was cut from the film.\n\"Here We Are\".\nSondheim began collaborating with David Ives in 2014 on a musical based on the Luis Bu\u00f1uel films \"The Exterminating Angel\" and \"The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie\", initially slated for previews at the Public Theater in 2017. That date was cast into doubt after an August 2016 reading for the musical had only the first act finished. A November 2016 workshop included Matthew Morrison, Shuler Hensley, Heidi Blickenstaff, Sierra Boggess, Gabriel Ebert, Sarah Stiles, Michael Cerveris, and Jennifer Simard. After media outlets mistakenly reported that the show had the working title \"Bu\u00f1uel\", Sondheim said that it still lacked a title in 2017. The Public Theatre denied reports that the show would be part of its 2019\u201320 season, but hoped to produce the musical \"when it is ready\". Development reportedly ceased for a time, but resumed for a September 2021 reading of the show, then called \"Square One\". Nathan Lane and Bernadette Peters were involved in a reading of this new work, and Sondheim discussed adapting the Bu\u00f1uel films in the final interview before his death. A posthumous production of the collaboration, directed by Joe Mantello, premiered at The Shed in September 2023 as \"Here We Are\".\nOther projects.\nConversations with Frank Rich and others.\nThe Kennedy Center staged a 15-week repertory festival of six Sondheim musicals\u2014\"Sweeney Todd\", \"Company\", \"Sunday in the Park with George\", \"Merrily We Roll Along\", \"Passion\", and \"A Little Night Music\"\u2014from May to August 2002. The Kennedy Center Sondheim Celebration also included \"Pacific Overtures\", a junior version of \"Into the Woods\", and Frank Rich of \"The New York Times\" speaking with the composer for \"Sondheim on Sondheim\" on April 28, 2002. The two men took their discussion, dubbed \"A Little Night Conversation with Stephen Sondheim\", on a West Coast tour of different U.S. cities including Santa Barbara, San Francisco, Los Angeles, and Portland, Oregon in March 2008, then to Oberlin College in September. The \"Cleveland Jewish News\" reported on their Oberlin appearance: \"Sondheim said: 'Movies are photographs; the stage is larger than life.' What musicals does Sondheim admire the most? \"Porgy and Bess\" tops a list which includes \"Carousel\", \"She Loves Me\", and \"The Wiz\", which he saw six times. Sondheim took a dim view of today's musicals. What works now, he said, are musicals that are easy to take; audiences don't want to be challenged\". Sondheim and Rich had additional conversations: January 18, 2009, at Avery Fisher Hall; February 2 at the Landmark Theatre in Richmond, Virginia; February 21 at the Kimmel Center in Philadelphia; and April 20 at the University of Akron in Ohio. The conversations were reprised at Tufts and Brown University in February 2010, at the University of Tulsa in April, and at Lafayette College in March 2011. Sondheim had another \"conversation with\" Sean Patrick Flahaven (associate editor of \"The Sondheim Review\") at the Kravis Center in West Palm Beach on February 4, 2009, in which he discussed many of his songs and shows: \"On the perennial struggles of Broadway: 'I don't see any solution for Broadway's problems except subsidized theatre, as in most civilized countries of the world.'\"\nOn February 1, 2011, Sondheim joined former \"Salt Lake Tribune\" theater critic Nancy Melich before an audience of 1,200 at Kingsbury Hall. Melich described the evening:\nHe was visibly taken by the university choir, who sang two songs during the evening, \"Children Will Listen\" and \"Sunday\", and then returned to reprise \"Sunday\". During that final moment, Sondheim and I were standing, facing the choir of students from the University of Utah's opera program, our backs to the audience, and I could see tears welling in his eyes as the voices rang out. Then, all of a sudden, he raised his arms and began conducting, urging the student singers to go full out, which they did, the crescendo building, their eyes locked with his, until the final \"on an ordinary Sunday\" was sung. It was thrilling, and a perfect conclusion to a remarkable evening\u2014nothing ordinary about it.\nOn March 13, 2008, \"A Salon with Stephen Sondheim\" (which sold out in three minutes) was hosted by the Academy for New Musical Theatre in Hollywood.\nWork away from Broadway.\nSondheim was an avid fan of puzzles and games. He is credited with introducing cryptic crosswords, a British invention, to American audiences through a series of cryptic crossword puzzles he created for \"New York\" magazine in 1968 and 1969. Sondheim was \"legendary\" in theater circles for \"concocting puzzles, scavenger hunts and murder-mystery games\", inspiring the central character of Anthony Shaffer's 1970 play \"Sleuth\". Sondheim's love of puzzles and mysteries is evident in \"The Last of Sheila\", an intricate whodunit written with longtime friend Anthony Perkins. The 1973 film, directed by Herbert Ross, featured Dyan Cannon, Joan Hackett, Raquel Welch, James Mason, James Coburn, Ian McShane, and Richard Benjamin.\nSondheim also wrote occasional music for film: most notably, he contributed five songs to Warren Beatty's 1990 film \"Dick Tracy\", including the ballad \"Sooner or Later (I Always Get My Man)\", sung in the film by Madonna, which won the Academy Award for Best Original Song. He also contributed to \"Reds\" (both to the score, and with the song \"Goodbye for Now\"), \"The Seven-Per-Cent Solution\" (\"The Madam's Song\", later recorded as \"I Never Do Anything Twice\"), \"Stavisky\" (writing the score), and \"The Birdcage\" (\"Little Dream\", and the eventually cut \"It Takes All Kinds\"). For the 2014 movie adaptation of \"Into the Woods\", Sondheim wrote the new song \"She'll Be Back\" for the character of The Witch (played by Meryl Streep), which was eventually cut. Sondheim made a posthumous cameo appearance as himself in the 2022 Netflix film \"\".\nSondheim collaborated with \"Company\" librettist George Furth to write the play \"Getting Away with Murder\" in 1996; the Broadway production closed after 31 previews and only 17 performances.\nIn 2003, he was invited to serve as guest curator for the Telluride Film Festival.\nMentoring.\nAfter he was mentored by Hammerstein, Sondheim returned the favor, saying that he loved \"passing on what Oscar passed on to me\". In an interview with Sondheim for \"The Legacy Project\", composer-lyricist Adam Guettel (son of Mary Rodgers and grandson of Richard Rodgers) recalled how as a 14-year-old boy he showed Sondheim his work. Guettel was \"crestfallen\" since he had come in \"sort of all puffed up thinking [he] would be rained with compliments and things\", which was not the case since Sondheim had some \"very direct things to say\". Later, Sondheim wrote and apologized to Guettel for being \"not very encouraging\" when he was actually trying to be \"constructive\".\nSondheim also mentored a fledgling Jonathan Larson, attending Larson's workshop for his \"Superbia\" (originally an adaptation of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\"). In Larson's musical \"Tick, Tick... Boom!\", the phone message is played in which Sondheim apologizes for leaving early, says he wants to meet him and is impressed with his work. After Larson's death, Sondheim called him one of the few composers \"attempting to blend contemporary pop music with theater music, which doesn't work very well; he was on his way to finding a real synthesis. A good deal of pop music has interesting lyrics, but they are not theater lyrics\". A musical-theater composer \"must have a sense of what is theatrical, of how you use music to tell a story, as opposed to writing a song. Jonathan understood that instinctively.\"\nAround 2008, Sondheim approached Lin-Manuel Miranda to work with him translating \"West Side Story\" lyrics into Spanish for an upcoming Broadway revival. Miranda then approached Sondheim with his new project \"Hamilton\", then called \"The Hamilton Mixtape\", which Sondheim gave notes on. Sondheim was originally wary of the project, saying he was \"worried that an evening of rap might get monotonous\". But he believed Miranda's attention to, and respect for, good rhyming made it work.\nSondheim provided a voice cameo for the 2021 film adaptation of \"Tick, Tick... Boom!\", directed by Miranda, for the scene in which a fictionalized version of himself leaves a phone message. Sondheim worked on a revised text of the message and voiced it himself after Bradley Whitford, who portrays him, was unavailable to rerecord the line.\nDramatists Guild.\nA supporter of writers' rights in the theater industry, Sondheim was an active member of the Dramatists Guild of America. In 1973, he was elected as the Guild's 16th president, serving until 1981.\nUnrealized projects.\nAccording to Sondheim, he was asked to translate \"Mahagonny-Songspiel\": \"But I'm not a Brecht/Weill fan and that's really all there is to it. I'm an apostate: I like Weill's music when he came to America better than I do his stuff before\u00a0... I love \"The Threepenny Opera\" but, outside of \"The Threepenny Opera\", the music of his I like is the stuff he wrote in America\u2014when he was not writing with Brecht, when he was writing for Broadway.\" He turned down an offer to musicalize Nathanael West's \"A Cool Million\" with James Lapine c.\u20091982.\nAround 1960, Sondheim and Burt Shevelove considered making a musical of the film \"Sunset Boulevard\", and had sketched out the opening scenes when they approached the film's director Billy Wilder at a cocktail party on the possibility. Wilder rejected the idea, believing the story was more suited to opera than musical theater. Sondheim agreed, and resisted a later offer from Prince and Hugh Wheeler to create a musical version starring Angela Lansbury. This occurred several years before a musical version was produced by Andrew Lloyd Webber.\nSondheim and Leonard Bernstein wrote \"The Race to Urga\", scheduled for Lincoln Center in 1969, but after Jerome Robbins left the project, it was not produced.\nAfter writing \"The Last of Sheila\" together, Sondheim and Anthony Perkins tried to collaborate again two more times, but the projects were unrealized. In 1975, Perkins said he and Sondheim were working on another script, \"The Chorus Girl Murder Case\": \"It's a sort of stew based on all those Bob Hope wartime comedies, plus a little \"Lady of Burlesque\" and a little Orson Welles magic show, all cooked into a \"Last of Sheila\"-type plot\". He later said other inspirations were \"They Got Me Covered\", \"The Ipcress File\", and \"Cloak and Dagger\". They had sold the synopsis in October 1974. At one point, Michael Bennett was to direct, with Tommy Tune to star. In November 1979, Sondheim said they had finished it, but the film was never made. In the 1980s, Perkins and Sondheim collaborated on another project, the seven-part \"Crime and Variations\" for Motown Productions. In October 1984 they had submitted a treatment to Motown. It was a 75-page treatment set in the New York socialite world about a crime puzzle; another writer was to write the script. It, too, was never made.\nIn 1991, Sondheim worked with Terrence McNally on a musical, \"All Together Now\". McNally said, \"Steve was interested in telling the story of a relationship from the present back to the moment when the couple first met. We worked together a while, but we were both involved with so many other projects that this one fell through\". The story follows Arden Scott, a 30-something female sculptor, and Daniel Nevin, a slightly younger, sexually attractive restaurateur. Its script, with concept notes by McNally and Sondheim, is archived in the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin. In February 2012, it was announced that Sondheim would collaborate on a musical titled \"All Together Now\" with David Ives and he had \"about 20\u201330 minutes of the musical completed\". The show was assumed to follow the format of \"Merrily We Roll Along\". Sondheim described the project as \"two people and what goes into their relationship\u00a0... We'll write for a couple of months, then have a workshop. It seemed experimental and fresh 20 years ago. I have a feeling it may not be experimental and fresh anymore\". Ives later described \"All Together Now\" as \"a musical that exploded a single moment in the lives of two people meeting for the first time. We'd see the moment without music and then we'd explore it musically.\" Ives and Sondheim worked on the piece intermittently until Sondheim's death, but it was ultimately unrealized.\nSondheim worked with William Goldman on \"Singing Out Loud\", a musical film, in 1992, penning the song \"Water Under the Bridge\". According to Sondheim, he had written six and a half songs and Goldman one or two drafts of the script when director Rob Reiner lost interest in the project. \"Dawn\" and \"Sand\", from the film, were recorded for the albums \"Sondheim at the Movies\" and \"Unsung Sondheim\".\nIn August 2003, Sondheim expressed interest in the idea of creating a musical adaptation of the 1993 comedy film \"Groundhog Day\", but in a 2008 live chat, he said that \"to make a musical of \"Groundhog Day\" would be to gild the lily. It cannot be improved.\" The musical was later created and premiered in 2016 with music and lyrics by Tim Minchin and book by Danny Rubin (screenwriter of the film) with Sondheim's blessing.\nNathan Lane said that he once approached Sondheim about creating a musical based on the film \"Being There\" with Lane starring as the central character of Chance. Sondheim declined on the basis that the central character is essentially a cipher, whom an audience would not accept expressing himself through song.\nAwards, honors and legacy.\nSondheim received an Academy Award, eight Tony Awards, and eight Grammy Awards. He also received the Pulitzer Prize for Drama for \"Sunday in the Park with George\" (1985, shared with James Lapine) and was honored with the Kennedy Center Honors, Lifetime Achievement (1993). He received the Hutchinson Prize for Music Composition (1950) and was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters (1983). He was also awarded the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement presented by Awards Council member James Earl Jones (2005), the Algur H. Meadows Award from Southern Methodist University (1994), a Special Laurence Olivier Award (2011) \"in recognition of his contribution to London theatre\", and a Critics' Circle Theatre Award (2012), which according to drama section chair Mark Shenton \"is effectively a lifetime achievement award.\" He became a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame (2014). In 2013, Sondheim was awarded The Edward MacDowell Medal by The MacDowell Colony for outstanding contributions to American culture In November 2015, Sondheim was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Barack Obama in a ceremony at the White House.\nSondheim founded Young Playwrights Inc. in 1981 to introduce young people to writing for the theater, and was the organization's executive vice-president. The Stephen Sondheim Center for the Performing Arts, at the Fairfield Arts and Convention Center in Fairfield, Iowa, opened in December 2007 with performances by Len Cariou, Liz Callaway, and Richard Kind, all of whom had participated in Sondheim musicals.\nThe Stephen Sondheim Society was established in 1993 to provide information about his work, with its \"Sondheim \u2013 the Magazine\" provided to its membership. The society maintains a database, organizes productions, meetings, outings, and other events, and assists with publicity. Its annual Student Performer of the Year Competition awards a \u00a31,000 prize to one of twelve musical-theatre students from UK drama schools and universities. At Sondheim's request, an additional prize is offered for a new song by a young composer. Judged by George Stiles and Anthony Drewe, each contestant performs a Sondheim song and a new song.\nMost episode titles of the television series \"Desperate Housewives\" refer to Sondheim's song titles or lyrics, and the series finale is titled \"Finishing the Hat\". In 1990, Sondheim, as the Cameron Mackintosh chair in musical theater at Oxford, conducted workshops with promising musical writers including George Stiles, Anthony Drewe, Andrew Peggie, Paul James, Kit Hesketh-Harvey, and Stephen Keeling. The writers founded the Mercury Workshop in 1992, which merged with the New Musicals Alliance to become MMD (a UK-based organization to develop new musical theater, of which Sondheim was a patron).\nSignature Theatre in Arlington County, Virginia established its Sondheim Award, which includes a $5,000 donation to a nonprofit organization of the recipient's choice, \"as a tribute to America's most influential contemporary musical theatre composer\". The first award, to Sondheim, was presented at an April 27, 2009, benefit with performances by Bernadette Peters, Michael Cerveris, Will Gartshore, and Eleasha Gamble. The 2010 recipient was Angela Lansbury, with Peters and Catherine Zeta-Jones hosting the April benefit. The 2011 honoree was Bernadette Peters. Other recipients were Patti LuPone in 2012, Hal Prince in 2013, Jonathan Tunick in 2014, and James Lapine in 2015. The 2016 awardee was John Weidman and the 2017 awardee was Cameron Mackintosh.\nHenry Miller's Theatre, on West 43rd Street in New York City, was renamed the Stephen Sondheim Theatre on September 15, 2010, for the composer's 80th birthday. In attendance were Nathan Lane, Patti LuPone, and John Weidman. Sondheim said in response to the honor, \"I'm deeply embarrassed. Thrilled, but deeply embarrassed. I've always hated my last name. It just doesn't sing. I mean, it's not Belasco. And it's not Rodgers and it's not Simon. And it's not Wilson. It just doesn't sing. It sings better than Schoenfeld and Jacobs. But it just doesn't sing\". Lane said, \"We love our corporate sponsors and we love their money, but there's something sacred about naming a theatre, and there's something about this that is right and just\".\nIn 2010, \"The Daily Telegraph\" wrote that Sondheim was \"almost certainly\" the only living composer with a quarterly journal published in his name; \"The Sondheim Review\", founded in 1994, chronicled and promoted his work. It ceased publication in 2016.\nIn Greta Gerwig's 2017 film \"Lady Bird\", characters perform songs from \"Merrily We Roll Along\", \"Into the Woods\", and \"Anyone Can Whistle\". In 2019, it was observed in the media that three major films of that year prominently featured Sondheim songs: \"Joker\" (Wall Street businessmen sing \"Send In the Clowns\" on the subway), \"Marriage Story\" (Adam Driver sings \"Being Alive\"; Scarlett Johansson, Merritt Wever, and Julie Hagerty sing \"You Can Drive a Person Crazy\"), and \"Knives Out\" (Daniel Craig sings \"Losing My Mind\"). Sondheim's work has also been referenced in television, such as \"The Morning Show\" (Jennifer Aniston and Billy Crudup sing \"Not While I'm Around\").\nSondheim at 80.\nSeveral benefits and concerts were performed to celebrate Sondheim's 80th birthday in 2010. Among them were the New York Philharmonic's March 15 and 16 \"Sondheim: The Birthday Concert\" at Lincoln Center's Avery Fisher Hall, hosted by David Hyde Pierce. The concert included Sondheim's music, performed by some of the original performers. Lonny Price directed, and Paul Gemignani conducted; performers included Laura Benanti, Matt Cavenaugh, Michael Cerveris, Victoria Clark, Jenn Colella, Jason Danieley, Alexander Gemignani, Joanna Gleason, Nathan Gunn, George Hearn, Patti LuPone, Marin Mazzie, Audra McDonald, John McMartin, Donna Murphy, Karen Olivo, Laura Osnes, Mandy Patinkin, Bernadette Peters, Bobby Steggert, Elaine Stritch, Jim Walton, Chip Zien, and the 2009 Broadway revival cast of \"West Side Story\". A ballet was performed by Blaine Hoven and Mar\u00eda Noel Riccetto to Sondheim's score for \"Reds\", and Jonathan Tunick paid tribute to his longtime collaborator. The concert was broadcast on PBS's \"Great Performances\" show in November, and its DVD was released on November 16.\n\"Sondheim 80\", a Roundabout Theatre Company benefit, was held on March 22. The evening included a performance of \"Sondheim on Sondheim\", dinner and a show at the New York Sheraton. \"A very personal star-studded musical tribute\" featured new songs by contemporary musical-theater writers. The composers (who sang their own songs) included Tom Kitt and Brian Yorkey, Michael John LaChiusa, Andrew Lippa, Robert Lopez and Kristen Anderson-Lopez, Lin-Manuel Miranda (accompanied by Rita Moreno), Duncan Sheik, and Jeanine Tesori and David Lindsay-Abaire. Bernadette Peters performed a song that had been cut from a Sondheim show.\nAn April 26 New York City Center birthday celebration and concert to benefit Young Playwrights, among others, featured (in order of appearance) Michael Cerveris, Alexander Gemignani, Donna Murphy, Debra Monk, Joanna Gleason, Maria Friedman, Mark Jacoby, Len Cariou, BD Wong, Claybourne Elder, Alexander Hanson, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Ra\u00fal Esparza, Sutton Foster, Nathan Lane, Michele Pawk, the original cast of \"Into the Woods\", Kim Crosby, Chip Zien, Danielle Ferland, and Ben Wright, Angela Lansbury, and Jim Walton. The concert, directed by John Doyle, was co-hosted by Mia Farrow; greetings from Sheila Hancock, Julia McKenzie, Milton Babbitt, Judi Dench, and Glynis Johns were read. After Catherine Zeta-Jones performed \"Send in the Clowns\", Julie Andrews sang part of \"Not a Day Goes By\" in a recorded greeting. Patti LuPone, Barbara Cook, Bernadette Peters, Tom Aldredge, and Victor Garber were originally scheduled to perform, but did not appear.\nA July 31 BBC Proms concert celebrated Sondheim's 80th birthday at the Royal Albert Hall. The concert featured songs from many of his musicals, including \"Send in the Clowns\" sung by Judi Dench (reprising her role as Desir\u00e9e in the 1995 production of \"A Little Night Music\"), and performances by Bryn Terfel and Maria Friedman.\nOn November 19 the New York Pops, led by Steven Reineke, performed at Carnegie Hall for the composer's 80th birthday. Kate Baldwin, Aaron Lazar, Christiane Noll, Paul Betz, Renee Rakelle, Marilyn Maye (singing \"I'm Still Here\"), and Alexander Gemignani appeared, and songs included \"I Remember\", \"Another Hundred People\", \"Children Will Listen\", and \"Getting Married Today\". Sondheim took the stage during an encore of his song, \"Old Friends\".\nSondheim at 90.\nTo honor Sondheim's 90th birthday, \"The New York Times\" published a special nine-page Theater supplement on March 15, 2020, featuring comments by \"Critics, Performers and Fans on the Bard of Broadway.\" Due to theater closures during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Broadway revival of \"Company\" set to open on March 22, 2020, Sondheim's 90th birthday, was delayed. But the virtual concert \"\" was livestreamed on the Broadway.com YouTube channel on April 26. Participants in the event included Lin-Manuel Miranda, Steven Spielberg, Meryl Streep, Nathan Lane, Mandy Patinkin, Victor Garber, Bernadette Peters, Patti LuPone, Neil Patrick Harris, Jake Gyllenhaal, Christine Baranski, Sutton Foster, Josh Groban, Ben Platt, Brandon Uranowitz, Katrina Lenk, Kelli O'Hara, Jason Alexander, Brian Stokes Mitchell, Beanie Feldstein, Audra McDonald, Laura Benanti, and Ra\u00fal Esparza. After New York City theaters reopened in 2021, Sondheim attended revivals of two of his musicals: the opening night of \"Assassins\" at the Classic Stage Company on November 14, and the first post-shutdown preview of \"Company\" at the Jacobs Theatre on November 15.\n\"Stephen Sondheim's Old Friends\".\nIn 2022, Cameron Mackintosh presented \"Stephen Sondheim's Old Friends\", a two-hour concert tribute to the late Sondheim. The concert happened in the West End in May and aired on BBC Two in December. Performers at the event included Helena Bonham Carter, Rob Brydon, Petula Clark, Judi Dench, Damian Lewis, Julia McKenzie, Bernadette Peters, and Imelda Staunton. Highlights included Dench singing \"Send in the Clowns\", Peters singing \"Children Will Listen\", and Staunton's \"Everything's Coming Up Roses\".\nMackintosh revived the tribute for a limited run at the Gielgud Theatre beginning previews on September 16, 2023, with a planned closing on January 6, 2024. The production stars Bernadette Peters, marking her West End debut, and Lea Salonga, returning to the West End for the first time since 1996.\nStyle and themes.\nAccording to Sondheim, when he asked Milton Babbitt if he could study atonality, Babbitt replied: \"You haven't exhausted tonal resources for yourself yet, so I'm not going to teach you atonal\". Music critic Anthony Tommasini wrote that Sondheim's work, \"while hewing to a tonal musical language, activated harmonies and folded elements of jazz and impressionist styles in his own distinctive, exhilarating voice.\"\nSondheim is known for complex polyphony in his vocals, such as the five minor characters who make up a Greek chorus in 1973's \"A Little Night Music\". He used angular harmonies and intricate melodies. His musical influences were varied; although he said that he \"loves Bach\", his favorite musical period was from Brahms to Stravinsky.\nRaymond-Jean Frontain writes that thematically, Sondheim's musicals occupy a paradoxical place in gay culture, describing him as a gay creative artist who never created an explicitly gay character, but nevertheless attained gay cult status. Frontain continues:\nHe incarnates the paradox of a highly intellectualized gay perspective that prizes ambivalence, undercuts traditional American progressivism, and rejects the musical's historically idealistic view of sex, romance, and the family; but that at the same time eschews camp, deconstructs the diva, and is apparently oblivious to AIDS, the post-Stonewall struggle for civil equality, and other socio-political issues that concern most gay men of his generation.\nLuca Prono described Sondheim's work as rejecting the traditional image of the Western world typically presented in Broadway productions, and instead depicting it as \"predatory and alienating\". His works have acquired a cult following with queer audiences, and his songs have been adopted as life scores for successive generations of gays, and have often had a primary role in AIDS fundraising events. \"Somewhere\" from \"West Side Story\" was informally adopted as a gay anthem before the start of the gay liberation movement, but Sondheim rejected that reading, saying, \"If you think that's a gay song, then all songs about getting away from the realities of life are gay songs.\"\nIn an interview with Terry Gross for the \"Fresh Air\" program on NPR, Sondheim stated,\nI'm interested in the theater because I'm interested in communication with audiences,\" [...] \"Otherwise I would be in concert music. I'd be in another kind of profession. I love the theater as much as music, and the whole idea of getting across to an audience and making them laugh, making them cry \u2013 just making them feel \u2013 is paramount to me.\"\nMatt Zoller Seitz characterized Sondheim's work for its bravery to express the truth, in all its complexity: \"compassionately but without sugarcoating anything\", devoid of the \"easy reassurances and neat resolutions\" typically demanded in the marketplace.\nPersonal life and death.\nSondheim was often described as introverted and solitary. In an interview with Frank Rich, he said: \"The outsider feeling\u2014somebody who people want to both kiss and kill\u2014occurred quite early in my life\". Sondheim jokingly told the \"New York Times\" in 1966: \"I've never found anybody I could work with as quickly as myself, or with less argument\", although he described himself as \"naturally a collaborative animal\".\nSondheim came out as gay at age 40. He rarely discussed his personal life, though he said in 2013 that he had not been in love before he turned 60, when he entered into a roughly eight-year relationship with dramatist Peter Jones. Sondheim married Jeffrey Scott Romley, a digital technologist, in 2017; they lived in Manhattan and Roxbury, Connecticut.\nIn 2010\u20132011, Sondheim published, in two volumes, his autobiography, \"Finishing the Hat: Collected Lyrics (1954\u20131981) with Attendant Comments, Principles, Heresies, Grudges, Whines and Anecdotes\" and \"Look, I Made a Hat: Collected Lyrics (1981\u20132011) with Attendant Comments, Amplifications, Dogmas, Harangues, Digressions, Anecdotes and Miscellany\". The memoir included Sondheim's lyrical declaration of principle, stating that four principles underpinned \"everything I've ever written\". These were: \"Content Dictates Form, Less is More, God is in the Details \u2013 all in the service of Clarity.\"\nIn \"Six by Sondheim\", James Lapine's 2013 documentary film about the creative process, Sondheim revealed that he liked to write his music lying down and would occasionally have a cocktail to help him write.\nSondheim died of cardiovascular disease at his home in Roxbury, Connecticut, on November 26, 2021, at age 91. Collaborator and friend Jeremy Sams said Sondheim \"died in the arms of his husband, Jeff\". On November 29, theatres across the West End of London dimmed their lights for two minutes to mark Sondheim's passing. Broadway theaters similarly dimmed their marquee lights for one minute on December 8.\nIt is estimated that Sondheim's estate, including the rights to his work, was valued at around $75\u00a0million, the entirety of which was placed in trust. In his will, he named F. Richard Pappas and a second unnamed individual as the executors. Beneficiaries included his husband, Jeff; his frequent collaborator James Lapine; former lover Peter Jones; former assistant Steven Clar; designer Peter Wooster; gardener Rob Girard; the Smithsonian Institution; the Library of Congress; and the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts.\nThe Library of Congress received Sondheim's papers in early 2025 and made many available for public viewing in July. Head music specialist Mark Eden Horowitz first began pursuing the papers in 1993, when the music division invited Sondheim to the library to \"knock his socks off\". They showed him papers from his mentor, Oscar Hammerstein II, along with materials from Sondheim's other heroes. George Gershwin's manuscript for \"Porgy and Bess\" brought Sondheim to tears and convinced him to leave his own papers at the library. The collection includes over 5,000 items.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
