{"id": "27479", "revid": "46388288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27479", "title": "Syrian Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Syria\nThe Syrian Armed Forces () are the military forces of Syria.\nUp until the fall of Bashar al-Assad's Ba'ath Party regime in December 2024, the Syrian Arab Armed Forces were the state armed forces. They consisted of the Syrian Arab Army, Syrian Arab Air Force, Syrian Arab Navy, Syrian Arab Air Defence Force, and paramilitary forces, such as the National Defence Forces. According to the 2012 Constitution of Ba'athist Syria, the President of Syria was the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. The Minister of Defense held the position of Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Armed Forces.\nAfter 1943, the Syrian Army played a major role in Syria's governance, mounting six military coups: two in 1949, including the March 1949 Syrian coup d'\u00e9tat and the August 1949 coup by Colonel Sami al-Hinnawi, and one each in 1951, 1954, 1963, 1966, and 1970. It fought four wars with Israel (1948, the Six-Day War in 1967, the Yom Kippur War of 1973, and 1982 Lebanon War) and one with Jordan (\"Black September\" in Jordan, 1970). The Air Force and Navy acted more as adjuncts to the army than independent actors, apart from the Air Force/ADF's reaction to the Israeli Operation Mole Cricket 19 ahead of the 1982 Lebanon War. Syrian fighters and air defence systems took very heavy losses. An armoured division was also deployed to Saudi Arabia in 1990\u201391 during the Gulf War, but saw little action. From 1976 to 2005 the Army was the major pillar of the Syrian occupation of Lebanon. Internally, it played a major part in suppressing the 1979\u201382 Islamist uprising in Syria, and from 2011 to 2024 was heavily engaged in fighting the Syrian Civil War, the most violent and prolonged war the Syrian Army had taken part in since its establishment in the 1940s.\nThe military used conscription. Males served in the military from age 18, but they were exempted from service if they did not have a brother who could take care of their parents. Females were exempt from conscription.\nThe Syrian Arab Armed Forces collapsed in 2024 with the fall of the Assad regime and flight of Bashar al-Assad. The new de facto rulers of Syria, under the Syrian transitional government, are making preparations to drastically reorganise Syria's military forces and ambitions.\nOn 21 December 2024 it was reported that Murhaf Abu Qasra had been appointed the new defence minister for the interim government, while Ali Noureddine Al-Naasan serves as Chief of the General Staff.\nHistory.\nFrom Mandate to Independence (1923\u20131945).\nThe French Mandate volunteer force, which would later become the Syrian army, was established in 1923 with the threat of Syrian Arab nationalism in mind. Although the unit's officers were originally all French, it was, in effect, the first indigenous modern Syrian army. In 1925, this force was expanded and designated the Special Troops of the Levant (Troupes Sp\u00e9ciales du Levant). In 1941, during the Second World War, the Army of the Levant participated in a futile resistance to the Syria\u2013Lebanon Campaign, the British and Free French invasion that ousted the Vichy French from Syria.\nAfter the Allied takeover, the army came under the control of the Free French and was designated the Levantine Forces (Troupes du Levant). French Mandate authorities maintained a gendarmerie to police Syria's vast rural areas. This paramilitary force was used to combat criminals and political foes of the Mandate government. As with the Levantine Special Troops, French officers held the top posts, but as Syrian independence approached, the ranks below major were gradually filled by Syrian officers who had graduated from the Homs Military Academy, which had been established by the French during the 1930s. In 1938, the Troupes Sp\u00e9ciales numbered around 10,000 men and 306 officers (of whom 88 were French, mainly in the higher ranks). A majority of the Syrian troops were of rural background and minority ethnic origin, mainly Alawis, Druzes, Kurds, Circassians and Bosniaks. By the end of 1945, the army numbered about 5,000 and the gendarmerie some 3,500. In April 1946, the last French officers were forced to leave Syria due to sustained resistance offensives; the Levantine Forces then became the regular armed forces of the newly independent state and grew rapidly to about 12,000 by the time of the 1948 Arab\u2212Israeli War, the first of four Arab\u2212Israeli wars involving Syria between 1948 and 1986.\nFirst and Second Republic (1946\u20131963).\nThe Syrian Armed Forces fought in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War (against Israel) and were involved in some military coups. Between 1948 and 1967, a series of coups destroyed the stability of the government and any remaining professionalism within the armed forces. In March 1949, the chief of staff, Gen. Husni al-Za'im, installed himself as president. Two more military dictators followed by December 1949. Gen. Adib Shishakli then held power until deposed in the 1954 Syrian coup d'etat. Further coups followed, each attended by a purge of the officer corps to remove supporters of the losers from the force.\nThe Syrian armed forces were part of the Armed Forces of the United Arab Republic between 1958 and 1961. Some Syrian ground forces formed the First Army (United Arab Republic) while the Second and Third Armies were established by the Egyptian half of the unified state.\nBa'athist Syria (1963\u20132024).\nIn 1963, the Military Committee of the Syrian Regional Command of the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party spent most of its time planning to take power through a conventional military coup. From the very beginning, the Military Committee knew it had to capture al-Kiswah and Qatana two military camps and seize control of the 70th Armored Brigade at al-Kiswah, the Military Academy in the city of Homs and the Damascus radio station. While the conspirators of the Military Committee were all young, their aim was not out of reach; the sitting regime had been slowly disintegrating and the traditional elite had lost effective political power over the country. A small group of military officers, including Hafez al-Assad, seized control in the March 1963 Syrian coup d'etat. Following the coup, Gen. Amin al-Hafiz discharged many ranking Sunni officers, thereby, Stratfor says, \"providing openings for hundreds of Alawites to fill top-tier military positions during the 1963\u20131965 period on the grounds of being opposed to Arab unity. This measure tipped the balance in favor of Alawite officers who staged a coup in 1966 and, for the first time, placed Damascus in the hands of the Alawites.\"\nThe Armed Forces were involved in the 1967 Six-Day War (against Israel). Since 1967, most of the Golan Heights territory of southwestern Syria has been under Israeli occupation. They then fought in the late 1960s War of Attrition (against Israel) and the 1970 Black September invasion of Jordan.\nWhen Hafez al-Assad came to power in 1971, the army began to modernize and change. In the first 10 years of Assad's rule, the army increased by 162%, and by 264% by 2000. At one point, 70% of the country's annual budget spend only to the army. At the beginning of the Yom Kippur War of 1973, the Syrian Army launched an attack to seize the Golan Heights that was only narrowly repulsed by two vastly outnumbered Israeli brigades. Since 1973 the cease-fire line has been respected by both sides, with very few incidents until the Syrian civil war.\nSyria was invited into Lebanon by that country's president in 1976, to intervene on the side of the Lebanese government against PLO guerilla and Lebanese Christian forces. The Arab Deterrent Force originally consisted of a Syrian core, up to 25,000 troops, with participation by some other Arab League states totaling only around 5,000 troops. In late 1978, after the Arab League had extended the mandate of the Arab Deterrent Force, the Sudanese, the Saudis and the United Arab Emirates announced intentions to withdraw troops from Lebanon, extending their stay into the early months of 1979 at the Lebanese government's request. The Libyan troops were essentially abandoned and had to find their way home (if at all), and the ADF thereby became a purely Syrian force (which did include the Palestinian Liberation Army (PLA)).\nA year after Israel invaded and occupied Southern Lebanon during the 1982 Lebanon War, the Lebanese government failed to extend the ADF's mandate, thereby effectively ending its existence, although not the Syrian or Israeli military presence in Lebanon. Eventually the Syrian presence became known as the Syrian occupation of Lebanon.\nOccupation of Lebanon (1982\u20132005).\nSyrian forces, still technically known as the Arab Deterrent Force, lingered in Lebanon throughout the Lebanese civil war (1975\u201390). Eventually, the Syrians brought most of the nation under their control as part of a power struggle with Israel, which had occupied areas of southern Lebanon in 1978. In 1985, Israel began to withdraw from Lebanon, as a result of domestic opposition to Israel and international pressure. In the aftermath of this withdrawal, the War of the Camps broke out, with Syria fighting their former Palestinian allies. Following the end of the Lebanese civil war in 1990, the Syrian occupation of Lebanon continued until they were also forced out by widespread public protest and international pressure. About 20,000 Syrian soldiers were deployed in Lebanon until 27 April 2005, when the last of Syria's troops left the country. Syrian forces were accused of involvement in the murder of Rafiq al-Hariri, as well as continued meddling in Lebanese affairs, and an international investigation into the Hariri killing and several subsequent bomb attacks has been launched by the UN.\nOther engagements.\nEngagements since 1979 included the Muslim Brotherhood insurgency (1979\u201382), notably including the Hama massacre, the 1982 Lebanon War (against Israel) and the dispatch of the 9th Armored Division to Saudi Arabia in 1990\u201391, ahead of the Gulf War against Iraq. The 9th Armored Division served as the Arab Joint Forces Command North reserve and saw little action. Syria's force numbered ~20,000 in strength (the sixth-largest contingent) and its involvement was justified domestically as an effort to defend Saudi Arabia. Syria's initial involvement in Operation Desert Shield also rolled into the Allied Operation Desert Storm, as Syrian forces did participate in helping dislodge and drive Iraqi forces out of Kuwait City. The total losses sustained were two dead and one wounded. There were indications the Syrian government had been prepared to double its force to 40,000.\nModernisation.\nIn recent years Syria has relied on Russian arms purchases to obtain modern weapons. Purchases included anti-tank and air defense systems. In early September 2008 the Syrian government ordered MiG-29SMT fighters, Pantsir S1E air-defence systems, Iskander tactical missile systems, Yak-130 aircraft, and two Amur-1650 submarines from Russia. Russia's Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov asserted that the sale wouldn't upset the balance of power in the Middle East and was \"in line with . . . international law.\"\nRussia aimed to turn the Russian naval base in Tartus into a permanent base. Israel and the US oppose further arms sales to Syria due to fears that the weapons could fall under the control of Iran or Hezbollah fighters in Lebanon.\nSyrian civil war (2011\u20132024).\nBecause of the violence against the people by the Syrian Army and the detention of a great number of people, some soldiers from different religions and sects (Sunni, Shia, Druze and Christian) defected in protest at orders to kill protesters in April 2011. By 2014, the number of defecting officers had reached approximately 170,000, from different ranks. They formed the Free Syrian Army on 29 July 2011 and at the beginning of the conflict they depended on light weapons. The arming of the Free Syrian Army began in mid-2012.\nIn March 2012 the Syrian government issued new travel restrictions for military-aged males. Under the new restrictions, reported by local Syrian news outlets, all males between 18 and 42 were banned from traveling outside the country. In a late June 2012 interview given by the FSA's \"Asharq Al-Awsat\" he claimed Riad al-Asaad said that about 20\u201330 Syrian officers defected to Turkey each day.\nOn 18 July 2012 the Syrian Defense Minister Dawoud Rajha, former defense minister Hasan Turkmani and the president's brother-in-law Gen. Assef Shawkat were killed in a bomb attack in Damascus. Syrian intelligence chief Hisham Bekhityar and Head of the 4th Army Division Maher Al Assad \u2013 brother of President Assad \u2013 were also injured in the explosion.\nSince the start of the conflict in Syria, human rights groups say that the majority of abuses were committed by the Syrian government's forces, and UN investigations concluded that the government's abuses were the greatest in both gravity and scale. The branches of the Syrian Armed Forces that committed war crimes include at least the Syrian Arab Army, Syrian Arab Air Force and the Syrian Military Intelligence. However the Syrian authorities denied these accusations and claimed that irregular armed groups with foreign support are behind the atrocities, including Al Qaeda linked Insurgents.\nThe numbers in the Syrian armed forces had reduced considerably during the Civil War, although estimates varied.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRussian sources gave higher estimates. In 2011, 300,000 reserves were reported in addition to regular forces. In 2014, Gazeta.ru reported that the regular army had reduced from 325,000 to 150,000 due to \"mortality, desertions and deviations\", but that this was supplemented by 60,000 Republican Guards and 50,000 Kurdish militias. In 2015, LifeNews still reported the same figures.\nDespite shrinking by nearly half from the 2011 beginning of the civil war by 2014, the Armed Forces became much more flexible and capable, especially in anti-guerilla warfare. Their \"modus operandi\" switched from traditional Soviet-modeled conventional military forces into a force of smaller groups fighting in close-quarters guerrilla combat with an increasing role for junior officers.\nIn September 2018, Statista Charts estimated that the Syrian military had lost 111 warplanes since the beginning of the civil war, including reconnaissance and attack drones. The Syrians lost most of their warplanes during the first four years of the war, with losses significantly decreasing after the Russian intervention into the war. After the civil war Bashar Al-Assad made little efforts to rehabilitate the military from the losses sustained during the civil war. This was most likely not due to a lack of resources, but instead it was an active choice of the regime. This left the military weakened and suspectable to attacks, such as from Israel.\nSyrian transitional government (2024\u2013present).\nIn December 2024, the Syrian Arab Army, alongside the Syrian Arab Republic itself, collapsed as the Assad regime fell. Some of the remaining Assad regime forces crossed into Iraq, others removed their uniforms before the rebels could arrive in Damascus, the last remaining territory controlled by the SAR. Retired U.S. General Wesley Clark said that a video showing Assad's forces evacuating to Iraq showed the \"demoralization and collapse of an army\", and that the forces knew they would lose, with the rebels taking Damascus and Assad's whereabouts unknown. He compared it to the fall of Kabul in 2021, where the U.S.-backed Afghan Armed Forces collapsed, and that when faced with certain defeat, armies simply \"melt away\".\nAs of 2024[ [update]], leaders of the Syrian Democratic Forces, the military forces of the Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria, were preparing for \"negotiations that would create a broader-based Syrian government that is not under al-Julani's control\". Leaders of the Southern Operations Room met with al-Julani on 11 December and expressed interest in \"coordination\", a \"unified effort\" and \"cooperation\", without stating that they would support the HTS transitional government.\nOn 17 December 2024, Prime Minister Mohammed Al-Bashir has said the defense ministry would be restructured using former rebel factions and officers who defected from Assad's army. Murhaf Abu Qasra (\"nom de guerre\"; Abu Hassan al-Hamawi), the military commander of Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham said to \"The Economist\", \"All military units will naturally transition to the ministry of defence, forming a unified army tasked with protecting the nation on behalf of all Syrians.\" \"The Economist\" added that Qasra insisted \"..that there will be no place in the new Syria for jihadists eager to launch attacks\". Abu Qasra, speaking with \"AFP\", said that HTS would be \"among the first to take the initiative\" to dissolve its armed wing for a national army; on 21 December it was reported that Abu Qasra was appointed transitional Minister of Defense.\nOn 22 December 2024, Ahmed al-Sharaa said that the new Syrian government would announce the new structure of the Syrian military within days. Two days later, the transitional government announced that a meeting between opposition groups and Ahmed al-Sharaa \"ended in an agreement on the dissolution of all the groups and their integration under the supervision of the ministry of defence\".\nOn 26 December 2024, the \"former forces of deposed leader Bashar al-Assad\" killed 14 HTS fighters in the process of the HTS/new government capturing Mohammad Kanjo Hassan. General Hassan, the former chief of military justice and head of the field court, had been closely associated with the Sednaya Prison, where detainees had been often been brutally tortured. This has led to the Western Syria clashes (December 2024\u2013present) against the new Syrian transitional government/regime.\nOn 29 December 2024, Ahmed al-Sharaa announced the promotion of 42 individuals to the rank of Colonel, 5 to the rank of Brigadier General, and 2 to the rank of Major-General in the Syrian Army. This number included Defense Minister Abu Qasra and new Chief of the General Staff of the Syrian Armed Forces and Army Ali Noureddine Al-Naasan, who were both elevated to the rank of Major-General. In January 2025 the defense ministry said that it has met with over 60 armed groups and claimed that all of the armed groups agreed to be a part of the armed forces and reorganized into units. but they reject the SDF proposal of creating a Kurdish \"bloc\" within the armed forces. Later in February the SDF, the Democratic Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria, and the Syrian Democratic Council decided in a meeting that the SDF would merge with the Syrian army.\nOn 8 March 2025, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported that Syrian security forces and pro-government fighters had been involved in the mass killings of more than 750 Alawite civilians amidst clashes with supposed remaining pro-Assad groups in the western governorates of Syria.\nBy June 2025, the Syrian transitional government had recruited half of its planned 200,000-man army by uniting various Syrian factions led by Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham, including 30,000 members of the Syrian National Army and 15,000 members of the Syrian Democratic Forces, as well as foreign fighters. Two-thirds of the senior commanders are HTS members. \"Reuters\" reported that the US gave the nod to Syria to integrate foreign fighters into its army.\nStructure.\nArmy.\nThe Syrian Army was historically the dominant military service, controlled the seniormost posts in the armed forces, and had approximately 80% of the armed forces' personnel. In 1987 Joshua Sinai wrote that the major recent structural developments were the establishment of a special forces division (the 14th Special Forces Division) and the organization of ground formations into three corps. In 2010, the International Institute for Strategic Studies estimated army regulars or professionals at 220,000, with an additional 280,000 reserves. That figure was unchanged in the 2011 edition of the \"Military Balance\", but in the 2013 edition, during the war, the IISS estimated that army strength was 110,000. By the end of 2018, analysts estimated the army to have just 100,000 combat-ready troops.\nAfter the beginning of the Syrian Civil War, Syrian military enlisted strength dropped by over half from a pre-civil war figure of 325,000 to 150,000 soldiers in the army in December 2014 due to casualties, desertions and draft dodging, reaching between 178,000 and 220,000 soldiers in the army, in addition to 80,000 to 100,000 irregular forces. By 2023, the number of active Syrian soldiers had increased to 170,000, but the number of active paramilitary and reserve forces may have decreased by as much as 50,000.\nAir Force.\nThe Syrian Air Force was established in 1948, and first saw action in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. Under Ba'athist Syria until 2024 it was known as the Syrian Arab Air Force. Land-based air defence systems were grouped under the Syrian Air Defence Force, separate from both the Air Force and the Army. The air force was nearly destroyed by the Israeli Defence Force in December 2024, following the collapse of the Assad regime.\nNavy.\nThe Syrian Navy was established in 1950, and saw action in the Yom Kippur War and the Syrian civil war.\nEquipment.\nThe breakup of the Soviet Union \u2013 long the principal source of training, material, and credit for the Syrian forces slowed Syria's ability to acquire modern military equipment. It had an arsenal of surface-to-surface missiles. In the early 1990s, Scud-C missiles with a 500-kilometer range were procured from North Korea, and Golan-1 and Golan-2 licensed-produced versions of later Scud variants were under development.\nSyria received significant financial aid from Persian Gulf Arab states as a result of its participation in the Gulf War of 1990\u201391, and a sizable portion of these funds were earmarked for military spending. In 2005, Russia forgave Syria three-fourths, or about $9.8 billion, of its $13.4 billion Soviet-era debt. Russia wrote off the debt to renew arms sales with Syria. As of 2011, arms contracts with Russia, Syria's main arms supplier, were worth at least $4\u00a0billion. Syria has conducted research and produced weapons of mass destruction.\nFrom December 2024, it became much harder to ascertain the condition and status of SAF equipment. Significant equipment will have been lost due to Israeli airstrikes, actions by Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham, militia action, as well as the emphasis on air defense systems, surface-to-surface missiles, and other assets that could potentially deliver unconventional weapons. Data related to these developments must be handled with great care.\nAfter the fall of the Syrian regime, Israeli strikes on Syria intensified, destroying a large amount of Syria's military equipment within 48 hours. In addition, the Israeli army has expanded its territorial control within Syria. Syrian president Ahmed al-Sharaa responded to the Israeli aggression with the following statement: \"Israel clearly crossed the disengagement line in Syria, which threatens a new unjustified escalation in the region\u201d but \u201cthe general exhaustion in Syria after years of war and conflict does not allow us to enter new conflicts.\"\nUniforms.\n1987-2024.\nIn 1987, according to a Library of Congress Country Study on Syria, service uniforms for Syrian military officers generally followed the British Army style, although army combat clothing followed the older British model. Each uniform had two coats: a long one for dress and a short jacket for informal wear. Army officer uniforms were khaki in summer, and olive in winter. Certain Army and Air Defense personnel (i.e., commandos and paratroops) may have worn camouflage uniforms. Air Force officers had two uniforms for each season: a khaki and a light gray for summer and a dark blue and a light gray in winter. Naval officers wore white in summer and navy blue in winter while lower ranks wore the traditional bell bottoms and white blouse. The uniform for naval chief petty officers was a buttoned jacket, similar to that worn by American chief petty officers. Officers had a variety of headgear, including a service cap, garrison cap, and beret (linen in summer and wool in winter). The color of the beret varied by season and according to the officer's unit.\nSyrian Commando and Paratroop uniforms consisted of lizard or woodland-patterned camouflage fatigues along with combat boots, helmets and bulletproof vests. Headgear consisted of a red or orange beret. The Syrian military provided NBC uniforms to soldiers to remain effective in an environment affected by biological or chemical agents. This uniform consisted of a Russian-made Model ShMS-41 mask similar to those made in the Desert Storm conflict. Previous models of the ShMS used a hose, while the improved \"ShmS-41\" used a canister-style respirator. It is difficult to assess how well equipped the Syrian Arab Army was. Although hundreds of hours of videos showing dead and captured Syrian soldiers filmed by rebels have been uploaded to social media, none show this equipment having been carried by or issued to frontline soldiers.\n2025.\nAfter the fall of the Assad regime, photographs and official documentation show the continued use of MultiCam, which was also used by the Ba'athist-led Syrian Arab Armed Forces prior to its collapse, among military personnel.\nRank insignia.\nIn 1987, according to a Library of Congress Country Study on Syria, the rank insignia of Syrian commissioned officers were identical for both the army and air force. These were gold on a bright green shoulder board for the army and gold on a bright blue board for the Air Force. Officer ranks were standard, although the highest was the equivalent of lieutenant general, a rank held in 1986 only by the commander in chief and the minister of defence. \nNavy officer rank insignias were gold stripes worn on the lower sleeve. The highest-ranking officer in Syria's navy was the equivalent of lieutenant general. Army and Air Force ranks for warrant officers were indicated by gold stars on an olive green shield worn on the upper left arm. Lower noncommissioned ranks were indicated by upright and inverted chevrons worn on the upper left arm.\nAwards and decorations.\nAlthough some twenty-five orders and medals were authorized, generally only senior officers and warrant officers wore medal ribbons. The following were some important Syrian awards: Order of Umayyad, the Medal of Military Honor, the War Medal, the Medal for Courage, the Yarmuk Medal, the Wounded in Action Medal, and the Medal of 8 March 1963.\nReferences.\n This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27480", "revid": "50946720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27480", "title": "Foreign relations of Syria", "text": "Since the Syrian Republic gained independence from the French Mandate, Syria has seen tension with its neighbours, such as Turkey, Israel, Jordan, Iraq, and Lebanon. Ensuring national security, increasing influence among its Arab neighbours and securing the return of the Golan Heights, had been the primary goals of Ba'athist Syria's foreign policy. Syria is also a full member of the Arab League. Syria enjoyed an improvement in relations with several of the states in its region in the 21st century, prior to the Arab Spring and the Syrian civil war. Due to the Syrian civil war, Ba'athist Syrian government was partially isolated from the countries in the region and the wider international community until 2022. After the fall of the Assad regime in late 2024, the new Syrian government actively engaged with the European Union and neighboring countries including Turkey and the Arab world for post-war reconstruction.\nHistory.\nBa'athist Syria.\nUnder the Ba'athist regime, diplomatic relations were severed with several countries, including Turkey, Canada, France, Australia, New Zealand, Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands, Germany, the United States, the United Kingdom, Belgium, Spain, Mexico, Qatar, Georgia, and Ukraine. In 2011 and 2012, Syria was suspended from the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, Union for the Mediterranean and the Arab League.\nBa'athist Syria had close ties with its traditional allies, Iran and Russia. Other countries that maintain good relations with the Assad regime include China, North Korea, Vietnam, Fiji, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Laos, Myanmar, Cambodia, Thailand, Philippines, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Malaysia, Indonesia Brunei, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Mongolia, Tajikistan, Greece, Cyprus, North Macedonia, Czech Republic, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Serbia, Montenegro, Vatican City and Belarus. Syria was a candidate state of the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU).\nSyria maintains relations with autonomous Iraqi Kurdistan. Syria has not recognized Israel since the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. Ba'athist Syria also didn\u2019t have diplomatic relations with South Korea, but the Assad regime had diplomatic relations with Abkhazia and South Ossetia (two Russian-occupied territories in Georgia).\nOn 26 February 2023, Bashar al-Assad met with Iraqi, Jordanian, Palestinian, Libyan, Egyptian and Emirati lawmakers, as well as representatives from Oman and Lebanon after more than a decade of isolation in the region. Arab states contributed significantly to the relief effort after the 2023 Turkey\u2013Syria earthquake. A week before, Al-Assad travelled to Oman for his first foreign visit since the quake. Syrian\u2013Turkish normalization was also underway since 2022. On 7 May 2023, following these rapprochements, Syria was readmitted to the Arab League. While the earthquake facilitated these rapprochements, the main reasons for the readmission were the Syrian refugees in neighboring countries and the Captagon trafficking, two issues that needed Syrias involvement for being solved.\nPost Ba'athist era.\nSince the fall of the Assad regime in 2024, it is unclear whether the new transitional government retained all of Ba'athist Syria's diplomatic relations. However, Turkey became the first country to re-establish diplomatic relations with post-Assad Syria, doing so on 14 December 2024. In December 2024, Qatar also re-established diplomatic relations with Syria.\nIn April 2025, Saudi Arabia increased its engagement with Syria by planning to pay off Syria's $15 million debt to the World Bank, potentially allowing Syria to receive grants for reconstruction efforts under its new government led by Ahmed al-Sharaa, who seized power in December 2024. The international community is cautiously observing al-Sharaa's government, particularly regarding its commitment to protecting religious minorities, though this move by Saudi Arabia signals a new level of diplomatic and economic engagement with the Syrian government after years of strained relations. In addition, other Gulf Arab states have announced plans to support Syria as well.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Syria maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nAmericas.\nSyria has diplomatic relations with most Central and South American countries such as Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Lucia, Suriname, Uruguay and Venezuela.\nAsia and Oceania.\nSyria's relations with the Arab world were strained by its support for Iran during the Iran\u2013Iraq War, which began in 1980. With the end of the war in August 1988, Syria began a slow process of reintegration with the other Arab states. In 1989, it joined with the rest of the Arab world in readmitting Egypt to the 19th Arab League Summit at Casablanca.\nThis decision, prompted in part by Syria's need for Arab League support of its own position in Lebanon, marked the end of the Syrian-led opposition to Egypt and the 1977\u201379 Sadat initiatives toward Israel, as well as the Camp David Accords. It coincided with the end of the 10-year Arab subsidy to Syria and other front-line Arab countries pledged at Baghdad in 1978. Syria re-established full diplomatic relations with Egypt in 1989. In the 1990\u20131991 Gulf War, Syria joined other Arab states in the US-led multinational coalition against Iraq. In 1998, Syria began a slow rapprochement with Iraq, driven primarily by economic needs. In this period, Syria continued to play an active pan-Arab role, which intensified as the Israel-Palestine peace process collapsed in September 2000 with the start of the second Palestinian uprising (Intifada) against Israel. Though it voted in favor of UNSCR 1441 in 2002, Syria was against coalition military action in Iraq in 2003. However, the Syrian government accepted UNSCR 1483 (after being absent for the actual vote), which lifted sanctions on Iraq and established a framework to assist the Iraqi people in determining their political future and rebuilding their economy.\nAfter start of the war in 2011, much of the Middle East condemned Syria's handling of the civil uprising, with only a few countries in the Middle East supporting Syria, most notably Iran, Iraq and Lebanon.\nEurope.\nThe Czech Republic and Austria were the only European Union countries which never closed its embasies in Damascus throughout the Syrian civil war. Greece and Cyprus re-established diplomatic relations with Syria and opened their embassies in 2021, making them the first EU countries to do so. Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania appointed a charg\u00e9 d'affaires to their diplomatic missions in the country. In July 2024, Italy decided to re-establish relations with Syria, appoint its special envoy and charg\u00e9 d'affaires to the country and reopen its embassy in Damascus. Following the fall of the Assad regime, Germany and France became the first European Union countries to visit Damascus. On 16 January 2025, Spain reopened its Embassy in Damascus. On 20 March 2025, Germany reopened its Embassy in Damascus.\nMembership in international organizations.\nSyria is a member of the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa, Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development, Arab Industrial Development and Mining Organization, Arab League, Arab Monetary Fund, Arab Parliament, Arab States Broadcasting Union, ALBA (observer), Asian\u2013African Legal Consultative Organization, Asian Parliamentary Assembly, Association of Arab Universities, Bureau International des Expositions, Council of Arab Economic Unity, Customs Cooperation Council, Economic and Social Council, Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, European Broadcasting Union (associate member), FEAS, Food and Agriculture Organization, Group of 24, Group of 77, International Atomic Energy Agency, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, International Civil Aviation Organization, International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions, International Chamber of Commerce, International Development Association, Islamic Development Bank (suspended 2012), International Fund for Agricultural Development, International Finance Corporation, International Labour Organization, International Monetary Fund, International Maritime Organization, Intelsat, Interpol, International Olympic Committee, International Organization for Standardization, IRENA (acceding), International Solar Alliance, International Telecommunication Union, Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, Non-Aligned Movement, Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (joined 2013, suspended 2021), OTIF, Parliamentary Assembly of the Mediterranean, UN, UN Commission on Human Rights, UN Conference on Trade and Development, UNESCO, UN Industrial Development Organization, UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, Union for the Mediterranean (suspended 2011), Universal Postal Union, World Bank, World Court, World Customs Organization, World Federation of Trade Unions, World Health Organization, WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean, World Intellectual Property Organization, World Meteorological Organization, World Tourism Organization and International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.\nSyria's two-year term as a nonpermanent member of the UN Security Council ended in December 2003. Syria was elected to the executive of the World Health Organization in 2021.\nArab League.\nSyria was temporarily suspended from the Arab League since the beginning of the Syrian civil war. Six of the Arab states of the Persian Gulf recognised the Syrian National Coalition as Syria's only legitimate representative on 12 November 2012, but Iraq, Algeria and Lebanon prevented the Arab League from following suit. On 26 March 2013, at the Arab league summit in Doha, the League recognised the National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, as the legitimate representatives of the Syrian people. The National Coalition was henceforth granted Damascus' seat at the summit.\nThis act of recognition was opposed by Algeria, Iraq and Lebanon. On 9 March 2014, secretary general Nabil al-Arabi said that Syria's seat would remain vacant until the opposition completes the formation of its institutions. In late 2018, Egypt, Tunisia and Morocco began lobbying for Syria's return to the League.\nIn December 2018, after American president Donald Trump announced the partial withdrawal of U.S. troops from Syria, some countries initiated reopening of their diplomatic relations with Syria. Diplomatic relations have returned with Iraq, Saudi Arabia (in 2023), Egypt (after 3 July 2013), Tunisia, UAE (after 2018), Jordan (after 2021), Lebanon (after 2021), Algeria, Mauritania (after 2018), Bahrain (after 2018), Kuwait (after 2018), Libya, Oman, Comoros, Sudan (after 2018), Yemen, Somalia and Palestine.\nFollowing the visit of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, the Arab League initiated the process of readmission of the Syrian Arab Republic to the organization, while the United Arab Emirates reopened their embassy in Syria on 27 December, and Bahrain announced its intentions to reopen their embassies.\nAfter the devastating 2023 Turkey\u2013Syria earthquake, the Saudis, Emirati, Algerians, Iraqis and Jordanians contributed significantly to the relief effort. A week before, Al-Assad travelled to Oman for his first foreign visit since the quake.\nOn 26 February 2023, President Bashar al-Assad had met with Iraqi, Jordanian, Palestinian, Libyan, Egyptian and Emirati speakers of legislative bodies, as well as representatives from Oman and Lebanon on behalf of Arab Inter-Parliamentary Union, to discuss further cooperation between the Arab states and Syria.\nIn early April 2023, Saudi Arabia had invited Syria's Assad to the Arab League summit, ending regional isolation. On 13 April 2023, Syrian Foreign Minister Faisal Mekdad arrived in Jeddah to meet Saudi Foreign Minister Faisal bin Farhan. After frayed relations during the Syrian civil war, both nations now seek \"a political solution to the Syrian crisis that preserves the unity, security and stability of Syria,\" according to the Saudi foreign ministry.\nOn 15 April 2023, foreign ministers of GCC+3 format met in Jeddah and discussed the return of Syria to the regional organisation and so called Arab peace plan.\nOn 18 April 2023, Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Faisal bin Farhan travelled to Damascus, met with Syrian President Assad and discussed further steps. The summit is scheduled for 19 May 2023.\nOn 7 May 2023, at the meeting of the Council of the Arab League in Cairo composed of foreign ministers, was agreed to reinstate Syria's membership in the Arab League.\nEarlier, Kuwait and Qatar had opposed al-Assad's presence at the Arab League summit. The regional normalisation effort had caught the U.S. and its European allies by surprise, as they were opposing an \"Arab-led political path\" in solving the crisis. According to the statement, al-Assad would be allowed to the meeting on 19 May 2023, if \"he wishes to do so\". The new political process in Syria was described as the \"Jordanian Initiative\".\nNevertheless, Syria remains under international sanctions after millions of Syrians had been displaced or sought refuge in Arab and European countries during the war. The changes to the relations between Syria and other Arab States would allow many of them to return to their homeland, according to the announcements made earlier by Jordanian and Saudi officials.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27481", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27481", "title": "Section 508 Amendment to the Rehabilitation Act of 1973", "text": "Amendment to United States federal law\nIn 1998, the U.S. Congress amended the Rehabilitation Act to require federal agencies to make their electronic and information technology accessible to people with disabilities. Section 508 was enacted to eliminate barriers in information technology, to make available new opportunities for people with disabilities and to encourage the development of technologies that will help achieve these goals. The law applies to all federal agencies when they develop, procure, maintain, or use electronic and information technology. Under Section 508 (\u00a0https://), agencies must give employees with disabilities and members of the public access to information that is comparable to the access available to others.\nHistory.\nSection 508 was originally added as an amendment to the \"Rehabilitation Act of 1973\" in 1986. The original section 508 dealt with electronic and information technologies, in recognition of the growth of this field.\nIn 1997, The Federal Electronic and Information Technology Accessibility and Compliance Act was proposed in the U.S. legislature to correct the shortcomings of the original section 508; the original Section 508 had turned out to be mostly ineffective, in part due to the lack of enforcement mechanisms. In the end, this Federal Electronic and Information Technology Accessibility and Compliance Act, with revisions, was enacted as the \"new\" Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, in 1998.\nSection 508 addresses legal compliance through the process of market research and government procurement and also has technical standards against which products can be evaluated to determine if they meet the technical compliance. Because technology can meet the legal provisions and be legally compliant (e.g., no such product exists at time of purchase) but may not meet the United States Access Board's technical accessibility standards, users are often confused between these two issues. Additionally, evaluation of compliance can be done only when reviewing the procurement process and documentation used when making a purchase or contracting for development, the changes in technologies and standards themselves, it requires a more detailed understanding of the law and technology than at first seems necessary.\nThere is nothing in Section 508 that requires private web sites to comply unless they are receiving federal funds or under contract with a federal agency. Commercial best practices include voluntary standards and guidelines as the World Wide Web Consortium's (W3C) Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI). Automatic accessibility checkers (engines) such as \"IBM Rational Policy Tester\" and AccVerify, refer to Section 508 guidelines but have difficulty in accurately testing content for accessibility.\nIn 2006, the United States Access Board organized the Telecommunications and Electronic and Information Technology Advisory Committee (TEITAC) to review and recommend updates to its Section 508 standards and Telecommunications Act Accessibility Guidelines. TEITAC issued its report to the Board in April 2008. The Board released drafts of proposed rules based on the committee's recommendations in 2010 and 2011 for public comment. In February 2015, the Board released a notice of proposed rulemaking for the Section 508 standards.\nIn 2017 the Section 508 Refresh came into effect. This was then updated a year later in January of 2018 to restore TTY access provisions. This refresh essentially aligned the web elements with the W3C's WCAG 2.0 AA criteria.\nThe law.\nProvisions.\nThe original legislation mandated that the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board, known as the Access Board, establish a draft for their Final Standards for accessibility for such electronic and information technologies in December 2001. The final standards were approved in April 2001 and became enforceable on June 25, 2001.\nThe latest information about these standards and about support available from the Access Board in implementing them, as well as the results of surveys conducted to assess compliance, is available from the Board's newsletter Access Currents. The Section 508 standards, tools, and resources are available from the Center for Information Technology Accommodation (CITA), in the U.S. General Services Administration's Office of Government-wide Policy.\nPractice.\nWhen evaluating a computer hardware or software product which could be used in a U.S. government agency, information technology managers now look to see if the vendor has provided an Accessibility Conformance Report (ACR). The most common ACR is known as Voluntary Product Accessibility Template (VPAT) although some departments historically promoted a https://. The VPAT template was created by the Information Technology Industry Council (ITI). A VPAT lists potential attributes of the product that affect the degree to which it is accessible.\nOne issue is whether a software's functions can be executed from the keyboard, or whether they require the use of a mouse, because keyboards are usable by a wider spectrum of people. Because colorblindness is common, another issue is whether the device or software communicates necessary information only by differences in displayed color. Because not all users can hear, another issue is whether the device or software communicates necessary information aurally only. If the product can be configured to avoid potential barriers to use, that is usually considered a satisfactory adaptation to the Section 508 requirements.\nOne challenge to the adoption of open-source software in the U.S. government has been that there is no vendor to provide support or write a VPAT, but a VPAT can be written by volunteers if they can find the necessary information."}
{"id": "27482", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27482", "title": "Scotland/Monarchs", "text": ""}
{"id": "27483", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27483", "title": "Scotland/Regions", "text": ""}
{"id": "27485", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27485", "title": "Slartibartfast", "text": "Character from The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\nSlartibartfast is a character in \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\", a comedy/science fiction series created by Douglas Adams. The character appears in the first and third novels, the first and third radio series (and the LP adaptation of the first radio series), the 1981 television series, and the 2005 feature film. The character was modelled after actor John Le Mesurier.\nCharacter overview.\nSlartibartfast is a Magrathean and a designer of planets. His favourite part of the job is creating coastlines, the most notable of which are the fjords found on the coast of Norway on planet Earth, for which he won an award. Whilst they are trapped on prehistoric Earth, Arthur Dent and Ford Prefect see Slartibartfast's signature deep inside a glacier in ancient Norway.\nWhen \"Earth Mk. II\" is being made, Slartibartfast is assigned to the continent of Africa. He is unhappy about this because he has already started \"doing it with fjords again\" (arguing that they give a continent a lovely baroque feel), but has been told by his superiors that they are \"not equatorial enough.\" In relation to this, he expresses the view that he would \"far rather be happy than right any day.\"\nIn any event, the new Earth is not required and, much to Slartibartfast's disgust, its owners suggest that he take a quick skiing holiday on his glaciers before dismantling them.\nSlartibartfast's aircar is later found near the place where Zaphod Beeblebrox, Ford Prefect, Trillian and Arthur Dent are attacked by cops, who are suddenly killed in a way similar to how the cleaning staff in Slartibartfast's study have perished. There is a note pointing to one of the controls in the aircar saying \"This is probably the best button to press.\"\nIn \"Life, the Universe and Everything\" Slartibartfast has joined the Campaign for Real Time (or \"CamTim\" as the volunteers casually refer to it, a reference to CAMRA) which tries to preserve events as they happened before time travelling was invented. He picks up Arthur and Ford from Lord's Cricket Ground with his \"Starship Bistromath\", after which they head out to stop the robots of Krikkit from bringing together the pieces of the Wikkit Gate.\nOrigin of name.\nDouglas Adams wrote in the notes accompanying that he wanted Slartibartfast's name to sound very rude, but still actually be broadcastable. He therefore started with the name \"Phartiphukborlz\", and changed bits of it until it would be acceptable to the BBC. He came closer to achieving this goal in the following episode, with the double-act Lunkwill and Fook. He adds to this statement in \"\", an analysis by Neil Gaiman:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One thing I don't think I explained in the script book was that I was also teasing the typist, Geoffrey [Perkins]'s secretary, because ... she'd be typing out this long and extraordinary name which would be quite an effort to type and right at the beginning he says 'My name is not important, and I'm not going to tell you what it is'. I was just being mean to Geoffrey's secretary.\nPortrayals.\nSlartibartfast was first portrayed in the 1978 radio serial, in which he was voiced by Richard Vernon, who also portrayed him in the 1981 live-action miniseries. Richard Griffiths voiced him in the 2004 radio series. He was portrayed by Bill Nighy in the 2005 film adaptation of the first novel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27487", "revid": "1318633690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27487", "title": "Split screen (video production)", "text": "Filmmaking technique\nIn film and video production, split screen is the visible division of the screen, traditionally in half, but also in several simultaneous images, rupturing the illusion that the screen's frame is a seamless view of reality, similar to that of the human eye. There may or may not be an explicit borderline. Until the arrival of digital technology, a split screen in films was accomplished by using an optical printer to combine two or more actions filmed separately by copying them onto the same negative, called the composite.\nIn filmmaking split screen is also a technique that allows one actor to appear twice in a scene. The simplest technique is to lock down the camera and shoot the scene twice, with one \"version\" of the actor appearing on the left side, and the other on the right side. The seam between the two splits is intended to be invisible, making the duplication seem realistic.\nInfluences.\nAn influential arena for the great split screen movies of the 1960s were two world's fairs - the 1964 New York World's Fair, where Ray and Charles Eames had a 17-screen film they created for IBM's \"Think\" Pavilion (it included sections with race car driving) and the 3-division film \"To Be Alive,\" by Francis Thompson, which won the Academy Award that year for Best Short. John Frankenheimer made \"Grand Prix\" after his visit to the 1964 New York World's Fair. The success of these pavilions further influenced the 1967 Universal exhibition in Montreal, commonly referred to as Expo 67, where multi-screen highlights included \"In the Labyrinth\", hailed by \"Time\" magazine as a \"stunning visual display,\" their review concluding: \"such visual delights as Labyrinth ... suggest that cinema\u2014the most typical of 20th century arts\u2014has just begun to explore its boundaries and possibilities,\" as well as \"A Place to Stand\", which displayed Christopher Chapman's pioneering \"multi-dynamic image technique\" of shifting multiple images. Directors Norman Jewison and Richard Fleischer conceived their ambitious split-screen films of 1968 after visiting Expo '67.\nIt is also common to use this technique to simultaneously portray both participants in a telephone conversation, a long-standing convention which dates back to early silents, as in Lois Weber's triangular frames in her 1913 \"Suspense\", and culminating in \"Pillow Talk\", where Doris Day and Rock Hudson share a party line. So linked to this convention are the Doris Day/Rock Hudson movies that \"Down With Love\", the only slightly tongue-in-cheek homage, used split screen in several phone calls, explicitly parodying this use. In the 1971 Emmy Award-winning TV movie \"Brian's Song\" which portrays the story of former Chicago Bears running backs Brian Piccolo and Hall of Famer Gale Sayers, it's the night after Piccolo's second surgery and Piccolo (James Caan) is talking to Sayers (Billy Dee Williams) on the phone. There is a diagonal split screen from upper left corner to lower right corner (Piccolo on the right side and Sayers on the left). The BBC series \"Coupling\" made extensive use of split screen as one of several techniques that are unconventional for TV series, often to a humorous effect. One episode, 'Split', was even named after the use of the effect. The acclaimed Fox TV series \"24\" used split-screen extensively to depict the many simultaneous events, enhancing the show's real-time element as well as connecting its multiple storylines.\nAn unusual and revolutionary use of split screen as an extension to the cinematic vocabulary was invented by film director Roger Avary in \"The Rules of Attraction\" (2002) where two separate halves of a split screen are folded together into one seamless shot through the use of motion control photography. The much acclaimed shot was examined and detailed in Bravo Television's \"Anatomy of a Scene\".\nIn 1975, behind the Iron Curtain, filmmaker Zbigniew Rybczynski created his experimental film \"Nowa Ksi\u0105\u017cka\" (Eng. \"New Book\"), where he split his screen into 9 small screens, shot on 35mm film. This innovative approach allowed him to create a fascinating continuous story of a man in a red hat and red coat. This film served as an inspiration for \"Timecode\" by Mike Figgis.\nDigital technology.\nThe arrival of digital video technology has made dividing the screen much easier to accomplish, and recent digital films and music videos have explored this possibility in depth. Sometimes the technique is used to show actions occurring simultaneously; \"Timecode\" (2000), by Mike Figgis, is a recent example where the combination is of four real time digital video cameras shown continuously for the duration of the film. Split-screen can also be used to the extent that it becomes part of the narrative structure of a film, as in \"The Boston Strangler\".\nUsage.\nIn films.\nEarly use of split screen can be seen in Lois Weber and Phillips Smalley\u2019s \"Suspense\" (1913), where it is used to portray simultaneous actions, and in Yakov Protazanov's \"The Queen of Spades\" (1916), where one screen depicts reality and the other a character's inner desires. This technique has been used to portray twins in such films as \"Wonder Man\" (1945), \"The Dark Mirror\" (1946), \"The Parent Trap\" (both the 1961 original and the 1998 remake), and \"Adaptation\" (2002). In the 1961 version of \"The Parent Trap\", conversations between the twins were simulated by filming the actress (Hayley Mills) as she stood at the left of the frame facing right, then filming her again, standing at the right and facing left. The negative of the first action was placed into a printer and copied onto another negative, the composite, but this other negative was masked so that only the right part of the original picture is copied. Then the composite was rewound and the negative of the second action was copied onto the right side of each frame. On this second pass, the left side was masked to prevent double exposure. This technique is then carefully hidden by background lines, such as windows, doors, etc. to disguise the split.\nIn \"Indiscreet\" (1958), the technique was famously used to bypass the censors and allow Cary Grant and Ingrid Bergman to be in bed together, and even to appear to pat her on the bottom.\nSeveral studio-made films in the 1960s popularized the use of split screen. They include John Frankenheimer's \"Grand Prix\" (1966), Richard Fleischer's \"The Boston Strangler\" (1968), and Norman Jewison's \"The Thomas Crown Affair\" (1968). In the 1970s, usage continued in films like \"Airport\" (1970), \"Woodstock\" (1970), \"The Andromeda Strain\" (1971), \"Sisters\" (1972), \"Carrie\" (1976) and \"More American Graffiti\" (1979).\nTitle sequence designer Saul Bass lamented the popularity of split screen in the 1960s. Although he used it extensively in his work for \"Grand Prix\", he later claimed that it had been artistically exhausted from excessive use. According to Bass:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The point is, it\u2019s a device, and as far as I\u2019m concerned I\u2019ll never use it again \u2014 if it actually cries out for it, I\u2019ll use it but as a device it\u2019s lost its currency, because, later on, it was, unfortunately, used meaninglessly. It\u2019s the kind of thing that grows up without ever having a youth and there\u2019s no opportunity to explore it. On \"Grand Prix\" I took the multiple image... and carried it down the line quite a way. I think it is terrific at expressing muchness, but I suspect it\u2019s not capable of expressing deep feeling or contemplative...\"\nHans Canosa's 2005 film \"Conversations with Other Women\" made extensive use of split screens. \"Conversations\" juxtaposed shot and reverse shot of two actors in the same take, captured with two cameras, for the entire movie. The film was designed to enlist the audience as perceptual editors, as they can choose to watch either character act and react in real time. While the shot/reverse shot function of split screen comprises most of the running time of the film, the filmmakers also used split screen for other spatial, temporal and emotional effects. \"Conversations\"' split screen sometimes showed flashbacks of the recent or distant past juxtaposed with the present; moments imagined or hoped by the characters juxtaposed with present reality; present experience fractured into more than one emotion for a given line or action, showing an actor performing the same moment in different ways; and present and near future actions juxtaposed to accelerate the narrative in temporal overlap.\nBy filmmakers.\nThe visionary French director, Abel Gance, used the term \"Polyvision\" to describe his three-camera, three-projector technique for both widening and dividing the screen in his 1927 silent epic, \"Napol\u00e9on\". The filmmaker Brian De Palma has incorporated split screens into many of his films, most notably in \"Sisters\" (1973) and they have since become synonymous with his filmmaking style (Specifically 1981's \"Blow Out\" and 1998's \"Snake Eyes\").\nIn technology.\nThe \"Interactive Olaf\" bonus feature from the DVD release of \"Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events\" shows Jim Carrey's makeup tests from the movie in a four-way split-screen. Viewers can split the audio by selecting which one to listen to, then pressing \"ENTER\" on their DVD remote. The split screen has also been simulated in video games, most notably \"Fahrenheit\" where it is used to allow a player to keep track of multiple simultaneous elements relevant to the gameplay.\nIn music video.\nA number of music videos have made creative use of split screen presentations. In Michael Jackson's \"Billie Jean\" video a number of freeze frames are shown in split screen. Video and film director Michel Gondry has made extensive use of split screen techniques in his videos. One notable example is \"Sugar Water\" - Cibo Matto (1996), where one side of the screen shows the video played normally, and the other side shows the same video played backwards. Through careful and creative staging the two sides appear to interact directly - passing objects from side to side and visually referencing each other. The music video for \"Doo Wop (That Thing)\" by Lauryn Hill was filmed using a split screen technique, the video features Lauryn, performing the song at block parties in two different eras: the mid-1960s (The year 1967 is shown on the left of the video) and the late-1990s (The year 1998 is shown on the right).\nIn television.\nThe split screen has also been used extensively in television programs. Newscasts often show two reporters in a split screen frame. The sitcom \"That '70s Show\", Nickelodeon teen sitcom \"Drake &amp; Josh\", Disney Channel teen sitcom \"Lizzie McGuire\", USA Network's \"Burn Notice\" and Fox's \"24\" made extensive use of split screens. It is sometimes used in game shows to show two contestants simultaneously, and on cable news shows, when participants in a discussion are in different locations.\nSplit screens are frequently used in motor racing, especially during safety car pit stops in the IndyCar Series and NASCAR, where four way splits are used, most often with three leading cars or trucks' pit stops shown on the left and a shot of the pit exit (where restart order is determined after pit stops) on the right, with some featuring just four different cars or trucks making pit stops. Often these pit stops can change the entire outcome of a race. In sports, an instant replay, highlights package, or featurette on a specific subject relating to the play may be shown in a corner while the main play is happening.\nSplit screens showcasing individual character reactions are a common device of Japanese anime, where they imitate the panel layouts of manga. These sometimes feature more than two characters at once, and may be split at oblique angles.\nIn 2019, Snapchat's original content arm, Snap Originals, released a series called 'Two Sides', which followed a young couple as they navigated a breakup, told from both perspectives at the same time. Season Two and Season Three will be released in 2021. \nSplit screens are sometimes used during commercial breaks, as in ESPN's \"Side-By-Side\" coverage of racing, where one side of the screen shows race footage and the other shows advertising. This allows commercial to be shown while not interrupting coverage of race action.\nSplit screens are also common in advertising, often to show comparison.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27488", "revid": "11104410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27488", "title": "Software documentation", "text": "Explains the functionality of software\nSoftware documentation is written text or illustration that accompanies computer software or is embedded in the source code. The documentation either explains how the software operates or how to use it, and may mean different things to people in different roles.\nDocumentation is an important part of software engineering. Types of documentation include:\nTypes.\nRequirements documentation.\nRequirements documentation is the description of what a given software does or should do. It is used throughout development to communicate how the software functions or how it is intended to operate. It is also used as an agreement or as the foundation for agreement on what the software will do. Requirements are produced and consumed by everyone involved in the production of software, including: end users, customers, project managers, sales, marketing, software architects, usability engineers, interaction designers, developers, and testers.\nRequirements come in a variety of styles, notations and formality. Requirements can be goal-like (e.g., \"distributed work environment\"), close to design (e.g., \"builds can be started by right-clicking a configuration file and selecting the 'build' function\"), and anything in between. They can be specified as statements in natural language, as drawn figures, as detailed mathematical formulas, or as a combination of them all.\nThe variation and complexity of requirement documentation make it a proven challenge. Requirements may be implicit and hard to uncover. It is difficult to know exactly how much and what kind of documentation is needed and how much can be left to the architecture and design documentation, and it is difficult to know how to document requirements considering the variety of people who shall read and use the documentation. Thus, requirements documentation is often incomplete (or non-existent). Without proper requirements documentation, software changes become more difficult \u2014 and therefore more error prone (decreased software quality) and time-consuming (expensive).\nThe need for requirements documentation is typically related to the complexity of the product, the impact of the product, and the life expectancy of the software. If the software is very complex or developed by many people (e.g., mobile phone software), requirements can help better communicate what to achieve. If the software is safety-critical and can have a negative impact on human life (e.g., nuclear power systems, medical equipment, mechanical equipment), more formal requirements documentation is often required. If the software is expected to live for only a month or two (e.g., very small mobile phone applications developed specifically for a certain campaign) very little requirements documentation may be needed. If the software is a first release that is later built upon, requirements documentation is very helpful when managing the change of the software and verifying that nothing has been broken in the software when it is modified.\nTraditionally, requirements are specified in requirements documents (e.g. using word processing applications and spreadsheet applications). To manage the increased complexity and changing nature of requirements documentation (and software documentation in general), database-centric systems and special-purpose requirements management tools are advocated.\nIn Agile software development, requirements are often expressed as \"user stories\" with accompanying acceptance criteria. User stories are typically part of a feature, or an epic, which is a broader functionality or set of related functionalities that deliver a specific value to the user based on the business requirements.\nArchitecture design documentation.\nArchitecture documentation (also known as software architecture description) is a special type of design document. In a way, architecture documents are third derivative from the code (design document being second derivative, and code documents being first). Very little in the architecture documents is specific to the code. These documents do not describe how to program a given routine, or even why a routine exists in the form that it does, but instead merely list the general requirements that would motivate the existence of such a routine. A good architecture document is short on details but thick on explanation. It may suggest approaches for lower level design, but leave the actual exploration trade studies to other documents.\nAnother type of design document is the comparison document, or trade study. This would often take the form of a \"whitepaper\". It focuses on one specific aspect of the system and suggests alternate approaches. It could be at the user interface, code, design, or even architectural level. It will outline what the situation is, describe one or more alternatives, and enumerate the pros and cons of each. A good trade study document is heavy on research, expresses its idea clearly (without relying heavily on obtuse jargon to dazzle the reader), and most importantly is impartial. It should honestly and clearly explain the costs of whatever solution it offers as best. The objective of a trade study is to devise the best solution, rather than to advance some viewpoint. It is acceptable to state no conclusion, or to conclude that none of the alternatives are sufficiently better than the baseline to warrant a change. It should be approached as a scientific endeavor, not as a marketing technique.\nA very important part of the design document in enterprise software development is the Database Design Document (DDD). It contains Conceptual, Logical, and Physical Design Elements. The DDD includes the formal information that the people who interact with the database need. The purpose of preparing it is to create a common source to be used by all players within the scene. The potential users are:\nWhen talking about Relational Database Systems, the document should include following parts:\nIt is very important to include all information that is to be used by all actors in the scene. It is also very important to update the documents as any change occurs in the database as well.\nTechnical documentation.\nIt is important for the code documents associated with the source code (which may include README files and application programming interface (API) documentation) to be thorough, but not so verbose that it becomes overly time-consuming or difficult to maintain them. Various how-to and overview documentation guides are commonly found specific to the software application or software product being documented by API writers. This documentation may be used by developers, testers, and also end-users. Today, a lot of high-end applications are seen in the fields of power, energy, transportation, networks, aerospace, safety, security, industry automation, and a variety of other domains. Technical documentation has become important within such organizations as the basic and advanced level of information may change over a period of time with architecture changes. There is evidence that the existence of good code documentation actually reduces maintenance costs for software.\nCode documents are often organized into a \"reference guide\" style, allowing a programmer to quickly look up an arbitrary function or class.\nTechnical documentation embedded in source code.\nOften, tools such as Doxygen, NDoc, Visual Expert, Javadoc, JSDoc, EiffelStudio, Sandcastle, ROBODoc, Plain Old Documentation (POD), TwinText, or Universal Report can be used to auto-generate the code documents\u2014that is, they extract the comments and software contracts, where available, from the source code and create reference manuals in such forms as text or HTML files.\nThe idea of auto-generating documentation is attractive to programmers for various reasons. For example, because it is extracted from the source code (for example, through comments), the programmer can write it while referring to the code, and use the same tools used to create the source code to make the documentation. This makes it much easier to keep the documentation up-to-date.\nA possible downside is that only programmers can edit this kind of documentation, and it depends on them to refresh the output (for example, by running a cron job to update the documents nightly). Some would characterize this as a pro rather than a con.\nLiterate programming.\nRespected computer scientist Donald Knuth has noted that documentation can be a very difficult afterthought process and has advocated literate programming (LP), written at the same time and location as the source code and extracted by automatic means. The programming languages Haskell and CoffeeScript have built-in support for a simple form of LP, but this support is not used widely.\nA stricter, more rigorous advance in method in the same direction is Docs as Code\nElucidative programming.\nElucidative programming is the result of practical applications of literate programming in real programming contexts. The elucidative paradigm proposes that source code and documentation be stored separately.\nOften, software developers need to be able to create and access information that is not going to be part of the source file itself. Such annotations are usually part of several software development activities, such as code walks and porting, where third-party source code is analysed in a functional way. Annotations can therefore help the developer during any stage of software development where a formal documentation system would hinder progress.\nUser documentation.\nUnlike code documents, user documents simply describe how a program is used.\nIn the case of a software library, the code documents and user documents could in some cases be effectively equivalent and worth conjoining, but for a general application this is not often true.\nTypically, the user documentation describes each feature of the program, and assists the user in realizing these features. It is very important for user documents to not be confusing, and for them to be up to date. User documents do not need to be organized in any given way, but it is very important for them to have a thorough index. Consistency and simplicity are also very valuable. User documentation is considered to constitute a contract specifying what the software will do. API Writers are very well accomplished towards writing good user documents as they would be well aware of the software architecture and programming techniques used. See also technical writing.\nUser documentation can be produced in a variety of online and print formats. However, user documentation may be organized in three main ways:\nA common complaint among users regarding software documentation is that only one of these three approaches was taken to the near-exclusion of the other two. It is common to limit provided software documentation for personal computers to online help that gives only reference information on commands or menu items. The job of tutoring new users or helping more experienced users get the most out of a program is left to private publishers, who are often given significant assistance by the software developer.\nComposing user documentation.\nLike other forms of technical documentation, good user documentation benefits from an organized process of development. In the case of user documentation, the process as it commonly occurs in industry consists of five steps:\nMarketing documentation.\nFor many applications it is necessary to have some promotional materials to encourage casual observers to spend more time learning about the product. This form of documentation has three purposes:\nDocumentation and agile development controversy.\n\"The resistance to documentation among developers is well known and needs no emphasis.\" This situation is common in agile software development because those methodologies try to avoid needless activities that add no direct value. The Agile Manifesto advocates valuing \"working software over comprehensive documentation\", which could be interpreted cynically as \"We want to spend all our time coding. Remember, real programmers don't write documentation.\"\nA survey among software engineering experts revealed, however, that documentation is by no means considered unnecessary in agile development.\nYet it is acknowledged that there are motivational problems in development, and that documentation methods tailored to agile development (e.g. through Reputation systems and Gamification) may be needed.\nDocs as Code.\n\"Docs as Code\" is a system for documentation that treats it with the same rigor and processes as software code. This includes:\nBenefits.\nCombining Docs as Code with Agile methods creates a robust framework for maintaining high-quality, up-to-date documentation.\nThe two can be integrated, thusly:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27489", "revid": "39723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27489", "title": "Social contract theories", "text": ""}
{"id": "27490", "revid": "32122377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27490", "title": "Sense and Sensibility", "text": "1811 novel by Jane Austen\nSense and Sensibility (working title: Elinor and Marianne) is the first novel by the English author Jane Austen, published in 1811. It was published anonymously: \"By A Lady\" appears on the title page where the author's name might have been.\nThe novel is probably set between 1792 and 1797 and follows the three Dashwood sisters and their widowed mother as they are forced to leave the family estate in Sussex and move to a modest cottage on the property of a distant relative in Devon. There the two eldest girls experience love and heartbreak that tries the contrasting characters of both.\nPlot summary.\nOn his deathbed, Henry Dashwood makes his son, John, promise to provide for his stepmother and half-sisters, Elinor, Marianne and Margaret, from his inheritance. John's wife Fanny instead persuades him not to support them financially, leaving them a greatly reduced income.\nFanny's brother Edward Ferrars arrives for a visit. When he and Elinor seem to be growing close, Fanny warns Mrs Dashwood that their mother has higher goals for Edward. Affronted, Mrs Dashwood moves her family to Barton Cottage in Devonshire, which her second cousin, Sir John Middleton, offered for a low rent. Later, while dining with the Middletons at Barton Park, family friend Colonel Brandon is attracted to Marianne. However, he is aged thirty-five, which seems too old to sixteen-year-old Marianne's romantic sensibilities.\nWhile out walking, Marianne sprains her ankle. John Willoughby happens upon her and carries Marianne home. During subsequent visits, their similar artistic tastes causes Marianne to fall in love with him, abandoning caution and propriety. Just as an engagement seems imminent, Willoughby informs the Dashwoods that his elderly cousin Mrs. Smith, whom he is financially dependent upon due to his debts, is sending him to London indefinitely on business. Marianne is left distraught.\nWhen Edward Ferrars visits Barton Cottage, he seems subdued. Shortly afterwards, sisters Anne and Lucy Steele, vulgar cousins of Sir John's mother-in-law, Mrs. Jennings, stay at Barton Park. While there, Lucy confides to Elinor that she and Edward are secretly engaged, giving Elinor an insight into Lucy's jealous and calculating nature.\nMrs Jennings invites the elder Dashwood sisters to visit her in London. After Marianne's letters to Willoughby go unanswered, they unexpectedly meet at a ball. Willoughby, there with another woman, greets Marianne coldly, later informing her he is betrothed to the rich Miss Grey. Marianne is heartbroken but tells Elinor that she and Willoughby never were engaged.\nColonel Brandon reveals to Elinor that Willoughby had earlier seduced and abandoned Brandon's teenaged ward, Eliza Williams. Willoughby's cousin has consequently disinherited him, which explains his need to marry an heiress. Meanwhile, the Steele sisters come to London and are invited to stay at John and Fanny Dashwood's London house in preference to Elinor and Marianne. Based on their cordiality, Anne mistakenly believes that the Ferrars have become fond enough of Lucy to welcome her into the family and reveals Lucy's engagement to Edward. As a result, the sisters are dismissed from the house, and Edward's wealthy mother orders him to break off the engagement. When Edward refuses, he is disinherited in favour of his younger brother. On learning this, Colonel Brandon shows his admiration for Edward's honourable conduct by offering him the nearby parsonage, allowing him and Lucy to marry after he is ordained.\nMrs. Jennings takes the Dashwood sisters to visit her second daughter as they journey back to Devonshire. Marianne goes walking in the rain and contracts putrid fever. When Marianne's condition worsens, Elinor writes home. Colonel Brandon, who lives nearby, volunteers to bring Marianne's mother. That night, Willoughby arrives. He tells Elinor that he genuinely loved Marianne. However, the callous way he talks about Eliza and his wife lessens Elinor's pity for him.\nMarianne recovers, and learning of Elinor's own silent heartache, is ashamed of her ostentatious grief, and vows to be guided by her sister's good sense and amend her future behaviour.\nAfter their return home, a family servant happens to encounter Lucy at a nearby market town and brings back news that she is now Mrs Ferrars. This final act of spite becomes obvious when Edward arrives to reveal that Lucy had jilted him and married his now wealthy younger brother. After being ordained, Edward marries Elinor, while Marianne later marries Colonel Brandon. The two sisters can now harmoniously live as neighbours.\nDevelopment of the novel.\nJane Austen wrote the first draft of the novel in epistolary form, perhaps as early as 1795 when she was about 19 years old; or 1797, at age 21. She is said to have given it the working title \"Elinor and Marianne\". Later she changed the form to a narrative and the title to \"Sense and Sensibility\".\nAusten drew inspiration for \"Sense and Sensibility\" from other novels of the 1790s that treated similar themes, including Adam Stevenson's \"Life and Love\" (1785) which he had written about himself and a relationship that was not meant to be. Jane West's \"A Gossip's Story\" (1796), which features one sister full of rational sense and another sister of romantic, emotive sensibility, is considered to have been an inspiration as well. West's romantic sister-heroine also shares her first name, Marianne, with Austen's. There are further textual similarities, described in a modern edition of West's novel.\nAusten may have drawn on her knowledge of Warren Hastings, the first Governor-General of India, in her portrayal of Colonel Brandon. Just as Eliza Brandon was rumoured to be the Colonel's love child, Hastings had been rumoured to be the biological father of Austen's cousin Eliza de Feuillide. Linda Robinson Walker argues that Hastings \"haunts \"Sense and Sensibility\" in the character of Colonel Brandon\": both left for India at the age of seventeen; Hastings may have had an illegitimate daughter named Eliza; both Hastings and Brandon participated in a duel.\nCritical views.\n19th-century responses.\nEarly reviews of \"Sense and Sensibility\" focused on the novel as providing lessons in conduct (which would be debated by later critics), as well as reviewing the characters. The Norton Critical Edition of \"Sense and Sensibility\" contains a number of such responses in its supplementary material. An \"Unsigned Review\" in the February 1812 \"Critical Review\" praises the novel as well-written and realistic, with well-drawn characters and a \"highly pleasing\" plot in which \"the whole is just long enough to interest the reader without fatiguing\". Elinor and her mother are praised, while Marianne's extreme sensibility is seen as bringing unhappiness on herself.\nAnother \"Unsigned Review\" from the May 1812 \"British Critic\" further emphasises the novel's function as a type of conduct book. In this author's opinion, Austen's favouring of Elinor's temperament over Marianne's provides the lesson. The reviewer claims that \"the object of the work is to represent the effects on the conduct of life, of discreet quiet good sense on the one hand, and an overrefined and excessive susceptibility on the other.\" He goes on to state that the book contains \"many sober and salutary maxims for the conduct of life\" within a \"very pleasing and entertaining narrative.\"\nW. F. Pollock's 1861 article for \"Frasier's Magazine,\" on \"British Novelists\" is described as an \"early example of what would become the customary view of \"Sense and Sensibility.\"\" In addition to emphasising the novel's morality, Pollock reviews the characters in catalogue-like fashion, allotting praise and criticism on the assumption that Austen favours Elinor's point of view and temperament and extending it to the minor characters. Mrs Palmer is silly, Sir John Dashwood is selfish, the behaviour of the Steele sisters is vulgar. However, an anonymous piece titled \"Miss Austen\" published in 1866 in \"The Englishwoman's Domestic Magazine\" departs from other early criticism in sympathising with Marianne over Elinor, claiming that Elinor is \"too good\" a character. The article also differs from other reviews in its claim that the \"prevailing merit\" of the book is not in its sketch of the two sisters; rather, the book is effective because of its \"excellent treatment of the subordinate characters.\" Alice Meynell's 1894 article \"The Classic Novelist\" in the \"Pall Mall Gazette\" also concurs with Austen's attention to small things and minor characters and small matters since \"that which makes life, art, and work trivial is a triviality of relations.\" Also discussed is the children's function in highlighting \"the folly of their mothers\", especially in Lady Middleton's case.\nCharacterisation.\nAs used by Austen, the word \"sense\" signifies good judgment, wisdom, or prudence, and \"sensibility\" signifies sensitivity, sympathy, or emotionality. By changing the title from the names of the sisters Elinor and Marianne in her first choice of title to that of their qualities, Austen adds \"philosophical depth\" to what began as a sketch of two characters. However, these characteristics, as demonstrated through the dominant behaviour of the sisters, are not mutually exclusive. Although their qualities are compared and contrasted through means of the plot, neither sister is a one-sided caricature. Humanised through emotional suffering, Marianne's sympathy for her sister teaches her self-control and prudence, while Elinor learns to express her emotions more overtly.\nNevertheless, the changes to the original novel's structure are never resolved in the eyes of some critics. A. Walton Litz judged that \"Sense and Sensibility\" is \"caught uneasily between burlesque and the serious novel...in which the crude antitheses of the original structure were never successfully overcome\". Tony Tanner sees a shift of view instead to \"the tensions between the potential instability of the individual and the required stabilities of society\", as demonstrated by the influence of the governing qualities on the younger and the older sister. While sensibility has its positive aspects, its over-cultivation leads in the novel to the psychosomatic disorders to which Marianne nearly succumbs.\nClaire Tomalin too argues that \"Sense and Sensibility\" has a \"wobble in its approach\", which developed because Austen, in the course of writing the novel, gradually became less certain about whether sense or sensibility should triumph. Austen characterises Marianne as a sweet person with attractive qualities: intelligence, musical talent, frankness, and the capacity to love deeply. She also acknowledges that Willoughby, with all his faults, continues to love and, in some measure, appreciate Marianne. For these reasons, some readers find Marianne's ultimate marriage to Colonel Brandon an unsatisfactory ending.\nIn Rachel Brownstein's opinion, the differences between the Dashwood sisters have been exaggerated, and in fact the sisters are more alike than they are different, with Elinor having an \"excellent heart\" and being capable of the same romantic passions as Marianne feels, while Marianne has much sense as well. Elinor is more reserved, more polite, and less impulsive than Marianne, who loves poetry, taking walks across picturesque landscapes and believes in intense romantic relationships, but it is this very closeness between the sisters that allows these differences to emerge during their exchanges.\nMary Favret explores the contrast through examining popular forms of fiction of the time. In epistolary fiction, action, dialogue, and character interactions are all reflected through letters sent from one or more of the characters. In exploring Austen's fraught relationship with such fiction, Favret surveys how Austen \"wrestled with epistolary form\" in previous writings and, with the publication of \"Sense and Sensibility\", \"announced her victory over the constraints of the letter\". Favret contends that Austen's version of the letter separates her from her \"admired predecessor, Samuel Richardson\" in that Austen's letters are \"a misleading guide to the human heart which, in the best instances, is always changing and adapting.\" According to Favret, the character of Elinor Dashwood is an \"anti-epistolary heroine\" whose \"inner world\" of thoughts and feelings does not find \"direct expression in the novel, although her point of view controls the story.\" \"Sense and Sensibility\" establishes what Favret calls a \"new privacy\" in the novel, which was constrained by previous notions of the romance of letters. This new privacy is a \"less constraining mode of narration\" in which Austen's narrator provides commentary on the action, rather than the characters themselves through the letters. Favret claims that in \"Sense and Sensibility\", Austen wants to \"recontextualize\" the letter and bring it into a \"new realism.\" Austen does so by imbuing the letter with dangerous power when Marianne writes to Willoughby; both their love and the letter \"prove false\". Additionally, Favret claims that Austen uses the correspondence of both of the sisters to emphasise the contrasts in their personalities. When both write letters upon arriving in London, Elinor's letter is the \"dutiful letter of the 'sensible sister'\" and Marianne writes a \"vaguely illicit letter\" reflecting her characterisation as the \"sensitive\" sister\". What is perhaps most striking about Favret's analysis is that she notes that the lovers who write to one another never unite with each other.\nSocietal themes.\nA common theme of Austen criticism has been on the legal aspects of society and the family, particularly wills, the rights of first and second sons, and lines of inheritance. Gene Ruoff's book \"Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility\" explores these issues in an extended discussion of the novel. The first two chapters deal extensively with the subject of wills and the discourse of inheritance. These topics reveal what Ruoff calls \"the cultural fixation on priority of male birth\". According to Ruoff, male birth is by far the dominant issue in these legal conversations. Ruoff observes that, within the linear family, the order of male birth decides issues of eligibility and merit. When Robert Ferrars becomes his mother's heir, Edward is no longer appealing to his \"opportunistic\" fianc\u00e9e Lucy, who quickly turns her attention to the foppish Robert and \"entraps him\" in order to secure the inheritance for herself. Ruoff comments that Lucy is specifically aiming for the heir because of the monetary advantage. William Galperin, in his book \"The History Austen,\" comments on the tendency of this system of patriarchal inheritance and earning as working to ensure the vulnerability of women. Because of this vulnerability, Galperin contends that \"Sense and Sensibility\" shows marriage as the only practical solution \"against the insecurity of remaining an unmarried woman.\"\nFeminist critics have long been engaged in conversations about Jane Austen, and \"Sense and Sensibility\" has figured in these discussions, especially in the context of the patriarchal system of inheritance and earning. Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar's seminal feminist work \"The Madwoman in the Attic: The Woman Writer and the Nineteenth-Century Imagination\" contains several discussions of this novel. The authors read the beginning of \"Sense and Sensibility\" as a retelling of \"King Lear\" from a female perspective and contend that these \"reversals imply that male traditions need to be evaluated and reinterpreted from a female perspective.\" Gilbert and Gubar argue that Austen explores the effects of patriarchal control on women, particularly in the spheres of employment and inheritance. In \"Sense and Sensibility\" they educe the fact that Mr. John Dashwood cuts off his stepmother and half sisters from their home as well as promised income, as an instance of these effects. They also point to the \"despised\" Mrs. Ferrars's tampering with the patriarchal line of inheritance in her disowning of her elder son, Edward Ferrars, as proof that this construction is ultimately arbitrary. Gilbert and Gubar contend that while \"Sense and Sensibility\"'s ultimate message is that \"young women like Marianne and Elinor must submit to powerful conventions of society by finding a male protector\", women such as Mrs. Ferrars and Lucy Steele demonstrate how women can \"themselves become agents of repression, manipulators of conventions, and survivors.\" In order to protect themselves and their own interests, Mrs. Ferrars and Lucy Steele must participate in the same patriarchal system that oppresses them.\nIn the chapter \"\"Sense and Sensibility:\" Opinions Too Common and Too Dangerous\", from her book \"Jane Austen: Women, Politics, and the Novel,\" Claudia Johnson also gives a feminist reading of \"Sense and Sensibility.\" She differs from previous critics, especially the earliest ones, in her contention that \"Sense and Sensibility\" is not, as it is often assumed to be, a \"dramatized conduct book\" that values \"female prudence\" (associated with Elinor's sense) over \"female impetuosity\" (associated with Marianne's sensibility). Rather, Johnson sees \"Sense and Sensibility\" as a \"dark and disenchanted novel\" that views \"institutions of order\" such as property, marriage, and family in a negative light, an attitude that makes the novel the \"most attuned to social criticism\" of Austen's works. According to Johnson, \"Sense and Sensibility\" critically examines the codes of propriety as well as their enforcement by the community. Key to Austen's criticism of society, runs Johnson's argument, is the depiction of the unfair marginalisation of women resulting from the \"death or simple absence of male protectors.\" Additionally, the male characters in \"Sense and Sensibility\" are depicted unfavourably. Johnson calls the gentlemen in \"Sense and Sensibility\" \"uncommitted sorts\" who \"move on, more or less unencumbered by human wreckage from the past.\" Johnson compares Edward to Willoughby in this regard, claiming that all of the differences between them as individuals do not hide the fact that their failures are actually identical; Johnson calls them both \"weak, duplicitous, and selfish,\" lacking the honesty and forthrightness with which Austen endows other \"exemplary gentlemen\" in her work.\nMary Poovey's analysis in \"The Proper Lady and the Woman Writer: Ideology as Style in the Works of Mary Wollstonecraft, Mary Shelley and Jane Austen\" concurs with Johnson's on the dark tone of \"Sense and Sensibility.\" Poovey contends that \"Sense and Sensibility\" has a \"somber tone\" in which conflict breaks out between Austen's engagement with her \"self-assertive characters\" and the moral codes necessary to control their potentially \"anarchic\" desires. Austen shows, according to Poovey, this conflict between individual desire and the restraint of moral principles through the character of Elinor herself. Except for Elinor, all of the female characters in \"Sense and Sensibility\" experience some kind of female excess. Poovey argues that while Austen does recognise \"the limitations of social institutions\", she demonstrates the necessity of controlling the \"dangerous excesses of female feeling\" rather than liberating them. She does so by demonstrating that Elinor's self-denial, especially in her keeping of Lucy Steele's secret and willingness to help Edward, even though both of these actions were hurtful to her, ultimately contribute to her own contentment and that of others. In this way, Poovey contends that Austen suggests that the submission to society that Elinor demonstrates is the proper way to achieve happiness in life.\nHarmony with the environment.\nThe new discipline of Ecocriticism extends the examination of imbalance in Austen's novels and finds that she \"antedated Victorian novelists in predicting early signs of environmental manipulation and identifying the attitudes and practices that led to the ecological collapse of early nineteenth century England\". Susan Rowland's article \"The 'Real Work': Ecocritical Alchemy and Jane Austen's \"Sense and Sensibility\"\" studies the effects of alienation upon Edward Ferrars and Marianne Dashwood. Edward feels out of place in society because he lacks what Rowland calls \"useful employment\". His condition underlines the historical problem of labour in Western industrialised societies. Edward's alienation also represents \"the progressive estrangement from nonhuman nature\" in modern society as a whole, only resolved in his case by becoming a \"pastor\". Rowland argues that human culture estranges people from nature rather than returning them to it, serving merely through the fact of ownership to bolster their place in the social order. Marianne's emotional estrangement begins as she is ripped from the aesthetic enjoyment of her home environment, although ultimately she finds a new identity by uniting with Colonel Brandon on his estate at Delaford.\nPublication history.\nIn 1811, Thomas Egerton of the Military Library publishing house in London accepted the manuscript for publication in three volumes. Austen paid to have the book published and paid the publisher a commission on sales. The cost of publication was more than a third of Austen's annual household income of \u00a3460 (about \u00a315,000 in 2008 currency). She made a profit of \u00a3140 (almost \u00a35,000 in 2008 currency) on the first edition, which sold all 750 printed copies by July 1813. A second edition was advertised in October 1813.\n\"Sense and Sensibility\" was the first Austen title to be republished in England after her death, and the first illustrated Austen book produced in Britain, in Richard Bentley's Standard Novels series of 1833. The novel has been in continuous publication since 1811, and has many times been illustrated, excerpted, abridged, and adapted for stage, film, and television.\nThe novel was soon translated into French by Madame Isabelle de Montolieu as \"Raison et Sensibilit\u00e9, ou les deux mani\u00e8res d'aimer\" (1815). Montolieu had only the most basic knowledge of English, and her translations were more \"imitations\" of Austen's novels as Montolieu had her assistants provide a summary of Austen's novels, which she then translated into an embellished French that often radically altered Austen's plots and characters. The \"translation\" of \"Sense and Sensibility\" by Montolieu changes entire scenes and characters, for example having Marianne call Willoughby an \"angel\" and an \"Adonis\" upon first meeting him, lines that are not in the English original. Likewise, the scene where Mrs Dashwood criticises her husband for planning to subsidise his widowed stepmother because it might be disadvantageous to \"our little Harry\", Mrs Dashwood soon forgets about Harry and it is made apparent her objections are founded in greed; Montolieu altered the scene by having Mrs Dashwood continuing to speak of \"our little Harry\" as the basis of her objections, completely changing her motives. When Elinor learns the Ferrars who married Lucy Steele is Robert, not Edward, Montolieu adds a scene, in which Edward, the Dashwood sisters and their mother all break down in tears while clasping hands, that was not in the original. Austen has the marriage of Robert Ferrars and Lucy Steele end well while Montolieu changes the marriage into a failure.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27491", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27491", "title": "Sanity", "text": "Soundness, rationality and healthiness of the mind\nSanity (from la\u00a0'health; sanity') refers to the soundness, rationality, and health of the human mind, as opposed to insanity. A person is sane if they are rational. In modern society, the term has become exclusively synonymous with . The contrast is \"non compos mentis\", or insanity. According to the writer G. K. Chesterton, sanity involves wholeness, whereas insanity implies narrowness and brokenness.\nA sane mind is nowadays considered healthy both in its analytical (once called rational) and emotional aspects.\nPsychiatry and psychology.\nAlfred Korzybski proposed a theory of sanity in his general semantics. He believed sanity was tied to the logical reasoning about and comprehension of what is going on in the world. He imposed this notion in a map-territory analogy: \"A map \"is not\" the territory it represents, but, if correct, it has a 'similar structure' to the territory, which accounts for its usefulness.\" Given that science continually seeks to adjust its theories structurally to fit the facts, i.e., improves its maps to fit the territory, and thus advances more rapidly than any other field, he believed that the key to understanding sanity would be found in the study of the methods of science (and the study of structure as revealed by science). The adoption of a scientific outlook and attitude of continual adjustment by the individual toward their assumptions was the way, so he claimed. In other words, there were \"factors of sanity to be found in the physico-mathematical methods of science.\" He also stressed that sanity requires the awareness that \"whatever you say a thing is, it is not\" because anything expressed through language is not the reality it refers to: language is like a map, and the map is not the territory. The territory, or reality, remains unnamable, unspeakable, and mysterious. Hence, the widespread assumption that we can grasp reality through language involves a degree of insanity.\nPsychiatrist Philip S. Graven suggested the term \"un-sane\" to describe a condition that is not exactly \"insane\", but not quite \"sane\" either.\nIn \"The Sane Society\", published in 1955, psychologist Erich Fromm proposed that not just individuals, but entire societies \"may be lacking in sanity.\" Fromm argued that one of the most deceptive features of social life involves \"consensual validation\":\nIt is naively assumed that the fact that the majority of people share certain ideas or feelings proves the validity of these ideas and feelings. Nothing is further from the truth... Just as there is a \"folie \u00e0 deux\" there is a \"folie \u00e0 millions\". The fact that millions of people share the same vices does not make these vices virtues, the fact that they share so many errors does not make the errors to be truths, and the fact that millions of people share the same form of mental pathology does not make these people sane.\nLaw.\nIn criminal and mental health law, sanity is a legal term denoting that an individual is of sound mind and therefore can bear legal responsibility for their actions. The official legal term is \"compos mentis\". It is generally defined in terms of the absence of insanity (\"non compos mentis\"). It is not a medical term, although the opinions of medical experts are often important in making a legal decision as to whether someone is sane or insane. It is also not the same concept as mental illness. One can be acting under profound mental illness and yet be sane, and one can also be ruled insane without an underlying mental illness.\nLegal definitions of sanity have been little explored by science and medicine, as the concentration has been on illness. It remains entirely impossible to prove sanity. Furthermore, as Korzybski has pointed out repeatedly, insanity to various degrees is widespread in the general population, which includes many people that are considered mentally fit in medical and legal terms. In this connection, Erich Fromm referred to the \"pathology of normalcy,\" while David Cooper proposed that normality was opposed to both madness and sanity.\nFor a last will and testament to be valid, the testator must have testamentary capacity. This is often expressed using the phrase \"being of sound mind and memory\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27495", "revid": "45205619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27495", "title": "Slavic", "text": "Slavic, Slav or Slavonic may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "27499", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27499", "title": "Stone, paper, scissors", "text": ""}
{"id": "27500", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27500", "title": "Stephen King/The Shining", "text": ""}
{"id": "27529", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27529", "title": "September", "text": "Ninth month in the Gregorian and Julian calendars\nSeptember is the ninth month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian calendars. Its length is 30 days.\nSeptember in the Northern Hemisphere and March in the Southern Hemisphere are seasonally equivalent. In the Northern Hemisphere, the beginning of the meteorological autumn is on 1 September. In the Southern Hemisphere, the beginning of the meteorological spring is on 1 September.\nSeptember marks the beginning of the ecclesiastical year in the Eastern Orthodox Church. It is the start of the academic year in many countries of the northern hemisphere, in which children go back to school after the summer break, sometimes on the first day of the month. Some Libras\nand Virgos are born in September, with Virgos being born on September 1st through September 22nd and Libras September 23rd through September 30.\nSeptember (from Latin \"septem\", \"seven\") was originally the seventh month in the oldest known Roman calendar, the calendar of Romulus c.\u2009750 BC, with March being (Latin \"Martius\") the first month of the year until perhaps as late as 451 BC. After the calendar reform that added January and February to the beginning of the year, September became the ninth month but retained its name. It had 29 days until the Julian reform, which added a day.\nEvents.\nAncient Roman observances for September include Ludi Romani, originally celebrated from September 12 to September 14, later extended to September 5 to September 19. In the 1st century BC, an extra day was added in honor of the deified Julius Caesar on 4 September. Epulum Jovis was held on September 13. Ludi Triumphales was held from September 18\u201322. The Septimontium was celebrated in September, and on December 11 on later calendars. These dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar.\nSeptember was called the \"harvest month\" in Charlemagne's calendar. September corresponds partly to the Fructidor and partly to the Vend\u00e9miaire of the first French republic. September is called \"Herbstmonat\", harvest month, in Switzerland. The Anglo-Saxons called the month \"Gerstmonath\", barley month, that crop being then usually harvested.\nIn 1752, the British Empire adopted the Gregorian calendar. In the British Empire that year, September 2 was immediately followed by September 14.\nOn Usenet, it is said that September 1993 (Eternal September) never ended.\nIn the United States, September is one of the most common birth months (third most popular after August and July, which both have 31 days), as all but one Top 10 most common birthdays are in September, based on the National Center for Health Statistics statistics on births between 1994 and 2014. The most common birthday is September 9 (#1), least common is September 1 (#250).\nAstronomy and astrology.\nThe September equinox takes place in this month, and certain observances are organized around it. It is the Autumn equinox in the Northern Hemisphere, and the Vernal equinox in the Southern Hemisphere. The dates can vary from 21 September to 24 September (in UTC).\nSeptember is mostly in the sixth month of the astrological calendar (and the first part of the seventh), which begins at the end of March/Mars/Aries.\nSymbols.\nSeptember's birthstone is the sapphire. The birth flowers are the forget-me-not, morning glory and aster. The zodiac signs are Virgo (until September 22) and Libra (September 23 onward).\nObservances.\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27530", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27530", "title": "September 1", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearSeptember 1 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27531", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27531", "title": "September 2", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearSeptember 2 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27532", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27532", "title": "September 21", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearSeptember 21 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27533", "revid": "202394", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27533", "title": "September 28", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearSeptember 28 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27540", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27540", "title": "Sprouts", "text": ""}
{"id": "27541", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27541", "title": "Sprouts (game)", "text": "Paper-and-pencil mathematical game\nSprouts is an impartial paper-and-pencil game which can be analyzed for its mathematical properties. It was invented by mathematicians John Horton Conway and Michael S. Paterson at Cambridge University in the early 1960s. The setup is even simpler than the popular dots and boxes game, but gameplay develops much more artistically and organically.\nRules.\nThe game is played by two players, starting with a few spots drawn on a sheet of paper. Players take turns, where each turn consists of drawing a line between two spots (or from a spot to itself) and adding a new spot somewhere along the line. The players are constrained by the following rules:\nIn so-called \"normal play\", the player who makes the last move wins. In \"mis\u00e8re play\", the player who makes the last move loses. Mis\u00e8re Sprouts is perhaps the only mis\u00e8re combinatorial game that is played competitively in an organized forum.\nThe diagram on the right shows a 2-spot game of normal-play Sprouts. After the fourth move, most of the spots are \"dead\"\u2013they have three lines attached to them, so they cannot be used as endpoints for a new line. There are two spots (shown in green) that are still \"alive\", having fewer than three lines attached. However, it is impossible to make another move, because a line from a live spot to itself would make four attachments, and a line from one live spot to the other would cross lines. Therefore, no fifth move is possible, and the first player loses. Live spots at the end of the game are called \"survivors\" and play a key role in the analysis of Sprouts.\nAnalysis of the game.\nThough the number of spots increases with every move, the game of Sprouts cannot go on forever. It has been mathematically proven that for a game starting with \"n\" spots, it must end in no more than 3\"n\"\u22121 moves, and no fewer than 2\"n\" moves. The reason the game must end is that the number of available connection points, or \"lives\", decreases with every turn.\nA spot is considered \"dead\" when it has three lines attached to it and can no longer be used to make a move. Each spot begins with three \"lives\". Each move reduces the total number of lives in the game by one. This is because the move uses up two lives (one at each end of the new line) but creates a new spot which itself has only one remaining life. Therefore, a game that starts with \"n\" spots has a total of 3\"n\" lives available. After \"m\" moves, the number of remaining lives is 3\"n\"\u2212\"m\".\nThe game ends when there are no more valid moves. At this point, any spot that still has lives is called a \"survivor\". A survivor must have only one life remaining (if it had two or more, a line could be drawn from the spot to itself). There must be at least one survivor\u2014the spot created in the final move. Since the total number of remaining lives equals the total number of survivors, and there must be at least one survivor, the number of moves \"m\" must be less than 3\"n\". More precisely, a game can last no more than 3\"n\"\u22121 moves. This maximum is often reached when one player tries to keep all the spots in a single connected group.\nThe minimum number of moves is 2\"n\". This lower bound is often the result of a player trying to divide the playing area into many separate regions, forcing the game to end more quickly. Each enclosed region will contain at least one survivor, and each survivor has two \"dead\" neighbors that cannot be used by any other survivor. In the minimum-move game, the board is filled with these small groups and there are no other dead spots left over. These leftover dead spots, which are not neighbors of any survivor, are sometimes called \"pharisees\" (from the Hebrew for \"separated ones\"). The total number of moves in a game is directly related to the number of pharisees created.\nBecause the total number of moves is limited by these bounds, much of the strategy in Sprouts revolves around trying to influence the game's length. One player will try to create enclosed regions to shorten the game, while the other will try to keep the game open and create \"pharisees\" to lengthen it. Real games often become a battle over whether the final number of moves will be an even or odd number.\nWinning strategies.\nSince Sprouts is a finite game where no draw is possible, a perfect strategy exists either for the first or the second player, depending on the number of initial spots. The main question about a given starting position is then to determine which player can force a win if they play perfectly.\nWhen the winning strategy is for the first player, it is said that the \"outcome\" of the position is a \"win\", and when the winning strategy is for the second player, it is said that the outcome of the position is a \"loss\" (because it is a loss from the point of view of the first player).\nThe outcome is determined by developing the game tree of the starting position. This can be done by hand only for a small number of spots, and all the new results since 1990 have been obtained by extensive search with computers.\nNormal version.\n\"Winning Ways for your Mathematical Plays\" reports that the 6-spot normal game was proved to be a loss for the first player by Denis Mollison, who produced a 47-page hand analysis. For several decades this remained the largest position solved without computer assistance.\nThe first major computational advance was made in 1990 by David Applegate, Guy Jacobson, and Daniel Sleator at Carnegie Mellon University.\nTheir program, based on Alpha\u2013beta pruning with a string-based representation of Sprouts positions, determined the outcomes for all positions up to 11 spots. Based on these results, they formulated the \"Sprouts conjecture\", stating that the first player wins exactly when\nformula_1.\nIn 2001, Riccardo Focardi and Flamina Luccio described a method to prove by hand that the normal 7-spot game is a loss.\nA second major leap came from Lemoine and Viennot, who introduced the use of nimbers (Grundy numbers) to exploit the natural decomposition of Sprouts positions. In 2007, they solved all positions up to 32 spots. In 2010\u20132011, they extended the record to all positions up to 44 spots, and three isolated cases at 46, 47, and 53 spots.\nIn 2025, \u010c\u00ed\u017eek, Balko, and Schmid introduced SPOTS, a massively parallel solver based on proof-number search with distributed-memory parallelism and nimber-based reductions.\nTheir solver established 42 previously unknown outcomes, raising the number of solved \"n\"-spot positions from 47 to 89.\nAll newly computed outcomes are consistent with the Sprouts conjecture (W = first-player win, L = loss):\nMis\u00e8re version.\nThe computation history of the mis\u00e8re version of Sprouts is very similar to that of the normal version, with the same people involved. However, the mis\u00e8re version is more difficult to compute, and progress has been significantly slower.\nIn 1990, Applegate, Jacobson and Sleator reached up to nine spots. Based on their results, they conjectured that the outcome follows a regular pattern of period five. However, this conjecture was invalidated in 2007 when Josh Jordan and Roman Khorkov extended the mis\u00e8re analysis up to 12 spots: the 12-spot mis\u00e8re game is a win, and not the conjectured loss. The same team reached up to 16 spots in 2009. The same year, Julien Lemoine and Simon Viennot reached 17 spots with complicated algorithms. They were able to extend their analysis up to 20 points in 2011.\nThe results for mis\u00e8re play are now conjectured to follow a pattern of length six with some exceptional values: the first player wins in mis\u00e8re Sprouts when the remainder (mod 6) is zero, four, or five, except that the first player wins the one-spot game and loses the four-spot game. The table below shows the pattern, with the two irregular values in bold.\nBrussels Sprouts.\nA variant of the game, named Brussels Sprouts after the cruciferous vegetable, starts with a number of crosses, i.e. spots with four free ends. Each move involves joining two free ends with a curve, again not crossing any existing line, and then putting a short stroke across the line to create two new free ends. This game is finite, and the total number of moves (and thus the game's winner) is predetermined by the initial number of crosses: the players cannot affect the result by their play. Thus, this variant may be termed, after Conway's categorisation of mathematics itself, a \"one player game\".\nEach move removes two free ends and introduces two more. Nonetheless, the game is bound to end as some free ends become isolated. With \"n\" initial crosses, the number of moves will, remarkably, always be 5\"n\"\u22122. Consequently, a game starting with an odd number of crosses will be a first player win, while a game starting with an even number will be a second player win regardless of the moves.\nTo prove this, first, we argue the game must end. Then, we will calculate precisely how many moves it needs to end. The game outcome is then implied, as already described.\nTreat each cross as a graph with 5 vertices and 4 edges. In the starting position with \"n\" crosses, we have a planar graph with \"v\" = 5\"n\" vertices, \"e\" = 4\"n\" edges, \"f\" = 1 face, and \"k\" = \"n\" connected components. The Euler characteristic for connected planar graphs is 2. In a disconnected planar graph, we get \nAfter \"m\" moves, we have:\nThen by the above, we have\nNext, note that every time we add a cross, we are ensuring that each side of this cross ends up with a degree 1 vertex. Thus, throughout the game, every face has at least one degree 1 vertex. Yet, the number of degree 1 vertices is invariant throughout the game, and remains at 4\"n\". Hence, \"f\" is at most 4\"n\". \nFrom this, we see \"m\" = \"f\" \u2212 \"k\" \u2212 1 + \"n\" is at most 5\"n\" \u2212 2 (since \"k\" is at least 1 and \"f\" is at most 4\"n\"). So the game must terminate, and it must terminate in at most 5\"n\" \u2212 2 moves. Now, we argue it must terminate in exactly 5\"n\" \u2212 2 moves.\nIn the final configuration, no face can have more than one degree 1 vertex, since otherwise, we could connect them with a cross and there would still be a legal move. Every face has at least one such vertex, so it must end with exactly one such vertex. So in the final configuration, \"f\" is exactly 4\"n\".\nSimilarly, in the final configuration, the graph must be connected, since the outer face gets at least one degree 1 vertex per connected component, and cannot have more than one such vertex. So, in the final configuration, \"k\" is exactly 1.\nThus, to obtain the final configuration, we must have had \"m\" = \"f\"\u2212\"k\"\u22121+\"n\" = 4\"n\"\u22121\u22121+\"n\" = 5\"n\"\u22122.\nA combination of standard Sprouts and Brussels Sprouts can also be played. The game starts with an arbitrary number (\"n\") of dots or crosses. At each turn, the player chooses to add either a dot, or a cross, along the line they have just drawn. The duration of the game lays between (2\"n\") and (5\"n\" \u2212 2), depending on the number of dots or crosses having been added.\nFor \"n\" = 1, starting with a dot, the game will end after 2 moves. Starting with a cross, it will end after 2 moves if the first player adds a dot, after 3 moves if they add a cross: hence the first player has a winning strategy for both the normal and the mis\u00e8re version. For \"n\" &gt; 1, the analysis is not completed.\nIn popular culture.\nThe game of Sprouts is a key plot element in the 1969 Nebula Award-nominated science fiction novel \"Macroscope\" by Piers Anthony. The protagonist, Ivo, is exceptionally skilled at the game, and his ability is used as a measure of his intelligence and creativity. The novel's characters play Sprouts as a high-level intellectual challenge, and the book includes diagrams of games in progress and discusses the game's psychological aspects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27544", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27544", "title": "SUSE linux", "text": ""}
{"id": "27546", "revid": "29330520", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27546", "title": "Sexual intercourse", "text": "Penetrative sexual activity for reproduction or sexual pleasure\nSexual intercourse (also coitus or copulation) is a sexual activity typically involving the insertion of the erect male penis inside the female vagina and followed by thrusting motions for sexual pleasure, reproduction, or both. This is also known as vaginal intercourse or vaginal sex. Sexual penetration is an instinctive form of sexual behaviour and psychology among humans. Other forms of penetrative sexual intercourse include anal sex (penetration of the anus by the penis), oral sex (penetration of the mouth by the penis or oral penetration of the female genitalia), fingering (sexual penetration by the fingers) and penetration by use of a dildo (especially a strap-on dildo), and vibrators. These activities involve physical intimacy between two or more people and are usually used among humans solely for physical or emotional pleasure. They can contribute to human bonding.\nThere are different views on what constitutes sexual intercourse or other sexual activity, which can impact views of sexual health. Although \"sexual intercourse\", particularly the term \"coitus,\" generally denotes penile\u2013vaginal penetration and the possibility of creating offspring, it also commonly denotes penetrative oral sex and penile\u2013anal sex, especially the latter. It usually encompasses sexual penetration, while non-penetrative sex has been labeled \"outercourse\", but non-penetrative sex may also be considered sexual intercourse. \"Sex\", often a shorthand for \"sexual intercourse\", can mean any form of sexual activity. Because people can be at risk of contracting sexually transmitted infections during these activities, safer sex practices are recommended by health professionals to reduce transmission risk.\nVarious jurisdictions place restrictions on certain sexual acts, such as adultery, incest, sexual activity with minors, prostitution, rape, zoophilia, sodomy, premarital sex and extramarital sex. Religious beliefs also play a role in personal decisions about sexual intercourse or other sexual activity, such as decisions about virginity, or legal and public policy matters. Religious views on sexuality vary significantly between different religions and sects of the same religion, though there are common themes, such as prohibition of adultery.\nReproductive sexual intercourse between non-human animals is more often called \"copulation\", and sperm may be introduced into the female's reproductive tract in non-vaginal ways among the animals, such as by cloacal copulation. For most non-human mammals, mating and copulation occur at the point of estrus (the most fertile period of time in the female's reproductive cycle), which increases the chances of successful impregnation. However, bonobos, dolphins and chimpanzees are known to engage in sexual intercourse regardless of whether the female is in estrus, and to engage in sex acts with same-sex partners. Like humans engaging in sexual activity primarily for pleasure, this behavior in these animals is also presumed to be for pleasure, and a contributing factor to strengthening their social bonds.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBehaviors.\nDefinitions.\n\"Sexual intercourse\" may be called \"coitus\", \"copulation\", \"coition\", or \"intercourse\". \"Coitus\" is derived from the Latin word \"coitio\" or \"coire\", meaning \"a coming together or joining together\" or \"to go together\", and is known under different ancient Latin names for a variety of sexual activities, but usually denotes penile\u2013vaginal penetration. This is often called vaginal intercourse or \"vaginal sex.\" \"Vaginal sex,\" and less often \"vaginal intercourse\", may also denote any vaginal sexual activity, particularly if penetrative, including sexual activity between lesbian couples. \"Copulation\", by contrast, more often denotes the mating process, especially for non-human animals; it can mean a variety of sexual activities between opposite-sex or same-sex pairings, but generally means the sexually reproductive act of transferring sperm from a male to a female or sexual procreation between a man and a woman.\nAlthough \"sex\" and \"having sex\" also most commonly denote penile\u2013vaginal intercourse, \"sex\" can be significantly broad in its meaning and may cover any penetrative or non-penetrative sexual activity between two or more people. The World Health Organization (WHO) states that non-English languages and cultures use different words for sexual activity, \"with slightly different meanings\". Various vulgarisms, slang, and euphemisms are used for sexual intercourse or other sexual activity, such as \"fuck\", \"screw\", \"shag\", and the phrase \"sleep together\". The laws of some countries use the euphemism, carnal knowledge. Penetration of the vagina by the erect penis is additionally known as \"intromission\", or by the Latin name \"immissio penis\" (Latin for \"insertion of the penis\"). The age of first sexual intercourse is called \"sexarche\".\nVaginal, anal and oral sex are recognized as sexual intercourse more often than other sexual behaviors. Sexual activity that does not involve penile-vaginal sex or other sexual penetration might be used to retain virginity (sometimes called technical virginity) or labeled \"outercourse\". One reason virginity loss is often based on penile\u2013vaginal intercourse is because heterosexual couples may engage in anal or oral sex as a way of being sexually active while maintaining that they are virgins since they have not engaged in the reproductive act of coitus. Some gay men consider frot or oral sex as a way of maintaining their virginities, with penile-anal penetration used as sexual intercourse and for virginity loss, while other gay men may consider frot or oral sex as their main forms of sexual activity. Lesbians may categorize oral sex or fingering as sexual intercourse and subsequently an act of virginity loss, or tribadism as a primary form of sexual activity.\nResearchers commonly use \"sexual intercourse\" to denote penile\u2013vaginal intercourse while using specific words, such as \"anal sex\" or \"oral sex\", for other sexual behaviors. Scholars Richard M. Lerner and Laurence Steinberg state that researchers also \"rarely disclose\" how they conceptualize sex \"or even whether they resolved potential discrepancies\" in conceptualizations of sex. Lerner and Steinberg attribute researchers' focus on penile\u2013vaginal sex to \"the larger culture's preoccupation with this form of sexual activity\", and have expressed concern that the \"widespread, unquestioned equation of penile\u2013vaginal intercourse with sex reflects a failure to examine systematically 'whether the respondent's understanding of the question [about sexual activity] matches what the researcher had in mind'\". This focus can also relegate other forms of mutual sexual activity to foreplay or contribute to them not being regarded as \"real sex\", and limits the meaning of rape. It may also be that conceptually conflating sexual activity with vaginal intercourse and sexual function hinders and limits information about sexual behavior that non-heterosexual people may be engaging in, or information about heterosexuals who may be engaging in non\u2013vaginal sexual activity.\nStudies regarding the meaning of sexual intercourse sometimes come into conflict. While most consider penile\u2013vaginal intercourse to be sex, whether anal or oral intercourse are considered sex is more debatable, with oral sex ranking lowest. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) stated that \"although there are only limited national data about how often adolescents engage in oral sex, some data suggest that many adolescents who engage in oral sex do not consider it to be 'sex'; therefore they may use oral sex as an option to experience sex while still, in their minds, remaining abstinent\". Upton et al. stated, \"It is possible that individuals who engage in oral sex, but do not consider it as 'sex', may not associate the acts with the potential health risks they can bring.\" In other cases, condom use is a factor, with some men stating that sexual activity involving the protection of a condom is not \"real sex\" or \"the real thing\". This view is common among men in Africa, where sexual activity involving the protection of a condom is often associated with emasculation because condoms prevent direct penile\u2013to\u2013skin genital contact.\nStimulation.\nSexual intercourse or other sexual activity can encompass various sexually stimulating factors (physiological stimulation or psychological stimulation), including different sex positions (such as the missionary position, the most common human sex position) or the use of sex toys. Foreplay may precede some sexual activities, often leading to sexual arousal of the partners and resulting in the erection of the penis or natural lubrication of the vagina. It is also common for people to be as sexually satisfied by being kissed, touched erotically, or held as they are during sexual intercourse.\nNon-primate females copulate only when in estrus, but sexual intercourse is possible at any time of the menstrual cycle for women. Sex pheromones facilitate copulatory reflexes in various organisms, but, in humans, the detection of pheromones is impaired and they have only residual effects. Non-primate females put themselves in the crucial lordosis position and remain motionless, but these motor copulatory reflexes are no longer functional in women.\nDuring coitus, the partners orient their hips to allow the penis to move back and forth in the vagina to cause friction, typically without fully removing the penis. In this way, they stimulate themselves and each other, often continuing until orgasm in either or both partners is achieved.\nFor human females, stimulation of the clitoris plays a significant role in sexual activity; 70\u201380% of women require direct clitoral stimulation to achieve orgasm, though indirect clitoral stimulation (for example, via vaginal intercourse) may also be sufficient (see orgasm in females). Because of this, some couples may engage in the woman on top position or the coital alignment technique, a technique combining the \"riding high\" variation of the missionary position with pressure-counterpressure movements performed by each partner in rhythm with sexual penetration, to maximize clitoral stimulation.\nAnal sex involves stimulation of the anus, anal cavity, sphincter valve or rectum; it most commonly means the insertion of a man's penis into another person's rectum, but may also mean the use of sex toys or fingers to penetrate the anus, or oral sex on the anus (anilingus), or pegging.\nOral sex consists of all the sexual activities that involve the use of the mouth and throat to stimulate genitalia or anus. It is sometimes performed to the exclusion of all other forms of sexual activity, and may include the ingestion or absorption of semen (during fellatio) or vaginal fluids (during cunnilingus).\nFingering involves the digital manipulation of the clitoris, rest of the vulva, vagina or anus for the purpose of sexual arousal and sexual stimulation; it may constitute the entire sexual encounter or it may be part of mutual masturbation, foreplay or other sexual activities.\nReproduction.\nNatural human reproduction involves penile\u2013vaginal penetration, during which semen, containing male gametes known as sperm cells or spermatozoa, is ejaculated through the penis into the vagina. The sperm passes through the vaginal vault, cervix and into the uterus, and then into the fallopian tubes. Millions of sperm are ejaculated to increase the chances of fertilization (see sperm competition), but only one is sufficient to fertilize an egg or ovum. When a fertile ovum from the female is present in the fallopian tubes, the male gamete fertilizes the ovum, forming a new embryo. Pregnancy begins after the fertilized ovum is implanted in the lining of the uterus (the endometrium).\nPregnancy rates for sexual intercourse are highest during the menstrual cycle time from some five days before until approximately one day after ovulation (this is sometimes called the fertile window). For optimal pregnancy chance, there are recommendations of vaginal intercourse every one or two days, or every two or three days. Some people who are trying to conceive may choose to time vaginal intercourse with the fertile window, a practice that is sometimes called 'timed intercourse'. Timed intercourse using urine tests that predict ovulation may help improve the rate of pregnancy and live births for some couples trying to conceive such as those who have been trying for less than 12 months and who are under 40 years old; however, it is not clear from medical evidence if timed intercourse improves the rate of ultrasound-confirmed pregnancies and it is also not clear if timed intercourse has an effect on a person's level of stress or their quality of life. Studies have shown no significant difference between different sex positions and pregnancy rate, as long as it results in ejaculation into the vagina.\nWhen a sperm donor has sexual intercourse with a woman who is not his partner and for the sole purpose of impregnating the woman, this may be known as natural insemination, as opposed to artificial insemination. Artificial insemination is a form of assisted reproductive technology, which are methods used to achieve pregnancy by artificial or partially artificial means. For artificial insemination, sperm donors may donate their sperm through a sperm bank, and the insemination is performed with the express intention of attempting to impregnate the female; to this extent, its purpose is the medical equivalent of sexual intercourse. Intracervical insemination (ICI), which involves the deposit of (usually) raw semen in the vagina of a woman, is in effect a substitute for intercourse and is often contrasted with 'normal intercourse' in this context. Reproductive methods also extend to gay and lesbian couples. For gay male pairings, there is the option of surrogate pregnancy; for lesbian couples, there is donor insemination in addition to choosing surrogate pregnancy. Some women use artificial insemination to become single mothers by choice.\nSafe sex and birth control.\nThere are a variety of safe sex methods that are practiced by heterosexual and same-sex couples, including non-penetrative sex acts, and heterosexual couples may use oral or anal sex (or both) as a means of birth control. However, pregnancy can still occur with anal sex or other forms of sexual activity if the penis is near the vagina (such as during intercrural sex or other genital-genital rubbing) and its sperm is deposited near the vagina's entrance and travels along the vagina's lubricating fluids; the risk of pregnancy can also occur without the penis being near the vagina because sperm may be transported to the vaginal opening by the vagina coming in contact with fingers or other non-genital body parts that have come in contact with semen.\nSafe sex is a relevant harm reduction philosophy and condoms are used as a form of safe sex and contraception. Condoms are widely recommended for the prevention of sexually transmitted infections (STIs). According to reports by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and World Health Organization (WHO), correct and consistent use of latex condoms reduces the risk of HIV/AIDS transmission by approximately 85\u201399% relative to risk when unprotected. Condoms are rarely used for oral sex and there is significantly less research on behaviors with regard to condom use for anal and oral sex. The most effective way to avoid sexually transmitted infections is to abstain from sexual intercourse, especially vaginal, anal, and oral sexual intercourse.\nDecisions and options concerning birth control can be affected by cultural reasons, such as religion, gender roles or folklore. In the predominantly Catholic countries Ireland, Italy, and the Philippines, fertility awareness and the rhythm method are emphasized while disapproval is expressed with regard to other contraceptive methods. Worldwide, sterilization is a more common birth control method, and use of the intrauterine device (IUD) is the most common and effective way of reversible contraception. Conception and contraception are additionally a life-and-death situation in developing countries, where one in three women give birth before age 20; however, 90% of unsafe abortions in these countries could be prevented by effective contraception use.\nThe National Survey of Sexual Health and Behavior (NSSHB) indicated in 2010 that \"1 of 4 acts of vaginal intercourse are condom-protected in the U.S. (1 in 3 among singles),\" that \"condom use is higher among black and Hispanic Americans than among white Americans and those from other racial groups,\" and that \"adults using a condom for intercourse were just as likely to rate the sexual extent positively in terms of arousal, pleasure and orgasm than when having intercourse without one\".\nPrevalence.\nPenile\u2013vaginal penetration is the most common form of sexual intercourse. Studies indicate that most heterosexual couples engage in vaginal intercourse nearly every sexual encounter. The National Survey of Sexual Health and Behavior (NSSHB) reported in 2010 that vaginal intercourse is \"the most prevalent sexual behavior among men and women of all ages and ethnicities\". Clint E. Bruess et al. stated that it \"is the most frequently studied behavior\" and is \"often the focus of sexuality education programming for youth.\" Weiten et al. said that it \"is the most widely endorsed and practiced sexual act in our society.\"\nRegarding oral or anal intercourse, the CDC stated in 2009, \"Studies indicate that oral sex is commonly practiced by sexually active male-female and same-gender couples of various ages, including adolescents.\" Oral sex is significantly more common than anal sex. The 2010 NSSHB study reported that vaginal intercourse was practiced more than insertive anal intercourse among men, but that 13% to 15% of men aged 25 to 49 practiced insertive anal intercourse. Receptive anal intercourse was infrequent among men, with approximately 7% of men aged 14 to 94 years old having said that they were a receptive partner during anal intercourse. The study said that fewer women reported engaging in anal sex than other partnered sexual behaviors. It was estimated that 10% to 14% of women aged 18 to 39 years old practiced anal sex in the past 90 days, and that most of the women who engage in anal sex said they practiced it once a month or a few times a year.\nAge at first intercourse.\nThe prevalence of sexual intercourse has been compared cross-culturally. In 2003, Michael Bozon of the French Institut national d'\u00e9tudes d\u00e9mographiques conducted a cross-cultural study titled \"At what age do women and men have their first sexual intercourse?\" In the first group of the contemporary cultures he studied, which included sub-Saharan Africa (listing Mali, Senegal and Ethiopia), the data indicated that the age of men at sexual initiation in these societies is at later ages than that of women, but is often extra-marital; the study considered the Indian subcontinent to also fall into this group, though data was only available from Nepal. In the second group, the data indicated families encouraged daughters to delay marriage, and to abstain from sexual activity before that time. However, sons are encouraged to gain experience with older women or prostitutes before marriage. Age of men at sexual initiation in these societies is at lower ages than that of women; this group includes south European and Latin cultures (Portugal, Greece and Romania are noted) and such from Latin America (Brazil, Chile, and the Dominican Republic). The study considered many Asian societies to also fall into this group, although matching data was only available from Thailand. In the third group, age of men and women at sexual initiation was more closely matched; there were two sub-groups, however. In non-Latin, Catholic countries (Poland and Lithuania are mentioned), age at sexual initiation was higher, suggesting later marriage and reciprocal valuing of male and female virginity. The same pattern of late marriage and reciprocal valuing of virginity was reflected in Singapore and Sri Lanka. The study considered China and Vietnam to also fall into this group, though data were not available. In northern and eastern European countries, age at sexual initiation was lower, with both men and women involved in sexual intercourse before any union formation; the study listed Switzerland, Germany and the Czech Republic as members of this group.\nConcerning United States data, tabulations by the National Center for Health Statistics report that the age of first sexual intercourse was 17.1 years for both males and females in 2010. The CDC stated that 45.5 percent of girls and 45.7 percent of boys had engaged in sexual activity by 19 in 2002; in 2011, reporting their research from 2006 to 2010, they stated that 43% of American unmarried teenage girls and 42% of American unmarried teenage boys have ever engaged in sexual intercourse.\nHealth effects.\nBenefits.\nIn humans, sexual intercourse and sexual activity in general have been reported as having health benefits as varied as increased immunity by increasing the body's production of antibodies and subsequent lower blood pressure, and decreased risk of prostate cancer. Sexual intimacy and orgasms increase levels of the hormone oxytocin (also known as \"the love hormone\"), which can help people bond and build trust. Oxytocin is believed to have a more significant impact on women than on men, which may be why women associate sexual attraction or sexual activity with romance and love more than men do. A long-term study of 3,500 people between ages 18 and 102 by clinical neuropsychologist David Weeks indicated that, based on impartial ratings of the subjects' photographs, sex on a regular basis is associated with people looking significantly chronologically younger. However this does not imply causality.\nVaginal intercourse for the first time increases vaginal immune activity.&lt;ref name=\"10.7554/eLife.78565\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nRisks.\nSexually transmitted infections (STIs) are bacteria, viruses or parasites that are spread by sexual contact, especially vaginal, anal, or oral intercourse, or unprotected sex. Oral sex is less risky than vaginal or anal intercourse. Many times, STIs initially do not cause symptoms, increasing the risk of unknowingly passing the infection on to a sex partner or others.\nThere are 19 million new cases of sexually transmitted infections every year in the U.S., and, in 2005, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that 448 million people aged 15\u201349 were infected per year with curable STIs (such as syphilis, gonorrhea and chlamydia). Some STIs can cause a genital ulcer; even if they do not, they increase the risk of both acquiring and passing on HIV up to ten-fold. Hepatitis B can also be transmitted through sexual contact. Globally, there are about 257 million chronic carriers of hepatitis B. HIV is one of the world's leading infectious killers; in 2010, approximately 30 million people were estimated to have died because of it since the beginning of the epidemic. Of the 2.7 million new HIV infections estimated to occur worldwide in 2010, 1.9 million (70%) were in Africa. The World Health Organization also stated that the \"estimated 1.2 million Africans who died of HIV-related illnesses in 2010 comprised 69% of the global total of 1.8 million deaths attributable to the epidemic.\" It is diagnosed by blood tests, and while no cure has been found, it can be controlled by management through antiretroviral drugs for the disease, and patients can enjoy healthy and productive lives.\nIn cases where infection is suspected, early medical intervention is highly beneficial in all cases. The CDC stated \"the risk of HIV transmission from an infected partner through oral sex is much less than the risk of HIV transmission from anal or vaginal sex,\" but that \"measuring the exact risk of HIV transmission as a result of oral sex is very difficult\" and that this is \"because most sexually active individuals practice oral sex in addition to other forms of sex, such as vaginal or anal sex, when transmission occurs, it is difficult to determine whether it occurred as a result of oral sex or other more risky sexual activities\". They added that \"several co-factors may increase the risk of HIV transmission through oral sex\"; this includes ulcers, bleeding gums, genital sores, and the presence of other STIs.\nIn 2005, the World Health Organization estimated that 123 million women become pregnant worldwide each year, and around 87 million of those pregnancies or 70.7% are unintentional. Approximately 46 million pregnancies per year reportedly end in induced abortion. Approximately 6 million U.S. women become pregnant per year. Out of known pregnancies, two-thirds result in live births and roughly 25% in abortions; the remainder end in miscarriage. However, many more women become pregnant and miscarry without even realizing it, instead mistaking the miscarriage for an unusually heavy menstruation. The U.S. teenage pregnancy rate fell by 27 percent between 1990 and 2000, from 116.3 pregnancies per 1,000 girls aged 15\u201319 to 84.5. This data includes live births, abortions, and fetal losses. Almost 1 million American teenage women, 10% of all women aged 15\u201319 and 19% of those who report having had intercourse, become pregnant each year.\nSexual activity can increase the expression of a gene transcription factor called \u0394FosB (delta FosB) in the brain's reward center; consequently excessively frequent engagement in sexual activity on a regular (daily) basis can lead to the overexpression of \u0394FosB, inducing an addiction to sexual activity. Sexual addiction or hypersexuality is often considered an impulse control disorder or a behavioral addiction. It has been linked to atypical levels of dopamine, a neurotransmitter. This behavior is characterized by a fixation on sexual intercourse and disinhibition. It was proposed that this 'addictive behavior' be classified in DSM-5 as an impulsive\u2013compulsive behavioral disorder. Addiction to sexual intercourse is thought to be genetically linked. Those having an addiction to sexual intercourse have a higher response to visual sexual cues in the brain. Those seeking treatment will typically see a physician for pharmacological management and therapy. One form of hypersexuality is Kleine\u2013Levin syndrome. It is manifested by hypersomnia and hypersexuality and remains relatively rare.\nSexual activity can directly cause death, particularly due to coronary circulation complications, which is sometimes called \"coital death,\" \"coital sudden death\" or \"coital coronary.\" However, coital deaths are significantly rare. People, especially those who get little or no physical exercise, have a slightly increased risk of triggering a heart attack or sudden cardiac death when they engage in sexual intercourse or any vigorous physical exercise that is engaged in on a sporadic basis. Regular exercise reduces, but does not eliminate, the increased risk.\nDuration and genital complications.\nSexual intercourse, when involving a male participant, often ends when the male has ejaculated, and thus the partner might not have time to reach orgasm. In addition, premature ejaculation (PE) is common, and women often require a substantially longer duration of stimulation with a sexual partner than men do before reaching an orgasm. Scholars, such as Weiten et al., state that \"many couples are locked into the idea that orgasms should be achieved only through intercourse [penile-vaginal sex],\" that \"the word \"foreplay\" suggests that any other form of sexual stimulation is merely preparation for the 'main event'\" and that \"because women reach orgasm through intercourse less consistently than men,\" they are likelier than men to fake an orgasm to satisfy their sexual partners.\nIn 1991, scholars from the Kinsey Institute stated, \"The truth is that the time between penetration and ejaculation varies not only from man to man, but from one time to the next for the same man.\" They added that the appropriate length for sexual intercourse is the length of time it takes for both partners to be mutually satisfied, emphasizing that Kinsey \"found that 75 percent of men ejaculated within two minutes of penetration. But he didn't ask if the men or their partners considered two minutes mutually satisfying\" and \"more recent research reports slightly longer times for intercourse\". A 2008 survey of Canadian and American sex therapists stated that the average time for heterosexual intercourse (coitus) was 7 minutes and that 1 to 2 minutes was too short, 3 to 7 minutes was adequate and 7 to 13 minutes desirable, while 10 to 30 minutes was too long.\nAnorgasmia is regular difficulty reaching orgasm after ample sexual stimulation, causing personal distress. This is significantly more common in women than in men, which has been attributed to the lack of sex education with regard to women's bodies, especially in sex-negative cultures, such as clitoral stimulation usually being key for women to orgasm. The physical structure of coitus favors penile stimulation over clitoral stimulation; the location of the clitoris then usually necessitates manual or oral stimulation in order for the woman to achieve orgasm. Approximately 25% of women report difficulties with orgasm, 10% of women have never had an orgasm, and 40% or 40\u201350% have either complained about sexual dissatisfaction or experienced difficulty becoming sexually aroused at some point in their lives.\nVaginismus is involuntary tensing of the pelvic floor musculature, making coitus, or any form of penetration of the vagina, distressing, painful and sometimes impossible for women. It is a conditioned reflex of the pubococcygeus muscle, and is sometimes referred to as the \"PC muscle.\" Vaginismus can be hard to overcome because if a woman expects to experience pain during sexual intercourse, this can cause a muscle spasm, which results in painful sexual intercourse. Treatment of vaginismus often includes both psychological and behavioral techniques, including the use of vaginal dilators. Additionally, the use of Botox as a medical treatment for vaginismus has been tested and administered. Painful or uncomfortable sexual intercourse may also be categorized as dyspareunia.\nApproximately 40% of males reportedly have some form of erectile dysfunction (ED) or impotence, at least occasionally. Premature ejaculation has been reported to be more common than erectile dysfunction, although some estimates suggest otherwise. Due to various meanings of the disorder, estimates for the prevalence of premature ejaculation vary significantly more than for erectile dysfunction. For example, the Mayo Clinic states, \"Estimates vary, but as many as 1 out of 3 men may be affected by [premature ejaculation] at some time.\" Further, \"Masters and Johnson speculated that premature ejaculation is the most common sexual dysfunction, even though more men seek therapy for erectile difficulties\" and that this is because \"although an estimated 15 percent to 20 percent of men experience difficulty controlling rapid ejaculation, most do not consider it a problem requiring help, and many women have difficulty expressing their sexual needs\". The American Urological Association (AUA) estimates that premature ejaculation could affect 21 percent of men in the United States.\nFor those whose impotence is caused by medical conditions, prescription drugs such as Viagra, Cialis, and Levitra are available. However, doctors caution against the unnecessary use of these drugs because they are accompanied by serious risks such as increased chance of heart attack. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) and antidepressant drug dapoxetine has been used to treat premature ejaculation. In clinical trials, those with PE who took dapoxetine experienced sexual intercourse three to four times longer before orgasm than without the drug. Another ejaculation-related disorder is delayed ejaculation, which can be caused as an unwanted side effect of antidepressant medications such as fluvoxamine; however, all SSRIs have ejaculation-delaying effects, and fluvoxamine has the least ejaculation-delaying effects.\nSexual intercourse often remains possible after major medical treatment of the reproductive organs and structures. This is especially true for women. Even after extensive gynecological surgical procedures (such as hysterectomy, oophorectomy, salpingectomy, dilation and curettage, hymenotomy, Bartholin gland surgery, abscess removal, vestibulectomy, labia minora reduction, cervical conization, surgical and radiological cancer treatments and chemotherapy), sexual intercourse can continue. Reconstructive surgery remains an option for women who have experienced benign and malignant conditions. Men and women who have undergone extensive surgery should consult their medical team to understand how their treatment or surgery affects sex and how long they should wait before having sexual intercourse after a surgery.\nDisabilities and other complications.\nObstacles that those with disabilities face with regard to engaging in sexual intercourse include pain, depression, fatigue, negative body image, stiffness, functional impairment, anxiety, reduced libido, hormonal imbalance, and drug treatment or side effects. Sexual functioning has been regularly identified as a neglected area of the quality of life in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. For those that must take opioids for pain control, sexual intercourse can become more difficult. Having a stroke can also largely impact on the ability to engage in sexual intercourse. Although disability-related pain, including as a result of cancer, and mobility impairment can hamper sexual intercourse, in many cases, the most significant impediments to sexual intercourse for individuals with a disability are psychological. In particular, people who have a disability can find sexual intercourse daunting due to issues involving their self-concept as a sexual being, or a partner's discomfort or perceived discomfort. Temporary difficulties can arise with alcohol and sex, as alcohol can initially increase interest through disinhibition but decrease capacity with greater intake; however, disinhibition can vary depending on the culture.\nPeople with mental disabilities also are subject to challenges in participating in sexual intercourse. This can include the lack of a knowledgeable healthcare provider trained and experienced in counseling those with intellectual disabilities on sexual intercourse. Those with intellectual disabilities may have hesitations regarding the discussion of the topic of sex, a lack of sexual knowledge and limited opportunities for sex education. In addition there are other barriers such as a higher prevalence of sexual abuse and assault. These crimes often remain underreported. There remains a lack of \"dialogue around this population's human right to consensual sexual expression, undertreatment of menstrual disorders, and legal and systemic barriers\". Women with intellectual disability may lack sexual health care and sex education. They may not recognize sexual abuse. Consensual sexual intercourse is not always an option for some. Those with intellectual disability may have limited knowledge and access to contraception, screening for sexually transmitted infections and cervical cancer.\nSocial effects.\nAdults.\nSexual intercourse may be for reproductive, relational, or recreational purposes. It often plays a strong role in human bonding. In many societies, it is normal for couples to have sexual intercourse while using some method of birth control, sharing pleasure and strengthening their emotional bond through sexual activity even though they are deliberately avoiding pregnancy.\nIn humans and bonobos, the female undergoes relatively concealed ovulation so that male and female partners commonly do not know whether she is fertile at any given moment. One possible reason for this distinct biological feature may be formation of strong emotional bonds between sexual partners important for social interactions and, in the case of humans, long-term partnership rather than immediate sexual reproduction.\nSexual dissatisfaction due to the lack of sexual intercourse is associated with increased risk of divorce and relationship dissolution, especially for men. Some research, however, indicates that general dissatisfaction with marriage for men results if their wives flirted with, erotically kissed or became romantically or sexually involved with another man (infidelity), and that this is especially the case for men with a lower emotional and composite marital satisfaction. Other studies report that the lack of sexual intercourse does not significantly result in divorce, though it is commonly one of the various contributors to it. According to the 2010 National Survey of Sexual Health and Behavior (NSSHB), men whose most recent sexual encounter was with a relationship partner reported greater arousal, greater pleasure, fewer problems with erectile function, orgasm, and less pain during the event than men whose last sexual encounter was with a non-relationship partner.\nFor women, there is often a complaint about the lack of their spouses' sexual spontaneity. Decreased sexual activity among these women may be the result of their perceived failure to maintain ideal physical attractiveness or because their sexual partners' health issues have hindered sexual intercourse. Some women express that their most satisfying sexual experiences entail being connected to someone, rather than solely basing satisfaction on orgasm. With regard to divorce, women are more likely to divorce their spouses for a one-night stand or various infidelities if they are in less cooperative or high-conflict marriages.\nResearch additionally indicates that non-married couples who are cohabiting engage in sexual intercourse more often than married couples, and are more likely to participate in sexual activity outside of their sexual relationships; this may be due to the \"honeymoon\" effect (the newness or novelty of sexual intercourse with the partner), since sexual intercourse is usually practiced less the longer a couple is married, with couples engaging in sexual intercourse or other sexual activity once or twice a week, or approximately six to seven times a month. Sexuality in older age also affects the frequency of sexual intercourse, as older people generally engage in sexual intercourse less frequently than younger people do.\nAdolescents.\nAdolescents commonly use sexual intercourse for relational and recreational purposes, which may negatively or positively impact their lives. For example, while teenage pregnancy may be welcomed in some cultures, it is also commonly disparaged, and research suggests that the earlier onset of puberty for children puts pressure on children and teenagers to act like adults before they are emotionally or cognitively ready. Some studies have concluded that engaging in sexual intercourse leaves adolescents, especially girls, with higher levels of stress and depression, and that girls may be likelier to engage in sexual risk (such as sexual intercourse without the use of a condom), but it may be that further research is needed in these areas. In some countries, such as the United States, sex education and abstinence-only sex education curricula are available to educate adolescents about sexual activity; these programs are controversial, as debate exists as to whether teaching children and adolescents about sexual intercourse or other sexual activity should only be left up to parents or other caregivers.\nSome studies from the 1970s through 1990s suggested an association between self-esteem and sexual intercourse among adolescents, while other studies, from the 1980s and 1990s, reported that the research generally indicates little or no relationship between self-esteem and sexual activity among adolescents. By the 1990s, the evidence mostly supported the latter, and further research has supported little or no relationship between self-esteem and sexual activity among adolescents. Scholar Lisa Arai stated, \"The idea that early sexual activity and pregnancy is linked to low self-esteem became fashionable in the latter half of the 20th century, particularly in the US,\" adding that, \"Yet, in a systematic review of the relationship between self-esteem and teenagers' sexual behaviours, attitudes and intentions (which analyzed findings from 38 publications) 62% of behavioral findings and 72% of the attitudinal findings exhibited no statistically significant associations (Goodson et al, 2006).\" Studies that do find a link suggest that non-virgin boys have higher self-esteem than virgin boys and that girls who have low self-esteem and poor self-image are more prone to risk-taking behaviors, such as unprotected sex and multiple sexual partners.\nPsychiatrist Lynn Ponton wrote, \"All adolescents have sex lives, whether they are sexually active with others, with themselves, or seemingly not at all\", and that viewing adolescent sexuality as a potentially positive experience, rather than as something inherently dangerous, may help young people develop healthier patterns and make more positive choices regarding sexual activity. Researchers state that long-term romantic relationships allow adolescents to gain the skills necessary for high-quality relationships later in life. Overall, positive romantic relationships among adolescents can result in long-term benefits. High-quality romantic relationships are associated with higher commitment in early adulthood, and are positively associated with social competence.\nEthical, religious, and legal views.\nGeneral.\nWhile sexual intercourse, as coitus, is the natural mode of reproduction for the human species, humans have intricate moral and ethical guidelines which regulate the practice of sexual intercourse and vary according to religious and governmental laws. Some governments and religions also have strict designations of what they consider appropriate and inappropriate sexual behavior, which include restrictions on the types of sex acts which are permissible. A historically prohibited or regulated sex act is anal sex.\nSexual offenses.\nSexual intercourse with a person against their will, or without their consent, is rape, but may also be called \"sexual assault\"; it is considered a serious crime in most countries. More than 90% of rape victims are female, 99% of rapists male, and only about 5% of rapists are strangers to the victims.\nMost countries have age of consent laws which set the minimum legal age with whom an older person may engage in sexual intercourse, usually set at 16 to 18, but ranges from 12 to 20, years of age. In some societies, an age of consent is set by non-statutory custom or tradition. Sex with a person under the age of consent, regardless of their stated consent, is often considered sexual assault or statutory rape depending on differences in ages of the participants. Some countries treat any sex with a person of diminished or insufficient mental capacity to give consent, regardless of age, as rape.\nRobert Francoeur et al. stated that \"prior to the 1970s, rape definitions of sex often included only penile-vaginal sexual intercourse.\" Authors Pamela J. Kalbfleisch and Michael J. Cody stated that this made it so that if \"sex means penile-vaginal intercourse, then rape means forced penile-vaginal intercourse, and other sexual behaviors\u00a0\u2013 such as fondling a person's genitals without her or his consent, forced oral sex, and same-sex coercion\u00a0\u2013 are not considered rape\"; they stated that \"although some other forms of forced sexual contact are included within the legal category of sodomy (e.g., anal penetration and oral-genital contact), many unwanted sexual contacts have no legal grounding as rape in some states\". Ken Plumber argued that the legal meaning \"of rape in most countries is unlawful sexual intercourse which means the penis must penetrate the vagina\" and that \"other forms of sexual violence towards women such as forced oral sex or anal intercourse, or the insertion of other objects into the vagina, constitute the 'less serious' crime of sexual assault\".\nOver time, the meaning of rape broadened in some parts of the world to include many types of sexual penetration, including anal intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, and penetration of the genitals or rectum by an inanimate object. Until 2012, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) still considered rape a crime solely committed by men against women. In 2012, they changed the meaning from \"The carnal knowledge of a female forcibly and against her will\" to \"The penetration, no matter how slight, of the vagina or anus with any body part or object, or oral penetration by a sex organ of another person, without the consent of the victim.\" The meaning does not change federal or state criminal codes or impact charging and prosecution on the federal, state or local level, but instead assures that rape will be more accurately reported nationwide. In some instances, penetration is not required for the act to be categorized as rape.\nIn most societies around the world, the concept of incest exists and is criminalized. James Roffee, a senior lecturer in criminology at Monash University, addressed potential harm associated with familial sexual activity, such as resulting children born with deficiencies. However, the law is more concerned with protecting the rights of people who are potentially subjected to such abuse. This is why familial sexual relationships are criminalized, even if all parties are consensual. There are laws prohibiting all kinds of sexual activity between relatives, not necessarily penetrative sex. These laws refer to grandparents, parents, children, siblings, aunts and uncles. There are differences between states in terms of the severity of punishments and what they consider to be a relative, including biological parents, step-parents, adoptive parents and half-siblings.\nAnother sexual matter concerning consent is zoophilia, which is a paraphilia involving sexual activity between human and non-human animals, or a fixation on such practice. Human sexual activity with non-human animals is not outlawed in some jurisdictions, but it is illegal in others under animal abuse laws or laws dealing with crimes against nature.\nRomantic relationships.\nMarriage and relationships.\nSexual intercourse has traditionally been considered an essential part of a marriage, with many religious customs requiring consummation of the marriage and citing marriage as the most appropriate union for sexual reproduction (procreation). In such cases, a failure for any reason to consummate the marriage would be considered a ground for annulment (which does not require a divorce process). Sexual relations between marriage partners have been a \"marital right\" in various societies and religions, both historically and in modern times, especially with regard to a husband's rights to his wife. Until the late 20th century, there was usually a marital exemption in rape laws which precluded a husband from being prosecuted under the rape law for forced sex with his wife. Author Oshisanya, 'lai Oshitokunbo stated, \"As the legal status of women has changed, the concept of a married man's or woman's marital right to sexual intercourse has become less widely held.\"\nAdultery (engaging in sexual intercourse with someone other than one's spouse) has been, and remains, a criminal offense in some jurisdictions. Sexual intercourse between unmarried partners and cohabitation of an unmarried couple are also illegal in some jurisdictions. Conversely, in other countries, marriage is not required, socially or legally, in order to have sexual intercourse or to procreate (for example, the majority of births are outside of marriage in countries such as Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Bulgaria, Estonia, Slovenia, France, Belgium).\nWith regard to divorce laws, the refusal to engage in sexual intercourse with one's spouse may give rise to a grounds for divorce, which may be listed under \"grounds of abandonment\". Concerning no-fault divorce jurisdictions, author James G. Dwyer stated that no-fault divorce laws \"have made it much easier for a woman to exit a marital relationship, and wives have obtained greater control over their bodies while in a marriage\" because of legislative and judicial changes regarding the concept of a marital exemption when a man rapes his wife.\nThere are various legal positions regarding the meaning and legality of sexual intercourse between persons of the same sex or gender. For example, in the 2003 New Hampshire Supreme Court case Blanchflower v. Blanchflower, it was held that female same-sex sexual relations, and same-sex sexual practices in general, did not constitute sexual intercourse, based on a 1961 entry in \"Webster's Third New International Dictionary\" that categorizes sexual intercourse as coitus; and thereby an accused wife in a divorce case was found not guilty of adultery. Some countries consider same-sex sexual behavior an offense punishable by imprisonment or execution; this is the case, for example, in Islamic countries, including LGBT issues in Iran.\nOpposition to same-sex marriage is largely based on the belief that sexual intercourse and sexual orientation should be of a heterosexual nature. The recognition of such marriages is a civil rights, political, social, moral and religious issue in many nations, and the conflicts arise over whether same-sex couples should be allowed to enter into marriage, be required to use a different status (such as a civil union, which either grant equal rights as marriage or limited rights in comparison to marriage), or not have any such rights. A related issue is whether the word \"marriage\" should be applied.\nReligious views.\nThere are wide differences in religious views with regard to sexual intercourse in or outside of marriage:\nIn some cases, the sexual intercourse between two people is seen as contrary to religious law or doctrine. In many religious communities, including the Catholic Church and Mahayana Buddhists, religious leaders are expected to refrain from sexual intercourse in order to devote their full attention, energy, and loyalty to their religious duties.\nOther animals.\nIn zoology, \"copulation\" often means the process in which a male introduces sperm into the female's body, especially directly into her reproductive tract. Spiders have separate male and female sexes. Before mating and copulation, the male spider spins a small web and ejaculates on it. He then stores the sperm in reservoirs on his large pedipalps, from which he transfers sperm to the female's genitals. The females can store sperm indefinitely.\nMany animals that live in water use external fertilization, whereas internal fertilization may have developed from a need to maintain gametes in a liquid medium in the Late Ordovician epoch. Internal fertilization with many vertebrates (such as reptiles, some fish, and most birds) occur via cloacal copulation (see also hemipenis), while mammals copulate vaginally, and many basal vertebrates reproduce sexually with external fertilization.\nFor primitive insects, the male deposits spermatozoa on the substrate, sometimes stored within a special structure; courtship involves inducing the female to take up the sperm package into her genital opening, but there is no actual copulation. In groups that have reproduction similar to spiders, such as dragonflies, males extrude sperm into secondary copulatory structures removed from their genital opening, which are then used to inseminate the female. In dragonflies, it is a set of modified sternites on the second abdominal segment. In advanced groups of insects, the male uses its aedeagus, a structure formed from the terminal segments of the abdomen, to deposit sperm directly (though sometimes in a capsule called a \"spermatophore\") into the female's reproductive tract.\nBonobos, chimpanzees and dolphins are species known to engage in heterosexual behaviors even when the female is not in estrus, which is a point in her reproductive cycle suitable for successful impregnation. These species are also known to engage in same-sex sexual behaviors. In these animals, the use of sexual intercourse has evolved beyond reproduction to apparently serve additional social functions (such as bonding).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27548", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27548", "title": "Supermarine", "text": "1913\u20131960 aircraft manufacturer\nSupermarine (founded in 1913 as Pemberton-Billing Ltd) was a British aircraft manufacturer. It is most famous for producing the Spitfire fighter plane during World War II. The company built a range of seaplanes and flying boats, winning the Schneider Trophy for seaplanes with three consecutive victories (in 1927, 1929 and 1931). After the war, the company produced a series of jet fighters.\nThe company was located on the River Itchen close to Woolston, Southampton, on ground purchased by the British aviator and inventor Noel Pemberton Billing. He designed two prototype quadruplanes designed to shoot down Zeppelins\u2014the Supermarine P.B.29 and the Supermarine Nighthawk. Pemberton Billing sold the company to his longtime associate Hubert Scott-Paine in 1916, when it was renamed Supermarine Aviation Works Ltd..\nIn 1928, Vickers-Armstrongs took over Supermarine as Supermarine Aviation Works (Vickers) Ltd. and in 1938 all Vickers-Armstrongs aviation interests were reorganised to become Vickers-Armstrongs (Aircraft) Ltd, although Supermarine continued to design, build and trade under its own name. The first Supermarine landplane design to go into production was the Spitfire, which caught the popular imagination and became the aircraft associated with the Battle of Britain. The aircraft went on to play a major part during the Second World War, in a number of variants and marks. Other company planes from the period include the (a naval version of the Spitfire). Supermarine developed the Spiteful and Seafang, the successors of the Spitfire and the Seafire respectively, and the Walrus flying boat. The Supermarine main works was heavily bombed in 1940. This caused work on their first heavy bomber design, the Supermarine B.12/36, to be abandoned.\nSupermarine built the Royal Navy's first jet fighter, the Attacker, developed from the final Spitfire type. It served front line squadrons aboard aircraft carriers and RNVR squadrons at shore bases. This was followed by the more advanced Swift, which served in the fighter and photo-reconnaissance roles. The last of the Supermarine aircraft was the Scimitar. After Vickers-Armstrongs (Aircraft) became a part of the British Aircraft Corporation, its individual manufacturing heritage names\u2014including that of Supermarine\u2014were dropped.\nPemberton-Billing Ltd.\nFounding.\nIn 1909 Noel Pemberton-Billing purchased a number of engineering workshops on of land at South in Sussex which he intended to develop as an airfield. At the same time, he built a number of unsuccessful aircraft of his own design. To promote the venture, he founded his own magazine \"Aerocraft\". Despite attracting some aircraft constructors, the airfield venture failed within a year and about the same time he sold \"Aerocraft\". In 1911, Pemberton-Billing purchased facilities to provide a base for a motor launch and yacht trading business at White's Yard off Elm Road (later renamed Hazel Road) on the River Itchen, upstream of Woolston. To manage the business, Pemberton-Billing hired his friend Scott-Paine, whom he had first met while involved in property speculation in Shoreham, Kent. Pemberton-Billing, his wife and Scott-Paine lived on Pemberton-Billing's yacht \"Utopia\".\nUnder Scott-Paine's management the business was soon profitable, which allowed Billing (with the assistance of Scott-Paine) to design a series of flying boats with detachable propeller and wings so that with them removed it could be used as a motor launch.\nPemberton-Billing submitted a patent application for his design in October 1913. After obtaining his aviator's certificate on 17 September 1913 following a \u00a3500 bet with Frederick Handley-Page that he could obtain it within 24 hour of commencing flight training, he decided to build his own aircraft.\nIn partnership with Alfred Delves de Broughton, Billing established Pemberton-Billing Ltd on 27 June 1914 with capital of \u00a320,000. Billing had 6,800 shares, Broughton 3,700 and works engineer Lorenz Hans Herkomer (1889\u20131922), 500. Herkomer's background was in electrical engineering and automobiles. Romanian Carol Vasilesco was employed to prepare drawings and undertake the detailed design of airframes. On land at Oakbank Wharf on the river Itchen in Woolston that Billing had previously purchased, the company established a factory with Hubert Scott-Paine as work manager. Its registered telegraphic address, used for sending telegrams and cables to the company, was; \"Supermarine, Southampton\".\nEarly aircraft.\nThe first aircraft built by the new company was the Pemberton-Billing P.B.1 a single-seat open cockpit biplane flying boat. Following modifications, the P.B.1 entered testing, but failed to achieve flight. Billing, who had designed the aircraft, claimed he \"wanted a boat which would fly rather than an aircraft that would float\". Though no proof can be found, Billing claimed that the aircraft made a short hop but other sources state that the PB.1 never flew. The sole P.B.1 was subsequently dismantled and no other examples were constructed.\nAnother early design was the P.B.7, a \"flying lifeboat\" with detachable wings.\nThe next significant design was the P.B.9 that used a set of wings which had been obtained from Radley-England. One example was built and while it flew it was felt that production was not worth pursuing. With no orders coming in, Billing had to sell one of his yachts and lease out part of the facilities to Tom Sopwith who used it for assembly and then testing of his Bat Boat.\nWorld War I.\nAt the outbreak the First World War Billing enlisted in the Royal Navy Volunteer reserve, and thus he was no longer involved in day-to-day activities.\nWith the business by now in serious financial trouble due to a lack of orders, 80 per cent of the staff were fired, leaving only 14 employees. On 14 November 1914 Broughton used his resources to pay off the company's debits which allowed the company to continue in business. Some work was obtained repairing aircraft subcontracting from Sopwith. Broughton then enlisted which left Scott-Paine in charge. At some point in 1914 Carol Vasilesco died suddenly of a heart attack, which left the company without a designer.\nIn early 1915 the company obtained work building 12 Short S.38 seaplanes under licence.\nWork continued on the company's own designs with the next to see the light of day being the P.B.23. The prototype was delivered in September 1915 with tests conducted at Heldon indicating that the design had some promise. As a result, a revised version designated the P.B.25 was produced, for which an order for 20 was received from the Royal Naval Air Service. In late 1915 having completed serving with the RNVR and RNAS Billing returned to the company. As a result of his experience while involved in the organising of the air raid in November 1914 on the Zeppelin sheds at Friedrichshafen on Lake Constance Billing believed that England was defenceless against attacks by Zeppelins.\nAs a result, his return led to the company concentrating on designing the quadruplane P.B.29, which was designed to shoot down Zeppelins.\nIn May 1916 the company was awarded by the Air Department of the Admiralty a contract to build the flying surfaces for the AD flying boat and to undertake the detailed design and construction of the AD Navyplane. The AD Flying Boat was initially found to have poor performance in the water, which were eventually resolved. This led to 34 being built, though none saw service.\nSupermarine Aviation Works.\nIn March 1916 Billing was elected as an Member of Parliament. Once in parliament he was very vocal in his support of air power, constantly accusing the government of neglecting the issue. As he intended to run a campaign against the Royal Aircraft Factory and its products, it became apparent that if the company was to maintain a good relationship with the Air Department and gain any further orders it was necessary for the company to distance itself from Billing. As a result, Billing sold his shares in the company for about \u00a312,500 to Scott-Paine and the other directors who renamed the company Supermarine Aviation Works Ltd and officially registered it under that name on 27 June 1916. As well as Scott-Paine, the other directors were Alfred Delves de Broughton and solicitor Charles Cecil Dominy.\nThe first product of the new company was the P.B.31E Nighthawk which was a carryover from Billing's time for a quadruplane heavily armed and searchlight-equipped home defence fighter. Fitted with a recoilless Davis gun, it had a separate powerplant to power the searchlight. Only the prototype was built, which was found to have insufficient performance to be of any use against Zeppelins.\nAfter completion of the Nighthawk Scott-Paine dropped Billing's fixation with anti-Zeppelin defence fighters, and in the hope of gaining orders for flying boats forged a strong relationship with the RNAS through their local liaison officer James Bird.\nIn early 1916 William Abraham Hargreaves was hired as chief designer.\nBy 1917 realizing that he needed to strengthen the company's technical capability Scott-Paine advertised for a personal assistant.. The successful applicant was R. J. Mitchell, who so impressed Scott-Paine he was hired on the spot and given a range of roles within the company to expose him to every aspect of the business including within a year acted for a period as assistant works manager.\nIn 1917 the company was contracted to build Short Type 184 torpedo bombers and Norman Thompson N.T.2B trainers.\nIn response to the issue of Navy Air Board Specification N.1(b) in early 1917, the company designed what later was called the Supermarine Baby. Three were subsequently built.\nPost World War I.\nThe signing of the armistice agreement, with little prospect of any military contracts for some time, led to the company diversifying by employing its woodworkers in constructing everything from toilet seats to wooden framed bodies for Ford Model T cars.\nAt the end of the war Supermarine was the only British aircraft constructor dedicated to building flying boats and Scott-Paine still wished the company to continue in this specialist field. To this end Supermarine joined the Society of British Aircraft Constructors in late 1919 and purchased from the government about 16 surplus AD Flying boats and the two completed Supermarine Babys. Supermarine modified 10 of the AD Flying boats to produce the commercial \"Type C\" Channel flying boats. The reconfigured aircraft provided accommodation for a pilot and three passengers in three open cockpits. Once the ban on civilian flying was lifted in May 1919 the ten aircraft were registered in June 1919, with three being granted civil certificates of airworthiness at the end of July of that same year. Services commenced in August from Southampton with typically three in service.\nTo pilot the commercial services Scott-Paine employed ex-RNAS pilots Henri Biard, Francis Bailey, Philip Brend. John Hoare, Basil Hobbs and Herbert Horsey.\nFollowing the completion of his duties for the Royal Naval Air Service NZAS James Bird (1883\u20131946) was invited in 1919 by Scott-Paine to join Supermarine as a director. A qualified marine architect he had previously been supervising contracts being undertaken by various companies in the Solent area for the RNAS.\nIn the summer of 1919 William Hargreaves left to work for Vospers and later in the year Mitchell at the age of 24 was promoted to succeed him as chief designer. In 1920, Mitchell's role was expanded to include that of chief engineer. In 1927, he was offered and accepted a position on the board as Technical Director.\nOther than the income from operating commercial flights, the main income between 1919 and 1921 came from selling Channels with a modified design known as the Channel II being developed. As well as sales within Great Britain the company was able to sell 19 overseas, to customers including Chile, Japan, New Zealand, Norway and Sweden.\nSchneider Trophy 1919 to 1924.\nIn 1919 Scott-Paine decided to enter an aircraft from Supermarine in the upcoming 1919 Schneider Trophy seaplane race. A suitable aircraft was produced by heavily modifying N61, the youngest of the two Babys that the company had purchased from the government. Fitted with a Napier Lion engine it was given the name Sea Lion. Flown by Basil Hobbs the aircraft sank on 10 September 1919 after it struck flotsam while competing in the event.\nIn early 1920 the company developed the Supermarine Sea King a single seat flying boat fighter resembling the Baby and the contemporary Sea Lion racing aircraft. While the prototype of which was exhibited at the Olympia air show but obtained no sales. This was subsequently fitted with new wings and tail surfaces and fitted with a more powerful engine, which Supermarine designating it as the Sea King II. No sales were however forthcoming.\nFor the 1922 Schneider Trophy contest, which was being held in Naples, Italy, the company modified the Sea King II by increasing the size of the rudder and fin and fitting a more powerful engine which gave a 50 percent increase in power. Designated Sea Lion II the aircraft won the contest and thus stopped the Italians from winning the trophy outright.\nWith it looking likely that no British company would be entering an aircraft in the 1923 Schneider Trophy contest Scott-Paine was persuaded by the British organizers to enter. As Supermarine being in a poor financial state, Mitchell was restricted to modifying the Sea Lion II, the result which was designated Sea Lion III and proved to be uncompetitive.\nFor the 1924 contest Mitchell began design work on a completely new flying-boat biplane design called the Sea Urchin, which would have been fitted with a Rolls-Royce engine. However, there was insufficient time to overcome a number of design issues which lead to Supermarine withdrawing from the event.\nBird takes over.\nIn the early 1920s the company developed a series of similar one-off amphibians. The most notable of these was the Seal II, which was a three-seater fleet spotter paid for by the Air Ministry. After it performed well during its evaluation by the RAF, two examples of an improved version, named the Seagull were subsequently purchased by the Air Ministry in 1922. Once these were completed faced with no further orders the company considered closing down part of the factory and laying off staff. Bird approached the Air Ministry for assistance and while he received no orders they were encouraging. At the same time Scott-Paine was close to forming the British Marine Air Navigation Company, which it was expected would place an order for aircraft with Supermarine. In expectation of receiving an order the directors decided not to reduce staff numbers. Meanwhile, to meet the requirements of the expected order Mitchell designed the Sea King in late 1922 to carry six passengers in an enclosed cabin. After receiving confirmation that subsidies would be available from the British government Scott-Paine was able together with Southern Rail and the Asiatic Petroleum to establish the British Marine Air Navigation Company in 1923. They subsequently ordered three Sea Kings, which were used to commence a daily service on 25 September 1923 between Southampton and Guernsey. Then late in 1922 orders were received from the Air Ministry for five Seagull IIs followed by two further orders in early 1923. Later orders for what was called the Seagull III were received in 1925 from the Royal Australian Navy.\nPartly due to Scott-Paine's preoccupation with developing the airline business the relationship between him and Bird began to breakdown. As a result, Bird assembled sufficient funds and on 16 November 1923 he confronted Scott-Paine who after negotiation accepted Bird's offer of \u00a3192,000 of his shares and left the company.\nIn 1925 in an attempt to obtain additional funds with which to expand the business the original company was wound up with all creditors paid in full and a new public limited company with the same name was established and listed on the Stock Exchange with a capitalisation rising from \u00a313,500 to \u00a3250,000.\nIn 1926 existing Chief Draughtsman Frank Holroyd was promoted to become Assistant Chief Engineer, while Joseph \"Joe\" Smith was designated as Chief Draughtsman.\nSupermarine Southampton.\nLooking to expand away from the market for small amphibians and flying boats which was becoming more competitive as Blackburn and Short Brothers entered the market, the company designed large multi-engine flying boats to Air Ministry specifications. As a result, one example was built of the Scylla, a torpedo bomber triplane flying boat to specification 14/21. No orders were forthcoming. One example was also built of the Swan, a twin-engined biplane commercial amphibian to specification 21/22. Capable of carrying 12 passengers it was first flown in March 1924 and tested by the Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment (MAEE). The Air Ministry was so impressed with the results that they ordered a military derivative to specification 18/24. Six were ordered, subsequently entering service in 1925 as the Southampton. A further orders soon followed. To manufacture the Southampton, which was much larger than their previous designs a new fabrication workshop were built in 1924 and an erection hangar in 1926. Still short of room, in early 1927 the company took out a lease on the Air Ministry's large wartime flying boat assembly and testing facilities at Hythe. Final erection and testing of the Southamptons was then moved to Hythe, which was on the opposite side of the Solent from the Woolston works.\nWhile the Southampton Mk I had wooden hulls, the Air Ministry indicated that they wanted future flying boats to be metal hulled and paid for the construction of a prototype. Compared with wooden hulls, metal hulls were stronger, lighter and didn't become heavier over time as the wood soaked up water.\nTo enable them to construct metal hulls Supermarine established a metallurgy department headed by Arthur Black (who joined the company at the end of 1925) and established metal production facilities at their Woolston works. The resulting metal hulled version of the Southampton entered service as the Mk II. The Southampton series was very successful with a total of 83 of all types being built. As a result of the success of the Seagull and Southampton between 1923 and 1927 sales rose from \u00a3137,683 to \u00a3403,868 and profits from \u00a358,002 to \u00a3111,935.\nSchneider Trophy 1925 to 1927.\nWhile it had been Scott-Paine' love of speed and competitive nature that had been the driving force behind the company's entry's in the early Schneider Trophy contests, Bird was happy to continue Supermarine's involvement as he wanted to use it to enhance the company profile. After the failure of their 1924 entry, and realizing that other countries designs were far superior, Mitchell reached the conclusion that racing flying boats were no longer competitive. As a result, he designed a monoplane seaplane called the S.4 which was used to set a new world air speed record over Southampton Water of 226.75\u00a0mph (364.9\u00a0km/h). However the sole example crashed during testing prior to the event, forcing the company to withdraw from the event.\nWith sponsorship from the Air Ministry, Mitchell began to design a new streamlined monoplane aircraft designated the S.5. Compared with the S.4 which was completely fabricated from wood, the new design had metal floats and fuselage. This was a major risk as at the time Supermarine had no prior experience in metal construction and had still to commission their new metalworking department. Unfortunately as neither the S.5 nor any other design from a British company was ready in time Britain did not enter the 1926 contest. Once the design was finished Supermarine received an order in late 1926 for two examples, with an order for a third following in early 1927. The S.5 dominated the 1927 contest, finishing first and second. The third example crashed killing its pilot while he was attempting to set a new air speed record over the Solent in 1928.\nSupermarine Aviation Works (Vickers) Ltd.\nIn the late 1920s Vickers Ltd began a series of divestments and mergers as it attempted to improve the strength and profitability of the group. The most notable was their merger in January 1928 with long term rival Armstrong Whitworth to form Vickers-Armstrongs, with the exception of the Armstrong-Whitworth aircraft division and Armstrong Siddeley motor car division, which were bought out by J. D. Siddeley, and so did not join the new group.\nThe new Vickers-Armstrong entity retained the existing Vickers aircraft manufacturing division which was restructured as a semi-independent subsidiary called Vickers (Aviation) Ltd under the management of Robert McLean. McLean was tasked with expanding the new company which he undertook by improving the capability of the existing factory and looking for new facilities. Identifying that a manufacturer of flying boats would be good fit with their existing expertise designing and constructing land-based aircraft they evaluated a number of possible acquisitions. Blackburn Aircraft was in poor condition, Saunders was potentially too costly as a consortium headed by A.V. Roe was proposing to purchase them, while Short was too big and diverse. That left Supermarine.\nAware that Supermarine's ability to modernise and expand was limited by a lack of financial resources, Bird and the other directors agreed to sell to Vickers in 1928. Vickers paid \u00a3390,000 and renamed it as \"Supermarine Aviation Works (Vickers) Ltd\".\nSubsequently, in December 1938, following both Air Ministry's and the Vickers board's concerns over delays to the Spitfire and Wellington manufacturing programmes, all Vickers-Armstrongs aviation interests were reorganised to become Vickers-Armstrongs (Aircraft) Ltd, with both Vickers and Supermarine now under a single management team. Both subsidiaries were then formally wound up, although Supermarine continued to design, build and trade under its own name. The phrase Vickers Supermarine was applied to the aircraft.\nDespite selling his shares to Vickers-Armstrongs, Bird stayed on as managing director of Supermarine while Mitchell continued as chief designer. He had signed a 10-year employment contract in 1923, that included a clause that said, if he left Supermarine he could not work for any other competitor without the directors written consent.\nWhile Supermarine was extremely profitable McLean and his management team were of the opinion that as well as wages being higher than at Vickers, it was also not being run efficiently, had poor record keeping, stock control, and was poorly equipped to build all-metal aircraft, with the ratio of unskilled to skilled labour at 1:3 compared with Vickers' 3:1. They therefore saw numerous opportunities to improve the profitability.\nOne measure Vickers undertook was to send their experienced engineer Barnes Wallis to overhaul the work practices in the design department. He arrived while Mitchell was away on his 1929 Christmas holidays and after installing himself in Mitchell's office began to make changes. Mitchell returned in the New Year, expressed his outrage at Wallis's presumption and immediately moved him to a disused loft in a remote corner of the Woolston works with orders to his staff not to make the interloper comfortable. Wallis eventually complained to McLean, who raised it with the board of Vickers-Armstrongs. Faced with Mitchell's threat to resign if Wallis remained, they backed down and Wallis was recalled back to Weybridge.\nShortly after Wallis's departure Major Harold Payn, an engineer from Vickers design department was appointed by Vickers as Mitchell's deputy. A former pilot with experience from World War I, as well as testing aircraft despite little design experience it was hoped that he would be more diplomatic in bringing Supermarine's design office into agreement with Vickers work practices.\nThat said the parent company provided the combined Vickers (Aviation) Ltd with \u00a3250,000 in 1929 to support research and development.\nAs a consequence the capabilities of the design team at Supermarine were expanded by employing among others Alfred Faddy, William Munro (who had expertise in hydrodynamics and metal hull construction) and Beverley Shenstone who was the first academically trained aerodynamicist at Supermarine. As a consequence the services of Mitchell's deputy Frank Holroyd were no longer required and he was dismissed. By 1931 the restructuring of the company ended with Mitchell still technical director and reporting to him, the Technical Office under Alan Clifton and the Drawing Office under Joe Smith.\nVickers' own pilots took over test flying, which led to Henry Biard's role as Supermarine's test pilot since 1919 coming to an end. As a result, he left in 1933.\nTrevor Westbrook, a 28-year-old and relatively inexperienced prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Robert McLean, was installed as Works Manager with a brief to improve the factory. His direct and forthright manner was not met with universal approval by the staff, but under his direction the factory was rebuilt, rationalised and extended, while the production methods were improved. In 1937 he was promoted within the Vickers group and left Supermarine. He was succeeded at Supermarine by H.B. Pratt.\nThe Depression.\nIn response to the onset of the Depression in 1929, with completion of contracts for Southampton running down and no new aircraft orders being received it was necessary to reduce construction staff numbers by a third over the winter of 1930. Vickers supported Supermarine by contracting it to build the wings and undertake the final completion of two Vickers Viastra airliners and then employing it to construct a special version called the Viastra X, for the Prince of Wales. The other notable work was the design of the Type 179, a six-engined flying boat, which led to the company being awarded a contract to build a prototype. Construction proceeded as far as the construction of the hull before the contract was cancelled.\nSchneider Trophy 1929 and 1931.\nFor the next contest Mitchell created the all-metal S.6 which featured the smallest possible airframe that he could design around a Rolls-Royce engine instead of the Napier engines used in the S.4 and S.5. This design won the 1929 contest.\nFor the 1931 contest Mitchell created the S.6a, a derivative of the S6. This won the contest and as Britain had won the trophy three times in a row it confirmed Britain as the outright and final winner of the Schneider trophy.\nFollowing the contest a S6b, flown by Flt Lt G. H. Stainforth went on to set a new world air speed record of 407.5\u00a0mph.\nWalrus and Stranraer.\nIn response to a 1929 Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) requirement for an aircraft to replace their Seagull IIIs, but with the ability to be catapult-launched from cruisers, the company in 1931 designated the Type 223 \"Seagull V\" as a private venture and built a prototype. This eventually led to the RAAF placing an order in 1934 for 24 production versions which were designated Type 228 \"Seagull V\". The Royal Navy was impressed by the new design and placed an order for 12 aircraft which were virtually identical except for a more powerful engine. Given the designation Type 236, they entered service as the Walrus. More orders were to follow until a total of 740 were built in all by Supermarine and other firms.\nFollowing on from the Southampton Mk II the company developed the biplane twin-engined Southampton IV in response to specification R.20/31 for a general reconnaissance flying boat. Featuring all-metal construction with fabric covered flying surfaces, it had an enclosed cockpit. The prototype first flew in July 1932. Renamed the Scapa fifteen were built.\nSoon after the design of the Scapa was finalised, the Air Ministry issued specification R.24/31 for a twin-engined general purpose flying boat, in response to which Supermarine developed the Stranraer. The prototype first flew in July 1934 and they entered service from April 1937, with the last being delivered to the RAF in 1939. Vickers in Canada also built them for the Royal Canadian Air Force.\nSupermarine Spitfire.\nIn 1930, the Air Ministry began formulating the requirements for an advanced high-performance fighter which were spelled out in specification F.7/30, which was in turn issued in the autumn of 1931 to a number of aircraft manufacturers. Among them was Supermarine, who were keen to broaden its product range from seaplanes and flying boats. In response to the specification, Mitchell designed the Type 224, an all-metal monoplane design, with an open cockpit, un-braced cranked wing and fixed undercarriage. A single prototype was built and first flew in February 1934. Flight testing however identified that it had only average performance and so Supermarine received no production contract.\nUnhappy at how the Type 224 had turned out, in July 1934 Mitchell commenced designing what he hoped would be a much improved fighter, which was given the designation Type 300. It was much more streamlined than the Type 224, with a shorter wing, retractable undercarriage and an enclosed cockpit. Mitchell continued to evolve the design, striving for the maximum performance he could get from the engine and airframe combination. In November 1934 the design was further revised to accommodate the promising new Rolls-Royce PV.XII (PV-12) engine, which was later named the Merlin. The estimated performance of the new design was such that McLean approved in November 1934 expenditure on detailed design of a prototype, as he was confident that funding of a prototype was extremely likely from what was a supportive Air Ministry. Within a month of receiving the initial data, the Air Ministry issued specification F.37/34 to cover the construction of a prototype Type 300.\nGiven the name Spitfire by the Vickers board, the prototype Type 300 when it first flew on 5 March 1936 at nearby Eastleigh airport marked a revolutionary advance for the RAF. The Air Ministry was so impressed that on 3 June 1936 it ordered 310 of the fighter aircraft.\nThe earlier Hawker Hurricane and the Spitfire were the mainstay of RAF Fighter Command fighter aircraft which fought off the Luftwaffe bombing raids with fighter escorts during the Battle of Britain in the summer of 1940. While the Hurricane was available in larger numbers and consequently played a larger role, the new Spitfire became adored by both the public and its pilots and became the aircraft associated with the battle. It went on to play a major part in the remainder of the war, in a number of variants and marks, and it was the only allied fighter aircraft to be in production through the entirety of the Second World War.\nThe Spitfire went out of service in 1954.\nIncreasing production capacity.\nAt the time of receiving its first order for the Spitfire the company did not have the management skills, organisation tools and physical space as this one order was more than double the total number of aircraft they had built in the previous 20 years. As a result, much of the work had to be sub-contracted to other firms, which led to chaos with drawings and the delivery of parts. To compound the problem skilled sheet-metal workers were in short supply. Supermarine had contracted to deliver the first Spitfire in September 1937, but by early 1938 not a single plane had left the factory.\nUpon receipt of the order Supermarine commenced fitting out its Woolston Works for production of the new fighter. With the orders for the Spitfire as well as for the Stranraer and Walrus, the company built a new factory to the designs of the noted 1930's modernist architect Oliver Percy Bernard. The new factory was known as the Itchen Works and was built on land reclaimed from the Itchen, just upstream from the Woolston Works. Opened in 1939, it was originally intended that it would be used to build the Walrus and Sea Otter, but because of its importance it was soon being used to construct Spitfire fuselages.\nIn 1938 with Walrus production having peaked the previous year the facility at Hythe was closed.\nWhile it was intended that outside sub-contractors would be employed in manufacturing many major components, Vickers-Armstrongs was initially reluctant to see companies from outside of the group involved and so was slow in releasing the necessary sub-components and drawings. As delays mounted the Air Ministry proposed that Supermarine would only complete the initial order and then once the Hawker Typhoon was ready for service in 1941 switch over to making Bristol Beaufighters. Supermarine was able to convince the Air Ministry that the problems would be overcome, which allayed the concerns sufficient for them to receive another order for 200 Spitfires on 24 March 1938. Supermarine was to subsequently organise over 200 sub-contractors to produce components for the Spitfire, with 27 of them producing fully assembled major components, four building the main section of the wing, four building wing tips and another five building flaps. The major components were then taken on trucks to Eastleigh Aerodrome where fitting of the engines, final assembly and flight testing was undertaken before being distributed to operational RAF bases.\nDue to the production delays, the first RAF unit, No. 19 Squadron at RAF Duxford, did not start receiving Spitfire Mk Is until 4 August 1938.\nEven then, production was slow to build up, and only 49 Spitfires had reached the RAF by 1 January 1939. By 3 September 1939 a total of 306 Spitfire Mk Is had been delivered to the RAF.\nCastle Bromwich.\nAware of the desperate shortage of modern aircraft, the lack of manufacturing capacity and that as the majority of aircraft manufacturers were located in the south of England, which made them vulnerable to enemy air attack, the British government in 1935 commenced the \"Shadow Factory\" programme. These massive new \"Shadow Factories\", which it was intended would employ the latest production techniques, were to be set up in areas away from the immediate threat of attack and where it was felt there would be sufficient transferable skills which could be employed on the manufacturing process. For the Spitfire, Lord Nuffield offered to build the massive Castle Bromwich Shadow Factory near Birmingham.\nWork began on its construction on 12 July 1938. However continual problems beset the factory and despite it having been planned that it would be producing 60 aircraft per week by April 1940 it was not until June 1940 (well into the Battle of Britain) that the problems were resolved by new management, with the first 10 Spitfires being delivered that month. Thereafter production increased to reach a maximum rate of 320 aircraft per month. By the end of the war it had produced a total of 12,129 aircraft (which was over half of all Spitfires made).\nHeavy bomber.\nIn response to Air Ministry specification B.12/36, which was issued in July 1936 to all the major aircraft manufacturers for a four-engined heavy bomber, Mitchell designed the Type 316 which carried its bombs in both the fuselage and wings. After submitting the Supermarine proposal, Mitchell in characteristic fashion began a total redesign called the Type 317 with new wings and different gun turrets. Two prototypes of the Type 317 with Bristol Hercules engines were ordered on 22 March 1937 but since Short Brothers had experience with large four engined aircraft and Supermarine had none and had to deliver the Spitfire, Shorts design submission to B.12/36 had already been selected for redesign as a back up in February 1937. Supermarine also proceeded with design work on a variant (Type 318) with Merlin engines until they were told in July to stop work on it to concentrate on the Type 317.\nFollowing the death of Mitchell in June 1937 after a long battle with cancer and with Supermarine having problems meeting the demand for the Spitfire the Air Ministry realised that work on the prototypes would be delayed. Two prototypes were ordered from Short Brothers, followed by a production order in April 1938 and their design entered service as the Short Stirling in January 1941.\nThe Type 317 prototypes were destroyed, along with construction drawings, by an air raid on 26 September 1940 while still under construction. The Air Ministry cancelled the contract on 25 November.\nDeath of Mitchell.\nFollowing the death of Mitchell, his deputy Harold Payn was appointed Chief Designer. However a security check in September 1939 identified that Payn had a German born wife. Concerns about the risk this posed to a major war programme saw Payn dismissed. Joe Smith was promoted from Chief Draughtsman, at first to acting manager of the design department and finally to chief designer in 1941 following approval from the Ministry of Aircraft Production.\nWorld War II.\nIn 1940 Bird retired as general manager and was superseded by W.T. Elliot.\nUpon the commencement of the war to protect the Supermarine factory at Woolston, anti-aircraft guns were placed at Peartree Green, the Railway Bridge and Taggarts Wharf.\nAt the time completed Spitfire wings and fuselages were taken on lorries from the Woolston and Itchen works, to the assembly hangar at Eastleigh Airport where the Merlin engines were fitted and the assembled aircraft tested. Under the supervision of works manager H.B. Pratt, a partial dispersal of Spitfire production away from the works at Woolston also begun. However, the production delays at Castle Bromwich meant that Supermarine could not afford any interruption in production at Woolston and Itchen which constrained dispersal. However progress was made on identifying suitable sites and requisitioning them.\nTo allow Supermarine to concentrate on Spitfires, Saunders-Roe on the Isle of Wight took on the manufacture of the Walrus and Sea Otter.\nAir raids.\nThe Supermarine factory and the Thornycroft naval shipyard (building destroyers, near the Woolston works) made Southampton a prime target for the Luftwaffe. Shortly after 5.30pm on the evening of 15 September 1940, the factory was directly attacked by eighteen Me 110s, each carrying two bombs. Only a few windows were broken, though nine people were killed in nearby houses.\nThe raid brought home that immediate action was now needed to disperse production. The buildings that had been sitting idle were prepared, and tools and jigs were gradually moved from Woolston and Itchen to the new facilities.\nThe Commercial and Personnel departments (which included payroll) moved to Deepdene House in Bitterne. This was fortunate as it allowed workers to receive emergency pay following later raids, when it was desperately needed, as the homes of many were destroyed by bombs.\nOn 24 September 1940, the works were attacked by 17 aircraft at 1.50pm and again by three aircraft at 4.15pm.\u202f The initial raid of Bf 110s was led by Martin Lutz of TG210, and by flying low and fast achieved complete surprise, with the workforce receiving little warning of the raid. Twenty-nine high explosive bombs and one incendiary were dropped. There was little damage to the factory as most of the 17 bombs which fell on the site landed in the mud of the river. However, 42 were killed and 161 injured, many when the railway bridge, under which workers were still making their way to air raid shelters, received a direct hit, as did one of the already occupied bomb shelters beneath a railway embankment, where 24 were killed and 75 injured. Also many nearby houses were destroyed with terrible loss of life. Works manager H.B. Pratt was wounded and badly traumatised by the attack.\nTwo days later, on 26 September, sixty Heinkel He 111s of \"KG 55\" escorted by 60 Messerschmitt Bf 110 fighters of \"ZG 26\" attacked from 5.45pm onwards in two waves. The incoming attack was detected early, with factory sirens sounding just after 4pm, which gave the workers ample time to evacuate. In spite of anti-aircraft fire more than 70 tons of bombs were dropped, with seven bombs directly hitting the Woolston works and one hitting the Itchen works. The factory buildings at Woolston were so badly damaged that they were never rebuilt, and the ruins were at one stage used to train commandos in street fighting. Both prototypes of the Type 317 bomber and three complete Spitfires were destroyed, while over 20 Spitfires were damaged. Luckily, several of the critical production jigs had already been moved to other sites and the remainder of the most important precision machines were virtually undamaged. One bomb scored a direct hit on a bomb shelter, but it was unoccupied as \u2013 after the experience of previous raid \u2013 many of the employees had run well away from the factory area. Even so, 55 were killed and 92 injured.\nComplete dispersal of production.\nBy this time the new factory at Castle Bromwich was producing Spitfires, but with a desperate need for more aircraft Lord Beaverbrook, the Minister of Aircraft Production (MAP), visited Southampton and immediately ordered a complete dispersal of Supermarine's facilities. The top floor of the Polygon Hotel in the centre of Southampton was immediately requisitioned by the MAP for the use of Supermarine's production team.\nWork immediately began by the production team under the leadership of the company's works engineer, Leonard G. Gooch on a dispersal programme. Gooch's impressive efforts meant that by December 1940 he formally replaced Pratt as Works Manager. The replacement of Pratt is also believed to have been partially orchestrated by Beaverbrook in retaliation for Pratt's refusal prior to the air raids to allow staff from the MAP into the Supermarine factories without the proper credentials. Pratt, overworked and suffering from depression, committed suicide soon afterwards.\nDuring 26 September air raid at least one bomb had passed through the drawing office, out of the window and into the mud on the river bank below; another went straight through the floor without exploding. As a result, the majority of the design material and drawings survived. The design team were quickly moved to temporary accommodation in old World War I army huts, being used by the University College in Highfield. One of the huts was then destroyed by an incendiary bomb prompting a further move beginning 7 December 1940 when all of the company's design, production and administration was moved to a new permanent home at Hursley House. Located close to Winchester, this large stately house was requisitioned by the Ministry of Aircraft Production from the Dowager Lady Mary Cooper, who remained in residence until June 1942.\nIt was decided that new dispersed facilities should stay within 50 miles of Southampton so that control and communication could be maintained. By mid November 1940, 35 workshops were up and running. Eventually there were 250 sub-contractors supplying 60 workshops in Hampshire, Wiltshire and Berkshire, clustered around four production centres: Reading (with assembly at Aldermaston and Henley), Salisbury (with assembly at Chattis Hill and High Post), Southampton (with assembly at Eastleigh) and Trowbridge (with assembly at Keevil). An additional area around Winchester and Chandler's Ford was linked to the main design base at Hursley Park.\nEach production centre had workshops able to make each part of the plane and an airfield at which final assembly and delivery could be performed. The smallest assembly centre was High Post where the assembly hangar was so small that only three Spitfires could be assembled at a time. Production was six a week.\nCastle Bromwich concentrated on the standard models of Spitfires, including the Mk II, V, IX and XIV, as it was time-consuming to change its mass assembly production lines from one model to another. In contrast the dispersed production and small output from each individual production centre surrounding Southampton had the advantage of allowing flexibility and responsiveness without major disruption to the overall production. Each production centre tended to specialise on a particular model of Spitfire and so could much more quickly provide smaller numbers of specialised aircraft in response to a new threat or requirement of the RAF and Royal Navy.\nThe Southampton workforce increased from 2,880 at the start of the war to 3,660 in September 1940, dropped to 3,079 in December 1940 as a result of the air raid before increasing to 10,000 (half of them women) by the end of 1944.\nWhen looking for suitable sites, preference was placed on buildings with wide concrete floors, uncluttered by pillars, with high ceilings and large access doors. While garages, vehicle showrooms and other workshops were capable of constructing sub-assemblies and even complete fuselages, bus depots with their extra height were valued for the making of wings. Many local garages and large store premises were requisitioned to provide the required facilities. Among the buildings requisitioned were Carey &amp; Lambert's showroom at Austin House in Southampton, Chiswell's Garage, Elliott's furniture factory in Newbury, Hendy's Garage, off Pound Tree Road in the centre of Southampton, Hendy's Agricultural Equipment Showroom at Chandlers Ford, Lowthers Garage on Park Road in Shirley, Seward's Garage, on Winchester Road in Shirley, Shorts Garage, Southampton, Sunlight Laundry also on Winchester Road, and Vincent's Garage in Reading.\nWhile most owners left with little complaint there were some who objected. The Hants and Dorset Bus Depot on Winchester Road in Southampton was already being used to store sandbags and pumps needed by the Fire Brigade in the event of an air raid. The deputy town clerk refused to move the pumps as he considered them to be more important. Eventually sufficient official pressure was brought to bear and the council moved the buses and pumps out, leaving Supermarine with the job of disposing of sandbags. The Mayor of Salisbury initially objected to the takeover of the city's bus depot until it was pointed out to him by MAP that as the local patron of the Spitfire Fund, it was no use collecting money if there was nowhere to build the aircraft. Near Trowbridge the owner of the Barnes steamroller factory on Church Street in Southwick thought his steamrollers were more important and appealed to his local MP. An arbitration panel ruled that Supermarine could have 75% of the factory; a wall was built to separate the two activities. Later a large purpose-built facility was built on Bradley Road in Trowbridge, where the main body and wing were made, and parts incorporated from other Trowbridge factories added, before being transported on trucks to Keevil Airfield. In a hangar at Keevil the Spitfire would be assembled, tested and then flown by an ATA (Air Transport Auxiliary) pilot to a frontline airfield.\nOften there were also conflicts with other Ministries, who had already requisitioned sites needed by Supermarine, but the Ministry for Aircraft Production usually ruled supreme as the production of aircraft had the highest priority.\nProduction fell from 363 aircraft in the quarter before the raids to 177 and 179 respectively in the next two quarters. It took another nine months before it was back to 100 per month, as the programme both had to find suitable new facilities, sufficient skilled workers to replace those killed and wounded and also the additional numbers needed to increase production, while at the same time provide accommodation for them. There was a great reluctance of Southampton-based workers to move away to the new dispersal facilities. Once the existing skilled workers were relocated it took time to train new semi-skilled workers. Many were straight out of school or older men who had undergone the Government's basic engineering training. As the war progressed more woman entered the workforce and began to take on more senior roles. By the end of the war, 8,000 planes had been built in the dispersal factories around Southampton.\nIn addition to the Spitfires and Seafires made at Supermarine's dispersed Southampton factories and at Castle Bromwich, several companies were subcontracted to make entire Supermarine designs. The most significant were Westland Aircraft who were responsible for the manufacture of the majority of the Seafire, making over 2,000, while Cunliffe-Owen Aircraft at their shadow factory at Eastleigh from 1942 converted 118 Spitfires VBs into Seafires before constructing over 520 new Seafires.\nNew designs.\nJoe Smith was confident that the Spitfire had great development potential and was successful in obtaining the maximum capability from the Spitfire and its naval version the Seafire through numerous variants, including the introduction of the Rolls-Royce Griffon-engined series, all of which ensured that it remained a front line fighter until the end of World War II.\nBy 1942, the designers had realised that the characteristics of the Spitfire's wing at high Mach numbers might become a limiting factor in further increasing the aircraft's high-speed performance. As a result, work commenced on the Spiteful and Seafang, which were designed to be successors of the Spitfire and Seafire, respectively. However, with the advent of jet propulsion, the future of high-performance fighters was clearly with the jet fighter, so only a small number were built.\nPost-World War II.\nFollowing the end of the war with no further need for dispersal of production the Itchen works was rebuilt but not the Woolston works. The manufacturing facilities were split into the Southern (Chilbolton, Eastleigh, Hursley and Itchen) under Leonard Gooch and Northern (South Marston and Trowbridge) under Stuart Lefevre.\nWith little demand for flying boats and lacking expertise in large multi-engined aircraft Supermarine concentrated on jet fighters, building the Royal Navy's first jet fighter, the Supermarine Attacker. To expedite its development Smith used the wings of Spiteful mated to a new fuselage housing a Nene engine. It served front line squadrons aboard aircraft carriers and RNVR squadrons at shore bases. The Attacker was followed by the more advanced Swift which served in the fighter and photo-reconnaissance roles.\nThe last aircraft to bear the Supermarine name was the Scimitar, the final examples of which were delivered in 1957.\nIn the late 1950s Supermarine became engaged in non-aviation related work ranging from film equipment to hovercraft (from 1961). The Vickers-Armstrongs VA-3 hovercraft which was constructed in the reconstructed Itchen works.\nIn the consolidation of British aircraft manufacturing in the late 1950s, Vickers-Armstrongs (Aircraft) became a part of the British Aircraft Corporation in 1960 and the individual manufacturing heritage names were lost.\nA separate Supermarine design office continued to exist at Weybridge until 1957 when many staff were absorbed into the main Vickers-Armstrongs organisation or relocated to the new Supermarine headquarters at South Marston in Wiltshire. In response to government specification GOR.339, Vickers-Armstrongs whose design team largely consisted of ex-Supermarine engineers (based in Weybridge) offered the Type 571. This design was eventually merged with that proposed by English-Electric/Short design to create the final design for the BAC TSR-2.\nRepresentation in media.\nPremiering in February 2018 at NST City in Southampton Howard Brenton's play \"The Shadow Factory\" told the story of the impact of the air raids on the Supermarine factory in 1940.\nThe production starred David Birrell (Fred/Hugh), Catherine Cusack (Lil/Sylvia), Lorna Fitzgerald (Jackie Dimmock), Hilton McRae (Lord Beaverbrook) and Daniel York (Len Gooch).\nMemorials.\nThe former Woolston Works is today the site of an aggregate unloading wharf and an apartment block. Only the pre-cast reinforced concrete slipway still exists \u2013 designed by noted modernist architect Oliver Bernard in 1936/37 together with the much expanded factory and Grade II Listed since 27 June 2011. A nearby memorial plaque remembers those who died during the three air raids in 1940 that targeted the Supermarine works.\nReuse of the Supermarine name.\nThe name was revived in 1990 by a company in Burslem called Supermarine Aero Engineering Ltd. that hand builds parts for Spitfire planes.\nNorthshore Marine Motor Yachts builds a range of motorboats under the Supermarine name in Itchenor near Chichester, England. The name is also used for Spitfire replicas made by an Australian company in Cisco, Texas.\nSupermarine aircraft.\nInitially, the company had no system for naming projects with a structured system only coming into use just prior to the company being purchased by Vickers-Armstrongs. The new owners imposed the Vickers' system where once a new project was approved for further work a Type number was allocated. Vickers initially assigned a block of Type numbers from 178 to 190 to Supermarine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27550", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27550", "title": "List of Spanish-language poets", "text": "This is a list of notable poets who have written in the Spanish language.\nMexico.\n\"See also List of Mexican poets\""}
{"id": "27553", "revid": "44645973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27553", "title": "Set theory", "text": "Branch of mathematics that studies sets\nSet theory is the branch of mathematical logic that studies sets, which can be informally described as collections of objects. Although objects of any kind can be collected into a set, set theory \u2013 as a branch of mathematics \u2013 is mostly concerned with those that are relevant to mathematics as a whole.\nThe modern study of set theory was initiated by the German mathematicians Richard Dedekind and Georg Cantor in the 1870s. In particular, Georg Cantor is commonly considered the founder of set theory. The non-formalized systems investigated during this early stage go under the name of \"naive set theory\". After the discovery of paradoxes within naive set theory (such as Russell's paradox, Cantor's paradox and the Burali-Forti paradox), various axiomatic systems were proposed in the early twentieth century, of which Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory (with or without the axiom of choice) is still the best-known and most studied.\nSet theory is commonly employed as a foundational system for the whole of mathematics, particularly in the form of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice. Besides its foundational role, set theory also provides the framework to develop a mathematical theory of infinity, and has various applications in computer science (such as in the theory of relational algebra), philosophy, formal semantics, and evolutionary dynamics. Its foundational appeal, together with its paradoxes, and its implications for the concept of infinity and its multiple applications have made set theory an area of major interest for logicians and philosophers of mathematics. Contemporary research into set theory covers a vast array of topics, ranging from the structure of the real number line to the study of the consistency of large cardinals.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe basic notion of grouping objects has existed since at least the emergence of numbers, and the notion of treating sets as their own objects has existed since at least the Tree of Porphyry in 3rd-century AD. The simplicity and ubiquity of sets makes it hard to determine the origin of sets as now used in mathematics; however, Bernard Bolzano's \"Paradoxes of the Infinite\" (\"Paradoxien des Unendlichen\", 1851) is generally considered the first rigorous introduction of sets to mathematics. In his work, he (among other things) expanded on Galileo's paradox, and introduced one-to-one correspondence of infinite sets, for example between the intervals formula_1 and formula_2 by the relation formula_3. However, he resisted saying these sets were equinumerous, and his work is generally considered to have been uninfluential in mathematics of his time.\nBefore mathematical set theory, basic concepts of infinity were considered to be in the domain of philosophy (see: \"Infinity (philosophy)\" and \"\"). Since the 5th century BC, beginning with Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea in the West (and early Indian mathematicians in the East), mathematicians had struggled with the concept of infinity. With the development of calculus in the late 17th century, philosophers began to generally distinguish between potential and actual infinity, wherein mathematics was only considered in the latter. Carl Friedrich Gauss famously stated: Infinity is nothing more than a figure of speech which helps us talk about limits. The notion of a completed infinity doesn't belong in mathematics.Development of mathematical set theory was motivated by several mathematicians. Bernhard Riemann's lecture \"On the Hypotheses which lie at the Foundations of Geometry\" (1854) proposed new ideas about topology. His lectures also introduced the concept of basing mathematics in terms of sets or manifolds in the sense of a class (which he called \"Mannigfaltigkeit\") now called point-set topology. The lecture was published by Richard Dedekind in 1868, along with Riemann's paper on trigonometric series (which presented the Riemann integral), The latter was the starting point for a movement in real analysis of the study of \u201cseriously\u201d discontinuous functions. A young Georg Cantor entered into this area, which led him to the study of point-sets. Around 1871, influenced by Riemann, Dedekind began working with sets in his publications, which dealt very clearly and precisely with equivalence relations, partitions of sets, and homomorphisms. Thus, many of the usual set-theoretic procedures of twentieth-century mathematics go back to his work. However, he did not publish a formal explanation of his set theory until 1888.\nNaive set theory.\nSet theory, as understood by modern mathematicians, is generally considered to be founded by a single paper in 1874 by Georg Cantor titled \"On a Property of the Collection of All Real Algebraic Numbers\". In his paper, he developed the notion of cardinality, comparing the sizes of two sets by setting them in one-to-one correspondence. His \"revolutionary discovery\" was that the set of all real numbers is uncountable, that is, one cannot put all real numbers in a list. This theorem is proved using Cantor's first uncountability proof, which differs from the more familiar proof using his diagonal argument.\nCantor introduced fundamental constructions in set theory, such as the power set of a set \"A\", which is the set of all possible subsets of \"A\". He later proved that the size of the power set of \"A\" is strictly larger than the size of \"A\", even when \"A\" is an infinite set; this result soon became known as Cantor's theorem. Cantor developed a theory of transfinite numbers, called cardinals and ordinals, which extended the arithmetic of the natural numbers. His notation for the cardinal numbers was the Hebrew letter formula_4 (\u2135, aleph) with a natural number subscript; for the ordinals he employed the Greek letter formula_5 (\u03c9, omega).\nSet theory was beginning to become an essential ingredient of the new \u201cmodern\u201d approach to mathematics. Originally, Cantor's theory of transfinite numbers was regarded as counter-intuitive\u00a0\u2013 even shocking. This caused it to encounter resistance from mathematical contemporaries such as Leopold Kronecker and Henri Poincar\u00e9 and later from Hermann Weyl and L. E. J. Brouwer, while Ludwig Wittgenstein raised philosophical objections (see: \"Controversy over Cantor's theory\"). \nDespite the controversy, Cantor's set theory gained remarkable ground around the turn of the 20th century with the work of several notable mathematicians and philosophers. Richard Dedekind, around the same time, began working with sets in his publications, and was famously constructing the real numbers in 1872 using Dedekind cuts. Cantor and Dedekind were in correspondence about set theory, especially in the 1870s. However, Dedekind's algebraic style only began to find followers in the 1890s. Cantor also worked with Giuseppe Peano in developing the Peano axioms, which formalized natural-number arithmetic, using set-theoretic ideas, which also introduced the epsilon symbol for set membership. Possibly most prominently, Gottlob Frege began to develop his \"Foundations of Arithmetic\".\nIn his work, Frege tries to ground all mathematics in terms of logical axioms using Cantor's cardinality. For example, the sentence \"the number of horses in the barn is four\" means that four objects fall under the concept \"horse in the barn\". Frege attempted to explain our grasp of numbers through cardinality ('the number of...', or formula_6), relying on Hume's principle.\nHowever, Frege's work was short-lived, as it was found by Bertrand Russell that his axioms lead to a contradiction. Specifically, Frege's Basic Law V (now known as the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension). According to Basic Law V, for any sufficiently well-defined property, there is the set of all and only the objects that have that property. The contradiction, called Russell's paradox, is shown as follows:Let \"R\" be the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. (This set is sometimes called \"the Russell set\".) If \"R\" is not a member of itself, then its definition entails that it is a member of itself; yet, if it is a member of itself, then it is not a member of itself, since it is the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. The resulting contradiction is Russell's paradox. In symbols:\n formula_7\nThis came around a time of several paradoxes or counter-intuitive results. For example, that the parallel postulate cannot be proved, the existence of mathematical objects that cannot be computed or explicitly described, and the existence of theorems of arithmetic that cannot be proved with Peano arithmetic. The result was a foundational crisis of mathematics.\nBasic concepts and notation.\nSet theory begins with a fundamental binary relation between an object o and a set A. If o is a \"member\" (or \"element\") of A, the notation \"o\" \u2208 \"A\" is used. A set is described by listing elements separated by commas, or by a characterizing property of its elements, within braces { }. Since sets are objects, the membership relation can relate sets as well, i.e., sets themselves can be members of other sets.\nA derived binary relation between two sets is the subset relation, also called \"set inclusion\". If all the members of set A are also members of set B, then A is a \"subset\" of B, denoted \"A\" \u2286 \"B\". For example, {1, 2} is a subset of {1, 2, 3}, and so is {2} but {1, 4} is not. As implied by this definition, a set is a subset of itself. For cases where this possibility is unsuitable or would make sense to be rejected, the term \"proper subset\" is defined, variously denoted formula_8, formula_9, or formula_10 (note however that the notation formula_8 is sometimes used synonymously with formula_12; that is, allowing the possibility that A and B are equal). We call A a \"proper subset\" of B if and only if A is a subset of B, but A is not equal to B. Also, 1, 2, and 3 are members (elements) of the set {1, 2, 3}, but are not subsets of it; and in turn, the subsets, such as {1}, are not members of the set {1, 2, 3}. More complicated relations can exist; for example, the set {1} is both a member and a proper subset of the set {1, {1}}.\nJust as arithmetic features binary operations on numbers, set theory features binary operations on sets. The following is a partial list of them:\nSome basic sets of central importance are the set of natural numbers, the set of real numbers and the empty set \u2013 the unique set containing no elements. The empty set is also occasionally called the \"null set\", though this name is ambiguous and can lead to several interpretations. The empty set can be denoted with empty braces \"formula_13\" or the symbol \"formula_14\" or \"formula_15\".\nThe power set of a set A, denoted formula_16, is the set whose members are all of the possible subsets of A. For example, the power set of {1, 2} is . Notably, formula_16 contains both A and the empty set.\nOntology.\nA set is pure if all of its members are sets, all members of its members are sets, and so on. For example, the set containing only the empty set is a nonempty pure set. In modern set theory, it is common to restrict attention to the \"von Neumann universe\" of pure sets, and many systems of axiomatic set theory are designed to axiomatize the pure sets only. There are many technical advantages to this restriction, and little generality is lost, because essentially all mathematical concepts can be modeled by pure sets. Sets in the von Neumann universe are organized into a cumulative hierarchy, based on how deeply their members, members of members, etc. are nested. Each set in this hierarchy is assigned (by transfinite recursion) an ordinal number formula_18, known as its \"rank.\" The rank of a pure set formula_19 is defined to be the least ordinal that is strictly greater than the rank of any of its elements. For example, the empty set is assigned rank 0, while the set containing only the empty set is assigned rank 1. For each ordinal formula_18, the set formula_21 is defined to consist of all pure sets with rank less than formula_18. The entire von Neumann universe is denoted\u00a0formula_23.\nFormalized set theory.\nElementary set theory can be studied informally and intuitively, and so can be taught in primary schools using Venn diagrams. The intuitive approach tacitly assumes that a set may be formed from the class of all objects satisfying any particular defining condition. This assumption gives rise to paradoxes, the simplest and best known of which are Russell's paradox and the Burali-Forti paradox. Axiomatic set theory was originally devised to rid set theory of such paradoxes.\nThe most widely studied systems of axiomatic set theory imply that all sets form a cumulative hierarchy. Such systems come in two flavors, those whose ontology consists of:\nThe above systems can be modified to allow \"urelements\", objects that can be members of sets but that are not themselves sets and do not have any members. Zermelo set theory was originally defined over a domain consisting of both sets and urelements.\nThe \"New Foundations\" systems of NFU (allowing urelements) and NF (lacking them), associate with Willard Van Orman Quine, are not based on a cumulative hierarchy. NF and NFU include a \"set of everything\", relative to which every set has a complement. In these systems urelements matter, because NF, but not NFU, produces sets for which the axiom of choice does not hold. Despite NF's ontology not reflecting the traditional cumulative hierarchy and violating well-foundedness, Thomas Forster has argued that it does reflect an iterative conception of set.\nSystems of constructive set theory, such as CST, CZF, and IZF, embed their set axioms in intuitionistic instead of classical logic. Yet other systems accept classical logic but feature a nonstandard membership relation. These include rough set theory and fuzzy set theory, in which the value of an atomic formula embodying the membership relation is not simply True or False. The Boolean-valued models of ZFC are a related subject.\nAn enrichment of ZFC called internal set theory was proposed by Edward Nelson in 1977.\nApplications.\nMany mathematical concepts can be defined precisely using only set theoretic concepts. For example, mathematical structures as diverse as graphs, manifolds, rings, vector spaces, and relational algebras can all be defined as sets satisfying various (axiomatic) properties. Equivalence and order relations are ubiquitous in mathematics, and the theory of mathematical relations can be described in set theory.\nSet theory is also a promising foundational system for much of mathematics. Since the publication of the first volume of \"Principia Mathematica\", it has been claimed that most (or even all) mathematical theorems can be derived using an aptly designed set of axioms for set theory, augmented with many definitions, using first or second-order logic. For example, properties of the natural and real numbers can be derived within set theory, as each of these number systems can be defined by representing their elements as sets of specific forms.\nSet theory as a foundation for mathematical analysis, topology, abstract algebra, and discrete mathematics is likewise uncontroversial; mathematicians accept (in principle) that theorems in these areas can be derived from the relevant definitions and the axioms of set theory. However, it remains that few full derivations of complex mathematical theorems from set theory have been formally verified, since such formal derivations are often much longer than the natural language proofs mathematicians commonly present. One verification project, Metamath, includes human-written, computer-verified derivations of more than 12,000 theorems starting from ZFC set theory, first-order logic and propositional logic.\nAreas of study.\nSet theory is a major area of research in mathematics with many interrelated subfields:\nCombinatorial set theory.\n\"Combinatorial set theory\" concerns extensions of finite combinatorics to infinite sets. This includes the study of cardinal arithmetic and the study of extensions of Ramsey's theorem such as the Erd\u0151s\u2013Rado theorem.\nDescriptive set theory.\n\"Descriptive set theory\" is the study of subsets of the real line and, more generally, subsets of Polish spaces. It begins with the study of pointclasses in the Borel hierarchy and extends to the study of more complex hierarchies such as the projective hierarchy and the Wadge hierarchy. Many properties of Borel sets can be established in ZFC, but proving these properties hold for more complicated sets requires additional axioms related to determinacy and large cardinals.\nThe field of effective descriptive set theory is between set theory and recursion theory. It includes the study of lightface pointclasses, and is closely related to hyperarithmetical theory. In many cases, results of classical descriptive set theory have effective versions; in some cases, new results are obtained by proving the effective version first and then extending (\"relativizing\") it to make it more broadly applicable.\nA recent area of research concerns Borel equivalence relations and more complicated definable equivalence relations. This has important applications to the study of invariants in many fields of mathematics.\nFuzzy set theory.\nIn set theory as Cantor defined and Zermelo and Fraenkel axiomatized, an object is either a member of a set or not. In \"fuzzy set theory\" this condition was relaxed by Lotfi A. Zadeh so an object has a \"degree of membership\" in a set, a number between 0 and 1. For example, the degree of membership of a person in the set of \"tall people\" is more flexible than a simple yes or no answer and can be a real number such as 0.75.\nInner model theory.\nAn \"inner model\" of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory (ZF) is a transitive class that includes all the ordinals and satisfies all the axioms of ZF. The canonical example is the constructible universe \"L\" developed by G\u00f6del.\nOne reason that the study of inner models is of interest is that it can be used to prove consistency results. For example, it can be shown that regardless of whether a model \"V\" of ZF satisfies the continuum hypothesis or the axiom of choice, the inner model \"L\" constructed inside the original model will satisfy both the generalized continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice. Thus the assumption that ZF is consistent (has at least one model) implies that ZF together with these two principles is consistent.\nThe study of inner models is common in the study of determinacy and large cardinals, especially when considering axioms such as the axiom of determinacy that contradict the axiom of choice. Even if a fixed model of set theory satisfies the axiom of choice, it is possible for an inner model to fail to satisfy the axiom of choice. For example, the existence of sufficiently large cardinals implies that there is an inner model satisfying the axiom of determinacy (and thus not satisfying the axiom of choice).\nLarge cardinals.\nA \"large cardinal\" is a cardinal number with an extra property. Many such properties are studied, including inaccessible cardinals, measurable cardinals, and many more. These properties typically imply the cardinal number must be very large, with the existence of a cardinal with the specified property unprovable in Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory.\nDeterminacy.\n\"Determinacy\" refers to the fact that, under appropriate assumptions, certain two-player games of perfect information are determined from the start in the sense that one player must have a winning strategy. The existence of these strategies has important consequences in descriptive set theory, as the assumption that a broader class of games is determined often implies that a broader class of sets will have a topological property. The axiom of determinacy (AD) is an important object of study; although incompatible with the axiom of choice, AD implies that all subsets of the real line are well behaved (in particular, measurable and with the perfect set property). AD can be used to prove that the Wadge degrees have an elegant structure.\nForcing.\nPaul Cohen invented the method of \"forcing\" while searching for a model of ZFC in which the continuum hypothesis fails, or a model of ZF in which the axiom of choice fails. Forcing adjoins to some given model of set theory additional sets in order to create a larger model with properties determined (i.e. \"forced\") by the construction and the original model. For example, Cohen's construction adjoins additional subsets of the natural numbers without changing any of the cardinal numbers of the original model. Forcing is also one of two methods for proving relative consistency by finitistic methods, the other method being Boolean-valued models.\nCardinal invariants.\nA \"cardinal invariant\" is a property of the real line measured by a cardinal number. For example, a well-studied invariant is the smallest cardinality of a collection of meagre sets of reals whose union is the entire real line. These are invariants in the sense that any two isomorphic models of set theory must give the same cardinal for each invariant. Many cardinal invariants have been studied, and the relationships between them are often complex and related to axioms of set theory.\nSet-theoretic topology.\n\"Set-theoretic topology\" studies questions of general topology that are set-theoretic in nature or that require advanced methods of set theory for their solution. Many of these theorems are independent of ZFC, requiring stronger axioms for their proof. A famous problem is the normal Moore space question, a question in general topology that was the subject of intense research. The answer to the normal Moore space question was eventually proved to be independent of ZFC.\nControversy.\nFrom set theory's inception, some mathematicians have objected to it as a foundation for mathematics. The most common objection to set theory, one Kronecker voiced in set theory's earliest years, starts from the constructivist view that mathematics is loosely related to computation. If this view is granted, then the treatment of infinite sets, both in naive and in axiomatic set theory, introduces into mathematics methods and objects that are not computable even in principle. The feasibility of constructivism as a substitute foundation for mathematics was greatly increased by Errett Bishop's influential book \"Foundations of Constructive Analysis\".\nA different objection put forth by Henri Poincar\u00e9 is that defining sets using the axiom schemas of specification and replacement, as well as the axiom of power set, introduces impredicativity, a type of circularity, into the definitions of mathematical objects. The scope of predicatively founded mathematics, while less than that of the commonly accepted Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel theory, is much greater than that of constructive mathematics, to the point that Solomon Feferman has said that \"all of scientifically applicable analysis can be developed [using predicative methods]\".\nLudwig Wittgenstein condemned set theory philosophically for its connotations of mathematical platonism. He wrote that \"set theory is wrong\", since it builds on the \"nonsense\" of fictitious symbolism, has \"pernicious idioms\", and that it is nonsensical to talk about \"all numbers\". Wittgenstein identified mathematics with algorithmic human deduction; the need for a secure foundation for mathematics seemed, to him, nonsensical. Moreover, since human effort is necessarily finite, Wittgenstein's philosophy required an ontological commitment to radical constructivism and finitism. Meta-mathematical statements \u2013 which, for Wittgenstein, included any statement quantifying over infinite domains, and thus almost all modern set theory \u2013 are not mathematics. Few modern philosophers have adopted Wittgenstein's views after a spectacular blunder in \"Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics\": Wittgenstein attempted to refute G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems after having only read the abstract. As reviewers Kreisel, Bernays, Dummett, and Goodstein all pointed out, many of his critiques did not apply to the paper in full. Only recently have philosophers such as Crispin Wright begun to rehabilitate Wittgenstein's arguments.\nCategory theorists have proposed topos theory as an alternative to traditional axiomatic set theory. Topos theory can interpret various alternatives to that theory, such as constructivism, finite set theory, and computable set theory. Topoi also give a natural setting for forcing and discussions of the independence of choice from ZF, as well as providing the framework for pointless topology and Stone spaces.\nAn active area of research is the univalent foundations and related to it homotopy type theory. Within homotopy type theory, a set may be regarded as a homotopy 0-type, with universal properties of sets arising from the inductive and recursive properties of higher inductive types. Principles such as the axiom of choice and the law of the excluded middle can be formulated in a manner corresponding to the classical formulation in set theory or perhaps in a spectrum of distinct ways unique to type theory. Some of these principles may be proven to be a consequence of other principles. The variety of formulations of these axiomatic principles allows for a detailed analysis of the formulations required in order to derive various mathematical results.\nMathematical education.\nAs set theory gained popularity as a foundation for modern mathematics, there has been support for the idea of introducing the basics of naive set theory early in mathematics education.\nIn the US in the 1960s, the New Math experiment aimed to teach basic set theory, among other abstract concepts, to primary school students but was met with much criticism. The math syllabus in European schools followed this trend and currently includes the subject at different levels in all grades. Venn diagrams are widely employed to explain basic set-theoretic relationships to primary school students (even though John Venn originally devised them as part of a procedure to assess the validity of inferences in term logic).\nSet theory is used to introduce students to logical operators (NOT, AND, OR), and semantic or rule description (technically intensional definition) of sets (e.g. \"months starting with the letter \"A\"\"), which may be useful when learning computer programming, since Boolean logic is used in various programming languages. Likewise, sets and other collection-like objects, such as multisets and lists, are common datatypes in computer science and programming.\nIn addition to that, certain sets are commonly used in mathematical teaching (such as the sets formula_24 of natural numbers, formula_25 of integers, formula_26 of real numbers, etc.). These are commonly used when defining a mathematical function as a relation from one set (the domain) to another set (the range).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27557", "revid": "40234724", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27557", "title": "Sabine Baring-Gould", "text": "English priest and scholar (1834\u20131924)\nSabine Baring-Gould (; 28 January 1834 \u2013 2 January 1924) of Lew Trenchard in Devon, England, was an Anglican priest, hagiographer, antiquarian, novelist, folk song collector and eclectic scholar. \nHe is remembered particularly as a writer of hymns, the best-known being \"Onward, Christian Soldiers\", and \"Now the Day Is Over\". He also translated the carols \"Gabriel's Message\", and \"Sing Lullaby\" from Basque to English.\nHis family home, the Jacobean manor house of Lew Trenchard, near Okehampton, Devon, has been preserved with the alterations he made and is a hotel.\nOrigins.\nSabine Baring-Gould was born in the parish of St Sidwell, Exeter, on 28 January 1834. He was the eldest son and heir of Edward Baring-Gould (1804\u20131872), lord of the manor of Lew Trenchard, a Justice of the Peace and Deputy Lieutenant of Devon, formerly a lieutenant in the Madras Light Cavalry (resigned 1830), by his first wife, Sophia Charlotte Bond, daughter of Admiral Francis Godolphin Bond, Royal Navy.\nSabine's paternal grandfather was William Baring (died 1846), JP, DL, who in 1795 had assumed by royal licence the additional surname and arms of Gould, in accordance with the terms of his inheritance of the manor of Lew Trenchard from his mother Margaret Gould, daughter and eventual heiress in her issue of William Drake Gould (1719\u20131767) of Lew Trenchard.\nThe Gould family was descended from a certain John Gold, a crusader present at the siege of Damietta in 1217 who for his valour, was granted in 1220 by Ralph de Vallibus, an estate at Seaborough in Somerset. Margaret Gould was the wife of Charles Baring (1742\u20131829) of Courtland in the parish of Exmouth, Devon, whose monument survives in Lympstone Church. He was the 4th son of Johann Baring (1697\u20131748), of Larkbeare House, Exeter, a German immigrant apprenticed to an Exeter wool merchant, and younger brother of Francis Baring (1740\u20131810), and John Baring (1730\u20131816) of Mount Radford, Exeter. The two brothers established the London merchant house of John and Francis Baring Company, which eventually became Barings Bank.\nSabine was named after the family of his grandmother, Diana Amelia Sabine (died 1858), wife of William Baring-Gould (died 1846), daughter of Joseph Sabine of Tewin, Hertfordshire and sister of the Arctic explorer General Sir Edward Sabine.\nCareer.\nBecause the family spent much of his childhood travelling round Europe, most of his education was by private tutors. He only spent about two years in formal schooling, first at King's College School in London (then located in Somerset House) and then, for a few months, at King's School, Warwick (now Warwick School). Here his time was ended by a bronchial disease of the kind that was to plague him throughout his long life. His father considered his ill-health as a good reason for another European tour.\nIn 1852, he was admitted to Cambridge University, earning the degrees of Bachelor of Arts in 1857, then Master of Arts (an upgrade, not a new qualification) in 1860 from Clare College, Cambridge. In September 1853 he informed Nathaniel Woodard of his desire to be ordained. He taught for only ten days at one of Woodard's boys' boarding schools in Sussex, Lancing College, but then moved to another, Hurstpierpoint College, where he stayed from 1857 to 1864. While there, he was responsible for several subjects, especially languages and science, and he also designed the ironwork of the bookcases in the boys' library, as well as painting the window jambs with scenes from the \"Canterbury Tales\" and \"The Faerie Queene\".\nHe took holy orders in 1864, and at age 30, became the curate at Horbury Bridge, West Riding of Yorkshire. It was while acting as a curate that he met Grace Taylor, the daughter of a mill hand, then aged fourteen. In the next few years they fell in love. His vicar, John Sharp, arranged for Grace to live for two years with relatives in York to learn middle-class manners. Gould later became a friend of George Bernard Shaw, and this story is thought to be part inspiration for Shaw's play \"Pygmalion\".\nBaring-Gould, meanwhile, relocated to become perpetual curate at Dalton, near Thirsk. He and Grace were married in 1868 at Wakefield.\nTheir marriage lasted until her death 48 years later, and the couple had 15 children, all but one of whom lived to adulthood. When he buried his wife in 1916, he had carved on her tombstone the Latin motto ('Half My Soul').\nBaring-Gould became the rector of East Mersea in Essex in 1871 and spent ten years there. In 1872, his father died and he inherited the family estates of Lewtrenchard in Devon, which included the gift of the living of Lew Trenchard parish. When the living became vacant in 1881, he was able to appoint himself to it, becoming parson as well as squire. He did a great deal of work restoring St Peter's Church, Lewtrenchard, and (from 1883 to 1914) thoroughly remodelled his home, Lew Trenchard Manor.\nFolk songs.\nBaring-Gould regarded his principal achievement to be the collection of folk songs that he made with the help of the ordinary people of Cornwall and Devon. His first book of songs, \"Songs and Ballads of the West\" (1889\u201391), was published in four parts between 1889 and 1891; the musical editor for this collection was Henry Fleetwood Sheppard, though some of the songs included were noted by Baring-Gould's other collaborator Frederick Bussell. \nBaring-Gould and Sheppard produced a second collection named \"A Garland of Country Songs\" during 1895. A new edition of \"Songs of the West\" was proposed for publication in 1905. Sheppard had died in 1901, and so the folk song collector Cecil Sharp was invited to undertake the musical editorship for the new edition. Sharp and Baring-Gould also collaborated on \"English Folk Songs for Schools\". This collection of 53 songs published in 1907 and used widely was used widely in British schools for the next 60 years.\nAlthough he had to modify the words of some songs which were too rude for the time, he left his original manuscripts for future students of folk song, thereby preserving many beautiful pieces of music and their lyrics which might otherwise have been lost.\nBaring-Gould gave the fair copies of the folk songs he collected, together with the notebooks he used for gathering information in the field, to Plymouth Public Library in 1914. They were deposited with the Plymouth and West Devon Record Office in 2006. These, together with the folk-song manuscripts from Baring-Gould's library discovered at Killerton in 1998, were published as a microfiche edition in 1998. In 2011 the complete collection of his folk-song manuscripts, including two notebooks not in the microfiche edition, were digitised and published online by the Devon Tradition Project managed by Wren Music in association with the English Folk Dance and Song Society as part of the \"Take Six\" project undertaken by the Vaughan Williams Memorial Library. It now forms part of the VWML's \"Full English\" website. Thirty boxes of additional manuscript material on other topics (the Killerton manuscripts) are kept in the Devon History Centre in Exeter.\nCecil Sharp dedicated his book \"English Folk Song: Some Conclusions\" (1907) to Baring-Gould.\nLiterature.\nBaring-Gould wrote many novels, including \"The Broom-Squire\" set in the Devil's Punch Bowl (1896), \"Mehalah: a story of the salt marshes\" (1880), \"Guavas the Tinner\" (1897), the 16-volume \"The Lives of the Saints\", and the biography of the eccentric poet-vicar of Morwenstow, Robert Stephen Hawker. He also published nearly 200 short stories in assorted magazines and periodicals. Many of these short stories were collected together and republished as anthologies, such as his \"\" (1904), \"Dartmoor Idyllys\" (1896), and \"In a Quiet Village\" (1900). His folkloric studies resulted in \"The Book of Were-Wolves\" (1865), one of the most frequently cited studies of lycanthropy. He habitually wrote while standing, and his standing desk can be seen in the manor.\nOne of his most enduringly popular works was \"Curious Myths of the Middle Ages,\" first published in two parts during 1866 and 1868, and republished in many other editions since then. \"Each of the book's twenty-four chapters deals with a particular medieval superstition and its variants and antecedents,\" writes critic Steven J. Mariconda. H. P. Lovecraft termed it \"that curious body of medieval lore which the late Mr. Baring-Gould so effectively assembled in book form.\"\nHe wrote much about the West Country: his works of this topic include:\nBaring-Gould served as president of the Royal Institution of Cornwall for ten years from 1897.\nDartmoor.\nBaring-Gould, along with his friend Robert Burnard, organised the first scientific archaeological excavations of hut-circles on Dartmoor at Grimspound during 1893. They then asked R. N. Worth, R. Hansford Worth, W. A. G. Gray and a Dr Prowse to assist them with further investigations. This resulted in the formation of the Committee of the Devonshire Association for the exploration of Dartmoor. Baring-Gould was the secretary and author of the first ten annual reports until 1905. The Dartmoor Exploration Committee performed many archaeological digs of prehistoric settlements on Dartmoor and systematically recorded and in some cases restored prehistoric sites. The current state of many prehistoric stone rows and stone circles on Dartmoor owes much to the work of Sabine Baring-Gould and Robert Burnard and the Dartmoor Exploration Committee. Baring-Gould was president of the Devonshire Association for the year 1896.\nHe wrote much about Dartmoor: his works of this topic include:\nFamily.\nHe married Grace Taylor on 25 May 1868 at Horbury. They had 15 children: Mary (born 1869), Margaret Daisy (born 1870, an artist who painted part of the screen in Lew Trenchard Church), Edward Sabine (born 1871), Beatrice Gracieuse (1874\u20131876), Veronica (born 1875), Julian (born 1877), William Drake (born 1878), Barbara (born 1880), Diana Amelia (born 1881), Felicitas (baptised 1883), Henry (born 1885), Joan (born 1887), Cecily Sophia (born 1889), John Hillary (born 1890), and Grace (born 1891).\nHis wife Grace died in April 1916, and he did not remarry; he died on 2 January 1924 at his home at Lew Trenchard and was buried next to his wife.\nHe wrote two volumes of memoirs: \"Early Reminiscences, 1834\u20131864\" (1923) and \"Further Reminiscences, 1864\u20131894\" (1925).\nOne grandson, William Stuart Baring-Gould, was a noted Sherlock Holmes scholar who wrote a fictional biography of the great detective\u2014in which, to make up for the lack of information about Holmes's early life, he based his account on the childhood of Sabine Baring-Gould. Sabine himself is a major character of Laurie R. King's Sherlock Holmes novel \"The Moor\", a Sherlockian pastiche. In this novel it is revealed that Sabine Baring-Gould is the godfather of Sherlock Holmes.\nRadio actor Robert Burnard was his grandson. Comedian Josh Widdicombe is a distant descendant.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27558", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27558", "title": "Salt (chemistry)", "text": "Chemical compound involving ionic bonding\nIn chemistry, a salt or ionic compound is a chemical compound consisting of an assembly of positively charged ions (cations) and negatively charged ions (anions), which results in a compound with no net electric charge. The constituent ions are held together by electrostatic forces termed \"ionic bonds\".\nThe component ions in a salt can be either inorganic, such as chloride (Cl\u2212), or organic, such as acetate (CH3COO\u2212). Each ion can be either monatomic, such as sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl\u2212) in sodium chloride, or polyatomic, such as ammonium (NH4+) and carbonate (CO32\u2212) ions in ammonium carbonate. Salts containing basic ions hydroxide (OH\u2212) or oxide (O2\u2212) are classified as bases, such as sodium hydroxide and potassium oxide.\nIndividual ions within a salt usually have multiple near neighbours, so they are not considered to be part of molecules, but instead part of a continuous three-dimensional network. Salts usually form crystalline structures when solid.\nSalts composed of small ions typically have high melting and boiling points, and are hard and brittle. As solids they are almost always electrically insulating, but when melted or dissolved they become highly conductive, because the ions become mobile. Some salts have large cations, large anions, or both. In terms of their properties, such species often are more similar to organic compounds.\nHistory of discovery.\nIn 1913 the structure of sodium chloride was determined by William Henry Bragg and his son William Lawrence Bragg. This revealed that there were six equidistant nearest neighbours for each atom, demonstrating that the constituents were not arranged in molecules or finite aggregates, but instead as a network with long-range crystalline order. Many other inorganic compounds were also found to have similar structural features. These compounds were soon described as being constituted of ions rather than neutral atoms, but proof of this hypothesis was not found until the mid-1920s, when X-ray reflection experiments (which detect the density of electrons), were performed.\nPrincipal contributors to the development of a theoretical treatment of ionic crystal structures were Max Born, Fritz Haber, Alfred Land\u00e9, Erwin Madelung, Paul Peter Ewald, and Kazimierz Fajans. Born predicted crystal energies based on the assumption of ionic constituents, which showed good correspondence to thermochemical measurements, further supporting the assumption.\nFormation.\nMany metals such as the alkali metals react directly with the electronegative halogens gases to form salts.\nSolid salts can form upon evaporation of solvent from their solutions once the solution is supersaturated and the solid compound nucleates. This process occurs widely in nature and is the means of formation of the evaporite minerals.\nInsoluble salts can be precipitated by mixing two solutions, one containing the cation and one containing the anion. Because all solutions are electrically neutral, the two solutions mixed must also contain counterions of the opposite charges. To ensure that these do not contaminate the precipitated salt, it is important to ensure they do not also precipitate. If the two solutions have hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions as the counterions, they will react with one another in what is called an acid\u2013base reaction or a neutralization reaction to form water. Alternately the counterions can be chosen to ensure that even when combined into a single solution they will remain soluble as spectator ions.\nIf the solvent is water in either the evaporation or precipitation method of formation, in many cases the ionic crystal formed also includes water of crystallization, so the product is known as a hydrate, and can have very different chemical properties compared to the anhydrous material.\nMolten salts will solidify on cooling to below their freezing point. This is sometimes used for the solid-state synthesis of complex salts from solid reactants, which are first melted together. In other cases, the solid reactants do not need to be melted, but instead can react through a solid-state reaction route. In this method, the reactants are repeatedly finely ground into a paste and then heated to a temperature where the ions in neighboring reactants can diffuse together during the time the reactant mixture remains in the oven. Other synthetic routes use a solid precursor with the correct stoichiometric ratio of non-volatile ions, which is heated to drive off other species.\nIn some reactions between highly reactive metals (usually from Group 1 or Group 2) and highly electronegative halogen gases, or water, the atoms can be ionized by electron transfer, a process thermodynamically understood using the Born\u2013Haber cycle.\nSalts can be formed through a variety of reaction types, such as those between:\nBonding.\nIons in salts are primarily held together by the electrostatic forces between the charge distribution of these bodies, and in particular, the ionic bond resulting from the long-ranged Coulomb attraction between the net negative charge of the anions and net positive charge of the cations. There is also a small additional attractive force from van der Waals interactions which contributes only around 1\u20132% of the cohesive energy for small ions. When a pair of ions comes close enough for their outer electron shells (most simple ions have closed shells) to overlap, a short-ranged repulsive force occurs, due to the Pauli exclusion principle. The balance between these forces leads to a potential energy well with minimum energy when the nuclei are separated by a specific equilibrium distance.\nIf the electronic structure of the two interacting bodies is affected by the presence of one another, covalent interactions (non-ionic) also contribute to the overall energy of the compound formed. Salts are rarely purely ionic, i.e. held together only by electrostatic forces. The bonds between even the most electronegative/electropositive pairs such as those in caesium fluoride exhibit a small degree of covalency. Conversely, covalent bonds between unlike atoms often exhibit some charge separation and can be considered to have a partial ionic character. The circumstances under which a compound will have ionic or covalent character can typically be understood using Fajans' rules, which use only charges and the sizes of each ion. According to these rules, compounds with the most ionic character will have large positive ions with a low charge, bonded to a small negative ion with a high charge. More generally HSAB theory can be applied, whereby the compounds with the most ionic character are those consisting of hard acids and hard bases: small, highly charged ions with a high difference in electronegativities between the anion and cation. This difference in electronegativities means that the charge separation, and resulting dipole moment, is maintained even when the ions are in contact (the excess electrons on the anions are not transferred or polarized to neutralize the cations).\nAlthough chemists classify idealized bond types as being ionic or covalent, the existence of additional types such as hydrogen bonds and metallic bonds, for example, has led some philosophers of science to suggest that alternative approaches to understanding bonding are required. This could be by applying quantum mechanics to calculate binding energies.\nStructure.\nThe lattice energy is the summation of the interaction of all sites with all other sites. For unpolarizable spherical ions, only the charges and distances are required to determine the electrostatic interaction energy. For any particular ideal crystal structure, all distances are geometrically related to the smallest internuclear distance. So for each possible crystal structure, the total electrostatic energy can be related to the electrostatic energy of unit charges at the nearest neighboring distance by a multiplicative constant called the Madelung constant that can be efficiently computed using an Ewald sum. When a reasonable form is assumed for the additional repulsive energy, the total lattice energy can be modelled using the Born\u2013Land\u00e9 equation, the Born\u2013Mayer equation, or in the absence of structural information, the Kapustinskii equation.\nUsing an even simpler approximation of the ions as impenetrable hard spheres, the arrangement of anions in these systems are often related to close-packed arrangements of spheres, with the cations occupying tetrahedral or octahedral interstices. Depending on the stoichiometry of the salt, and the coordination (principally determined by the radius ratio) of cations and anions, a variety of structures are commonly observed, and theoretically rationalized by Pauling's rules.\nIn some cases, the anions take on a simple cubic packing and the resulting common structures observed are:\nSome ionic liquids, particularly with mixtures of anions or cations, can be cooled rapidly enough that there is not enough time for crystal nucleation to occur, so an ionic glass is formed (with no long-range order).\nDefects.\nWithin any crystal, there will usually be some defects. To maintain electroneutrality of the crystals, defects that involve loss of a cation will be associated with loss of an anion, i.e. these defects come in pairs. Frenkel defects consist of a cation vacancy paired with a cation interstitial and can be generated anywhere in the bulk of the crystal, occurring most commonly in compounds with a low coordination number and cations that are much smaller than the anions. Schottky defects consist of one vacancy of each type, and are generated at the surfaces of a crystal, occurring most commonly in compounds with a high coordination number and when the anions and cations are of similar size. If the cations have multiple possible oxidation states, then it is possible for cation vacancies to compensate for electron deficiencies on cation sites with higher oxidation numbers, resulting in a non-stoichiometric compound. Another non-stoichiometric possibility is the formation of an F-center, a free electron occupying an anion vacancy. When the compound has three or more ionic components, even more defect types are possible. All of these point defects can be generated via thermal vibrations and have an equilibrium concentration. Because they are energetically costly but entropically beneficial, they occur in greater concentration at higher temperatures. Once generated, these pairs of defects can diffuse mostly independently of one another, by hopping between lattice sites. This defect mobility is the source of most transport phenomena within an ionic crystal, including diffusion and solid state ionic conductivity. When vacancies collide with interstitials (Frenkel), they can recombine and annihilate one another. Similarly, vacancies are removed when they reach the surface of the crystal (Schottky). Defects in the crystal structure generally expand the lattice parameters, reducing the overall density of the crystal. Defects also result in ions in distinctly different local environments, which causes them to experience a different crystal-field symmetry, especially in the case of different cations exchanging lattice sites. This results in a different splitting of d-electron orbitals, so that the optical absorption (and hence colour) can change with defect concentration.\nProperties.\nAcidity/basicity.\nIonic compounds containing hydrogen ions (H+) are classified as acids, and those containing electropositive cations and basic anions ions hydroxide (OH\u2212) or oxide (O2\u2212) are classified as bases. Other ionic compounds are known as salts and can be formed by acid\u2013base reactions. Salts that produce hydroxide ions when dissolved in water are called alkali salts, and salts that produce hydrogen ions when dissolved in water are called acid salts, e.g. sodium hydrogen selenite (). If the compound is the result of a reaction between a strong acid and a weak base, the result is an acid salt. If it is the result of a reaction between a strong base and a weak acid, the result is a base salt. If it is the result of a reaction between a strong acid and a strong base, the result is a neutral salt. Weak acids reacted with weak bases can produce ionic compounds with both the conjugate base ion and conjugate acid ion, such as ammonium acetate.\nSome ions are classed as amphoteric, being able to react with either an acid or a base. This is also true of some compounds with ionic character, typically oxides or hydroxides of less-electropositive metals (so the compound also has significant covalent character), such as zinc oxide, aluminium hydroxide, aluminium oxide and lead(II) oxide.\nSolubility.\nWhen simple salts dissolve, they dissociate into individual ions, which are solvated and dispersed throughout the resulting solution. Salts do not exist in solution. In contrast, molecular compounds, which includes most organic compounds, remain intact in solution.\nThe solubility of salts is highest in polar solvents (such as water) or ionic liquids, but tends to be low in nonpolar solvents (such as petrol/gasoline). This contrast is principally because the resulting ion\u2013dipole interactions are significantly stronger than ion-induced dipole interactions, so the heat of solution is higher. When the oppositely charged ions in the solid ionic lattice are surrounded by the opposite pole of a polar molecule, the solid ions are pulled out of the lattice and into the liquid. If the solvation energy exceeds the lattice energy, the negative net enthalpy change of solution provides a thermodynamic drive to remove ions from their positions in the crystal and dissolve in the liquid. In addition, the entropy change of solution is usually positive for most solid solutes like salts, which means that their solubility increases when the temperature increases. There are some unusual salts such as cerium(III) sulfate, where this entropy change is negative, due to extra order induced in the water upon solution, and the solubility decreases with temperature.\nThe lattice energy, the cohesive forces between these ions within a solid, determines the solubility. The solubility is dependent on how well each ion interacts with the solvent, so certain patterns become apparent. For example, salts of sodium, potassium and ammonium are usually soluble in water. Notable exceptions include ammonium hexachloroplatinate and potassium cobaltinitrite. Most nitrates and many sulfates are water-soluble. Exceptions include barium sulfate, calcium sulfate (sparingly soluble), and lead(II) sulfate, where the 2+/2\u2212 pairing leads to high lattice energies. For similar reasons, most metal carbonates are not soluble in water. Some soluble carbonate salts are: sodium carbonate, potassium carbonate and ammonium carbonate.\nStrength.\nStrong salts or strong electrolyte salts are chemical salts composed of strong electrolytes. These salts dissociate completely or almost completely in water. They are generally odorless and nonvolatile.\nStrong salts start with Na__, K__, NH4__, or they end with __NO3, __ClO4, or __CH3COO. Most group 1 and 2 metals form strong salts. Strong salts are especially useful when creating conductive compounds as their constituent ions allow for greater conductivity.\nWeak salts or weak electrolyte salts are composed of weak electrolytes. These salts do not dissociate well in water. They are generally more volatile than strong salts. They may be similar in odor to the acid or base they are derived from. For example, sodium acetate, CH3COONa, smells similar to acetic acid CH3COOH.\nElectrical conductivity.\nSalts are characteristically insulators. Although they contain charged atoms or clusters, these materials do not typically conduct electricity to any significant extent when the substance is solid. In order to conduct, the charged particles must be mobile rather than stationary in a crystal lattice. This is achieved to some degree at high temperatures when the defect concentration increases the ionic mobility and solid state ionic conductivity is observed. When the salts are dissolved in a liquid or are melted into a liquid, they can conduct electricity because the ions become completely mobile. For this reason, molten salts and solutions containing dissolved salts (e.g., sodium chloride in water) can be used as electrolytes. This conductivity gain upon dissolving or melting is sometimes used as a defining characteristic of salts.\nIn some unusual salts: fast-ion conductors, and ionic glasses, one or more of the ionic components has a significant mobility, allowing conductivity even while the material as a whole remains solid. This is often highly temperature dependent, and may be the result of either a phase change or a high defect concentration. These materials are used in all solid-state supercapacitors, batteries, and fuel cells, and in various kinds of chemical sensors.\nMelting and boiling points.\nElectrostatic forces between particles are strongest when the charges are high, and the distance between the nuclei of the ions is small. In such cases, the compounds generally have very high melting and boiling points and a low vapour pressure. Trends in melting points can be even better explained when the structure and ionic size ratio is taken into account. Above their melting point, salts melt and become molten salts (although some salts such as aluminium chloride and iron(III) chloride show molecule-like structures in the liquid phase). Inorganic compounds with simple ions typically have small ions, and thus have high melting points, so are solids at room temperature. Some substances with larger ions, however, have a melting point below or near room temperature (often defined as up to 100\u00a0\u00b0C), and are termed ionic liquids. Ions in ionic liquids often have uneven charge distributions, or bulky substituents like hydrocarbon chains, which also play a role in determining the strength of the interactions and propensity to melt.\nEven when the local structure and bonding of an ionic solid is disrupted sufficiently to melt it, there are still strong long-range electrostatic forces of attraction holding the liquid together and preventing ions boiling to form a gas phase. This means that even room temperature ionic liquids have low vapour pressures, and require substantially higher temperatures to boil. Boiling points exhibit similar trends to melting points in terms of the size of ions and strength of other interactions. When vapourized, the ions are still not freed of one another. For example, in the vapour phase sodium chloride exists as diatomic \"molecules\".\nBrittleness.\nMost salts are very brittle. Once they reach the limit of their strength, they cannot deform malleably, because the strict alignment of positive and negative ions must be maintained. Instead the material undergoes fracture via cleavage. As the temperature is elevated (usually close to the melting point) a ductile\u2013brittle transition occurs, and plastic flow becomes possible by the motion of dislocations.\nCompressibility.\nThe compressibility of a salt is strongly determined by its structure, and in particular the coordination number. For example, halides with the caesium chloride structure (coordination number 8) are less compressible than those with the sodium chloride structure (coordination number 6), and less again than those with a coordination number of 4.\nColour.\nThe colour of a salt is often different from the colour of an aqueous solution containing the constituent ions, or the hydrated form of the same compound.\nThe anions in compounds with bonds with the most ionic character tend to be colorless (with an absorption band in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum). In compounds with less ionic character, their color deepens through yellow, orange, red, and black (as the absorption band shifts to longer wavelengths into the visible spectrum).\nThe absorption band of simple cations shifts toward a shorter wavelength when they are involved in more covalent interactions. This occurs during hydration of metal ions, so colorless anhydrous salts with an anion absorbing in the infrared can become colorful in solution.\nSalts exist in many different colors, which arise either from their constituent anions, cations or solvates. For example:\nSome minerals are salts, some of which are soluble in water. Similarly, inorganic pigments tend not to be salts, because insolubility is required for fastness. Some organic dyes are salts, but they are virtually insoluble in water.\nTaste.\nSalts can elicit all five basic tastes, e.g., salty (sodium chloride), sweet (lead diacetate, which will cause lead poisoning if ingested), sour (potassium bitartrate), bitter (magnesium sulfate), and umami or savory (monosodium glutamate).\nOdor.\nSalts of strong acids and strong bases (\"strong salts\") are non-volatile and often odorless, whereas salts of either weak acids or weak bases (\"weak salts\") may smell like the conjugate acid (e.g., acetates like acetic acid (vinegar) and cyanides like hydrogen cyanide (almonds)) or the conjugate base (e.g., ammonium salts like ammonia) of the component ions. That slow, partial decomposition is usually accelerated by the presence of water, since hydrolysis is the other half of the reversible reaction equation of formation of weak salts.\nUses.\nSalts have long had a wide variety of uses and applications. Many minerals are ionic. Humans have processed common salt (sodium chloride) for over 8000 years, using it first as a food seasoning and preservative, and now also in manufacturing, agriculture, water conditioning, for de-icing roads, and many other uses. Many salts are so widely used in society that they go by common names unrelated to their chemical identity. Examples of this include borax, calomel, milk of magnesia, muriatic acid, oil of vitriol, saltpeter, and slaked lime.\nSoluble salts can easily be dissolved to provide electrolyte solutions. This is a simple way to control the concentration and ionic strength. The concentration of solutes affects many colligative properties, including increasing the osmotic pressure, and causing freezing-point depression and boiling-point elevation. Because the solutes are charged ions they also increase the electrical conductivity of the solution. The increased ionic strength reduces the thickness of the electrical double layer around colloidal particles, and therefore the stability of emulsions and suspensions.\nThe chemical identity of the ions added is also important in many uses. For example, fluoride containing compounds are dissolved to supply fluoride ions for water fluoridation.\nSolid salts have long been used as paint pigments, and are resistant to organic solvents, but are sensitive to acidity or basicity. Since 1801 pyrotechnicians have described and widely used metal-containing salts as sources of colour in fireworks. Under intense heat, the electrons in the metal ions or small molecules can be excited. These electrons later return to lower energy states, and release light with a colour spectrum characteristic of the species present.\nIn chemical synthesis, salts are often used as precursors for high-temperature solid-state synthesis.\nMany metals are geologically most abundant as salts within ores. To obtain the elemental materials, these ores are processed by smelting or electrolysis, in which redox reactions occur (often with a reducing agent such as carbon) such that the metal ions gain electrons to become neutral atoms.\nNomenclature.\nAccording to the nomenclature recommended by IUPAC, salts are named according to their composition, not their structure. In the most simple case of a binary salt with no possible ambiguity about the charges and thus the stoichiometry, the common name is written using two words. The name of the cation (the unmodified element name for monatomic cations) comes first, followed by the name of the anion. For example, MgCl2 is named magnesium chloride, and Na2SO4 is named sodium sulfate (SO42\u2212, sulfate, is an example of a polyatomic ion). To obtain the empirical formula from these names, the stoichiometry can be deduced from the charges on the ions, and the requirement of overall charge neutrality.\nIf there are multiple different cations and/or anions, multiplicative prefixes (\"di-\", \"tri-\", \"tetra-\",\u00a0...) are often required to indicate the relative compositions, and cations then anions are listed in alphabetical order. For example, KMgCl3 is named magnesium potassium trichloride to distinguish it from K2MgCl4, magnesium dipotassium tetrachloride (note that in both the empirical formula and the written name, the cations appear in alphabetical order, but the order varies between them because the symbol for potassium is K). When one of the ions already has a multiplicative prefix within its name, the alternate multiplicative prefixes (\"bis-\", \"tris-\", \"tetrakis-\",\u00a0...) are used. For example, Ba(BrF4)2 is named barium bis(tetrafluoridobromate).\nCompounds containing one or more elements which can exist in a variety of charge/oxidation states will have a stoichiometry that depends on which oxidation states are present, to ensure overall neutrality. This can be indicated in the name by specifying either the oxidation state of the elements present, or the charge on the ions. Because of the risk of ambiguity in allocating oxidation states, IUPAC prefers direct indication of the ionic charge numbers. These are written as an arabic integer followed by the sign (...\u00a0, 2\u2212, 1\u2212, 1+, 2+,\u00a0...) in parentheses directly after the name of the cation (without a space separating them). For example, FeSO4 is named iron(2+) sulfate (with the 2+ charge on the Fe2+ ions balancing the 2\u2212 charge on the sulfate ion), whereas Fe2(SO4)3 is named iron(3+) sulfate (because the two iron ions in each formula unit each have a charge of 3+, to balance the 2\u2212 on each of the three sulfate ions). Stock nomenclature, still in common use, writes the oxidation number in Roman numerals (...\u00a0, \u2212II, \u2212I, 0, I, II,\u00a0...). So the examples given above would be named iron(II) sulfate and iron(III) sulfate respectively. For simple ions the ionic charge and the oxidation number are identical, but for polyatomic ions they often differ. For example, the uranyl(2+) ion, UO22+, has uranium in an oxidation state of +6, so would be called a dioxouranium(VI) ion in Stock nomenclature. An even older naming system for metal cations, also still widely used, appended the suffixes \"-ous\" and \"-ic\" to the Latin root of the name, to give special names for the low and high oxidation states. For example, this scheme uses \"ferrous\" and \"ferric\", for iron(II) and iron(III) respectively, so the examples given above were classically named ferrous sulfate and ferric sulfate.\nCommon salt-forming cations include:\nCommon salt-forming anions (parent acids in parentheses where available) include:\nSalts with varying number of hydrogen atoms replaced by cations as compared to their parent acid can be referred to as \"monobasic\", \"dibasic\", or \"tribasic\", identifying that one, two, or three hydrogen atoms have been replaced; \"polybasic\" salts refer to those with more than one hydrogen atom replaced. Examples include:\nNon-salt.\nZwitterion.\nZwitterions contain an anionic and a cationic centre in the same molecule, but are not considered salts. Examples of zwitterions are amino acids, many metabolites, peptides, and proteins.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27559", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27559", "title": "Sir Arthur Conan Doyle", "text": ""}
{"id": "27560", "revid": "43274729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27560", "title": "Solar deity", "text": "Sky deity who represents the Sun\nA solar deity or sun deity is a deity who represents the Sun or an aspect thereof. Such deities are usually associated with power and strength. Solar deities and Sun worship can be found throughout most of recorded history in various forms. The English word \"sun\" derives from Proto-Germanic *\"sunn\u01ed\". The Sun is sometimes referred to by its Latin name \"Sol\" or by its Greek name \"Helios\".\nOverview.\nPredynasty Egyptian beliefs attribute Atum as the Sun god and Horus as a god of the sky and Sun. As the Old Kingdom theocracy gained influence, early beliefs were incorporated into the expanding popularity of Ra and the Osiris-Horus mythology. Atum became Ra-Atum, the rays of the setting Sun. Osiris became the divine heir to Atum's power on Earth and passed his divine authority to his son, Horus. Other early Egyptian myths imply that the Sun is incorporated with the lioness Sekhmet at night and is reflected in her eyes; or that the Sun is found within the cow Hathor during the night and reborn each morning as her son (\"bull\").\nMesopotamian Shamash played an important role during the Bronze Age, and \"my Sun\" was eventually used to address royalty. Similarly, South American cultures have a tradition of Sun worship as with the Incan Inti.\nIn Germanic mythology, the solar deity is \"Sol;\" in Vedic, Surya; and in Greek, Helios (occasionally referred to as Titan) and (sometimes) as Apollo. In Proto-Indo-European mythology the sun appears to be a multilayered figure manifested as a deity but also perceived as the eye of the sky father Dyeus.\nSolar myth.\nThree theories exercised great influence on nineteenth and early twentieth century mythography. The theories were the \"solar mythology\" of Alvin Boyd Kuhn and Max M\u00fcller, the tree worship of Mannhardt, and the totemism of J. F. McLennan.\nM\u00fcller's \"solar mythology\" was born from the study of Indo-European languages. Of them, M\u00fcller believed Archaic Sanskrit was the closest to the language spoken by the Aryans. Using the Sanskrit names for deities as a base, he applied Grimm's law to names for similar deities from different Indo-European groups to compare their etymological relationships to one another. In the comparison, M\u00fcller saw the similarities between the names and used these etymological similarities to explain the similarities between their roles as deities. Through the study, M\u00fcller concluded that the Sun having many different names led to the creation of multiple solar deities and their mythologies that were passed down from one group to another.\nR. F. Littledale criticized the Sun myth theory, pointing out that by his own principles, Max M\u00fcller was himself only a solar myth. Alfred Lyall delivered another attack on the same theory's assumption that tribal gods and heroes, such as those of Homer, were only reflections of the Sun myth by proving that the gods of certain Rajput clans were actual warriors who founded the clans a few centuries ago, and were the ancestors of the present chieftains.\nSolar vessels and chariots.\nSolar boats.\nThe Sun was sometimes envisioned as traveling through the sky in a boat. A prominent example is the solar barque used by Ra in ancient Egyptian mythology. The Neolithic concept of a \"solar barge\" (also \"solar bark\", \"solar barque\", \"solar boat\" and \"sun boat\", a mythological representation of the Sun riding in a boat) is found in the later myths of ancient Egypt, with Ra and Horus. Several Egyptian kings were buried with ships that may have been intended to symbolize the solar barque, including the Khufu ship that was buried at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Giza.\nSolar boats and similar vessels also appear in Indo-European mythologies, such as a 'hundred-oared ship' of Surya in the Rig Veda, the golden boat of Saul\u0117 in Baltic mythology, and the golden bowl of Helios in Greek mythology. Numerous depictions of solar boats are known from the Bronze Age in Europe. Possible solar boat depictions have also been identified in Neolithic petroglyphs from the Megalithic culture in western Europe, and in Mesolithic petroglyphs from northern Europe.\nExamples of solar vessels include:\nSolar chariots.\nThe concept of the \"solar chariot\" is younger than that of the solar barge and is typically Indo-European, corresponding with the Indo-European expansion after the invention of the chariot in the 2nd millennium BC. The reconstruction of the Proto-Indo-European religion features a \"solar chariot\" or \"sun chariot\" with which the Sun traverses the sky.\nChariots were introduced to Egypt in the Hyksos period, and were seen as solar vehicles associated with the sun god in the subsequent New Kingdom period. A gold solar boat model from the tomb of Queen Ahhotep, dating from the beginning of the New Kingdom (c.\u20091550 BC), was mounted on four-spoked chariot wheels. Similarities have been noted with the Trundholm Sun Chariot from Denmark, dating from c.\u20091500\u20131400 BC, which was also mounted on four-spoked wheels.\nExamples of solar chariots include:\nIn Chinese culture, the sun chariot is associated with the passage of time. For instance, in the poem \"Suffering from the Shortness of Days\", Li He of the Tang dynasty is hostile towards the legendary dragons that drew the sun chariot as a vehicle for the continuous progress of time. The following is an excerpt from the poem:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGender.\nSolar deities are often thought of as male (and lunar deities as being female) but the opposite has also been the case. In Germanic mythology, the Sun is female, and the Moon is male. Other European cultures that have sun goddesses include the Lithuanians (Saul\u0117) and Latvians (Saule), the Finns (P\u00e4iv\u00e4t\u00e4r, Beiwe) and the related Hungarians. Sun goddesses are found around the world in Australia (Bila, Wala); in Indian tribal religions (Bisal-Mariamma, Bomong, 'Ka Sgni) and Sri Lanka (Pattini); among the Hittites (Wurusemu), Berbers (Tafukt), Egyptians (Hathor, Sekhmet), and Canaanites (Shapash); in the Canary Islands (Chaxiraxi, Magec); in Native America, among the Cherokee (Unelanuhi), Natchez (O\u00fca Chill/Uwahci\u2219\u0142), Inuit (Siqiniq), and Miwok (He'-koo-l\u0101s); and in Asia among the Japanese (Amaterasu).\nThe cobra (of Pharaoh, son of Ra), the lioness (daughter of Ra), and the cow (daughter of Ra), are the dominant symbols of the most ancient Egyptian deities. They were female and carried their relationship to the sun atop their heads, and their cults remained active throughout the history of the culture. Later another sun god (Aten) was established in the eighteenth dynasty on top of the other solar deities, before the \"aberration\" was stamped out and the old pantheon re-established. When male deities became associated with the sun in that culture, they began as the offspring of a mother (except Ra, King of the Gods who gave birth to himself).\nAfrica.\nAncient Egypt.\nSun worship was prevalent in ancient Egyptian religion. From at least the 4th Dynasty of ancient Egypt, the Sun was worshiped as the deity Ra (meaning simply 'the sun'), and portrayed as a falcon-headed god surmounted by the solar disk, and surrounded by a serpent. Ra supposedly gave warmth to the living body, symbolized as an ankh: a \"\u2625\" shaped amulet with a looped upper half. The ankh, it was believed, was surrendered with death, but could be preserved in the corpse with appropriate mummification and funerary rites. The supremacy of Ra in the Egyptian pantheon was at its highest with the Fifth Dynasty, when open-air solar temples became common.\nIn the Middle Kingdom of Egypt, Ra lost some of his preeminence to Osiris, lord of the west, and judge of the dead. In the New Empire period, the Sun became identified with the dung beetle, whose spherical ball of dung was identified with the Sun. In the form of the sun disc Aten, the Sun had a brief resurgence during the Amarna Period when it again became the preeminent, if not only, divinity for the pharaoh, Akhenaten.\nThe Sun's movement across the sky represents a struggle between the pharaoh's soul and an avatar of Osiris. Ra travels across the sky in his solar-boat; at dawn he drives away the god of chaos, Apep. The \"solarisation\" of several local gods (Khnum-Ra, Min-Ra, Amun-Ra) reached its peak in the period of the Fifth Dynasty.\nRituals to the god Amun, who became identified with the sun god Ra, were often carried out on the top of temple pylons. A pylon mirrored the hieroglyph for 'horizon' or \"akhet\", which was a depiction of two hills \"between which the sun rose and set\", associated with recreation and rebirth. On the first pylon of the temple of Isis at Philae, the pharaoh is shown slaying his enemies in the presence of Isis, Horus, and Hathor.\nIn the Eighteenth Dynasty, the earliest-known monotheistic head of state, Akhenaten, changed the polytheistic religion of Egypt to a monotheistic one, Atenism. All other deities were replaced by the Aten, including Amun-Ra, the reigning sun god of Akhenaten's own region. Unlike other deities, Aten did not have multiple forms. His only image was a disk\u2014a symbol of the Sun.\nSoon after Akhenaten's death, worship of the traditional deities was reestablished by the religious leaders (Ay the High-Priest of Amun-Ra, mentor of Tutankhaten/Tutankhamen) who had adopted the Aten during the reign of Akhenaten.\nKongo.\nIn Kongo religion, Nzambi Mpungu is the Sky Father and god of the Sun, while that his female counterpart, Nzambici, is Sky Mother and the god of the Moon and Earth. The Sun is very significant to Bakongo people, who believe that the position of the sun marks the different seasons of a Kongo person's life as they transition between the four moments of life: conception (\"musoni\"), birth (\"kala\"), maturity (\"tukula\"), and death (\"luvemba\"). The Kongo cosmogram, a sacred symbol in Bakongo culture, depicts these moments of the sun.\nKalenjin.\nKalenjin mythology was based upon the belief in a supreme god, Asis or Cheptalel, represented in the form of the sun (asista), although the sun itself was not considered to be God. He lives in the sky and is supreme, omnipotent, and the guarantor of right. Among the Northern sections of the Kalenjin he is also commonly referred to as Tororut. Beneath Asis is Elat, who controls thunder and lightning.\nAmericas.\nAztec mythology.\nIn Aztec mythology, \"Tonatiuh\" (, \"Movement of the Sun\") was the sun god. The Aztec people considered him the leader of \"Tollan\" (heaven). He was also known as the fifth sun, because the Aztecs believed that he was the sun that took over when the fourth sun was expelled from the sky. According to their cosmology, each sun was a god with its own cosmic era. According to the Aztecs, they were still in Tonatiuh's era. According to the Aztec creation myth, the god demanded human sacrifice as tribute and without it would refuse to move through the sky. The Aztecs were fascinated by the Sun and carefully observed it, and had a solar calendar similar to that of the Maya. Many of today's remaining Aztec monuments have structures aligned with the Sun.\nIn the Aztec calendar, Tonatiuh is the lord of the thirteen days from 1 Death to 13 Flint. The preceding thirteen days are ruled over by Chalchiuhtlicue, and the following thirteen by Tlaloc.\nIncan mythology.\nInti is the ancient Incan sun god. He is revered as the national patron of the Inca state. Although most consider Inti the sun god, he is more appropriately viewed as a cluster of solar aspects, since the Inca divided his identity according to the stages of the sun. Inti is represented as a golden disk with rays and a human face.\nThe Inca dedicated many ceremonies to the Sun in order to ensure the Sapa Inca's welfare. The Incas would set aside large quantities of natural and human resources throughout the empire for Inti. Each conquered province was supposed to dedicate a third of their lands and herds to Inti as mandated by the Inca. Each major province would also have a Sun Temple in which male and female priests would serve.\nAsia.\nArmenian mythology.\nIn Armenian mythology and in the vicinity of Carahunge, the ancient site of interest in the field of archaeoastronomy, people worshiped a powerful deity or intelligence called Ara, embodied as the sun (Ar or Arev). The ancient Armenians called themselves \"children of the sun\". (Russian and Armenian archaeoastronomers have suggested that at Carahunge seventeen of the stones still standing were associated with observations of sunrise or sunset at the solstices and equinoxes.)\nChinese mythology.\nIn Chinese mythology (cosmology), there were originally ten suns in the sky, who were all brothers. They were supposed to emerge one at a time as commanded by the Jade Emperor. They were all very young and loved to fool around. Once they decided to all go into the sky to play, all at once. This made the world too hot for anything to grow. A hero named Hou Yi, honored to this day, shot down nine of them with a bow and arrow to save the people of the Earth.\nIn another myth, a solar eclipse was said to be caused by a magical dog or dragon biting off a piece of the Sun. The referenced event is said to have occurred around 2136 BC; two royal astronomers, Ho and Hi, were executed for failing to predict the eclipse. There was a tradition in China to make lots of loud celebratory sounds during a solar eclipse to scare the sacred beast away.\nThe Deity of the Sun in Chinese mythology is Ri Gong Tai Yang Xing Jun (Tai Yang Gong/Grandfather Sun) or Star Lord of the Solar Palace, Lord of the Sun. In some mythologies, Tai Yang Xing Jun is believed to be Hou Yi.\nTai Yang Xing Jun is usually depicted with the Star Lord of the Lunar Palace, Lord of the Moon, Yue Gong Tai Yin Xing Jun (Tai Yin Niang Niang/Lady Tai Yin). Worship of the moon goddess Chang'e and her festivals are very popular among followers of Chinese folk religion and Taoism. The goddess and her holy days are ingrained in Chinese popular culture.\nPre-Islamic Arabia.\nThe concept of the sun as a deity in Pre-Islamic Arabia, was abolished only under Muhammad. The Arabian solar deity appears to have been a goddess, Shams/Shamsun, most likely related to the Canaanite Shapash and broader middle-eastern Shamash. She was the patron goddess of Himyar, and possibly exalted by the Sabaeans.\nYazidism.\nIn Yazidism, the angel \u015e\u00ea\u015fims is venerated as the Xudan or Lord of sun and light. He is also linked with fire, which is his terrestrial counterpart, and oaths, which are sworn by the doorway of his shrine. Annually, during the Feast of the Assembly, a ceremonial bull sacrifice is performed in front of his shrine at Lalish. Yazidi religious texts refer to the light of the sun as a manifestation of God's light, therefore, Yazidis direct their faces in the sun's direction while praying. There are daily Yazidi prayers that are recited during the daytime, divided into three main phases of the day, the morning prayers include \"Dua \u015eifaq\u00ea\" (the dawn prayer), \"Dua Sib\u00ea\" (the morning prayer), \"Duaya Rojhelat\u00ee\" (the sunrise prayer). For the noon there is \"Dua N\u00eevro\" (the noon prayer) and at evening there is the \"Duaya H\u00eavar\u00ee\" (the evening prayer).\nEurope.\nAlbanian paganism.\nThe Sun () holds the primary role in Albanian pagan customs, beliefs, rituals, myths, and legends. Albanian major traditional festivities and calendar rites are based on the Sun, worshiped as the god of light, sky and weather, giver of life, health and energy, and all-seeing eye. In Albanian tradition the fire \u2013 \"zjarri\", evidently also called with the theonym Enji \u2013 worship and rituals are particularly related to the cult of the Sun. Ritual calendar fires or bonfires are traditionally kindled before sunrise in order to give strength to the Sun and to ward off evil. Many rituals are practiced before and during sunrise, honoring this moment of the day as it is believed to give energy and health to the body. As the wide set of cultic traditions dedicated to him indicates, the Albanian Sun-god appears to be an expression of the Proto-Indo-European Sky-god (Zot or Zojz in Albanian).\nAlbanians were firstly described in written sources as worshippers of the Sun and the Moon by German humanist Sebastian Franck in 1534, but the Sun and the Moon have been preserved as sacred elements of Albanian tradition since antiquity. Illyrian material culture shows that the Sun was the chief cult object of the Illyrian religion. Finding correspondences with Albanian folk beliefs and practices, the Illyrian Sun-deity is figuratively represented on Iron Age plaques from Lake Shkodra as the god of the sky and lightning, also associated with the fire altar where he throws lightning bolts. The symbolization of the cult of the Sun, which is often combined with the crescent Moon, is commonly found in a variety of contexts of Albanian folk art, including traditional tattooing, grave art, jewellery, embroidery, and house carvings. Solemn oaths (Besa), good omens, and curse formulas, involve and are addressed to, or taken by, the Sun. Prayers to the Sun, ritual bonfires, and animal sacrifices have been common practices performed by Albanians during the ritual pilgrimages on mountain tops.\nIn Albanian pagan beliefs and mythology the Sun is a personified male deity, and the Moon () is his female counterpart. In pagan beliefs the fire hearth () is the symbol of fire as the offspring of the Sun. In some folk tales, myths and legends the Sun and the Moon are regarded as husband and wife, also appearing as the parents of E Bija e H\u00ebn\u00ebs dhe e Diellit (\"the Daughter of the Moon and the Sun\"); in others the Sun and the Moon are regarded as brother and sister, but in this case they are never considered consorts. N\u00ebna e Diellit (\"the Mother of the Sun\" or \"the Sun's Mother\") also appears as a personified deity in Albanian folk beliefs and tales.\nAlbanian beliefs, myths and legends are organized around the dualistic struggle between good and evil, light and darkness, which cyclically produces the cosmic renewal. The most famous representation of it is the constant battle between drangue and kulshedra, which is seen as a mythological extension of the cult of the Sun and the Moon, widely observed in Albanian traditional art. In Albanian traditions, kulshedra is also fought by the Daughter of the Moon and the Sun, who uses her light power against pride and evil, or by other heroic characters marked in their bodies by the symbols of celestial objects, such as Zjermi (lit.\u2009'the Fire'), who notably is born with the Sun on his forehead.\nBaltic mythology.\nThose who practice Dievtur\u012bba, beliefs of traditional Latvian culture, worship the Sun goddess Saule, known in traditional Lithuanian beliefs as Saul\u0117. Saule is among the most important deities in Baltic mythology and traditions.\nCeltic mythology.\nThe sun in Insular Celtic culture is assumed to have been feminine, and several goddesses have been proposed as possibly solar in character. In Continental Celtic culture, the sun gods, like Belenus, Grannus, and Lugus, were masculine.\nIn Irish, the name of the Sun, \"Grian\", is feminine. The figure known as \u00c1ine is generally assumed to have been either synonymous with her, or her sister, assuming the role of Summer Sun while Grian was the Winter Sun. Similarly, \u00c9ta\u00edn has at times been considered to be another theonym associated with the Sun; if this is the case, then the pan-Celtic Epona might also have been originally solar in nature.\nThe British Sulis has a name cognate with that of other Indo-European solar deities such as the Greek Helios and Indic Surya, and bears some solar traits like the association with the eye as well as epithets associated with light. The theonym Sulevia, which is more widespread and probably unrelated to Sulis, is sometimes taken to have suggested a pan-Celtic role as a solar goddess.\nThe Welsh Olwen has at times been considered a vestige of the local sun goddess, in part due to the possible etymological association with the wheel and the colors gold, white and red.\nBrighid has at times been argued as having had a solar nature, fitting her role as a goddess of fire and light.\nGermanic mythology.\nIn Germanic mythology the Sun is personified as a woman, Old Norse S\u00f3l, Old High German Sunna. In the Norse tradition, the Sun is driven through the sky on a chariot pulled by two horses named \u00c1rvakr and Alsvi\u00f0r (\"Early-awake\" and \"All-swift\"). \nFirst century historian Tacitus, in his book \"Germania\", mentioned that \"beyond the Suiones [tribe]\" a sea was located where the sun maintained its brilliance from its rising to its sunset, and that \"[the] popular belief\" was that \"the sound of its emergence was audible\" and \"the form of its horses visible\".\nIn Norway, Sun worship was common until the last century, usually as a simple ritual of leaving butter in a saucer on a windowsill, so the Sun can melt it, when its light comes into the window. Alternatively, the glass on the window itself could be smeared by butter, or the butter could be put on the roof or wall. Similar rituals are attested among the Sami people. Usually, the ritual was connected to the day, when the sun shows up from horizon or mountain (or in the eastern window of the main house of the farm) after the period of polar night, when there is no sun at all, or the sun is so low, that it is hidden behind mountains. Because of these reasons, the date of the ritual varied from farm to farm, or wasn\u2019t practiced at all (e.g. in Oslo area, which is flat and has no real polar night).\nA ritual of greeting the first sun after the polar night while standing on top of a mountain is mentioned by Procopius in his description of the Northerners, but is also attested in modern time in area of Glomfjord, and a similar one in southern Vest-Agder. Another ritual is known from southern Vest-Agder, when small round stones are supposed to be taken up to a mountain top and put in a heap as an offering to the Spring Sun. The stone offering heaps itself are very common in Scandinavia, but only in Vest-Agder they are connected to the Sun worship.\nAmong famous people, who were practicing the butter-in-saucer ritual were poets Ivar Mortensson-Egnund and Astrid Krog Halse.\nGreco-Roman world.\nHellenistic mythology.\nIn Greek mythology, Helios, a Titan, was the personification of the Sun; however, with the notable exception of the island of Rhodes and nearby parts of southwestern Anatolia, he was a relatively minor deity. The Ancient Greeks also associated the Sun with Apollo, the god of enlightenment.\nThe Greek astronomer Thales of Miletus described the scientific properties of the Sun and Moon, making their godship unnecessary. Anaxagoras was arrested in 434\u00a0BC and banished from Athens for denying the existence of a solar or lunar deity. The titular character of Sophocles' \"Electra\" refers to the Sun as \"All-seeing\". Hermetic author Hermes Trismegistus calls the Sun \"God Visible\".\nThe Minotaur has been interpreted as a solar deity (as Moloch or Chronos), including by Arthur Bernard Cook, who considers both Minos and Minotaur as aspects of the sun god of the Cretans, who depicted the sun as a bull.\nRoman mythology.\nDuring the Roman Empire, a festival of the birth of the \"Unconquered Sun\" (or \"Dies Natalis Solis Invicti\") was celebrated on the winter solstice\u2014the \"rebirth\" of the Sun\u2014which occurred on 25 December of the Julian calendar. In late antiquity, the theological centrality of the Sun in some Imperial religious systems suggests a form of a \"solar monotheism\". The religious commemorations on 25 December were replaced under Christian domination of the Empire with the birthday of Christ.\nMuch more ancient was the cult of Sol Indiges, supposed to have been introduced among Roman deities by the Sabines at the times of Titus Tatius.\nModern influence.\nCopernicus describing the Sun mythologically, drawing from Greco-Roman examples:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the middle of all sits the Sun on his throne. In this loveliest of temples, could we place the luminary in any more appropriate place so that he may light the whole simultaneously. Rightly is he called the Lamp, the Mind, the Ruler of the Universe: Hermes Trismegistus entitles him the God Visible. Sophocles' Electra names him the All-seeing. Thus does the Sun sit as upon a royal dais ruling his children the planets which circle about him.\nWorld religions.\nChristianity.\nThe comparison of Christ with the astronomical Sun is common in ancient Christian writings. By \"the sun of righteousness\" in Malachi 4 \"the fathers, from Justin downward, and nearly all the earlier commentators understand \"Christ\", who is supposed to be described as the rising sun\". The New Testament itself contains a hymn fragment in Ephesians 5: \"Awake, O sleeper, and arise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you.\" Clement of Alexandria wrote of \"the Sun of the Resurrection, he who was born before the dawn, whose beams give light\".\nThe pseudodocumentary \"Zeitgeist: The Movie\" (2007) asserts that Judas Iscariot is an allegory of Scorpio (with Jesus being a personification of the sun passing through the twelve constellations). When the sun transits Scorpio, Judas schemes with the Sanhedrin to arrest Jesus by kissing him. In the metaphorical sense, as the sun exited Libra in late autumn it enters Scorpio to be \"kissed\" by its stinger, which signifies the sun getting weaker as winter approaches. The three days after 21 December are the darkest as the sun is low in the sky, under Sagittarius's arrow, and therefore it is allegorized that, at this time, Jesus (the sun) dies for three days. After 25 December, the Sun moves 1 degree north, which indicate longer days or Jesus's resurrection.\nAmerican theosophist Alvin Boyd Kuhn had postulated that Jesus or the Abrahamic God is a sun god, with other figures in the Old Testament such as Samson (whose name means \"sun\" in Hebrew), King David, Solomon, Saul (meaning soul, or sol, the sun), Abraham, Moses, Gideon and Jephtha also being solar allegories. To corroborate his argument about God being a solar deity, Kuhn cites the Psalm's verses such as, \"Our God is a living fire,\" \"Our God is a consuming fire\", \"The Lord God is a sun\", in addition to Jesus's \"Christ will shine upon thee!\", \"I am come to send fire on earth\" and \"I am the light of the world\".\nChristianization of \"Natalis Invicti\".\nAccording to one hypothesis about Christmas, the date was set to 25 December because it was the date of the festival of Sol Invictus. The idea became popular especially in the 18th and 19th centuries.\nThe Philocalian calendar of AD 354 marks a festival of \"Natalis Invicti\" on 25 December. There is limited evidence that the festival was celebrated at around the time before the mid-4th century.\nThe earliest-known example of the idea that Christians chose to celebrate the birth of Jesus on 25 December because it was the date of an already existing festival of the Sol Invictus was expressed in an annotation to a manuscript of a work by 12th-century Syrian bishop Jacob Bar-Salibi. The scribe who added it wrote: \"It was a custom of the Pagans to celebrate on the same 25 December the birthday of the Sun, at which they kindled lights in token of festivity. In these solemnities and revelries the Christians also took part. Accordingly when the doctors of the Church perceived that the Christians had a leaning to this festival, they took counsel and resolved that the true Nativity should be solemnized on that day.\"\nChristian iconography.\nThe charioteer in the mosaic of Mausoleum M has been interpreted by some as Christ by those who argue that Christians adopted the image of the Sun (Helios or Sol Invictus) to represent Christ. In this portrayal, he is a beardless figure with a flowing cloak in a chariot drawn by four white horses, as in the mosaic in Mausoleum M discovered under Saint Peter's Basilica and in an early-4th-century catacomb fresco. The nimbus of the figure under Saint Peter's Basilica is rayed, as in traditional pre-Christian representations. Clement of Alexandria had spoken of Christ driving his chariot across the sky. This interpretation is doubted by others: \"Only the \"cross-shaped\" nimbus makes the Christian significance apparent\". and the figure is seen by some simply as a representation of the sun with no explicit religious reference whatever, pagan or Christian.\nHinduism.\nWorship of Surya.\nThe sun is prayed to by South Indians during the harvest festival.\nIn Tamil Nadu, the Tamil people worship the sun god during the Tamil month of Thai, after a year of crop farming. The month is known as the harvesting month and people pay respects to the sun on the first day of the Thai month known as Thai pongal, or Pongal, which is a four-day celebration. It is one of the few indigenous worships by the Tamil people.\nIn other parts of India, the festival is celebrated as Makar Sankranti and is mostly worshiped by Hindu diaspora.\nNew religious movements.\nSolar deities are revered in certain new religious movements.\nTheosophy.\nThe primary local deity in Theosophy is the Solar Logos, \"the consciousness of the sun\".\nThelema.\nThelema adapts its gods and goddesses from Ancient Egyptian religion, particularly those named in the Stele of Revealing, among whom is the Sun god Ra-Hoor-Khuit, a form of Horus. Ra-Hoor-Khuit is one of the principal deities described in Aleister Crowley's \"Liber AL vel Legis\".\nIn Thelema, Ra-Hoor-Khuit represents the active, warlike aspect of the solar deity Horus, embodying the principles of strength and power. The Stele of Revealing, a funerary tablet from the 26th dynasty of Egypt, plays a central role in Crowley's cosmology, symbolizing the New Aeon of Horus. This Aeon is characterized by the themes of individualism, self-realization, and the discovery of one's True Will.\nOne of the key practices in Thelema is the daily performance of \"Liber Resh vel Helios\", a set of solar adorations composed by Crowley. These rituals are performed at dawn, noon, sunset, and midnight, each directed towards different aspects of the Sun\u2014Ra, Ahathoor, Tum, and Khephra, respectively. The practice aims to align the practitioner with the natural cycles of the Sun and to integrate the physical and spiritual dimensions of existence in accordance with Thelemic principles.\nThe adoration of Ra-Hoor-Khuit and the performance of \"Liber Resh\" are intended to serve as daily reminders of the central Thelemic tenet, \"Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.\" By engaging in these rituals, Thelemites seek to harmonize their personal will with the divine will, achieving greater spiritual enlightenment and alignment with the cosmic order.\nKurozumiky\u014d.\nKurozumiky\u014d, founded by Kurozumi Munetada in 1814, is a Shinto-based Japanese new religion centered on solar worship. The solar deity Amaterasu is worshipped. Everyday at sunrise, the sun is worshipped at the Kurozumiky\u014d headquarters on Shint\u014d-zan (\u795e\u9053\u5c71, or \"Mount Shinto\") in Okayama, Japan.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27561", "revid": "31966049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27561", "title": "Stendhal syndrome", "text": "Psychosomatic condition of being overwhelmed by art or beauty\nStendhal syndrome, Stendhal's syndrome or Florence syndrome is a psychosomatic condition involving rapid heartbeat, confusion, hallucinations, and even fainting, allegedly occurring when individuals become exposed to objects, artworks, or phenomena of great beauty.\nThe affliction is named after the 19th-century French author Stendhal (pseudonym of Marie-Henri Beyle), who described his experience with the phenomenon during his 1817 visit to Florence, Italy, in his book \"\". When he visited the Basilica of Santa Croce, where Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli, Michelangelo and Galileo Galilei are buried, he was overcome with profound emotion. Stendhal wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlthough psychologists have long debated whether Stendhal syndrome exists, the apparent effects on some individuals are severe enough to warrant medical attention. The staff at Florence's Santa Maria Nuova hospital are accustomed to tourists suffering from dizzy spells or disorientation after viewing the statue of David, the artworks of the Uffizi Gallery, and other historic treasures of the Tuscan city.\nThough there are numerous accounts dating from the early 19th century, the phenomenon of people fainting while taking in Florentine art was first named in 1979, when it was described by Italian psychiatrist Graziella Magherini, who observed over a hundred similar cases among tourists. There is no evidence to define Stendhal syndrome as a specific psychiatric disorder, and it is not listed as a recognised condition in the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\"; however, there is scientific evidence that the same cerebral areas involved in emotional responses are stimulated during exposure to art.\nA more recent account of the Stendhal syndrome was in 2018, when a visitor to the Uffizi Gallery in Florence suffered a heart attack while admiring Sandro Botticelli's \"The Birth of Venus\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27562", "revid": "49338826", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27562", "title": "Spanish proverbs", "text": "Spanish proverbs are a subset of proverbs that are used in Western cultures in general; there are many that have essentially the same form and content as their counterparts in other Western languages. Proverbs that have their origin in Spanish have migrated to and from English, French, Flemish, German and other languages.\nOrigins.\nMany Spanish proverbs have a long history of cultural diffusion; there are proverbs, for example, that have their origin traced to Ancient Babylon and that have been transmitted culturally to Spain during the period of classical antiquity; equivalents of the Spanish proverb \"\u201cEn boca cerrada no entran moscas\u201d\" (Silence is golden, literally \"Flies cannot enter a closed mouth\") belong to the cultural tradition of many African countries such as Ethiopia; having gone through multiple languages and millennia, this proverb can be traced back to an ancient Babylonian proverb.\nThe written evidence of the use of Spanish proverbs goes far back in Spanish literature. \"El Cantar de Mio Cid\", written at the end of the 11th or the beginning of the 12th century, is the first instance. Examples of other early works that use Spanish proverbs are the \"Libro de Buen Amor\" by Juan Ruiz in the 14th century and \"El Corbacho\" by Alfonso Mart\u00ednez de Toledo in the 15th century. The first anthology of Spanish proverbs, \"Proverbios que dicen las viejas tras el fuego\", was written by \u00cd\u00f1igo L\u00f3pez de Mendoza, 1st Marquis of Santillana in the 15th century. Also in the 15th century was written the \"Seniloquium\", an erudite and anonymous work containing a compendium of Spanish sayings and proverbs with commentaries. The language of the characters in Fernando de Rojas\u2019 \"La Celestina\" (15th \u2013 16th century) is enlivened with the use of proverbs.\nThen, of course, in the 17th century there is the renowned book \"Don Quixote\" by novelist Miguel de Cervantes. Sancho Panza, Cervantes\u2019 earthy character, is the essential common man. His thinking habitually relies on the authority he vests in the wealth of popular cultural wisdom expressed in proverbs, which he continually quotes. In contrast, his master Don Quixote draws his references from chivalric romance books and is surprised that Sancho can find suitable proverbs for every circumstance. \"Don Quixote\" includes many Spanish proverbs. There are Spanish proverbs that contradict others; the \u201cwisdom\u201d that they encapsulate is not, of course, absolute. People will use those proverbs that best conform to their own particular way of approaching life. Taken together, however, they reveal the deep wellsprings of Spanish culture and of human nature in general.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n He who keeps well silent they call Sancho\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Don't speak if it would be foolish to do so\n \"Comments:\"\n Philologist claims that this proverb refers to eleventh century King Sancho II of Castile and Le\u00f3n, who is said to have kept silent when his dying father King Ferdinand divided up his kingdom between his three sons. After his father's death Sancho dispossessed his brothers to re-establish a single kingdom. \nAn alternative theory is that \"Sancho\" may be a mis-hearing of the word \"santo\" (saint), which could lead to the interpretation that keeping quiet at the appropriate time is a saintly thing to do.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Every peddler praises his needles\n \"Meanings/uses:\"\n Every vendor wishes to convince potential buyers that their goods are excellent.\n This is used in a broader sense to allude to a tendency for people to exaggerate when describing their own virtues.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Each rooster sings on its dung-heap.\n \"Meanings/uses:\"\n Each person rules in his own house or territory.\n A person manifests his true nature when surrounded by family or close friends, when in his own ambience and in his place of origin.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Each Tuesday has its Sunday.\n \"Meaning/Use:\"\n Similar to English 'every cloud has a silver lining'.\n \"Comments:\"\n Tuesday is a weekday of hard work, long before Sunday, the day of rest.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Each person talks about the fair according to how they experience it.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Our views reflects our own experience.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Tell me who you walk with, and I will tell you who you are.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Similar to the English phrase 'Birds of a feather flock together'. The company you keep reflects your character.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Wherever two people eat, three people eat.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n You can add one person more in any situation you are managing.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Love is blind\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Love makes us blind to the defects and failings of our beloved.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Love makes everything equal.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Love overcomes differences, hardships and barriers.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n The best scribe makes a blot.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Even the best make mistakes. Don't let errors demotivate you.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Time cures all.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Time is a great healer.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n To be like Garibay's soul\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n To waver or vacillate. \n \"Origin/Comments:\"\n 19th century Spanish historian Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Sbarbi y Osuna claims that the phrase refers to 16th century Basque writer Esteban de Garibay whose soul was believed trapped between heaven and hell after his death, according to inhabitants of his home town, leading to ghostly voices in his house at night.\n \"Literal meaning:\"\n Greed bursts the sack.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Greed and excessive ambition can stand in the way of obtaining benefit or success.\n \"Comments:\"\n This Spanish proverb evokes the image of a thief using a sack to carry the objects they steal. When the sack fills up, they press down its contents to make more fit in, making it break and losing their whole loot.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n The face is the mirror of the soul.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Our face reflects our state of health, our character, and our mood.\n \"Origin:\"\n Cicero (106-43 BC): 'Ut imago est animi voltus sic indices oculi'\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Diligence is the mother of good fortune.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n One must be active and diligent in order to achieve one's goals.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Faith moves mountains.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Praises the power of the confidence that faith endows us with.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n The best word is the one left unsaid.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Sings the praises of prudence in talk.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n The worst hen is the one that clucks the most.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n It is not rare to see a person boasting and wishing to stand out even though his merits are few and his qualities inadequate.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Blood boils without fire.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Comments on the strength of blood bonds.\n \"English equivalent:\"\n The die is cast.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Said in the face of a threatening situation the outcome of which one is unable to prevent.\n \"Origin/Comments:\"\n Julius Caesar is reputed to have said \"Alea iacta est\" after having crossed the Rubicon river with his legions.\n \"Near literal translation and English equivalent:\"\n Life is not a path of roses.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n It's normal to encounter all kinds of difficulties along the road of life.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Bad jokes become reality.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n One should be careful when joking to avoid being hurting or offensive. \"Burlas\" and \"veras\" when used in relationship with one another, the first means \u201cjokingly\u201d and the second \u201creally\u201d.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Misfortunes never come one at a time.\n \"Meaning/uses:\"\n Said when several annoyances or setbacks occur at the same time or follow closely one another.\n \"English equivalents:\"\n When it rains, it pours.\n It never rains but it pours.\n \"Similar Spanish proverb:\"\n Un mal llama a otro.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n You can only be really certain of what is already in your belly.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n When confronted with a choice between something certain and something uncertain, this Spanish proverb is used to gravitate towards the first.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Years don't pass in vain.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Resign oneself to the ravages of time, particularly illness and old age.\n \"English equivalent:\"\n Years take their toll.\n \"English equivalent:\"\n One can't see the forest for the trees.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Attention to detail can make one lose perspective.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Jealousy is a bad counsellor.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Jealousy does not lead to sensible behaviour.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Times change.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Exhorts to adapt to changing circumstances and not indulge in lamentations and useless comparisons.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Tomorrow will be another day.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Recommends to let matters rest and leave for another day and a clearer head the search for a solution to a problem or situation.\n \"Variation:\"\n Ma\u00f1ana ser\u00e1 otro d\u00eda, y ver\u00e1 el tuerto los esp\u00e1rragos.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n No one is satisfied with his fortune.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Alludes to a person who is forever dissatisfied with his lot and never has enough.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n No hunchback sees his own hump.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Reprehends a person who criticizes others for defects which are also his own, maybe even more acutely so.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Two roosters do not crow in a henhouse.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Peace is disrupted when two want to impose their authority at the same time and place.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n No flour without bran.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n One can't have everything in life; there are always drawbacks.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n No matter if you rise early because it does not sunrise earlier.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Things have their moment; you can be in hurry but you will not get anything.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n One can't make an omelette without breaking eggs.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Alludes to the effort necessary to achieve a goal and the damage that may be done in the course of creating something new.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n Not every truth should be said.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n There are truths one should keep to oneself.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n The whole hillside is not covered in oregano.\n \"Meanings/uses:\"\n In any endeavor, not everything is easy and pleasurable.\n Indicates that things are not what one imagined them to be.\n \"Comments:\"\n Oregano is a valued plant that is used as a culinary herb and historically as medicine to treat various complaints. \n \"Literal translation:\"\n It never rains to everyone's taste.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n What some find agreeable and pleasurable others find bothersome and annoying.\n \"Literal translation:\"\n A dog that barks often seldom bites.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Those who threaten very often likely will not able to carry out these threats.\n \"Literal translation and English equivalent:\"\n All roads lead to Rome.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Goals can be achieved by different means.\n \"Literal translation and English equivalent:\"\n Mix churra with merino.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n Confusing things that are totally different.\n \"Comments:\"\n Churra and Merino are two breeds of Spanish sheep, the former excelling at milk and meat while the latter excelling at wool. When they tried to inter-breed both sheep hoping to get the best of both breeds, the outcome was a total disaster.\n \"Literal translation and English equivalent:\"\n The problem is that there are more interested people than interesting people.\n \"Meaning/use:\"\n There are more people that are interested in others than there are people that are interesting to others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27563", "revid": "50567145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27563", "title": "Soad Hosny", "text": "Egyptian actress (1943\u20132001)\nSoad Mohammad Kamal Hosny (, ; 26 January 1943 \u2013 21 June 2001) was an Egyptian actress. She was known as the \"Cinderella of the Screen\" and one of the most influential actresses in the Middle East and the Arab world. She is generally regarded as one of Egypt's most iconic female performers of the 20th-century, who played leading roles for many of the country's top directors, in a career spanning 83 films between 1959 and 1991, garnering several national and international accolades. \nBorn in the Boulaq district of Cairo to an artistic family. Her father is Mohamed Hosni, who was one of the best Egyptian calligraphers. She is the sister of the singer Nagat El-Sagheera. She worked in the Egyptian Radio as a young child with Baba Sharo and was introduced for Film industry by Abdel Rahman El Khamisi. Her film debut was \"Hassan and Naima\" (1959), and she quickly rose to stardom at the end of the 1950s, performing in more than 83 films between 1959 and 1991 with nine films in the greatest 100 films in the history of Egyptian cinema. \nA majority of her films were shot in the 1960s and 1970s. Her notable films include; \"Money and Women\" (1960), \"A Date at the Tower\" (1962), \"Too Young for Love\" (1966), \"Cairo 30\" (1966), \"The Second Wife\" (1967), \"Sunset and Sunrise\" (1970), \"The Choice\" (1971), \"Those People of the Nile\" (1972), \"Where is My Mind?\" (1974), \"Amira, My Love\" (1974), \"Whom Should We Shoot?\" (1975), \"Karnak\" (1975), \"Shafika and Metwali\" (1979), \"The Savage\" (1979), \"People on the Top\" (1981), \"A Dinner Date\" (1981), \"Al Qadisiyya\" (1981), \"A Stranger in My House\" (1982), \"Love in a Jail Cell\" (1983) and \"The Hunger\" (1986). Her 1972 film \"Watch Out For Zouzou\", is widely considered her most famous film, to the point that many people gave her the nickname \u201cZouzou\", her character's name. Her final screen appearance was in the 1991 film,\"The Shepherd and the Women\", directed by her ex-husband Ali Badrakhan.\nEarly life.\nSoad Muhammad Kamal Hosny was born in Bulaq district in Cairo, Egypt, to, Mohammad Hosni, a renowned Egyptian calligrapher. Her father is originally of a Kurdish descent; and her mother is Gawhara Mohamed Hassan Saffour, an Egyptian woman. \nHer parents divorced and her mother married Abdul Monem Hafeez with whom she had six more children, thus giving Soad and her two sisters no fewer than 14 half-siblings.\nHer father's household was known as \"the artists' home\" because leading artists from across the Arab world regularly visited Hosni's home in Cairo for tuition and social interaction with the master calligrapher. Her father, whose artistic output included the production of frames for the silent movies and book covers, was well known across the artistic community. A number of his children became performance artists. Soad's half-sister, Nagat, was an actress and singer. Her half-brother, Ezz Eddin Hosni (1927\u20132013), was a composer and taught Soad and Najat music and singing. Another sibling, Sami Hosni, became a cello player, jewellery designer, and calligrapher. Yet another brother, Farooq, was a painter and his daughter Samira was also an actress.\nCareer.\nAt the age of three, she began her career when she sang in the popular Egyptian children's TV program, \"Papa Sharo\", hosted by prominent kids' shows presenter Mohamed Shaaban. Her work included a wide range of genres, from light comedies and romances through to political satire. Her film debut was in \"Hassan and Nayima\" (1959). She is credited with acting in films with the most notable Egyptian film stars such as Omar Sharif, Salah Zulfikar, Rushdy Abaza, and Shoukry Sarhan. \nIn the early 1960s, Hosny starred in; \"A Rumor of Love\" (1960) alongside Omar Sharif and Youssef Wahbi. She also starred in \"Mafish Tafahom\" (1961), \"El-Do' el-Khaft\" (1961), \"El-Saferia Aziza\" (1961) alongside Shoukry Sarhan. She was also paired with Ahmed Mazhar in \"El-garema el-Dahka\" (1963). Other important film credits include her role in Hassan El-Imam's \"Money and Women\" (1960) opposite Salah Zulfikar, whom she was paired with for the second time in \"A Date at the Tower\" (1962) directed by Ezz El-Dine Zulficar. In 1964, she starred alongside Nadia Lutfi in Mahmoud Zulfikar's \"For Men Only\", where she played a role of a girl disguised in a man's appearance to have the opportunity to work in an oil exploration project; the film was a box office hit. In 1966, she starred in 10 films including \"Mabka el-Oshak\", \"His Excellency\", \"The Ambassador\", \"El-Talata Yhbonha\" and \"Leilat El Zefaf\". In the same year, Hosny starred in \"Too Young for Love\" (1966) opposite Rushdy Abaza.\nIn 1970, she starred alongside Salah Zulfikar and Rushdy Abaza in the political film \"Sunset and Sunrise\" (1970) by Kamal El Sheikh. She worked in two films directed by Youssef Chahine during her career, the first one being \"The Choice\" (1970), and the second \"Those People of the Nile\" (1972) in which she was paired with Salah Zulfikar for the fourth time. One of her most well-known roles was that of a college student who fell in love with her professor in Hassan El Imam\u2019s film \"Watch Out for ZouZou\" (1972). In 1974, she starred in Kamal El Sheikh's \"Whom Should We Shoot?\" (1974) alongside Mahmoud Yassin, whom she shared the lead with in \"Where is My Mind?\" (1974). Her next role was a student and political activist who was tortured in \"Karnak\" (1975), the film was based on the novel by Naguib Mahfouz.\nIn the films \"Shafika and Metwali\" (1979) with Ahmed Zaki and \"People on the Top\" (1981) with Nour El-Sherif, she transformed the musical numbers into scathing satires which gave voice to the oppressed. For this and her other hard-hitting, politically relevant roles, she was seen as part of the intelligentsia. She starred in \"A Dinner Date\" (1981), in which she played a dramatic role. She also starred in \"Al Qadisiyya\" (1981), \"The Suspect\" (1981), \"A Stranger in My House\" (1982), \"Love in a Jail Cell\" (1983) and \"The Hunger\" (1986).\nDuring her lifetime, she was known as the \"Cinderella of the Screen\". She starred in the films of every important Egyptian director during the 60s and 70s and played women in complex plots. In her later career, she played women who had been abused or victimized. Due to illness and health issues, she retired from acting in 1991. Hosny's final screen appearance was in \"The Shepherd and the Women\" (1991).\nPersonal life.\nSoad Hosny was married four times. Around 1968, she was married to cinematographer Salah Kurayyem; the marriage lasted for approximately one year. In 1970, Hosny was married to the Egyptian film director Ali Badrakhan; this marriage lasted for approximately eleven years. She was then married to Zaki Fatin Abdel Wahab, son of Fateen Abdel Wahab and Leila Mourad in 1981. This marriage lasted only five months. Persistent rumors claim that her first marriage was to the actor and singer, Abdel Halim Hafez (1929\u20131977), popularly known as \"Al Andaleeb al Asmar\" [The Dark-skinned Nightingale], whom she is believed to have married in secret. However, her family have denied the veracity of such rumors.\nShe was romantically linked with various celebrities including the Egyptian film star Abdel Halim Hafez. Despite never wearing a wedding dress in all her marriages, Hosni wore wedding dresses many times on screen through her films, and her first film husband was the Egyptian film star Salah Zulfikar in \"Money and Women\" of 1960. The rumor of her marriage to Abdel Halim Hafez was not the first in her life. In late 1962, a rumor was spread in the Egyptian press about her marriage to Salah Zulfikar, leading man and box-office star who was popularly known as \"Fares al Ahlem\" [Knight of Dreams], while filming with Zulfikar in \"A Date at the Tower\". Filming of the film scenes began in the Cairo Tower, and the team continued for two weeks on board the ship \"Aida\" in the Mediterranean. After filming ended, the rumor of her marriage to Zulfikar spread in newspapers and magazines at the time. Zulfikar did not forget the nature of his previous work as a police officer and began with his sense of security to investigate the source of the rumor, to make sure that the lighting worker in the film crew was the owner of the rumor after a kiss was filmed between Zulfikar and Soad Hosny, where the kiss lasted for three minutes, until Zulfikar sensed it took them too long and told the cinematographer, \"Stop\", and so the worker built this rumor because of the shot, but this rumor was denied and later, the two film stars participated in more than one film together. Her fourth and final marriage was to screen writer Maher Awad.\nDeath.\n On 21 June 2001, Soad Hosny died after falling from the balcony of her friend Nadia Yousri's apartment in Stuart Tower building in Westminster. Her death was surrounded by controversy, with authorities initially failing to provide details of how she fell; an omission that fueled media speculation and rumors that her death may have been a suicide or murder rather than accidental. Soad's body was flown home to Cairo and her funeral there was attended by over 10,000 people. She was buried in a family's plot of land on the outskirts of Cairo. She had no children and was survived by her last husband, writer Maher Awad, whom she married in 1987.\nAwards.\nSoad Hosny had won many awards, including the Best Actress Award from the National Festival in 1971, the Ministry of Culture Award for 5 times, the Egyptian Film Association Award for 5 times, the Alexandria International Film Festival best actress award, the Best Actress Award from the Cinema Art Association, and the Best Actress Award from the Ministry of Culture. Egyptian media in 1987, and a certificate of appreciation on Art Day in 1979 from President Anwar Sadat. At the 1980 State Film Awards, Hosni won the Best Actress Award for the movie \"The Savage\".\nLegacy and image.\nSoad Hosny has been considered as one of the most influential actresses in the Middle East and Arab World. Highly regarded for her range, versatility, and ability to play a wide range of characters\u2014from comedic and lighthearted roles to dramatic and tragic ones, captivating the audiences with her charm, which would earn her the nickname \"Cinderella of the Screen\". Her fashion sense and style made her a fashion icon for many young girls during her time, and has been considered a sex symbol.\nIn 2013, Lebanese filmmaker Rania Stephan used snippets from Hosny's films to re-tell Hosny's story and the history of Egyptian cinema in \"The Three Disappearances of Soad Hosni\". It was featured in Berlin's Art Week. The \"Three Disappearances\" is an important archive, which while following the chronology of Soad Hosny's career, simultaneously documents the costumes, sets and styles used from the 1950s to the 1990s, a period that marked the peak and decline of Egyptian cinema.\nOne of Hosny's songs, \"I'm going down to the Square\" became a popular \"anthem\" during the 2011 Egyptian revolution.\nFilmography.\nSoad Hosny's film career lasted for 32 years. She is an icon in Egyptian film industry. She was a film, stage, television, and radio actor. She appeared in more than 80 films and sang on Egyptian radio.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27566", "revid": "725768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27566", "title": "Summer Olympic Games", "text": "Major international multi-sport event\nThe Summer Olympic Games, also known as the Summer Olympics or the Games of the Olympiad, is a major international multi-sport event normally held once every four years. The inaugural Games took place in 1896 in Athens, then part of the Kingdom of Greece, and the most recent was held in 2024 in Paris, France. This was the first international multi-sport event of its kind, organised by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) founded by Pierre de Coubertin. The tradition of awarding medals began in 1904; in each Olympic event, gold medals are awarded for first place, silver medals for second place, and bronze medals for third place. The Winter Olympic Games were created out of the success of the Summer Olympic Games, which are regarded as the largest and most prestigious multi-sport international event in the world.\nThe Summer Olympics have increased in scope from a 42-event competition programme in 1896 with fewer than 250 male competitors from 14 nations, to 339 events in 2021 (2020 Summer Olympics) with 11,319 competitors (almost half of whom were women) from 206 nations. The Games have been held in nineteen countries over five continents: four times in the United States (1904, 1932, 1984, and 1996), three times in Great Britain (1908, 1948, and 2012) and in France (1900, 1924, and 2024), twice each in Greece (1896 and 2004), Germany (1936 and 1972), Australia (1956 and 2000), and Japan (1964 and 2020), and once each in Sweden (1912), Belgium (1920), the Netherlands (1928), Finland (1952), Italy (1960), Mexico (1968), Canada (1976), Russia (1980), South Korea (1988), Spain (1992), China (2008), and Brazil (2016).\nLondon and Paris have hosted three times, while Los Angeles, Athens, and Tokyo have each hosted twice; Los Angeles will host the Games for the third time in 2028. Only three countries have won at least one medal in every Summer Olympic Games: Australia, France and Great Britain. Only Great Britain has won at least a gold medal in every edition. The United States leads the all-time medal count for the Summer Olympics and has topped the medal table on 19 separate occasions, followed by the USSR (seven times, including the 1992 'Unified Team'), and France, Great Britain, Germany and China (once each).\nHosting.\nThe United States has hosted the Summer Olympic Games four times: the 1904 Games in St.\u00a0Louis, Missouri; the 1932 and 1984 Games in Los Angeles, California, and the 1996 Games in Atlanta, Georgia. The 2028 Games in Los Angeles will mark the fifth occasion on which the Summer Olympics have been hosted by the U.S.\nIn 1924, Paris became the first city to host the Summer Olympics twice, while in 2012, London became the first to host three times. Paris hosted for the third time in 2024, while Los Angeles will do so in 2028. Tokyo (1964 and 2020) and Athens (1896 and 2004, excluding 1906) have each hosted two Summer Olympic Games.\nAustralia, Germany, Greece and Japan have all hosted the Summer Olympics twice (with Australia hosting for the third time in 2032). Tokyo was the first city outside the predominantly English-speaking and European nations to have hosted twice; it is also the largest city ever to have hosted, having grown considerably since 1964. The other countries to have hosted the Summer Olympics are Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Finland, Italy, Mexico, Netherlands, South Korea, Soviet Union, Spain, and Sweden, with each of these countries having hosted on one occasion.\nAsia has hosted four times: in Tokyo (1964 and 2020), Seoul (1988), and Beijing (2008).\nThe 2016 Games in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, were the first Summer Olympics to be held in South America and the first that was held completely during the local \"winter\" season. The only two countries in the Southern Hemisphere to have hosted have been Australia (1956, 2000, and again in 2032) and Brazil (2016), with Africa having yet to host any Summer Olympics.\nStockholm, Sweden, has hosted events at two Summer Olympics, having been the sole host of the 1912 Games while hosting the equestrian events for the 1956 Summer Olympics (which quarantine regulations prevented from being held in Melbourne, Australia). Amsterdam, Netherlands, has also hosted events at two Summer Olympic Games, having been the sole host of the 1928 Games while hosting two of the sailing races at the 1920 Summer Olympics. At the 2008 Summer Olympics, Hong Kong provided the venues for the equestrian events, which took place in Sha Tin and Kwu Tung.\nHosting the Games requires and accelerates large investments in city infrastructure. The Games now play a key role in city leaders' plans to strengthen their cities' global integration and economic competitiveness.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nThe International Olympic Committee (IOC) was founded in 1894 when Pierre de Coubertin, a French pedagogue and historian, sought to promote international understanding through sporting competition. The first edition of The Olympic Games was held in Athens in 1896 and attracted just 245 competitors, of whom more than 200 were Greek, and only 14 countries were represented. Nevertheless, no international events of this magnitude had been organised before. Female athletes were not allowed to compete, though one woman, Stamata Revithi, ran the marathon course on her own, saying, \"If the committee doesn't let me compete, I will go after them regardless\". Women first participated officially in the 1900 Paris Games, with 22 women competing in five sports. Female participation has increased dramatically since then, with nearly half of the athletes in recent Games being women.\nThe 1896 Summer Olympics, officially known as the Games of the Olympiad, was an international multi-sport event which was celebrated in Athens, Greece, from 6 to 15\u00a0April 1896. It was the first Olympic Games held in the modern era. About 100,000 people attended for the opening of the games. The athletes came from 14 nations, with most coming from Greece. Although Greece had the most athletes, the U.S. finished with the most champions; 11 Americans placed first in their events vs. the 10 from Greece. Ancient Greece was the birthplace of the Olympic Games, consequently Athens was perceived to be an appropriate choice to stage the inaugural modern Games. It was unanimously chosen as the host city during a congress organised by Pierre de Coubertin in Paris, on 23\u00a0June 1894. The IOC was also established during this congress.\nDespite many obstacles and setbacks, the 1896 Olympics were regarded as a great success. The Games had the largest international participation of any sporting event to that date. Panathinaiko Stadium, the first big stadium in the modern world, overflowed with the largest crowd ever to watch a sporting event. The highlight for the Greeks was the Marathon victory by their compatriot Spiridon Louis, a water carrier. He won in 2\u00a0hours, 58\u00a0minutes and 50\u00a0seconds, setting off wild celebrations at the stadium. The most successful competitor was German wrestler and gymnast Carl Schuhmann, who won four gold medals.\nGreek officials and the public were enthusiastic about the experience of hosting an Olympic Games. This feeling was shared by many of the athletes, who even demanded that Athens be the permanent Olympic host city. The IOC intended for subsequent Games to be rotated to various host cities around the world. The second Olympics was held in Paris.\nFour years later the 1900 Summer Olympics in Paris attracted more than four times as many athletes, including 20 women, who were allowed to officially compete for the first time, in croquet, golf, sailing, and tennis. The Games were integrated with the Paris World's Fair and lasted over five months. It has been disputed which exact events were \"Olympic\", as some events were for professionals, some had restricted eligibility, and others lacked international competitors.\nTensions caused by the Russo\u2013Japanese War and the difficulty of travelling to St.\u00a0Louis may have contributed to the fact that very few top-ranked athletes from outside the U.S. and Canada took part in the 1904 Games, the first Games held outside Europe.\nThe \"Second International Olympic Games in Athens\", as they were called at the time, were held in 1906. The IOC does not currently recognise these games as being official Olympic Games, although many historians do and credit the 1906 games with preventing the demise of the Olympics. The 1906 Athens games were the first of an alternating series of games to be held in Athens in even non-Olympic years, but the series failed to materialise. The games were more successful than the 1900 and 1904 games, with over 850 athletes competing, and contributed positively to the success of future games.\nThe 1908 London Games saw numbers rise again, as well as the first running of the marathon over its now-standard distance of 42.195\u00a0 km (26 miles 385 yards). The first Olympic Marathon in 1896 (a male-only race) was raced at a distance of 40\u00a0 km (24 miles 85 yards). The new marathon distance was chosen to ensure that the race finished in front of the box occupied by the British royal family. Thus the marathon had been for the first games in 1896, but was subsequently varied by up to depending on local conditions such as street and stadium layout. At the six Olympic games between 1900 and 1920, the marathon was raced over six distances. The Games saw Great Britain winning 146 medals, 99 more than second-placed Americans, its best result to this day.\nAt the end of the 1908 marathon, the Italian runner Dorando Pietri was first to enter the stadium, but he was clearly in distress and collapsed of exhaustion before he could complete the event. He was helped over the finish line by concerned race officials and later disqualified for that. As compensation for the missing medal, Queen Alexandra gave Pietri a gilded silver cup. Arthur Conan Doyle wrote a special report about the race in the \"Daily Mail\".\nThe Games continued to grow, attracting 2,504 competitors, to Stockholm in 1912, including the great all-rounder Jim Thorpe, who won both the decathlon and pentathlon. Thorpe had previously played a few games of baseball for a fee, and saw his medals stripped for this 'breach' of amateurism after complaints from Avery Brundage. They were reinstated in 1983, 30 years after his death. The Games at Stockholm were the first to fulfil Pierre de Coubertin's original idea. For the first time since the Games started in 1896, all five inhabited continents were represented with athletes competing in the same stadium.\nThe scheduled 1916 Summer Olympics were to be held in Berlin, cancelled following the onset of World War I.\nInterwar era.\nThe 1920 Antwerp Games in war-ravaged Belgium were a subdued affair, but again drew a record number of competitors. This record only stood until 1924, when the Paris Games involved 3,000 competitors, the greatest of whom was Finnish runner Paavo Nurmi. The \"Flying Finn\" won three team gold medals and the individual 1,500- and 5,000-metre runs, the latter two on the same day.\nParis hosted the 1924 Games, becoming the first two-time host city. The Games were the last held under the IOC presidency of Pierre de Coubertin, father of the modern Olympics, and saw the introduction of the Olympic motto \"Citius, Altius, Fortius\", the Olympic Village, and the Winter Olympics as an \u201cInternational Winter Sports Week.\u201d\nThe 1928 Amsterdam Games was notable for being the first games which allowed females to compete at track &amp; field athletics, and benefited greatly from the general prosperity of the times alongside the first appearance of sponsorship of the games, from the Coca-Cola Company. The 1928 games saw the introduction of a standard medal design with the IOC, choosing Giuseppe Cassioli's depiction of Greek goddess Nike with a winner being carried by a crowd of people. This design was used up until 1972.\nThe 1932 Los Angeles Games were affected by the Great Depression, which contributed to the low number of competitors.\nThe 1936 Berlin Games were seen by the German government as a golden opportunity to promote their ideology. The ruling Nazi Party commissioned film-maker Leni Riefenstahl to film the games. The result, \"Olympia\", was widely considered to be a masterpiece, despite the infusion of Adolf Hitler's theories of Aryan racial superiority. Individually, African-American sprinter and long jumper Jesse Owens won four gold medals, while the host nation won the most gold and overall medals. The 1936 Berlin Games also saw the introduction of the Torch Relay.\nDue to World War II, the 1940 Games (scheduled to be held in Tokyo and temporarily relocated to Helsinki upon the outbreak of the war) were cancelled. The 1944 Games were set to be held in London but were also cancelled; instead, London hosted the first games after the end of the war, in 1948.\nAfter World War II.\nThe first post-war Games were held in 1948 in London, with both Germany and Japan excluded. Dutch sprinter Fanny Blankers-Koen won four gold medals on the track, emulating Owens' achievement in Berlin.\nAt the 1952 Helsinki Games, the USSR team competed for the first time and quickly emerged as one of the dominant teams, finishing second in the number of gold and overall medals won. Their immediate success might be explained by the advent of the state-sponsored \"full-time amateur athlete\". The USSR entered teams of athletes who were all nominally students, soldiers, or working in a profession, but many of whom were in reality paid by the state to train on a full-time basis, hence violating amateur rules. Finland made a legend of an amiable Czechoslovak Army lieutenant named Emil Z\u00e1topek, who was intent on improving on his single gold and silver medals from 1948. Having first won both the 10,000- and 5,000-metre races, he also entered the marathon, despite having never previously raced at that distance. Pacing himself by chatting with the other race leaders, Z\u00e1topek led from about halfway, slowly dropping the remaining contenders to win by two and a half minutes, and completed a trio of wins.\nThe 1956 Melbourne Games, the first in the Southern Hemisphere, were largely successful, with the exception of a water polo match between Hungary and the Soviet Union, which ended in a pitched battle between the teams on account of the Soviet invasion of Hungary. The equestrian events were held in Stockholm because of a foot-and-mouth disease outbreak in Britain at the time and the strict quarantine laws of Australia.\nAt the 1960 Rome Games, a young light-heavyweight boxer named Cassius Clay, later known as Muhammad Ali, arrived on the scene. Ali would later throw his gold medal away in disgust after being refused service in a whites-only restaurant in his home town of Louisville, Kentucky. He was awarded a new medal 36 years later at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta. Other notable performers in 1960 included Wilma Rudolph, a gold medallist in the 100\u00a0metres, 200\u00a0metres, and 4\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0100 metres relay events.\nThe 1964 Tokyo Games were the first to be held in Asia and to be broadcast worldwide on television, enabled by the recent advent of communication satellites. These Games marked a turning point in the global visibility and popularity of the Olympics and are credited for heralding the modern age of telecommunications. Judo debuted as an official sport, and Dutch judoka Anton Geesink caused a stir when he won the final of the open weight division, defeating Akio Kaminaga in front of his home crowd.\nPerformances at the 1968 Games in Mexico City were affected by the altitude of the host city. These Games introduced the now-universal Fosbury flop, a technique which won American high jumper Dick Fosbury the gold medal. In the medal award ceremony for the men's 200-metre race, black American athletes Tommie Smith (gold medal winner) and John Carlos (bronze medal winner) took a stand for civil rights by raising their black-gloved fists and wearing black socks in lieu of shoes. The two athletes were subsequently expelled from the Games by the IOC. V\u011bra \u010c\u00e1slavsk\u00e1, in protest against the 1968 Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia, and the controversial decision by the judges on the balance beam and floor, turned her head down and away from the Soviet flag while the national anthem was played during the medal ceremony. She returned home as a heroine of the Czechoslovak people but was made an outcast by the Soviet-dominated government.\nPolitics again intervened at the 1972 Games in Munich, but this time with lethal consequences. A Palestinian terrorist group named Black September invaded the Olympic village and broke into the apartment of the Israeli delegation. They killed two Israelis and held nine others as hostages, demanding that Israel release numerous prisoners. When the Israeli government refused the terrorists' demands, the situation developed into a tense stand-off while negotiations continued. Eventually, the captors, still holding their hostages, were offered safe passage and taken to an airport, where they were ambushed by German security forces. In the ensuing firefight, 15 people were killed, including the nine captive Israeli athletes and five of the terrorists. After much debate, the decision was taken to continue the Games, but the proceedings were understandably dominated by these events. Some memorable athletic achievements did occur during these Games, notably the winning of a then-record seven gold medals by United States swimmer Mark Spitz, Finland's Lasse Vir\u00e9n taking back-to-back gold medals in the 5,000 metres and 10,000 metres, and the winning of three gold medals by Soviet gymnastic star Olga Korbut, who achieved a historic backflip off the high bar. In the final of the men's basketball, the United States lost to the Soviet Union in what is widely considered as the most controversial game in international basketball history. In a close-fought match, the U.S. team appeared to have won by a score of 50\u201349. However, the final three seconds of the game were replayed three times by judges until the Soviet team came out on top and claimed a 51\u201350 victory. Ultimately the U.S. team refused to accept their silver medals.\nThere was no such tragedy at the 1976 Montreal Games, but bad planning and fraud led to the cost of these Games far exceeding the budget. Costing $1.5\u00a0billion (equivalent to $\u00a0billion in 2023), the 1976 Summer Games were the most expensive in Olympic history (until the 2014 Winter Olympics) and it seemed, for a time, that the Olympics might no longer be a viable financial proposition. In retrospect, it is believed that contractors (suspected of being members of the Montreal Mafia) skimmed large sums of money from all levels of contracts while also profiting from the substitution of cheaper building materials of lesser quality, which may have contributed to the delays, poor construction, and excessive costs. In 1988, one such contractor, Giuseppe Zappia \"was cleared of fraud charges that resulted from his work on Olympic facilities after two key witnesses died before testifying at his trial\". The 1976 Games were boycotted by many African nations as a protest against a recent tour of apartheid-run South Africa by the New Zealand national rugby union team. Romanian gymnast Nadia Com\u0103neci made history when she won the women's individual all-around gold medal with two of four possible perfect scores. She won two other individual events, with two perfect scores in the balance beam and all perfect scores in the uneven bars. Lasse Vir\u00e9n repeated his double gold in the 5,000 and 10,000 metres, making him the first athlete to ever win the distance double twice.\nEnd of the 20th century.\nFollowing the Soviet Union's 1979 invasion of Afghanistan, 66 nations, including the United States, Canada, West Germany, and Japan, boycotted the 1980 Games held in Moscow. Eighty nations were represented at the Moscow Games \u2013 the smallest number since 1956. The boycott contributed to the 1980 Games being a less publicised and less competitive affair, which was dominated by the host country.\nAccording to British journalist Andrew Jennings, a KGB colonel stated that the agency's officers had posed as anti-doping authorities from the IOC to undermine doping tests and that Soviet athletes were \"rescued with [these] tremendous efforts\". On the topic of the 1980 Summer Olympics, an Australian study in 1989 said \"There is hardly a medal winner at the Moscow Games, certainly not a gold medal winner, who is not on one sort of drug or another: usually several kinds. The Moscow Games might as well have been called the Chemists' Games.\"\nDocuments obtained in 2016 revealed the Soviet Union's plans for a statewide doping system in track and field in preparation for the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. Dated prior to the country's decision to boycott the Games, the document detailed the existing steroids operations of the programme, along with suggestions for further enhancements. The communication, directed to the Soviet Union's head of track and field, was prepared by Dr. Sergei Portugalov of the Institute for Physical Culture. Portugalov was also one of the main figures involved in the implementation of the Russian doping programme prior to the 2016 Summer Olympics.\nIn 1984, the Soviet Union and 13 Soviet allies retaliated by boycotting the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. Romania and Yugoslavia, notably are the only two countries from the Eastern Bloc that did attend the 1984 Olympics. These games were perhaps the first games of a new era to make a profit. Although a boycott led by the Soviet Union depleted the field in certain sports, 140 National Olympic Committees took part, which was a record at the time. The Games were also the first time mainland China (People's Republic) participated.\nThe 1988 Games, in Seoul, was very well planned but the games were tainted when many of the athletes, most notably men's 100 metres winner Ben Johnson, failed mandatory drug tests. Despite splendid drug-free performances by many individuals, the number of people who failed screenings for performance-enhancing chemicals overshadowed the games.\nThe 1992 Barcelona Games featured the admittance of players from one of the North American top leagues, the NBA, exemplified by but not limited to U.S. basketball's \"Dream Team\". The 1992 games also saw the reintroduction to the Games of several smaller European states which had been annexed into the Soviet Union during World War II. At these games, gymnast Vitaly Scherbo set an inaugural medal record of five individual gold medals at a Summer Olympics, and equaled the inaugural record set by Eric Heiden at the 1980 Winter Olympics.\nBy then the process of choosing a location for the Games had become a commercial concern; there were widespread allegations of corruption potentially affecting the IOC's decision process.\nAt the Atlanta 1996 Summer Olympics, the highlight was 200 metres runner Michael Johnson annihilating the world record in front of a home crowd. Canadians savoured Donovan Bailey recording a gold medal run in the 100-metre dash. This was generally felt to be an appropriate recompense for the previous national disgrace involving Ben Johnson. There were also emotional scenes, such as when Muhammad Ali, clearly affected by Parkinson's disease, lit the Olympic torch and received a replacement medal for the one he had discarded in 1960. The latter event took place in the basketball arena. The atmosphere at the Games was marred, however, when a bomb exploded during the celebration in Centennial Olympic Park. In June 2003, the principal suspect in this bombing, Eric Robert Rudolph, was arrested.\nThe 2000 Summer Olympics, held in Sydney, Australia, showcased individual performances by locals favorites Ian Thorpe in the pool and Cathy Freeman, an Indigenous Australian whose triumph in the 400 metres united a packed stadium., Briton Steve Redgrave who won a rowing gold medal in an unprecedented fifth consecutive Olympics, and Eric \"the Eel\" Moussambani, a swimmer from Equatorial Guinea, received wide media coverage when he completed the 100-metre freestyle swim in by far the slowest time in Olympic history. He nevertheless won the heat as both his opponents had been disqualified for false starts. His female compatriot Paula Barila Bolopa also received media attention for her record-slow and struggling but courageous performance. The Sydney Games also saw the first appearance of a joint North and South Korean contingent at the opening ceremonies, though they competed in all events as different teams. Controversy occurred in the Women's Artistic Gymnastics when the vaulting horse was set to the wrong height during the All-Around Competition.\nStart of the 21st century.\nIn 2004, the Olympic Games returned to their birthplace in Athens, Greece. At least $7.2\u00a0billion was spent on the 2004 Games, including $1.5\u00a0billion on security. Michael Phelps won his first Olympic medals, tallying six gold and two bronze medals. Pyrros Dimas, winning a bronze medal, became the most decorated weightlifter of all time with four Olympic medals, three gold and one bronze. Although unfounded reports of potential terrorism drove crowds away from the preliminary competitions at the first weekend of the Olympics (14\u201315\u00a0August 2004), attendance picked up as the Games progressed. A third of the tickets failed to sell, but ticket sales still topped figures from the Seoul and Barcelona Olympics (1988 and 1992). IOC President Jacques Rogge characterised Greece's organisation as outstanding and its security precautions as flawless. All 202 NOCs participated at the Athens Games with over 11,000 participants.\nThe 2008 Summer Olympics was held in Beijing, People's Republic of China. Several new events were held, including the new discipline of BMX for both men and women. Women competed in the steeplechase for the first time. The fencing programme was expanded to include all six events for both men and women; previously, women had not been able to compete in team foil or sabre events, although women's team \u00e9p\u00e9e and men's team foil were dropped for these Games. Marathon swimming events were added, over the distance of . Also, the doubles events in table tennis were replaced by team events. American swimmer Michael Phelps set a record for gold medals at a single Games with eight, and tied the record of most gold medals by a single competitor previously held by both Eric Heiden and Vitaly Scherbo. Another notable star of the Games was Jamaican sprinter Usain Bolt, who became the first male athlete ever to set world records in the finals of both the 100 and 200\u00a0metres in the same Games. Equestrian events were held in Hong Kong.\nLondon held the 2012 Summer Olympics, becoming the first city to host the Olympic Games three times. In his closing address, Jacques Rogge described the Games as \"Happy and glorious\". The host nation won 29 gold medals, the best haul for Great Britain since the 1908 Games in London. The United States returned to the top of the medal table after China dominated in 2008. The IOC had removed baseball and softball from the 2012 programme. The London Games were successful on a commercial level because they were the first in history to completely sell out every ticket, with as many as one million applications for 40,000 tickets for both the Opening Ceremony and the 100m Men's Sprint Final. Such was the demand for tickets to all levels of each event that there was controversy over seats being set aside for sponsors and National Delegations which went unused in the early days. A system of reallocation was put in place so the empty seats were filled throughout the Games.\nRecent Games.\nRio de Janeiro in Brazil hosted the 2016 Summer Olympics, becoming the first South American city to host the Olympics, the second Olympic host city in Latin America, after Mexico City in 1968, as well as the third city in the Southern Hemisphere to host the Olympics after Melbourne, Australia, in 1956 and Sydney, Australia, in 2000. The preparation for these Games was overshadowed by controversies, including political instability and an economic crisis in the host country, health and safety concerns surrounding the Zika virus, and significant pollution in the Guanabara Bay. However, these concerns were superseded by a state-sponsored doping scandal involving Russian athletes at the Winter Olympics held two years earlier, which affected the participation of its athletes in these Games.\nThe 2020 Summer Olympics were originally scheduled to take place from 24\u00a0July to 9\u00a0August 2020 in Tokyo, Japan. The city was the fifth in history to host the Games twice and the first Asian city to have this title. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the then-Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, the IOC and the Tokyo Organising Committee announced that the 2020 Games were to be delayed until 2021, marking the first time that the Olympic Games have been postponed. This was the first time since 1900 that the games were not held in a leap year, and were instead hosted on a non-leap year. Unlike previous Olympics, these Games took place without spectators because of concerns over COVID-19 and a state of emergency imposed in the host city. Nevertheless, the Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games featured many memorable moments and feats of technical excellence. One star of the Games, U.S. gymnast Simone Biles, gracefully bowed out to focus on her mental health, but later returned to claim an individual bronze medal. Norway's Karsten Warholm smashed his own world record in the 400m hurdles.\nThe 2024 Summer Olympics were held in Paris, France, making it the second city after London to host the Summer Olympics three times (the other times being 1900 and 1924, marking a centenary since the later). This is the first of any Olympic Games after the pandemic to allow spectators to attend. In a first, the opening ceremonies were staged outside the main stadium with the athletes parading down boats along the Seine River. Following this, the open water swimming competitions also occurred in the River.\nFuture Games.\nThe 2028 Summer Olympics will be held in Los Angeles, California, United States, making it the third city (after Paris (1900,1924, 2024) and London (1908, 1948, 2012)) to host the Games three times (the other times being 1932 and 1984), with the U.S. hosting the Summer Olympics for the fifth time.\nThe 2032 Summer Olympics will be held in Brisbane, Australia, which is the third city to host the Games in Australia and the fourth south of the equator.\nSports.\nThere has been a total of 42 sports, spanning 55 disciplines, included in the Olympic programme at one point or another in the history of the Games. The schedule has comprised 33 sports for the recent Summer Olympics (2020), with 32 sports planned for the next Summer Olympics (2024).\nThe various Olympic Sports federations are grouped under a common umbrella association, called the Association of Summer Olympic International Federations (ASOIF).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Current sport\u00a0\u00a0\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0No longer included\nQualification.\nQualification rules for each of the Olympic sports are set by the International Sports Federation (IF) that governs that sport's international competition.\nFor individual sports, competitors typically qualify by attaining a certain place in a major international event or on the IF's ranking list. There is a general rule that a maximum of three individual athletes may represent each nation per competition. National Olympic Committees (NOCs) may enter a limited number of qualified competitors in each event, and the NOC decides which qualified competitors to select as representatives in each event if more have attained the benchmark than can be entered.\nNations most often qualify teams for team sports through continental qualifying tournaments, in which each continental association is given a certain number of spots in the Olympic tournament. Each nation may be represented by no more than one team per competition; a team consists of just two people in some sports.\nSome National Olympic Committees, whose nations are underrepresented after qualifications, may be granted wild card quotas, which are termed \"Universality Places\", in some eligible sports.\nPopularity of Olympic sports.\nThe IOC divides Summer Olympic sports into five categories (A \u2013 E) based on popularity, gauged by six criteria: television viewing figures (40%), internet popularity (20%), public surveys (15%), ticket requests (10%), press coverage (10%), and number of national federations (5%). The category of a sport determines the share of Olympic revenue received by that sport's International Federation. Sports that were new to the 2016 Olympics (rugby and golf) have been placed in Category E.\nThe current categories are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;a Aquatics encompasses artistic swimming, diving, swimming, and water polo.\nAll-time medal table.\nThe table below uses official data provided by the IOC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Defunct nation\"\"\nMedal leaders by year.\nNumber of occurrences\nList of Summer Olympic Games.\nThe IOC has never decided which events of the early Games were \"Olympic\" and which were not. The founder of the modern Olympics, Pierre de Coubertin, ceded that determination to the organisers of those Games. \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27567", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27567", "title": "Shareware", "text": "Proprietary software whose full use is limited in time\nShareware is a term for proprietary software that is initially shared by the owner for trial use at little or no cost. Often the software has limited functionality or incomplete documentation until the user sends payment to the software developer. Shareware is often offered as a download from a website. Shareware differs from freeware, which is fully-featured software distributed at no cost to the user but without source code being made available; and free and open-source software, in which the source code is freely available for anyone to inspect and alter.\nThere are many types of shareware and, while they may not require an initial up-front payment, many are intended to generate revenue in one way or another. Some limit use to personal non-commercial purposes only, with purchase of a license required for use in a business enterprise. The software itself may be time-limited, or it may remind the user that payment would be appreciated.\nThe term \u201cshareware\u201d is largely out of use in the modern computing world, replaced by \u201ctrialware\u201d or \u201cfreemium\u201d.\nTypes of shareware.\nTrialware.\nTrialware or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;demoware is a program that limits the time that it can be effectively used, commonly via a built-in time limit, number of uses, or only allowing progression up to a certain point (e.g. in video games, see Game demo). The user can try out the fully featured program until the trial period is up, and then most trialware reverts to either a reduced-functionality (freemium, nagware, or crippleware) or non-functional mode, unless the user purchases a full version. Trialware has become normalized for online Software as a Service (SaaS). WinRAR is a notable example of an unlimited trialware, i.e. a program that retains its full functionality even after the trial period has ended.\nThe rationale behind trialware is to give potential users the opportunity to try out the program to judge its usefulness before purchasing a license. According to industry research firm Softletter, 66% of online companies surveyed had free-trial-to-paying-customer conversion rates of 25% or less. SaaS providers employ a wide range of strategies to nurture leads, and convert them into paying customers.\nFreemium.\nFreemium works by offering a product or service free of charge (typically digital offerings such as software, content, games, web services or other) while charging a premium for advanced features, functionality, or related products and services. For example, a fully functional feature-limited version may be given away for free, with advanced features disabled until a license fee is paid. The word \"freemium\" combines the two aspects of the business model: \"free\" and \"premium\". It has become a popular model especially in the antivirus industry.\nAdware.\nAdware, short for \"advertising-supported software\", is any software package which automatically renders advertisements in order to generate revenue for its author. Shareware is often packaged with adware to lower the shareware fees or eliminate the need to charge users a fee. The advertisements may take the form of a banner on an application window. The functions may be designed to analyze which websites the user visits and to present advertising pertinent to the types of goods or services featured there. The term is sometimes used to refer to software that displays unwanted advertisements, which typically are more intrusive and may appear as pop-ups, as is the case in most ad-oriented spyware. During the installation of the intended software, the user is presented with a requirement to agree to the terms of click through an end-user license agreement or similar licensing which governs the installation of the software.\nCrippleware.\nCrippleware has vital features of the program, such as printing or the ability to save files, disabled or unwanted features like watermarks on screencasting and video editing software until the user buys the software. This allows users to take a close look at the features of a program without being able to use it to generate output. The distinction between freemium and crippleware is that an unlicensed freemium program has useful functionality, while crippleware demonstrates its potential but is not useful on its own.\nDonationware.\nDonationware is a licensing model that supplies fully operational unrestricted software to the user and requests an optional donation be paid to the programmer or a third-party beneficiary (usually a non-profit). The amount of the donation may also be stipulated by the author, or it may be left to the discretion of the user, based on individual perceptions of the software's value. Since donationware comes fully operational (i.e. not crippleware) with payment optional, it is a type of freeware. In some cases, there is a delay to start the program or \"nag screen\" reminding the user that they haven't donated to the project. This nag feature and/or delayed start is often removed in an update once the user has donated to (paid for) the software.\nNagware.\nNagware (also known as begware, annoyware or a nagscreen) is a pejorative term for shareware that persistently reminds the user to purchase a license. It usually does this by popping up a message when the user starts the program, or intermittently while the user is using the application. These messages can appear as windows obscuring part of the screen, or as modal window message boxes that can quickly be closed. Some nagware keeps the message up for a certain time period and locking the application, forcing the user to wait to continue to use the program. Unlicensed programs that support printing, photo or video editing may superimpose a watermark on the printed or exported output, typically stating that the output was produced by an unlicensed copy.\nSome titles display a dialog box with payment information and a message that paying will remove the notice, which is usually displayed either upon startup or after an interval while the application is running. These notices are designed to annoy the user into paying.\nPostcardware.\nPostcardware, also called just cardware, is a style of software distribution similar to shareware, distributed by the author on the condition that users send the author a postcard. A variation of cardware, emailware, uses the same approach but requires the user to send the author an email. Postcardware, like other novelty software distribution terms, is often not strictly enforced. Cardware is similar to beerware.\nThe concept was first used by Aaron Giles, author of JPEGView. Another well-known piece of postcardware is the roguelike game \"Ancient Domains of Mystery\", whose author collects postcards from around the world. Orbitron is distributed as postcardware. Exifer is a popular application among digital photographers that has been postcardware. Caledos Automatic Wallpaper Changer is a \"still alive\" project cardware. \"Empathy\" is a postcardware for password-protected executables. Dual Module Player and Linux were also postcardware for a long time. An example for emailware is the video game \"Jump 'n Bump\". Another popular postcardware company is the Laravel package developers from Spatie, which has released over 200 open-source packages to the Laravel framework, which are postcardware licensed, and all shown at their website.\nHistory.\nIn 1982, Andrew Fluegelman created a program for the IBM PC called PC-Talk, a telecommunications program, and used the term \"freeware\"; he described it \"as an experiment in economics more than altruism\". About the same time, Jim \"Button\" Knopf released PC-File, a database program, calling it \"user-supported software\". Not much later, Bob Wallace produced PC-Write, a word processor, and called it \"shareware\". Appearing in an episode of \"Horizon\" titled \"Psychedelic Science\" originally broadcast 5 April 1998, Bob Wallace said the idea for shareware came to him \"to some extent as a result of my psychedelic experience\".\nFluegelman said that his experience as a book publisher and author discouraged him from finding a traditional software publisher. KQED pledge drives inspired his distribution method, as well as his not knowing how to implement copy protection.\nIn 1983 Jerry Pournelle wrote of \"an increasingly popular variant\" of free software \"that has no name, but works thus: 'If you like this, send me (the author) some money. I prefer cash.'\" In 1984, \"Softalk-PC\" magazine had a column, \"The Public Library\", about such software. \"Public domain\" is a misnomer for shareware, and \"Freeware\" was trademarked by Fluegelman and could not be used legally by others, and \"User-Supported Software\" was too cumbersome. So columnist Nelson Ford had a contest to come up with a better name.\nThe most popular name submitted was \"Shareware\", which was being used by Wallace. However, Wallace acknowledged that he got the term from an InfoWorld magazine column by that name in the 1970s, and that he considered the name to be generic, so its use became established over \"freeware\" and \"user-supported software\".\nBy 1984 Knopf reported receiving about $1,000 a day for PC-File, and by 1985 Fluegelman was receiving \"dozens of $35 checks\" daily. He had two employees to fulfill orders and answer questions for PC-Talk. By 1988 more than 27,000 registered PC-Write users were paying $1.5 million a year. Fluegelman, Knopf, and Wallace clearly established shareware as a viable software distribution model by becoming wealthy.\nPrior to the popularity of the World Wide Web and widespread Internet access, shareware was often the only economical way for independent software authors to get their product onto users' desktops. Those with Internet or BBS access could download software and distribute it amongst their friends or user groups, who would then be encouraged to send the registration fee to the author, usually via postal mail. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, shareware software was widely distributed over online services, bulletin board systems and on diskettes. Contrary to commercial developers who spent millions of dollars urging users \"Don't Copy That Floppy\", shareware developers encouraged users to upload the software and share it on disks.\nCommercial shareware distributors such as Educorp and Public Domain Inc printed catalogs describing thousands of public domain and shareware programs that were available for a small charge on floppy disk. These companies later made their entire catalog available on CD-ROM. One such distributor, \"Public Software Library\" (PSL), began an order-taking service for programmers who otherwise had no means of accepting credit card orders. Meanwhile, major online service provider CompuServe enabled people to pay (register) for software using their CompuServe accounts. When AOL bought out CompuServe, that part of CompuServe called SWREG (Shareware Registration) was sold to UK businessman Stephen Lee of Atlantic Coast PLC who placed the service on to the internet and enabled over 3,000 independent software developers to use SWREG as a back office to accept various payment methods including credit, debit and charge cards, PayPal and other services in multiple currencies. This worked in realtime so that a client could pay for software and instantly download it which was novel at the time. SWREG was eventually bought by Digital River, Inc. Also, services like Kagi started offering applications that authors could distribute along with their products that would present the user with an onscreen form to fill out, print, and mail along with their payment. Once telecommunications became more widespread, this service also expanded online. Toward the beginning of the Internet era, books compiling reviews of available shareware were published, sometimes targeting specific niches such as small business. These books would typically come with one or more floppy disks or CD-ROMs containing software from the book.\nAs Internet use grew, users turned to downloading shareware programs from FTP or web sites. This spelled the end of bulletin board systems and shareware disk distributors. At first, disk space on a server was hard to come by, so networks like Info-Mac were developed, consisting of non-profit mirror sites hosting large shareware libraries accessible via the web or ftp. With the advent of the commercial web hosting industry, the authors of shareware programs started their own sites where the public could learn about their programs and download the latest versions, and even pay for the software online. This erased one of the chief distinctions of shareware, as it was now most often downloaded from a central \"official\" location instead of being shared samizdat-style by its users. To ensure users would get the latest bug-fixes as well as an install untainted by viruses or other malware, some authors discouraged users from giving the software to their friends, encouraging them to send a link instead.\nMajor download sites such as VersionTracker and CNet's Download.com began to rank titles based on quality, feedback, and downloads. Popular software was sorted to the top of the list, along with products whose authors paid for preferred placement.\nRegistration.\nIf features are disabled in the freely accessible version, paying may provide the user with a license key or code they can enter into the software to disable the notices and enable full functionality. Some pirate web sites publish license codes for popular shareware, leading to a kind of arms race between the developer and the pirates where the developer disables pirated codes and the pirates attempt to find or generate new ones. Some software publishers have started accepting known pirated codes, using the opportunity to educate users on the economics of the shareware model.\nSome shareware relies entirely on the user's honesty and requires no password. Simply checking an \"I have paid\" checkbox in the application is all that is required to disable the registration notices.\nGames.\nIn the early 1990s, shareware distribution was a popular method of publishing games for smaller developers, including then-fledgling companies Apogee Software (also known as 3D Realms), Epic MegaGames (now Epic Games), Ambrosia Software and id Software. It gave consumers the chance to play the game before investing money in it, and it gave them exposure that some products would be unable to get in the retail space.\nWith the Kroz series, Apogee introduced the \"episodic\" shareware model that became the most popular incentive for buying a game. While the shareware game would be a truly complete game, there would be additional \"episodes\" of the game that were not shareware and could only be legally obtained by paying for the shareware episode. In some cases these episodes were neatly integrated and would feel like a longer version of the game, and in other cases the later episodes would be stand-alone games. Sometimes the additional content was completely integrated with the unregistered game, such as in Ambrosia's \"Escape Velocity\" series, in which a character representing the developer's pet parrot, equipped with an undefeatable ship, would periodically harass and destroy the player after they reached a certain level representing the end of the trial period.\nRacks of games on single 5\u00a01/4-inch and later 3.5-inch floppy disks were common in retail stores. However, computer shows and bulletin board systems (BBS) such as Software Creations BBS were the primary distributors of low-cost software. Free software from a BBS was the motivating force for consumers to purchase a computer equipped with a modem, so as to acquire software at no cost. The success of shareware games, including id Software hits \"Commander Keen\" and \"Doom\", depended in part on the BBS community's willingness to redistribute them from one BBS to another across North America. The reasons for redistribution included allowing modem users who could not afford long-distance calls the opportunity to view the games.\nThe important distinguishing feature between a shareware game and a game demo is that the shareware game is (at least in theory) a complete working software program albeit with reduced content compared to the full game, while a game demo omits significant functionality as well as content. Shareware games commonly offered both single player and multiplayer modes plus a significant fraction of the full game content such as the first of three episodes, while some even offered the entire product as shareware while unlocking additional content for registered users. By contrast a game demo may offer as little as one single-player level or consist solely of a multiplayer map, this makes them easier to prepare than a shareware game.\nIndustry standards and technologies.\nThere are several widely accepted standards and technologies that are used in the development and promotion of shareware.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27568", "revid": "49957049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27568", "title": "Substance theory", "text": "Basic ontological concept\nSubstance theory, or substance\u2013attribute theory, is an ontological theory positing that objects are constituted each by a \"substance\" and properties borne by the substance but distinct from it. In this role, a substance can be referred to as a \"substratum\" or a \"thing-in-itself\". \"Substances\" are particulars that are ontologically independent: they are able to exist all by themselves. Another defining feature often attributed to substances is their ability to \"undergo changes\". Changes involve something existing \"before\", \"during\" and \"after\" the change. They can be described in terms of a persisting substance gaining or losing properties. \"Attributes\" or \"properties\", on the other hand, are entities that can be exemplified by substances. Properties characterize their bearers; they express what their bearer is like.\n\"Substance\" is a key concept in ontology, the latter in turn part of metaphysics, which may be classified into monist, dualist, or pluralist varieties according to how many substances or individuals are said to populate, furnish, or exist in the world. According to monistic views, there is only one substance. Stoicism and Spinoza, for example, hold monistic views, that pneuma or God, respectively, is the one substance in the world. These modes of thinking are sometimes associated with the idea of immanence. Dualism sees the world as being composed of two fundamental substances (for example, the Cartesian substance dualism of mind and matter). Pluralist philosophies include Plato's Theory of Forms and Aristotle's hylomorphic categories.\nAncient Greek philosophy.\nAristotle.\nAristotle used the term \"substance\" ( \"ousia\") in a secondary sense for genera and species understood as hylomorphic forms. Primarily, however, he used it with regard to his category of substance, the specimen (\"this person\" or \"this horse\") or individual, \"qua\" individual, who survives accidental change and in whom the essential properties inhere that define those universals.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Aristotle\u2014\u200a\nIn chapter 6 of book I the \"Physics\" Aristotle argues that any change must be analysed in reference to the property of an invariant subject: as it was before the change and thereafter. Thus, in his hylomorphic account of change, what is known as \"prime matter\" serves as a relative substratum of transformation, i.e. prime matter as a metaphysical principal in pure potency for the reception of a substantial form. In the \"Categories\", properties are predicated only of substance, but in chapter 7 of book I of the \"Physics\", Aristotle discusses substances coming to be and passing away in the \"unqualified sense\" wherein primary substances (\u03c0\u03c1\u1ff6\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9 \u03bf\u1f50\u03c3\u03af\u03b1\u03b9; \"Categories\" 2a35) are generated from (or perish into) a material substratum by having gained (or lost) the essential property that formally defines substances of that kind (in the secondary sense). Examples of such a substantial change include not only conception and dying, but also metabolism, e.g., the bread a man eats becomes the man. On the other hand, in accidental change, because the essential property remains unchanged, by identifying the substance with its formal essence, substance may thereby serve as the relative subject matter or property-bearer of change in a qualified sense (i.e., barring matters of life or death). An example of this sort of accidental change is a change of color or size: a tomato becomes red, or a juvenile horse grows.\nAristotle thinks that in addition to primary substances (which are particulars), there are secondary substances (\u03b4\u03b5\u03cd\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03b1\u03b9 \u03bf\u1f50\u03c3\u03af\u03b1\u03b9), which are universals (\"Categories\" 2a11\u2013a18).\nHowever, according to Aristotle's theology, a form of invariant form exists without matter, beyond the cosmos, powerless and oblivious, in the eternal substance of the unmoved mover.\nPyrrhonism.\nEarly Pyrrhonism rejected the idea that substances exist. Pyrrho put this as:\n\"Whoever wants to live well (eudaimonia) must consider these three questions: First, how are \"pragmata\" (ethical matters, affairs, topics) by nature? Secondly, what attitude should we adopt towards them? Thirdly, what will be the outcome for those who have this attitude?\" Pyrrho's answer is that \"As for \"pragmata\" they are all adiaphora (undifferentiated by a logical differentia), \"astathm\u0113ta\" (unstable, unbalanced, not measurable), and \"anepikrita\" (unjudged, unfixed, undecidable). Therefore, neither our sense-perceptions nor our \"doxai\" (views, theories, beliefs) tell us the truth or lie; so we certainly should not rely on them. Rather, we should be \"adoxastoi\" (without views), \"aklineis\" (uninclined toward this side or that), and \"akradantoi\" (unwavering in our refusal to choose), saying about every single one that it no more is than it is not or it both is and is not or it neither is nor is not.\nStoicism.\nThe Stoics rejected the idea that incorporeal beings inhere in matter, as taught by Plato. They believed that all being is corporeal infused with a creative fire called pneuma. Thus they developed a scheme of categories different from Aristotle's based on the ideas of Anaxagoras and Timaeus. The fundamental basis of Stoicism in this context was a universally consistent ethical and moral code that should be maintained at all time, the physical belief of beings as matter is an important philosophical footnote, as it marked the start of thinking as beings as inherently linked to reality, instead of to some abstract heaven.\nNeoplatonism.\nNeoplatonists argue that beneath the surface phenomena that present themselves to our senses are three higher spiritual principles or hypostases, each one more sublime than the preceding. For Plotinus, these are the soul or world-soul, being/intellect or divine mind (\"nous\"), and \"the one\".\nEarly modern philosophy.\nRen\u00e9 Descartes means by a substance an entity which exists in such a way that it needs no other entity in order to exist. Therefore, only God is a substance in this strict sense. However, he extends the term to created things, which need only the concurrence of God to exist. He maintained that two of these are mind and body, each being distinct from the other in their attributes and therefore in their essence, and neither needing the other in order to exist. This is Descartes' substance dualism.\nBaruch Spinoza denied Descartes' \"real distinction\" between mind and matter. Substance, according to Spinoza, is one and indivisible, but has multiple \"attributes\". He regards an attribute, though, as \"what we conceive as constituting the [single] essence of substance\". The single essence of one substance can be conceived of as material and also, consistently, as mental. What is ordinarily called the natural world, together with all the individuals in it, is immanent in God: hence his famous phrase \"deus sive natura\" (\"God or Nature\").\nJohn Locke views substance through a corpuscularian lens where it exhibits two types of qualities which both stem from a source. He believes that humans are born \"tabula rasa\" or \"blank slate\" \u2013 without innate knowledge. In \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" Locke writes that \"first essence may be taken for the very being of anything, whereby it is, what it is.\" If humans are born without any knowledge, the way to receive knowledge is through perception of a certain object. But, according to Locke, an object exists in its primary qualities, no matter whether the human perceives it or not; it just exists. For example, an apple has qualities or properties that determine its existence apart from human perception of it, such as its mass or texture. The apple itself is also \"pure substance in which is supposed to provide some sort of 'unknown support' to the observable qualities of things\" that the human mind perceives. The foundational or support qualities are called primary essences which \"in the case of physical substances, are the underlying physical causes of the object's observable qualities\". But then what is an object except \"the owner or support of other properties\"? Locke rejects Aristotle's category of the forms, and develops mixed ideas about what substance or \"first essence\" means. Locke's solution to confusion about first essence is to argue that objects simply are what they are \u2013 made up of microscopic particles existing because they exist. According to Locke, the mind cannot completely grasp the idea of a substance as it \"always falls beyond knowledge\". There is a gap between what first essence truly means and the mind's perception of it that Locke believes the mind cannot bridge, objects in their primary qualities must exist apart from human perception.\nThe molecular combination of atoms in first essence then forms the solid base that humans can perceive and add qualities to describe - the only way humans can possibly begin to perceive an object. The way to perceive the qualities of an apple is from the combination of the primary qualities to form the secondary qualities. These qualities are then used to group the substances into different categories that \"depend on the properties [humans] happen to be able to perceive\". The taste of an apple or the feeling of its smoothness are not traits inherent to the fruit but are the power of the primary qualities to produce an idea about that object in the mind. The reason that humans can not sense the actual primary qualities is the mental distance from the object; thus, Locke argues, objects remain nominal for humans. Therefore, the argument then returns to how \"a philosopher has no other idea of those substances than what is framed by a collection of those simple ideas which are found in them.\" The mind's conception of substances \"[is] complex rather than simple\" and \"has no (supposedly innate) clear and distinct idea of matter that can be revealed through intellectual abstraction away from sensory qualities\".\nThe last quality of substance is the way the perceived qualities seem to begin to change \u2013 such as a candle melting; this quality is called the tertiary quality. Tertiary qualities \"of a body are those powers in it that, by virtue of its primary qualities, give it the power to produce observable changes in the primary qualities of other bodies\"; \"the power of the sun to melt wax is a tertiary quality of the sun\". They are \"mere powers; qualities such as flexibility, ductility; and the power of sun to melt wax\". This goes along with \"passive power: the capacity a thing has for being changed by another thing\". In any object, at the core are the primary qualities (unknowable by the human mind), the secondary quality (how primary qualities are perceived), and tertiary qualities (the power of the combined qualities to make a change to the object itself or to other objects).\nRobert Boyle's corpuscularian hypothesis states that \"all material bodies are composites of ultimately small particles of matter\" that \"have the same material qualities as the larger composite bodies do\". Using this basis, Locke defines his first group, primary qualities, as \"the ones that a body doesn't lose, however much it alters.\" The materials retain their primary qualities even if they are broken down because of the unchanging nature of their atomic particles. If someone is curious about an object and they say it is solid and extended, these two descriptors are primary qualities. The second group consists of secondary qualities which are \"really nothing but the powers to produce various sensations in us by their primary qualities.\" Locke argues that the impressions our senses perceive from the objects (i.e. taste, sounds, colors, etc.) are not natural properties of the object itself, but things they induce in us by means of the \"size, shape, texture, and motion of their imperceptible parts.\" The bodies send insensible particles to our senses which let us perceive the object through different faculties; what we perceive is based on the object's composition. With these qualities, people can achieve the object through bringing \"co-existing powers and sensible qualities to a common ground for explanation\". Locke supposes that one wants to know what \"binds these qualities\" into an object, and argues that a \"substratum\" or \"substance\" has this effect, defining \"substance\" as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he idea of ours to which we give the general name \"substance\", being nothing but the supposed but unknown support of those qualities we find existing and which we imagine can't exist \"sine re substante\" \u2014 that is, without some thing to support them \u2014 we call that support \"substantia\"; which, according to the true meaning of the word, is in plain English \"standing under\" or \"upholding\".\u2014\u200a\nThis substratum is a construct of the mind in an attempt to bind all the qualities seen together; it is only \"a supposition of\nan unknown support of qualities that are able to cause simple\nideas in us.\" Without making a substratum, people would be at a loss as to how different qualities relate. Locke does, however, mention that this substratum is an unknown, relating it to the story of the world on the turtle's back and how the believers eventually had to concede that the turtle just rested on \"something he knew not what\". This is how the mind perceives all things and from which it can make ideas about them; it is entirely relative, but it does provide a \"regularity and consistency to our ideas\". Substance, overall, has two sets of qualities \u2014 those that define it, and those related to how we perceive it. These qualities rush to our minds, which must organize them. As a result, our mind creates a substratum (or \"substance\") for these objects, into which it groups related qualities.\nCriticism of soul as substance.\nKant observed that the assertion of a spiritual soul as substance could be a synthetic proposition which, however, was unproved and completely arbitrary. Introspection does not reveal any diachronic substrate remaining unchanged throughout life. The temporal structure of consciousness is retentive-perceptive-prognostic. The selfhood arises as result of several informative flows: (1) signals from our own body; (2) retrieved memories and forecasts; (3) the affective load: dispositions and aversions; (4) reflections in other minds. Mental acts have the feature of appropriation: they are always attached to some pre-reflective consciousness. As visual perception is only possible from a definite point of view, so inner experience is given together with self-consciousness. The latter is not an autonomous mental act, but a formal way how the first person has their experience. From the pre-reflective consciousness, the person gains conviction of their existence. This conviction is immune to false reference. The concept of person is prior to the concepts of subject and body. The reflective self-consciousness is a conceptual and elaborate cognition. Selfhood is a self-constituting effigy, a task to be accomplished. Humans are incapable of comprising all their experience within the current state of consciousness; overlapping memories are critical for personal integrity. Appropriated experience can be recollected. At stage B, we remember the experience of stage A; at stage C, we may be aware of the mental acts of stage B. The idea of self-identity is enforced by the relatively slow changes of our body and social situation. Personal identity may be explained without accepting a spiritual agent as subject of mental activity. Associative connection between life episodes is necessary and sufficient for the maintenance of a united selfhood. Personal character and memories can persist after radical mutation of the body.\nIrreducible concepts.\nTwo irreducible concepts encountered in substance theory are the \"bare particular\" and \"inherence\".\nBare particular.\nIn substance theory, a bare particular of an object is the element without which the object would not exist, that is, its substance, which exists independently from its properties, even if it is impossible for it to lack properties entirely. It is \"bare\" because it is considered without its properties and \"particular\" because it is not abstract. The properties that the substance has are said to inhere in the substance.\nInherence.\nAnother primitive concept in substance theory is the inherence of properties within a substance. For example, in the sentence, \"The apple is red\" substance theory says that red inheres in the apple. Substance theory takes the meaning of an apple having the property of redness to be understood, and likewise that of a property's inherence in substance, which is similar to, but not identical with, being part of the substance.\nThe inverse relation is participation. Thus in the example above, just as red inheres in the apple, so the apple participates in red.\nArguments supporting the theory.\nTwo common arguments supporting substance theory are the argument from grammar and the argument from conception.\nArgument from grammar.\nThe argument from grammar uses traditional grammar to support substance theory. For example, the sentence \"Snow is white\" contains a grammatical subject \"snow\" and the predicate \"is white\", thereby asserting \"snow is white\". The argument holds that it makes no grammatical sense to speak of \"whiteness\" disembodied, without asserting that snow or something else \"is\" white. Meaningful assertions are formed by virtue of a grammatical subject, of which properties may be predicated, and in substance theory, such assertions are made with regard to a substance.\nBundle theory rejects the argument from grammar on the basis that a grammatical subject does not necessarily refer to a metaphysical subject. Bundle theory, for example, maintains that the grammatical subject of a statement refers to its properties. For example, a bundle theorist understands the grammatical subject of the sentence, \"Snow is white\", to be a bundle of properties such as white. Accordingly, one can make meaningful statements about bodies without referring to substances.\nArgument from conception.\nAnother argument for the substance theory is the argument from conception. The argument claims that in order to conceive of an object's properties, like the redness of an apple, one must conceive of the object that has those properties. According to the argument, one cannot conceive of redness, or any other property, distinct from the substance that has that property.\nCriticism.\nThe idea of substance was famously critiqued by David Hume, who held that since substance cannot be perceived, it should not be assumed to independently exist.\nFriedrich Nietzsche, and after him Martin Heidegger, Michel Foucault and Gilles Deleuze also rejected the notion of \"substance\", and in the same movement the concept of subject \u2013seeing both concepts as holdovers from Platonic idealism. For this reason, Althusser's \"anti-humanism\" and Foucault's statements were criticized, by J\u00fcrgen Habermas and others, for misunderstanding that this led to a fatalist conception of social determinism. For Habermas, only a subjective form of liberty could be conceived, to the contrary of Deleuze who talks about \"\"a\" life\", as an impersonal and immanent form of liberty.\nFor Heidegger, Descartes means by \"substance\" that by which \"we can understand nothing else than an entity which \"is\" in such a way that it need no other entity in order to \"be\".\" Therefore, only God is a substance as \"Ens perfectissimus\" (most perfect being). Heidegger showed the inextricable relationship between the concept of substance and of subject, which explains why, instead of talking about \"man\" or \"humankind\", he speaks about the \"Dasein\", which is not a simple subject, nor a substance.\nAlfred North Whitehead has argued that the concept of substance has only a limited applicability in everyday life and that metaphysics should rely upon the concept of process.\nRoman Catholic theologian Karl Rahner, as part of his critique of transubstantiation, rejected substance theory and instead proposed the doctrine of \"transfinalization\", which he felt was more attuned to modern philosophy. However, this doctrine was rejected by Pope Paul VI in his encyclical \"Mysterium fidei\".\nBundle theory.\nIn direct opposition to substance theory is bundle theory, whose most basic premise is that all concrete particulars are merely constructions or 'bundles' of attributes or qualitative properties:\nNecessarily, for any concrete entity, formula_1, if for any entity, formula_2, formula_2 is a constituent of formula_1, then formula_2 is an attribute.\nThe bundle theorist's principal objections to substance theory concern the bare particulars of a substance, which substance theory considers independently of the substance's properties. The bundle theorist objects to the notion of a thing with no properties, claiming that such a thing is inconceivable and citing John Locke, who described a substance as \"a something, I know not what.\" To the bundle theorist, as soon as one has any notion of a substance in mind, a property accompanies that notion.\nIdentity of indiscernibles counterargument.\nThe indiscernibility argument from the substance theorist targets those bundle theorists who are also metaphysical realists. Metaphysical realism uses the identity of \"universals\" to compare and identify particulars. Substance theorists say that bundle theory is incompatible with metaphysical realism due to the identity of indiscernibles: particulars may differ from one another only with respect to their attributes or relations.\nThe substance theorist's indiscernibility argument against the metaphysically realistic bundle theorist states that numerically different concrete particulars are discernible from the self-same concrete particular only by virtue of qualitatively different attributes.\nNecessarily, for any complex objects, formula_1 and formula_2, if for any entity, formula_8, formula_8 is a constituent of formula_1 if and only if formula_8 is a constituent of formula_2, then formula_1 is numerically identical with formula_2.\nThe indiscernibility argument points out that if bundle theory and discernible concrete particulars theory explain the relationship between attributes, then the identity of indiscernibles theory must also be true:\nNecessarily, for any concrete objects, formula_1 and formula_2, if for any attribute, \u03a6, \u03a6 is an attribute of formula_1 if and only if \u03a6 is an attribute of formula_2, then formula_1 is numerically identical with formula_2.\nThe indiscernibles argument then asserts that the identity of indiscernibles is violated, for example, by identical sheets of paper. All of their qualitative properties are the same (e.g. white, rectangular, 9 x 11\u00a0inches...) and thus, the argument claims, bundle theory and metaphysical realism cannot both be correct.\nHowever, bundle theory combined with trope theory (as opposed to metaphysical realism) avoids the indiscernibles argument because each attribute is a trope if can only be held by only one concrete particular.\nThe argument does not consider whether \"position\" should be considered an attribute or relation. It is after all through the differing positions that we in practice differentiate between otherwise identical pieces of paper.\nReligious philosophy.\nChristianity.\nThe Christian writers of antiquity adhered to the Aristotelian conception of substance. Their peculiarity was the use of this idea for the discernment of theological nuances. Clement of Alexandria considered both material and spiritual substances: blood and milk; mind and soul, respectively. Origen may be the first theologian expressing Christ's similarity with the Father as consubstantiality. Tertullian professed the same view in the West. The ecclesiastics of the Cappadocian group (Basil of Caesarea, Gregory of Nazianzus, Gregory of Nyssa) taught that the Trinity had a single substance in three hypostases individualized by the relations among them. In later ages, the meaning of \"substance\" became more important because of the dogma of the Eucharist. Hildebert of Lavardin, archbishop of Tours, introduced the term \"transubstantiation\" about 1080; its use spread after the Fourth Council of the Lateran in 1215.\nAccording to Thomas Aquinas, beings may possess substance in three different modes. Together with other Medieval philosophers, he interpreted God's epithet \"El Shaddai\" (Genesis 17:1) as self-sufficient and concluded that God's essence was identical with existence. Aquinas also deemed the substance of spiritual creatures identical with their essence (or form); therefore he considered each angel to belong to its own distinct species. In Aquinas' view, composite substances consist of form and matter. Human substantial form, i.e. soul, receives its individuality from body. \nBuddhism.\nBuddhism rejects the concept of substance. Complex structures are comprehended as an aggregate of components without any essence. Just as the junction of parts is called cart, so the collections of elements are called things. All formations are unstable (\"anicc\u0101\") and lacking any constant core or \"self\" (\"anatt\u0101\"). Physical objects have no metaphysical substrate. Arising entities hang on previous ones conditionally: in the notable teaching on interdependent origination, effects arise not as caused by agents but conditioned by former situations. Our senses, perception, feelings, wishes and consciousness are flowing, the view \"satk\u0101ya-d\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e6di\" of their permanent carrier is rejected as fallacious. The school of Madhyamaka, namely N\u0101g\u0101rjuna, introduced the idea of the ontological void (\"\u015b\u016bnyat\u0101\"). The Buddhist metaphysics Abhidharma presumes particular forces which determine the origin, persistence, aging and decay of everything in the world. Vasubandhu added a special force making a human, called \"\"apr\u0101pti\" or \"p\u1e5bthagjanatvam\"\". Because of the absence of a substantial soul, the belief in personal immortality loses foundation. Instead of deceased beings, new ones emerge whose fate is destined by the karmic law. The Buddha admitted the empirical identity of persons testified by their birth, name, and age. He approved the authorship of deeds and responsibility of performers. The disciplinary practice in the Sangha including reproaches, confession and expiation of transgressions, requires continuing personalities as its justification.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27570", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27570", "title": "Samurai 1-- Musashi Miyamoto", "text": ""}
{"id": "27571", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27571", "title": "Siebold", "text": "Siebold or von Siebold is a German surname. It is a patronymic surname derived from the given name Siebold, which consists of the Old High German words \"sigu\" (\"Victory\") and \"bold\" (\"strong\"). \nNotable people with the surname include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "27573", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27573", "title": "Superfluid helium-4", "text": "State of matter at low temperatures\nSuperfluid helium-4 (helium II or He-II) is the superfluid form of helium-4, the most common isotope of the element helium. The substance, which resembles other liquids such as helium I (conventional, non-superfluid liquid helium), flows without friction past any surface, which allows it to continue to circulate over obstructions and through pores in containers which hold it, subject only to its own inertia.\nThe formation of the superfluid is a manifestation of the formation of a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate of helium atoms. This condensation occurs in liquid helium-4 at a far higher temperature (2.17\u00a0K) than it does in helium-3 (2.5\u00a0mK) because each atom of helium-4 is a boson particle, by virtue of its zero spin. Helium-3, however, is a fermion particle, which can form bosons only by pairing with itself at much lower temperatures, in a weaker process that is similar to the electron pairing in superconductivity.\nHistory.\nKnown as a major facet in the study of quantum hydrodynamics and macroscopic quantum phenomena, the superfluidity effect was discovered by Pyotr Kapitsa and John F. Allen, and Don Misener in 1937. Onnes possibly observed the superfluid phase transition on August 2, 1911, the same day that he observed superconductivity in mercury. It has since been described through phenomenological and microscopic theories.\nIn the 1950s, Hall and Vinen performed experiments establishing the existence of quantized vortex lines in superfluid helium. In the 1960s, Rayfield and Reif established the existence of quantized vortex rings. Packard has observed the intersection of vortex lines with the free surface of the fluid,\nand Avenel and Varoquaux have studied the Josephson effect in superfluid helium-4. In 2006, a group at the University of Maryland visualized quantized vortices by using small tracer particles of solid hydrogen.\nIn the early 2000s, physicists created a Fermionic condensate from pairs of ultra-cold fermionic atoms. Under certain conditions, fermion pairs form diatomic molecules and undergo Bose\u2013Einstein condensation. At the other limit, the fermions (most notably superconducting electrons) form Cooper pairs which also exhibit superfluidity. This work with ultra-cold atomic gases has allowed scientists to study the region in between these two extremes, known as the BEC-BCS crossover.\nSupersolids may also have been discovered in 2004 by physicists at Penn State University. When helium-4 is cooled below about 200\u00a0mK under high pressures, a fraction (\u22481%) of the solid appears to become superfluid. By quench cooling or lengthening the annealing time, thus increasing or decreasing the defect density respectively, it was shown, via torsional oscillator experiment, that the supersolid fraction could be made to range from 20% to completely non-existent. This suggested that the supersolid nature of helium-4 is not intrinsic to helium-4 but a property of helium-4 and disorder. Some emerging theories posit that the supersolid signal observed in helium-4 was actually an observation of either a superglass state or intrinsically superfluid grain boundaries in the helium-4 crystal.\nApplications.\nRecently in the field of chemistry, superfluid helium-4 has been successfully used in spectroscopic techniques as a quantum solvent. Referred to as superfluid helium droplet spectroscopy (SHeDS), it is of great interest in studies of gas molecules, as a single molecule solvated in a superfluid medium allows a molecule to have effective rotational freedom, allowing it to behave similarly to how it would in the \"gas\" phase. Droplets of superfluid helium also have a characteristic temperature of about 0.4\u00a0K which cools the solvated molecule(s) to its ground or nearly ground rovibronic state.\nSuperfluids are also used in high-precision devices such as gyroscopes, which allow the measurement of some theoretically predicted gravitational effects (for an example, see Gravity Probe B).\nThe Infrared Astronomical Satellite IRAS, launched in January 1983 to gather infrared data was cooled by 73 kilograms of superfluid helium, maintaining a temperature of . When used in conjunction with helium-3, temperatures as low as 40\u00a0mK are routinely achieved in extreme low temperature experiments. The helium-3, in liquid state at 3.2\u00a0K, can be evaporated into the superfluid helium-4, where it acts as a gas due to the latter's properties as a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate. This evaporation pulls energy from the overall system, which can be pumped out in a way completely analogous to normal refrigeration techniques. (See dilution refrigerator)\nSuperfluid-helium technology is used to extend the temperature range of cryocoolers to lower temperatures. So far, the limit is 1.19\u00a0K, but there is a potential to reach 0.7\u00a0K.\nProperties.\nSuperfluids, such as helium-4 below the lambda point (known, for simplicity, as helium II), exhibit many unusual properties. A superfluid acts as if it were a mixture of a normal component, with all the properties of a normal fluid, and a superfluid component. The superfluid component has zero viscosity and zero entropy. Application of heat to a spot in superfluid helium results in a flow of the normal component which takes care of the heat transport at relatively high velocity (up to 20\u00a0cm/s) which leads to a very high effective thermal conductivity.\nFilm flow.\nMany ordinary liquids, like alcohol or petroleum, creep up solid walls, driven by their surface tension. Liquid helium also has this property, but, in the case of He-II, the flow of the liquid in the layer is not restricted by its viscosity but by a critical velocity which is about 20\u00a0cm/s. This is a fairly high velocity so superfluid helium can flow relatively easily up the wall of containers, over the top, and down to the same level as the surface of the liquid inside the container, in a siphon effect. It was, however, observed, that the flow through nanoporous membrane becomes restricted if the pore diameter is less than 0.7\u00a0nm (i.e. roughly three times the classical diameter of helium atom), suggesting the unusual hydrodynamic properties of He arise at larger scale than in the classical liquid helium.\nRotation.\nAnother fundamental property becomes visible if a superfluid is placed in a rotating container. Instead of rotating uniformly with the container, the rotating state consists of quantized vortices. That is, when the container is rotated at speeds below the first critical angular velocity, the liquid remains perfectly stationary. Once the first critical angular velocity is reached, the superfluid will form a vortex. The vortex strength is quantized, that is, a superfluid can only spin at certain \"allowed\" values. Rotation in a normal fluid, like water, is not quantized. If the rotation speed is increased more and more quantized vortices will be formed which arrange in nice patterns similar to the Abrikosov lattice in a superconductor.\nComparison with helium-3.\nAlthough the phenomenologies of the superfluid states of helium-4 and helium-3 are very similar, the microscopic details of the transitions are very different. Helium-4 atoms are bosons, and their superfluidity can be understood in terms of the Bose\u2013Einstein statistics that they obey. Specifically, the superfluidity of helium-4 can be regarded as a consequence of Bose\u2013Einstein condensation in an interacting system. On the other hand, helium-3 atoms are fermions, and the superfluid transition in this system is described by a generalization of the BCS theory of superconductivity. In it, Cooper pairing takes place between atoms rather than electrons, and the attractive interaction between them is mediated by spin fluctuations rather than phonons. (See fermion condensate.) A unified description of superconductivity and superfluidity is possible in terms of gauge symmetry breaking.\nMacroscopic theory.\nThermodynamics.\nFigure 1 is the phase diagram of 4He. It is a pressure-temperature (p-T) diagram indicating the solid and liquid regions separated by the melting curve (between the liquid and solid state) and the liquid and gas region, separated by the vapor-pressure line. This latter ends in the critical point where the difference between gas and liquid disappears. The diagram shows the remarkable property that 4He is liquid even at absolute zero. 4He is only solid at pressures above 25 bar.\nFigure 1 also shows the \u03bb-line. This is the line that separates two fluid regions in the phase diagram indicated by He-I and He-II. In the He-I region the helium behaves like a normal fluid; in the He-II region the helium is superfluid.\nThe name lambda-line comes from the specific heat \u2013 temperature plot which has the shape of the Greek letter \u03bb. See figure 2, which shows a peak at 2.172 K, the so-called \u03bb-point of 4He.\nBelow the lambda line the liquid can be described by the so-called two-fluid model. It behaves as if it consists of two components: a normal component, which behaves like a normal fluid, and a superfluid component with zero viscosity and zero entropy. The ratios of the respective densities \u03c1n/\u03c1 and \u03c1s/\u03c1, with \u03c1n (\u03c1s) the density of the normal (superfluid) component, and \u03c1 (the total density), depends on temperature and is represented in figure 3. By lowering the temperature, the fraction of the superfluid density increases from zero at \"T\"\u03bb to one at zero kelvins. Below 1\u00a0K the helium is almost completely superfluid.\nIt is possible to create density waves of the normal component (and hence of the superfluid component since \u03c1n + \u03c1s = constant) which are similar to ordinary sound waves. This effect is called second sound. Due to the temperature dependence of \u03c1n (figure 3) these waves in \u03c1n are also temperature waves.\nSuperfluid hydrodynamics.\nThe equation of motion for the superfluid component, in a somewhat simplified form, is given by Newton's law\nformula_1\nThe mass formula_2 is the molar mass of 4He, and formula_3 is the velocity of the superfluid component. The time derivative is the so-called hydrodynamic derivative, i.e. the rate of increase of the velocity when moving with the fluid. In the case of superfluid 4He in the gravitational field the force is given by\nformula_4\nIn this expression formula_5 is the molar chemical potential, formula_6 the gravitational acceleration, and formula_7 the vertical coordinate. Thus we get the equation which states that the thermodynamics of a certain constant will be amplified by the force of the natural gravitational acceleration\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEq.\u00a0(1) only holds if formula_8 is below a certain critical value, which usually is determined by the diameter of the flow channel.\nIn classical mechanics the force is often the gradient of a potential energy. Eq.\u00a0(1) shows that, in the case of the superfluid component, the force contains a term due to the gradient of the chemical potential. This is the origin of the remarkable properties of He-II such as the fountain effect.\nFountain pressure.\nIn order to rewrite Eq.(1) in more familiar form we use the general formula\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHere formula_9 is the molar entropy and formula_10 the molar volume. With Eq.(2) formula_11 can be found by a line integration in the formula_12\u2013formula_13 plane. First, we integrate from the origin formula_14 to formula_15, so at formula_16. Next, we integrate from formula_15 to formula_18, so with constant pressure (see figure 6). In the first integral formula_19 and in the second formula_20. With Eq.(2) we obtain\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe are interested only in cases where formula_12 is small so that formula_10 is practically constant. So\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_23 is the molar volume of the liquid at formula_16 and formula_25. The other term in Eq.(3) is also written as a product of formula_23 and a quantity formula_27 which has the dimension of pressure\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe pressure formula_28 is called the fountain pressure. It can be calculated from the entropy of 4He which, in turn, can be calculated from the heat capacity. For formula_29 the fountain pressure is equal to 0.692 bar. With a density of liquid helium of 125\u00a0kg/m3 and g = 9.8\u00a0m/s2 this corresponds with a liquid-helium column of 56-meter height. So, in many experiments, the fountain pressure has a bigger effect on the motion of the superfluid helium than gravity.\nWith Eqs.(4) and (5), Eq.(3) obtains the form\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSubstitution of Eq.(6) in (1) gives\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwith formula_30 the density of liquid 4He at zero pressure and temperature.\nEq.(7) shows that the superfluid component is accelerated by gradients in the pressure and in the gravitational field, as usual, but also by a gradient in the fountain pressure.\nSo far Eq.(5) has only mathematical meaning, but in special experimental arrangements formula_28 can show up as a real pressure. Figure 7 shows two vessels both containing He-II. The left vessel is supposed to be at zero kelvins (formula_32) and zero pressure (formula_33). The vessels are connected by a so-called superleak. This is a tube, filled with a very fine powder, so the flow of the normal component is blocked. However, the superfluid component can flow through this superleak without any problem (below a critical velocity of about 20\u00a0cm/s). In the steady state formula_34 so Eq.(7) implies\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere the indexes formula_35 and formula_36 apply to the left and right side of the superleak respectively. In this particular case formula_33, formula_38, and formula_39 (since formula_40). Consequently,\nformula_41\nThis means that the pressure in the right vessel is equal to the fountain pressure at formula_42.\nIn an experiment, arranged as in figure 8, a fountain can be created. The fountain effect is used to drive the circulation of 3He in dilution refrigerators.\nHeat transport.\nFigure 9 depicts a heat-conduction experiment between two temperatures formula_43 and formula_44 connected by a tube filled with He-II. When heat is applied to the hot end a pressure builds up at the hot end according to Eq.(7). This pressure drives the normal component from the hot end to the cold end according to\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHere formula_45 is the viscosity of the normal component, formula_46 some geometrical factor, and formula_47 the volume flow. The normal flow is balanced by a flow of the superfluid component from the cold to the hot end. At the end sections a normal to superfluid conversion takes place and vice versa. So, heat is transported, not by heat conduction, but by convection. This kind of heat transport is very effective, so the thermal conductivity of He-II is very much better than the best materials. The situation is comparable with heat pipes where heat is transported via gas\u2013liquid conversion. The high thermal conductivity of He-II is applied for stabilizing superconducting magnets such as in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN.\nMicroscopic theory.\nLandau two-fluid approach.\nL. D. Landau's phenomenological and semi-microscopic theory of superfluidity of helium-4 earned him the Nobel Prize in physics, in 1962. Assuming that sound waves are the most important excitations in helium-4 at low temperatures, he showed that helium-4 flowing past a wall would not spontaneously create excitations if the flow velocity was less than the sound velocity. In this model, the sound velocity is the \"critical velocity\" above which superfluidity is destroyed. (Helium-4 actually has a lower flow velocity than the sound velocity, but this model is useful to illustrate the concept.) Landau also showed that the sound wave and other excitations could equilibrate with one another and flow separately from the rest of the helium-4, which is known as the \"condensate\".\nFrom the momentum and flow velocity of the excitations he could then define a \"normal fluid\" density, which is zero at zero temperature and increases with temperature. At the so-called Lambda temperature, where the normal fluid density equals the total density, the helium-4 is no longer superfluid.\nTo explain the early specific heat data on superfluid helium-4, Landau posited the existence of a type of excitation he called a \"roton\", but as better data became available, he considered that the \"roton\" was the same as a high momentum version of sound.\nThe Landau theory does not elaborate on the microscopic structure of the superfluid component of liquid helium. The first attempts to create a microscopic theory of the superfluid component itself were done by London and subsequently, Tisza.\nOther microscopical models have been proposed by different authors. Their main objective is to derive the form of the inter-particle potential between helium atoms in superfluid state from first principles of quantum mechanics.\nTo date, a number of models of this kind have been proposed, including: models with vortex rings, hard-sphere models, and Gaussian cluster theories.\nVortex ring model.\nLandau thought that vorticity entered superfluid helium-4 by vortex sheets, but such sheets have since been shown to be unstable.\nLars Onsager and, later independently, Feynman showed that vorticity enters by quantized vortex lines. They also developed the idea of quantum vortex rings.\nArie Bijl in the 1940s,\nand Richard Feynman around 1955, developed microscopic theories for the roton, which was shortly observed with inelastic neutron experiments by Palevsky. Later on, Feynman admitted that his model gives only qualitative agreement with experiment.\nHard-sphere models.\nThe models are based on the simplified form of the inter-particle potential between helium-4 atoms in the superfluid phase. Namely, the potential is assumed to be of the hard-sphere type.\nIn these models the famous Landau (roton) spectrum of excitations is qualitatively reproduced.\nGaussian cluster approach.\nThis is a two-scale approach which describes the superfluid component of liquid helium-4. It consists of two nested models linked via parametric space. The short-wavelength part describes the interior structure of the fluid element using a non-perturbative approach based on the logarithmic Schr\u00f6dinger equation; it suggests the Gaussian-like behaviour of the element's interior density and interparticle interaction potential. The long-wavelength part is the quantum many-body theory of such elements which deals with their dynamics and interactions. The approach provides a unified description of the phonon, maxon and roton excitations, and has noteworthy agreement with experiment: with one essential parameter to fit one reproduces at high accuracy the Landau roton spectrum, sound velocity and structure factor of superfluid helium-4. This model utilizes the general theory of quantum Bose liquids with logarithmic nonlinearities which is based on introducing a dissipative-type contribution to energy related to the quantum Everett\u2013Hirschman entropy function.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27574", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27574", "title": "Simon Flexner", "text": "American physician and scientist (1863\u20131946)\nSimon Flexner (March 25, 1863 \u2013 May 2, 1946) was an American physician, scientist, administrator, and professor of experimental pathology at the University of Pennsylvania (1899\u20131903). He served as the first director of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research (1901\u20131935) (later developed as Rockefeller University) and a trustee of the Rockefeller Foundation. He was also a friend and adviser to John D. Rockefeller Jr.\nAmong Flexner's most important achievements are studies into poliomyelitis and the development of serum treatment for meningitis. Among his lab assistants were Hideyo Noguchi and Cornelius Rhoads, later directors of Memorial Hospital and the Sloan-Kettering Institute, respectively.\nThe bacteria species \"Shigella flexneri\" was named in recognition of Flexner. In addition, Flexner was the first to describe Flexner-Wintersteiner rosettes, a characteristic finding in retinoblastoma, a type of cancer.\nEarly life and career.\nSimon was born in Louisville, Kentucky, to Moritz (Morris) Flexner, a Jewish immigrant from Neumark, Bohemia, via several years in Strasbourg, France; and Ester from Roden, Germany. He was the fourth son of seven in a large family of nine children: Jacob, Henry, and Isadore; then Simon, followed by Bernard Flexner, Abraham Flexner, and Washington. The two sisters Mary and Gertrude were the youngest. Jacob became a pharmacist and physician, Bernard became a Zionist leader, and Abraham became an educator, eventually influencing the direction of medical education in the United States.\nSimon first gained a degree from the Louisville College of Pharmacy and worked with his brother Jacob for eight years.\nMedical school and career.\nHe returned to college, getting his medical degree from Louisville Medical College in 1889. He did postgraduate work in pathology at Johns Hopkins University Medical School, and started teaching there. By 1899, he was a professor of pathology at the University of Pennsylvania.\nFlexner was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1901.\nHe taught at Penn until 1903, but was called to the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research (later Rockefeller University), where he started serving as its first director in 1901. He managed the research institute until 1935. Through this affiliation and related work, he came to know the philanthropist John D. Rockefeller, who supported research and basic medical care.\nIn December 1907 Flexner declared in a reading of his paper on \"Tendencies in Pathology\" in the University of Chicago that it would be possible in the then-future for diseased human organs substitution for healthy ones by surgery\u2014including arteries, stomach, kidneys and heart. These previsions became reality in the second half of the 20th century.\nIn 1911, Flexner was awarded the Cameron Prize for Therapeutics of the University of Edinburgh.\nFrom 1910 to 1914 he was a trustee of the Carnegie Institution.\nMarriage and family.\nSimon Flexner married Helen Thomas (later professor of English) and had a family. His son James Thomas Flexner became a prolific writer; one of his works was an extensive biography of George Washington.\nSimon Flexner died in May 1946 in New York City, from a myocardial infarction (heart attack). He was 83 years old. His papers are currently housed at the American Philosophical Society and the Becker Medical Library at the Washington University School of Medicine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27575", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27575", "title": "Statistical regularity", "text": "Statistical regularity is a notion in statistics and probability theory that random events exhibit regularity when repeated enough times or that enough sufficiently similar random events exhibit regularity. It is an umbrella term that covers the law of large numbers, all central limit theorems and ergodic theorems.\nIf one throws a dice once, it is difficult to predict the outcome, but if one repeats this experiment many times, one will see that the number of times each result occurs divided by the number of throws will eventually stabilize towards a specific value.\nRepeating a series of trials will produce similar, but not identical, results for each series: the average, the standard deviation and other distributional characteristics will be around the same for each series of trials.\nThe notion is used in games of chance, demographic statistics, quality control of a manufacturing process, and in many other parts of our lives.\nObservations of this phenomenon provided the initial motivation for the concept of what is now known as frequency probability.\nThis phenomenon should not be confused with the gambler's fallacy, because regularity only refers to the (possibly very) long run. The gambler's fallacy does not apply to statistical regularity because the latter considers the whole rather than individual cases."}
{"id": "27576", "revid": "30905782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27576", "title": "Statistical model", "text": "Type of mathematical model\nA statistical model is a mathematical model that embodies a set of statistical assumptions concerning the generation of sample data (and similar data from a larger population). A statistical model represents, often in considerably idealized form, the data-generating process. When referring specifically to probabilities, the corresponding term is probabilistic model. All statistical hypothesis tests and all statistical estimators are derived via statistical models. More generally, statistical models are part of the foundation of statistical inference. A statistical model is usually specified as a mathematical relationship between one or more random variables and other non-random variables. As such, a statistical model is \"a formal representation of a theory\" (Herman Ad\u00e8r quoting Kenneth Bollen).\nIntroduction.\nInformally, a statistical model can be thought of as a statistical assumption (or set of statistical assumptions) with a certain property: that the assumption allows us to calculate the probability of any event. As an example, consider a pair of ordinary six-sided dice. We will study two different statistical assumptions about the dice.\nThe first statistical assumption is this: for each of the dice, the probability of each face (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6) coming up is . From that assumption, we can calculate the probability of both dice coming up 5:\u2009 \u00d7 \n .\u2009 More generally, we can calculate the probability of any event: e.g. (1 and 2) or (3 and 3) or (5 and 6). The alternative statistical assumption is this: for each of the dice, the probability of the face 5 coming up is (because the dice are weighted). From that assumption, we can calculate the probability of both dice coming up 5:\u2009 \u00d7 \n .\u2009 We cannot, however, calculate the probability of any other nontrivial event, as the probabilities of the other faces are unknown.\nThe first statistical assumption constitutes a statistical model: because with the assumption alone, we can calculate the probability of any event. The alternative statistical assumption does \"not\" constitute a statistical model: because with the assumption alone, we cannot calculate the probability of every event. In the example above, with the first assumption, calculating the probability of an event is easy. With some other examples, though, the calculation can be difficult, or even impractical (e.g. it might require millions of years of computation). For an assumption to constitute a statistical model, such difficulty is acceptable: doing the calculation does not need to be practicable, just theoretically possible.\nFormal definition.\nIn mathematical terms, a statistical model is a pair (formula_1), where formula_2 is the set of possible observations, i.e. the sample space, and formula_3 is a set of probability distributions on formula_2. The set formula_3 represents all of the models that are considered possible. This set is typically parameterized: formula_6. The set formula_7 defines the parameters of the model. If a parameterization is such that distinct parameter values give rise to distinct distributions, i.e. formula_8 (in other words, the mapping is injective), it is said to be \"identifiable\".\nIn some cases, the model can be more complex.\nAn example.\nSuppose that we have a population of children, with the ages of the children distributed uniformly, in the population. The height of a child will be stochastically related to the age: e.g. when we know that a child is of age 7, this influences the chance of the child being 1.5 meters tall. We could formalize that relationship in a linear regression model, like this: \nheight\"i\"\u00a0= \"b\"0\u00a0+ \"b\"1age\"i\"\u00a0+ \u03b5\"i\", where \"b\"0 is the intercept, \"b\"1 is a parameter that age is multiplied by to obtain a prediction of height, \u03b5\"i\" is the error term, and \"i\" identifies the child. This implies that height is predicted by age, with some error.\nAn admissible model must be consistent with all the data points. Thus, a straight line (height\"i\"\u00a0= \"b\"0\u00a0+ \"b\"1age\"i\") cannot be admissible for a model of the data\u2014unless it exactly fits all the data points, i.e. all the data points lie perfectly on the line. The error term, \u03b5\"i\", must be included in the equation, so that the model is consistent with all the data points. To do statistical inference, we would first need to assume some probability distributions for the \u03b5\"i\". For instance, we might assume that the \u03b5\"i\" distributions are i.i.d. Gaussian, with zero mean. In this instance, the model would have 3 parameters: \"b\"0, \"b\"1, and the variance of the Gaussian distribution. We can formally specify the model in the form (formula_1) as follows. The sample space, formula_2, of our model comprises the set of all possible pairs (age, height). Each possible value of formula_15\u00a0= (\"b\"0, \"b\"1, \"\u03c3\"2) determines a distribution on formula_2; denote that distribution by formula_17. If formula_7 is the set of all possible values of formula_15, then formula_6. (The parameterization is identifiable, and this is easy to check.)\nIn this example, the model is determined by (1) specifying formula_2 and (2) making some assumptions relevant to formula_3. There are two assumptions: that height can be approximated by a linear function of age; that errors in the approximation are distributed as i.i.d. Gaussian. The assumptions are sufficient to specify formula_3\u2014as they are required to do.\nGeneral remarks.\nA statistical model is a special class of mathematical model. What distinguishes a statistical model from other mathematical models is that a statistical model is non-deterministic. Thus, in a statistical model specified via mathematical equations, some of the variables do not have specific values, but instead have probability distributions; i.e. some of the variables are stochastic. In the above example with children's heights, \u03b5 is a stochastic variable; without that stochastic variable, the model would be deterministic. Statistical models are often used even when the data-generating process being modeled is deterministic. For instance, coin tossing is, in principle, a deterministic process; yet it is commonly modeled as stochastic (via a Bernoulli process). Choosing an appropriate statistical model to represent a given data-generating process is sometimes extremely difficult, and may require knowledge of both the process and relevant statistical analyses. Relatedly, the statistician Sir David Cox has said, \"How [the] translation from subject-matter problem to statistical model is done is often the most critical part of an analysis\".\nThere are three purposes for a statistical model, according to Konishi\u00a0&amp; Kitagawa:\nThose three purposes are essentially the same as the three purposes indicated by Friendly\u00a0&amp; Meyer: prediction, estimation, description.\nDimension of a model.\nSuppose that we have a statistical model (formula_1) with formula_6. In notation, we write that formula_26 where k is a positive integer (formula_27 denotes the real numbers; other sets can be used, in principle). Here, k is called the dimension of the model. The model is said to be \"parametric\" if formula_7 has finite dimension. As an example, if we assume that data arise from a univariate Gaussian distribution, then we are assuming that\nformula_29. \nIn this example, the dimension, k, equals 2. As another example, suppose that the data consists of points (x, y) that we assume are distributed according to a straight line with i.i.d. Gaussian residuals (with zero mean): this leads to the same statistical model as was used in the example with children's heights. The dimension of the statistical model is 3: the intercept of the line, the slope of the line, and the variance of the distribution of the residuals. (Note the set of all possible lines has dimension 2, even though geometrically, a line has dimension 1.)\nAlthough formally formula_30 is a single parameter that has dimension k, it is sometimes regarded as comprising k separate parameters. For example, with the univariate Gaussian distribution, formula_15 is formally a single parameter with dimension 2, but it is often regarded as comprising 2 separate parameters\u2014the mean and the standard deviation. A statistical model is \"nonparametric\" if the parameter set formula_7 is infinite dimensional. A statistical model is \"semiparametric\" if it has both finite-dimensional and infinite-dimensional parameters. Formally, if k is the dimension of formula_7 and n is the number of samples, both semiparametric and nonparametric models have formula_34 as formula_35. If formula_36 as formula_35, then the model is semiparametric; otherwise, the model is nonparametric.\nParametric models are by far the most commonly used statistical models. Regarding semiparametric and nonparametric models, Sir David Cox has said, \"These typically involve fewer assumptions of structure and distributional form but usually contain strong assumptions about independencies\".\nNested models.\nTwo statistical models are nested if the first model can be transformed into the second model by imposing constraints on the parameters of the first model. As an example, the set of all Gaussian distributions has, nested within it, the set of zero-mean Gaussian distributions: we constrain the mean in the set of all Gaussian distributions to get the zero-mean distributions. As a second example, the quadratic model \n\"y\"\u00a0\n \"b\"0\u00a0+ \"b\"1\"x\"\u00a0+ \"b\"2\"x\"2\u00a0+ \u03b5,\u00a0 \u00a0 \u03b5\u00a0~ \ud835\udca9(0, \"\u03c3\"2) \nhas, nested within it, the linear model \n\"y\"\u00a0\n \"b\"0\u00a0+ \"b\"1\"x\"\u00a0+ \u03b5,\u00a0 \u00a0 \u03b5\u00a0~ \ud835\udca9(0, \"\u03c3\"2)\n\u2014we constrain the parameter \"b\"2 to equal 0.\nIn both those examples, the first model has a higher dimension than the second model (for the first example, the zero-mean model has dimension\u00a01). Such is often, but not always, the case. As an example where they have the same dimension, the set of positive-mean Gaussian distributions is nested within the set of all Gaussian distributions; they both have dimension 2.\nComparing models.\nComparing statistical models is fundamental for much of statistical inference. state: \"The majority of the problems in statistical inference can be considered to be problems related to statistical modeling. They are typically formulated as comparisons of several statistical models.\" Common criteria for comparing models include the following: \"R\"2, Bayes factor, Akaike information criterion, and the likelihood-ratio test together with its generalization, the relative likelihood.\nAnother way of comparing two statistical models is through the notion of deficiency introduced by Lucien Le Cam.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27577", "revid": "48456760", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27577", "title": "Statistical inference", "text": "Process of using data analysis for predicting population data from sample data\nStatistical inference is the process of using data analysis to infer properties of an underlying probability distribution. Inferential statistical analysis infers properties of a population, for example by testing hypotheses and deriving estimates. It is assumed that the observed data set is sampled from a larger population.\nInferential statistics can be contrasted with descriptive statistics. Descriptive statistics is solely concerned with properties of the observed data, and it does not rest on the assumption that the data come from a larger population. In machine learning, the term \"inference\" is sometimes used instead to mean \"make a prediction, by evaluating an already trained model\"; in this context inferring properties of the model is referred to as \"training\" or \"learning\" (rather than \"inference\"), and using a model for prediction is referred to as \"inference\" (instead of \"prediction\"); see also predictive inference.\nIntroduction.\nStatistical inference makes propositions about a population, using data drawn from the population with some form of sampling. Given a hypothesis about a population, for which we wish to draw inferences, statistical inference consists of (first) selecting a statistical model of the process that generates the data and (second) deducing propositions from the model.\nKonishi and Kitagawa state \"The majority of the problems in statistical inference can be considered to be problems related to statistical modeling\". Relatedly, Sir David Cox has said, \"How [the] translation from subject-matter problem to statistical model is done is often the most critical part of an analysis\".\nThe conclusion of a statistical inference is a statistical proposition. Some common forms of statistical proposition are the following:\nModels and assumptions.\nAny statistical inference requires some assumptions. A statistical model is a set of assumptions concerning the generation of the observed data and similar data. Descriptions of statistical models usually emphasize the role of population quantities of interest, about which we wish to draw inference. Descriptive statistics are typically used as a preliminary step before more formal inferences are drawn.\nDegree of models/assumptions.\nStatisticians distinguish between three levels of modeling assumptions:\nImportance of valid models/assumptions.\nWhatever level of assumption is made, correctly calibrated inference, in general, requires these assumptions to be correct; i.e. that the data-generating mechanisms really have been correctly specified.\nIncorrect assumptions of 'simple' random sampling can invalidate statistical inference. More complex semi- and fully parametric assumptions are also cause for concern. For example, incorrectly assuming the Cox model can in some cases lead to faulty conclusions. Incorrect assumptions of Normality in the population also invalidates some forms of regression-based inference. The use of any parametric model is viewed skeptically by most experts in sampling human populations: \"most sampling statisticians, when they deal with confidence intervals at all, limit themselves to statements about [estimators] based on very large samples, where the central limit theorem ensures that these [estimators] will have distributions that are nearly normal.\" In particular, a normal distribution \"would be a totally unrealistic and catastrophically unwise assumption to make if we were dealing with any kind of economic population.\" Here, the central limit theorem states that the distribution of the sample mean \"for very large samples\" is approximately normally distributed, if the distribution is not heavy-tailed.\nApproximate distributions.\nGiven the difficulty in specifying exact distributions of sample statistics, many methods have been developed for approximating these.\nWith finite samples, approximation results measure how close a limiting distribution approaches the statistic's sample distribution: For example, with 10,000 independent samples the normal distribution approximates (to two digits of accuracy) the distribution of the sample mean for many population distributions, by the Berry\u2013Esseen theorem. Yet for many practical purposes, the normal approximation provides a good approximation to the sample-mean's distribution when there are 10 (or more) independent samples, according to simulation studies and statisticians' experience. Following Kolmogorov's work in the 1950s, advanced statistics uses approximation theory and functional analysis to quantify the error of approximation. In this approach, the metric geometry of probability distributions is studied; this approach quantifies approximation error with, for example, the Kullback\u2013Leibler divergence, Bregman divergence, and the Hellinger distance.\nWith indefinitely large samples, limiting results like the central limit theorem describe the sample statistic's limiting distribution if one exists. Limiting results are not statements about finite samples, and indeed are irrelevant to finite samples. However, the asymptotic theory of limiting distributions is often invoked for work with finite samples. For example, limiting results are often invoked to justify the generalized method of moments and the use of generalized estimating equations, which are popular in econometrics and biostatistics. The magnitude of the difference between the limiting distribution and the true distribution (formally, the 'error' of the approximation) can be assessed using simulation. The heuristic application of limiting results to finite samples is common practice in many applications, especially with low-dimensional models with log-concave likelihoods (such as with one-parameter exponential families).\nRandomization-based models.\nFor a given dataset that was produced by a randomization design, the randomization distribution of a statistic (under the null-hypothesis) is defined by evaluating the test statistic for all of the plans that could have been generated by the randomization design. In frequentist inference, the randomization allows inferences to be based on the randomization distribution rather than a subjective model, and this is important especially in survey sampling and design of experiments. Statistical inference from randomized studies is also more straightforward than many other situations. In Bayesian inference, randomization is also of importance: in survey sampling, use of sampling without replacement ensures the exchangeability of the sample with the population; in randomized experiments, randomization warrants a missing at random assumption for covariate information.\nObjective randomization allows properly inductive procedures. Many statisticians prefer randomization-based analysis of data that was generated by well-defined randomization procedures. (However, it is true that in fields of science with developed theoretical knowledge and experimental control, randomized experiments may increase the costs of experimentation without improving the quality of inferences.) Similarly, results from randomized experiments are recommended by leading statistical authorities as allowing inferences with greater reliability than do observational studies of the same phenomena. However, a good observational study may be better than a bad randomized experiment.\nThe statistical analysis of a randomized experiment may be based on the randomization scheme stated in the experimental protocol and does not need a subjective model.\nHowever, at any time, some hypotheses cannot be tested using objective statistical models, which accurately describe randomized experiments or random samples. In some cases, such randomized studies are uneconomical or unethical.\nModel-based analysis of randomized experiments.\nIt is standard practice to refer to a statistical model, e.g., a linear or logistic models, when analyzing data from randomized experiments. However, the randomization scheme guides the choice of a statistical model. It is not possible to choose an appropriate model without knowing the randomization scheme. Seriously misleading results can be obtained analyzing data from randomized experiments while ignoring the experimental protocol; common mistakes include forgetting the blocking used in an experiment and confusing repeated measurements on the same experimental unit with independent replicates of the treatment applied to different experimental units.\nModel-free randomization inference.\nModel-free techniques provide a complement to model-based methods, which employ reductionist strategies of reality-simplification. The former combine, evolve, ensemble and train algorithms dynamically adapting to the contextual affinities of a process and learning the intrinsic characteristics of the observations.\nFor example, model-free simple linear regression is based either on:\nIn either case, the model-free randomization inference for features of the common conditional distribution formula_6 relies on some regularity conditions, e.g. functional smoothness. For instance, model-free randomization inference for the population feature \"conditional mean\", formula_7, can be consistently estimated via local averaging or local polynomial fitting, under the assumption that formula_8 is smooth. Also, relying on asymptotic normality or resampling, we can construct confidence intervals for the population feature, in this case, the \"conditional mean\", formula_8.\nParadigms for inference.\nDifferent schools of statistical inference have become established. These schools\u2014or \"paradigms\"\u2014are not mutually exclusive, and methods that work well under one paradigm often have attractive interpretations under other paradigms.\nBandyopadhyay and Forster describe four paradigms: The classical (or frequentist) paradigm, the Bayesian paradigm, the likelihoodist paradigm, and the Akaikean-Information Criterion-based paradigm.\nFrequentist inference.\nThis paradigm calibrates the plausibility of propositions by considering (notional) repeated sampling of a population distribution to produce datasets similar to the one at hand. By considering the dataset's characteristics under repeated sampling, the frequentist properties of a statistical proposition can be quantified\u2014although in practice this quantification may be challenging.\nFrequentist inference, objectivity, and decision theory.\nOne interpretation of frequentist inference (or classical inference) is that it is applicable only in terms of frequency probability; that is, in terms of repeated sampling from a population. However, the approach of Neyman develops these procedures in terms of pre-experiment probabilities. That is, before undertaking an experiment, one decides on a rule for coming to a conclusion such that the probability of being correct is controlled in a suitable way: such a probability need not have a frequentist or repeated sampling interpretation. In contrast, Bayesian inference works in terms of conditional probabilities (i.e. probabilities conditional on the observed data), compared to the marginal (but conditioned on unknown parameters) probabilities used in the frequentist approach.\nThe frequentist procedures of significance testing and confidence intervals can be constructed without regard to utility functions. However, some elements of frequentist statistics, such as statistical decision theory, do incorporate utility functions. In particular, frequentist developments of optimal inference (such as minimum-variance unbiased estimators, or uniformly most powerful testing) make use of loss functions, which play the role of (negative) utility functions. Loss functions need not be explicitly stated for statistical theorists to prove that a statistical procedure has an optimality property. However, loss-functions are often useful for stating optimality properties: for example, median-unbiased estimators are optimal under absolute value loss functions, in that they minimize expected loss, and least squares estimators are optimal under squared error loss functions, in that they minimize expected loss.\nWhile statisticians using frequentist inference must choose for themselves the parameters of interest, and the estimators/test statistic to be used, the absence of obviously explicit utilities and prior distributions has helped frequentist procedures to become widely viewed as 'objective'.\nBayesian inference.\nThe Bayesian calculus describes degrees of belief using the 'language' of probability; beliefs are positive, integrate into one, and obey probability axioms. Bayesian inference uses the available posterior beliefs as the basis for making statistical propositions. There are several different justifications for using the Bayesian approach.\nBayesian inference, subjectivity and decision theory.\nMany informal Bayesian inferences are based on \"intuitively reasonable\" summaries of the posterior. For example, the posterior mean, median and mode, highest posterior density intervals, and Bayes Factors can all be motivated in this way. While a user's utility function need not be stated for this sort of inference, these summaries do all depend (to some extent) on stated prior beliefs, and are generally viewed as subjective conclusions. (Methods of prior construction which do not require external input have been proposed but not yet fully developed.)\nFormally, Bayesian inference is calibrated with reference to an explicitly stated utility, or loss function; the 'Bayes rule' is the one which maximizes expected utility, averaged over the posterior uncertainty. Formal Bayesian inference therefore automatically provides optimal decisions in a decision theoretic sense. Given assumptions, data and utility, Bayesian inference can be made for essentially any problem, although not every statistical inference need have a Bayesian interpretation. Analyses which are not formally Bayesian can be (logically) incoherent; a feature of Bayesian procedures which use proper priors (i.e. those integrable to one) is that they are guaranteed to be coherent. Some advocates of Bayesian inference assert that inference \"must\" take place in this decision-theoretic framework, and that Bayesian inference should not conclude with the evaluation and summarization of posterior beliefs.\nLikelihood-based inference.\nLikelihood-based inference is a paradigm used to estimate the parameters of a statistical model based on observed data. Likelihoodism approaches statistics by using the likelihood function, denoted as formula_10, quantifies the probability of observing the given data formula_11, assuming a specific set of parameter values formula_12. In likelihood-based inference, the goal is to find the set of parameter values that maximizes the likelihood function, or equivalently, maximizes the probability of observing the given data.\nThe process of likelihood-based inference usually involves the following steps:\nAIC-based inference.\nThe \"Akaike information criterion\" (AIC) is an estimator of the relative quality of statistical models for a given set of data. Given a collection of models for the data, AIC estimates the quality of each model, relative to each of the other models. Thus, AIC provides a means for model selection.\nAIC is founded on information theory: it offers an estimate of the relative information lost when a given model is used to represent the process that generated the data. (In doing so, it deals with the trade-off between the goodness of fit of the model and the simplicity of the model.)\nOther paradigms for inference.\nMinimum description length.\nThe minimum description length (MDL) principle has been developed from ideas in information theory and the theory of Kolmogorov complexity. The (MDL) principle selects statistical models that maximally compress the data; inference proceeds without assuming counterfactual or non-falsifiable \"data-generating mechanisms\" or probability models for the data, as might be done in frequentist or Bayesian approaches.\nHowever, if a \"data generating mechanism\" does exist in reality, then according to Shannon's source coding theorem it provides the MDL description of the data, on average and asymptotically. In minimizing description length (or descriptive complexity), MDL estimation is similar to maximum likelihood estimation and maximum a posteriori estimation (using maximum-entropy Bayesian priors). However, MDL avoids assuming that the underlying probability model is known; the MDL principle can also be applied without assumptions that e.g. the data arose from independent sampling.\nThe MDL principle has been applied in communication-coding theory in information theory, in linear regression, and in data mining.\nThe evaluation of MDL-based inferential procedures often uses techniques or criteria from computational complexity theory.\nFiducial inference.\nFiducial inference was an approach to statistical inference based on fiducial probability, also known as a \"fiducial distribution\". In subsequent work, this approach has been called ill-defined, extremely limited in applicability, and even fallacious. However this argument is the same as that which shows that a so-called confidence distribution is not a valid probability distribution and, since this has not invalidated the application of confidence intervals, it does not necessarily invalidate conclusions drawn from fiducial arguments. An attempt was made to reinterpret the early work of Fisher's fiducial argument as a special case of an inference theory using upper and lower probabilities.\nStructural inference.\nDeveloping ideas of Fisher and of Pitman from 1938 to 1939, George A. Barnard developed \"structural inference\" or \"pivotal inference\", an approach using invariant probabilities on group families. Barnard reformulated the arguments behind fiducial inference on a restricted class of models on which \"fiducial\" procedures would be well-defined and useful. Donald A. S. Fraser developed a general theory for structural inference based on group theory and applied this to linear models. The theory formulated by Fraser has close links to decision theory and Bayesian statistics and can provide optimal frequentist decision rules if they exist.\nInference topics.\nThe topics below are usually included in the area of statistical inference.\nPredictive inference.\nPredictive inference is an approach to statistical inference that emphasizes the prediction of future observations based on past observations.\nInitially, predictive inference was based on \"observable\" parameters and it was the main purpose of studying probability, but it fell out of favor in the 20th century due to a new parametric approach pioneered by Bruno de Finetti. The approach modeled phenomena as a physical system observed with error (e.g., celestial mechanics). De Finetti's idea of exchangeability\u2014that future observations should behave like past observations\u2014came to the attention of the English-speaking world with the 1974 translation from French of his 1937 paper, and has since been propounded by such statisticians as Seymour Geisser.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27578", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27578", "title": "Survey sampling", "text": "Statistical selection process\nIn statistics, survey sampling describes the process of selecting a sample of elements from a target population to conduct a survey. \nThe term \"survey\" may refer to many different types or techniques of observation. In survey sampling it most often involves a questionnaire used to measure the characteristics and/or attitudes of people. Different ways of contacting members of a sample once they have been selected is the subject of survey data collection. The purpose of sampling is to reduce the cost and/or the amount of work that it would take to survey the entire target population. A survey that measures the entire target population is called a census. A sample refers to a group or section of a population from which information is to be obtained.\nSurvey samples can be broadly divided into two types: probability samples and super samples. Probability-based samples implement a sampling plan with specified probabilities (perhaps adapted probabilities specified by an adaptive procedure). Probability-based sampling allows design-based inference about the target population. The inferences are based on a known objective probability distribution that was specified in the study protocol. Inferences from probability-based surveys may still suffer from many types of bias.\nSurveys that are not based on probability sampling have greater difficulty measuring their bias or sampling error. Surveys based on non-probability samples often fail to represent the people in the target population.\nIn academic and government survey research, probability sampling is a standard procedure. In the United States, the Office of Management and Budget's \"List of Standards for Statistical Surveys\" states that federally funded surveys must be performed:\nselecting samples using generally accepted statistical methods (e.g., probabilistic methods that can provide estimates of sampling error). Any use of nonprobability sampling methods (e.g., cut-off or model-based samples) must be justified statistically and be able to measure estimation error.\nRandom sampling and design-based inference are supplemented by other statistical methods, such as model-assisted sampling and model-based sampling.\nFor example, many surveys have substantial amounts of nonresponse. Even though the units are initially chosen with known probabilities, the nonresponse mechanisms are unknown. For surveys with substantial nonresponse, statisticians have proposed statistical models with which the data sets are analyzed.\nIssues related to survey sampling are discussed in several sources, including Salant and Dillman (1994).\nProbability sampling.\nIn a probability sample (also called \"scientific\" or \"random\" sample) each member of the target population has a known and non-zero probability of inclusion in the sample. A survey based on a probability sample can in theory produce statistical measurements of the target population that are unbiased, because the expected value of the sample mean is equal to the population mean, E(\u0233)=\u03bc, or have a measurable sampling error, which can be expressed as a confidence interval or margin of error. \nA probability-based survey sample is created by constructing a list of the target population, called the sampling frame, a randomized process for selecting units from the sample frame, called a selection procedure, and a method of contacting selected units to enable them to complete the survey, called a data collection method or mode. For some target populations this process may be easy; for example, sampling the employees of a company by using payroll lists. However, in large, disorganized populations simply constructing a suitable sample frame is often a complex and expensive task.\nCommon methods of conducting a probability sample of the household population in the United States are Area Probability Sampling, Random Digit Dial telephone sampling, and more recently, Address-Based Sampling.\nWithin probability sampling, there are specialized techniques such as stratified sampling and cluster sampling that improve the precision or efficiency of the sampling process without altering the fundamental principles of probability sampling.\nStratification is the process of dividing members of the population into homogeneous subgroups before sampling, based on auxiliary information about each sample unit. The strata should be mutually exclusive: every element in the population must be assigned to only one stratum. The strata should also be collectively exhaustive: no population element can be excluded. Then methods such as simple random sampling or systematic sampling can be applied within each stratum. Stratification often improves the representativeness of the sample by reducing sampling error.\nBias in probability sampling.\nBias in surveys is undesirable, but often unavoidable. The major types of bias that may occur in the sampling process are:\nNon-probability sampling.\nMany surveys are not based on probability samples, but rather on finding a suitable collection of respondents to complete the survey. Some common examples of non-probability sampling are:\nIn non-probability samples the relationship between the target population and the survey sample is immeasurable and potential bias is unknowable. Sophisticated users of non-probability survey samples tend to view the survey as an experimental condition, rather than a tool for population measurement, and examine the results for internally consistent relationships.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nThe textbook by Groves et alia provides an overview of survey methodology, including recent literature on questionnaire development (informed by cognitive psychology) : \nThe other books focus on the statistical theory of survey sampling and require some knowledge of basic statistics, as discussed in the following textbooks:\nThe elementary book by Scheaffer et alia uses quadratic equations from high-school algebra: \nMore mathematical statistics is required for Lohr, for S\u00e4rndal et alia, and for Cochran (classic):\nThe historically important books by Deming and Kish remain valuable for insights for social scientists (particularly about the U.S. census and the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan): "}
{"id": "27579", "revid": "38895428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27579", "title": "Statistical theory", "text": "Theory of statistics\nThe theory of statistics provides a basis for the whole range of techniques, in both study design and data analysis, that are used within applications of statistics. The theory covers approaches to statistical-decision problems and to statistical inference, and the actions and deductions that satisfy the basic principles stated for these different approaches. Within a given approach, statistical theory gives ways of comparing statistical procedures; it can find the best possible procedure within a given context for given statistical problems, or can provide guidance on the choice between alternative procedures.\nApart from philosophical considerations about how to make statistical inferences and decisions, much of statistical theory consists of mathematical statistics, and is closely linked to probability theory, to utility theory, and to optimization.\nScope.\nStatistical theory provides an underlying rationale and provides a consistent basis for the choice of methodology used in applied statistics.\nModelling.\nStatistical models describe the sources of data and can have different types of formulation corresponding to these sources and to the problem being studied. Such problems can be of various kinds:\nStatistical models, once specified, can be tested to see whether they provide useful inferences for new data sets. \nData collection.\nStatistical theory provides a guide to comparing methods of data collection, where the problem is to generate informative data using optimization and randomization while measuring and controlling for observational error. Optimization of data collection reduces the cost of data while satisfying statistical goals, while randomization allows reliable inferences. Statistical theory provides a basis for good data collection and the structuring of investigations in the topics of:\nSummarising data.\nThe task of summarising statistical data in conventional forms (also known as descriptive statistics) is considered in theoretical statistics as a problem of defining what aspects of statistical samples need to be described and how well they can be described from a typically limited sample of data. Thus the problems theoretical statistics considers include:\nInterpreting data.\nBesides the philosophy underlying statistical inference, statistical theory has the task of considering the types of questions that data analysts might want to ask about the problems they are studying and of providing data analytic techniques for answering them. Some of these tasks are:\nWhen a statistical procedure has been specified in the study protocol, then statistical theory provides well-defined probability statements for the method when applied to all populations that could have arisen from the randomization used to generate the data. This provides an objective way of estimating parameters, estimating confidence intervals, testing hypotheses, and selecting the best. Even for observational data, statistical theory provides a way of calculating a value that can be used to interpret a sample of data from a population, it can provide a means of indicating how well that value is determined by the sample, and thus a means of saying corresponding values derived for different populations are as different as they might seem; however, the reliability of inferences from post-hoc observational data is often worse than for planned randomized generation of data.\nApplied statistical inference.\nStatistical theory provides the basis for a number of data-analytic approaches that are common across scientific and social research. Interpreting data is done with one of the following approaches:\nMany of the standard methods for those approaches rely on certain statistical assumptions (made in the derivation of the methodology) actually holding in practice. Statistical theory studies the consequences of departures from these assumptions. In addition it provides a range of robust statistical techniques that are less dependent on assumptions, and it provides methods checking whether particular assumptions are reasonable for a given data set.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27580", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27580", "title": "Statistical unit", "text": "Individual entity for statistical purposes\nIn statistics, a unit is one member of a set of entities being studied. It is the main source for the mathematical abstraction of a \"random variable\". Common examples of a unit would be a single person, animal, plant, manufactured item, or country that belongs to a larger collection of such entities being studied.\nExperimental and sampling units.\nUnits are often referred to as being either experimental units or sampling units:\nFor example, in an experiment on educational methods, methods may be applied to classrooms of students. This would make the classroom as the experimental unit. Measurements of progress may be obtained from individual students, as observational units. But the treatment (teaching method) being applied to the class would not be applied independently to the individual students. Hence, the student could not be regarded as the experimental unit. The class, or the teacher (who applies the method, if he/she has multiple classes), would be the appropriate experimental unit.\nImplementation.\nIn most statistical studies, the goal is to generalize from the observed units to a larger set consisting of all comparable units that exist but are not directly observed. For example, if we randomly sample 100 people and ask them which candidate they intend to vote for in an election, our main interest is in the voting behavior of all eligible voters, not exclusively on the 100 observed units.\nIn some cases, the observed units may not form a sample from any meaningful population, but rather constitute a convenience sample, or may represent the entire population of interest. In this situation, we may study the units descriptively, or we may study their dynamics over time. But it typically does not make sense to talk about generalizing to a larger population of such units. Studies involving countries or business firms are often of this type. Clinical trials also typically use convenience samples, however the aim is often to make inferences about the effectiveness of treatments in other patients, and given the inclusion and exclusion criteria for some clinical trials, the sample may not be representative of the majority of patients with the condition or disease.\nIn simple data sets, the units are in one-to-one correspondence with the data values. In more complex data sets, multiple measurements are made for each unit. For example, if blood pressure measurements are made daily for a week on each subject in a study, there would be seven data values for each statistical unit. Multiple measurements taken on an individual are not independent (they will be more alike compared to measurements taken on different individuals). Ignoring these dependencies, the analysis can lead to an inflated sample size or pseudoreplication.\nWhile a \"unit\" is often the lowest level at which observations are made, in some cases, a \"unit\" can be further decomposed as a statistical assembly.\nMany statistical analyses use quantitative data that have units of measurement. This is a distinct and non-overlapping use of the term \"unit.\"\nUnits of collection and analysis.\nStatistical units are divided into two types. They are:"}
{"id": "27581", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27581", "title": "Statistical assembly", "text": "In statistics, for example in statistical quality control, a statistical assembly is a collection of parts or components which makes up a statistical unit. Thus a statistical unit, which would be the prime item of concern, is made of discrete components like organs or machine parts. The reliability of the statistical unit is, in part, determined by the reliability of the components in the statistical assembly, and by their interactions.\nMuch of the observation of a statistical assembly requires special preparation of the unit, which demands that the intervention must not prejudice the observations. A simple version of this kind of research uses the stimulus-response model.\nIn other contexts, statistical assembly refers to the process of constructing a manufactured item which must be carefully specified to contain given amounts of nonuniformity within it."}
{"id": "27582", "revid": "126457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27582", "title": "Stimulus\u2013response model", "text": "Conceptual framework in psychology\nThe stimulus\u2013response model is a conceptual framework in psychology that describes how individuals react to external stimuli. According to this model, an external stimulus triggers a reaction in an organism, often without the need for conscious thought. This model emphasizes the mechanistic aspects of behavior, suggesting that behavior can often be predicted and controlled by understanding and manipulating the stimuli that trigger responses.\nFields of application.\nStimulus\u2013response models are applied in international relations, \nrisk assessment, \nneurally-inspired system design,\nand many other fields.\nPharmacological dose response relationships are an application of stimulus-response models.\nAnother field this model can be applied to is psychological problems/disorders such as Tourette syndrome. Research shows Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (GTS) can be characterized by enhanced cognitive functions related to creating, modifying and maintaining connections between stimuli and responses (S\u2010R links). Specifically, two areas, procedural sequence learning and, as a novel finding, also event file binding, show converging evidence of hyperfunctioning in GTS.\nPrevious research on E-learning has proven that studying online can be even more daunting for lecturers and students who suddenly change their learning patterns from the classrooms to the virtual ones. This is mainly because the suddenness of this change makes it difficult for lecturers to fully prepare to lecture in the virtual learning environment. In light of the above-mentioned facts, this research proposes a novel model and integrates flow theory into the theory of technology acceptance model (TAM), based on stimulus-organism-response (S-O-R) theory, the SOR model has been widely used in previous studies of online customer behavior, and the model theory includes three components: stimulus, organism, and response. Assuming that stimuli contained in the external environment cause people to change, which affects their behavior.\nMathematical formulation.\nThe object of a stimulus\u2013response model is to establish a mathematical function that describes the relation \"f\" between the stimulus \"x\" and the expected value (or other measure of location) of the response \"Y\":\n formula_1\nA common simplification assumed for such functions is linear, thus we expect to see a relationship like\n formula_2\nStatistical theory for linear models has been well developed for more than fifty years, and a standard form of analysis called linear regression has been developed.\nBounded response functions.\nSince many types of response have inherent physical limitations (e.g. minimal maximal muscle contraction), it is often applicable to use a bounded function (such as the logistic function) to model the response. Similarly, a linear response function may be unrealistic as it would imply arbitrarily large responses. For binary dependent variables, statistical analysis with regression methods such as the probit model or logit model, or other methods such as the Spearman\u2013K\u00e4rber method. Empirical models based on nonlinear regression are usually preferred over the use of some transformation of the data that linearizes the stimulus-response relationship.\nOne example of a logit model for the probability of a response to the real input (stimulus) formula_3, (formula_4) is\nformula_5\nwhere formula_6 are the parameters of the function.\nConversely, a Probit model would be of the form\nformula_7\nwhere formula_8 is the cumulative distribution function of the normal distribution.\nHill equation.\nIn biochemistry and pharmacology, the Hill equation refers to two closely related equations, one of which describes the response (the physiological output of the system, such as muscle contraction) to Drug or Toxin, as a function of the drug's concentration. The Hill equation is important in the construction of dose-response curves. The Hill equation is the following formula, where formula_9 is the magnitude of the response, &lt;chem&gt;[A]&lt;/chem&gt; is the drug concentration (or equivalently, stimulus intensity), formula_10 is the drug concentration that produces a half-maximal response and formula_11 is the Hill coefficient.\nformula_12\nThe Hill equation rearranges to a logistic function with respect to the logarithm of the dose (similar to a logit model).\nFounder of the Model.\nIvan Pavlov.\nPavlov started studying the digestive system in dogs by performing chronic implants of fistulas in the stomach, by which he was able to show with extreme clarity that the nervous system plays a dominant role in the regulation of the digestive process. Experiments on digestion led to the development of the first experimental model of learning, in which a neutral stimulus acquires the capacity to evoke a specific response further to repeated pairing with another stimulus that evokes the response. \nEdward Thorndike.\nThorndike, who proposed the model, believed that learning stemmed from stimulus and response. Pavlov popularized and revolutionized the theory though by experimenting on the dogs."}
{"id": "27585", "revid": "1293122922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27585", "title": "Statistical population", "text": "Complete set of items that share at least one property in common\nIn statistics, a population is a set of similar items or events which is of interest for some question or experiment. A statistical population can be a group of existing objects (e.g. the set of all stars within the Milky Way galaxy) or a hypothetical and potentially infinite group of objects conceived as a generalization from experience (e.g. the set of all possible hands in a game of poker). \nA population with finitely many values formula_1 in the support of the population distribution is a finite population with population size formula_1. A population with infinitely many values in the support is called infinite population.\nA common aim of statistical analysis is to produce information about some chosen population.\nIn statistical inference, a subset of the population (a statistical \"sample\") is chosen to represent the population in a statistical analysis. Moreover, the statistical sample must be unbiased and accurately model the population. The ratio of the size of this statistical sample to the size of the population is called a \"sampling fraction\". It is then possible to estimate the \"population parameters\" using the appropriate sample statistics.\nFor finite populations, sampling from the population typically removes the sampled value from the population due to drawing samples without replacement. This introduces a violation of the typical independent and identically distribution assumption so that sampling from finite populations requires \"finite population corrections\" (which can be derived from the hypergeometric distribution). As a rough rule of thumb, if the sampling fraction is below 10% of the population size, then finite population corrections can approximately be neglected.\nMean.\nThe population mean, or population expected value, is a measure of the central tendency either of a probability distribution or of a random variable characterized by that distribution. In a discrete probability distribution of a random variable formula_3, the mean is equal to the sum over every possible value weighted by the probability of that value; that is, it is computed by taking the product of each possible value formula_4 of formula_3 and its probability formula_6, and then adding all these products together, giving formula_7. An analogous formula applies to the case of a continuous probability distribution. Not every probability distribution has a defined mean (see the Cauchy distribution for an example). Moreover, the mean can be infinite for some distributions.\nFor a finite population, the population mean of a property is equal to the arithmetic mean of the given property, while considering every member of the population. For example, the population mean height is equal to the sum of the heights of every individual\u2014divided by the total number of individuals. The \"sample mean\" may differ from the population mean, especially for small samples. The law of large numbers states that the larger the size of the sample, the more likely it is that the sample mean will be close to the population mean.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27586", "revid": "42052832", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27586", "title": "Sample (statistics)", "text": ""}
{"id": "27587", "revid": "7557079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27587", "title": "Summary statistics", "text": "Type of statistics\nIn descriptive statistics, summary statistics are used to summarize a set of observations, in order to communicate the largest amount of information as simply as possible. Statisticians commonly try to describe the observations in\nA common collection of order statistics used as summary statistics are the five-number summary, sometimes extended to a seven-number summary, and the associated box plot.\nEntries in an analysis of variance table can also be regarded as summary statistics.378\nExamples.\nLocation.\nCommon measures of location, or central tendency, are the arithmetic mean, median, mode, and interquartile mean.\nSpread.\nCommon measures of statistical dispersion are the standard deviation, variance, range, interquartile range, absolute deviation, mean absolute difference and the distance standard deviation. Measures that assess spread in comparison to the typical size of data values include the coefficient of variation.\nThe Gini coefficient was originally developed to measure income inequality and is equivalent to one of the L-moments.\nA simple summary of a dataset is sometimes given by quoting particular order statistics as approximations to selected percentiles of a distribution.\nShape.\nCommon measures of the shape of a distribution are skewness or kurtosis, while alternatives can be based on L-moments. A different measure is the distance skewness, for which a value of zero implies central symmetry.\nDependence.\nThe common measure of dependence between paired random variables is the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient, while a common alternative summary statistic is Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. A value of zero for the distance correlation implies independence.\nHuman perception of summary statistics.\nHumans efficiently use summary statistics to quickly perceive the gist of auditory and visual information.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27588", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27588", "title": "Range (statistics)", "text": "Concept in statistics\nIn descriptive statistics, the range of a set of data is size of the narrowest interval which contains all the data.\nIt is calculated as the difference between the largest and smallest values (also known as the sample maximum and minimum). \nIt is expressed in the same units as the data.\nThe range provides an indication of statistical dispersion. Closely related alternative measures are the Interdecile range and the Interquartile range.\nRange of continuous IID random variables.\nFor \"n\" independent and identically distributed continuous random variables \"X\"1, \"X\"2, ..., \"X\"\"n\" with the cumulative distribution function G(\"x\") and a probability density function g(\"x\"), let T denote the range of them, that is, T= max(\"X\"1, \"X\"2, ..., \"X\"\"n\")-\nmin(\"X\"1, \"X\"2, ..., \"X\"\"n\").\nDistribution.\nThe range, T, has the cumulative distribution function\nformula_1\nGumbel notes that the \"beauty of this formula is completely marred by the facts that, in general, we cannot express \"G\"(\"x\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"t\") by \"G\"(\"x\"), and that the numerical integration is lengthy and tiresome.\"385 \nIf the distribution of each \"X\"\"i\" is limited to the right (or left) then the asymptotic distribution of the range is equal to the asymptotic distribution of the largest (smallest) value. For more general distributions the asymptotic distribution can be expressed as a Bessel function.\nMoments.\nThe mean range is given by\nformula_2\nwhere \"x\"(\"G\") is the inverse function. In the case where each of the \"X\"\"i\" has a standard normal distribution, the mean range is given by\nformula_3\nDerivation of the distribution.\nPlease note that the following is an informal derivation of the result. It is a bit loose with the calculation of the probabilities.\nLet formula_4 denote respectively the min and max of the random variables formula_5.\nThe event that the range is smaller than formula_6 can be decomposed into smaller events according to:\nFor a given index formula_8 and minimum value formula_7, the probability of the joint event:\nis:formula_13Summing over the indices and integrating over formula_7 yields the total probability of the event: \"the range is smaller than formula_6\" which is exactly the cumulative density function of the range:formula_16which concludes the proof.\nThe range in other models.\nOutside of the IID case with continuous random variables, other cases have explicit formulas. These cases are of marginal interest.\nRelated quantities.\nThe range is a specific example of order statistics. In particular, the range is a linear function of order statistics, which brings it into the scope of L-estimation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27590", "revid": "19814917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27590", "title": "Standard deviation", "text": "In statistics, a measure of variation\nIn statistics, the standard deviation is a measure of the amount of variation of the values of a variable about its mean. A low standard deviation indicates that the values tend to be close to the mean (also called the expected value) of the set, while a high standard deviation indicates that the values are spread out over a wider range. The standard deviation is commonly used in the determination of what constitutes an outlier and what does not. Standard deviation may be abbreviated SD or std dev, and is most commonly represented in mathematical texts and equations by the lowercase Greek letter \u03c3 (sigma), for the population standard deviation, or the Latin letter s, for the sample standard deviation.\nThe standard deviation of a random variable, sample, statistical population, data set, or probability distribution is the square root of its variance. (For a finite population, variance is the average of the squared deviations from the mean.) A useful property of the standard deviation is that, unlike the variance, it is expressed in the same unit as the data. Standard deviation can also be used to calculate standard error for a finite sample, and to determine statistical significance.\nWhen only a sample of data from a population is available, the term \"standard deviation of the sample\" or \"sample standard deviation\" can refer to either the above-mentioned quantity as applied to those data, or to a modified quantity that is an unbiased estimate of the \"population standard deviation\" (the standard deviation of the entire population).\nRelationship with standard error and statistical significance.\nThe standard deviation of a population or sample and the standard error of a statistic (e.g., of the sample mean) are quite different, but related. The sample mean's standard error is the standard deviation of the set of means that would be found by drawing an infinite number of repeated samples from the population and computing a mean for each sample. The mean's standard error turns out to equal the population standard deviation divided by the square root of the sample size, and is estimated by using the sample standard deviation divided by the square root of the sample size. For example, a poll's standard error (what is reported as the margin of error of the poll) is the expected standard deviation of the estimated mean if the same poll were to be conducted multiple times. Thus, the standard error estimates the standard deviation of an estimate, which itself measures how much the estimate depends on the particular sample that was taken from the population. \nIn science, it is common to report both the standard deviation of the data (as a summary statistic) and the standard error of the estimate (as a measure of potential error in the findings). By convention, only effects more than two standard errors away from a null expectation are considered \"statistically significant\", a safeguard against spurious conclusion that is really due to random sampling error.\nBasic examples.\nPopulation standard deviation of grades of eight students.\nSuppose that the entire population of interest is eight students in a particular class.\nTheir marks are the following eight values:\nformula_1\nFor a finite set of numbers, the population standard deviation is found by taking the square root of the average of the squared deviations of the values subtracted from their average value, that is:\nformula_2\nThese eight data points have the mean (average) of 5:\nformula_3\nFirst, calculate the deviations of each data point from the mean, and square the result of each:\nformula_4\nThe variance is the mean of these values:\nformula_5\nand the \"population\" standard deviation is equal to the square root of the variance:\nformula_6\nThis formula is valid only if the eight values with which we began form the complete population. If the values instead were a random sample drawn from some large parent population (for example, there were 8 students randomly and independently chosen from a student population of 2\u00a0million), then one divides by 7 (which is \"n\" \u2212 1) instead of 8 (which is \"n\") in the denominator of the last formula, and the result is formula_7 In that case, the result of the original formula would be called the \"sample\" standard deviation and denoted by formula_8 instead of formula_9 Dividing by formula_10 rather than by formula_11 gives an unbiased estimate of the variance of the larger parent population. This is known as \"Bessel's correction\". Roughly, the reason for it is that the formula for the sample variance relies on computing differences of observations from the sample mean, and the sample mean itself was constructed to be as close as possible to the observations, so just dividing by \"n\" would underestimate the variability.\nStandard deviation of average height for adult men.\nIf the population of interest is approximately normally distributed, the standard deviation provides information on the proportion of observations above or below certain values. For example, the average height for adult men in the United States is about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;, with a standard deviation of around &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;. This means that most men (about 68%, assuming a normal distribution) have a height within 3\u00a0inches of the mean (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;)\u00a0\u2013 one standard deviation\u00a0\u2013 and almost all men (about 95%) have a height within &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt; of the mean (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;)\u00a0\u2013 two standard deviations. If the standard deviation were zero, then all men would share an identical height of 69\u00a0inches. Three standard deviations account for 99.73% of the sample population being studied, assuming the distribution is normal or bell-shaped (see the 68\u201395\u201399.7 rule, or the \"empirical rule,\" for more information).\nDefinition of population values.\nLet \u03bc be the expected value (the average) of random variable X with density :\nformula_12\nThe standard deviation \u03c3 of X is defined as \nformula_13\nwhich can be shown to equal formula_14\nUsing words, the standard deviation is the square root of the variance of X.\nThe standard deviation of a probability distribution is the same as that of a random variable having that distribution. \nNot all random variables have a standard deviation. If the distribution has fat tails going out to infinity, the standard deviation might not exist, because the integral might not converge. The normal distribution has tails going out to infinity, but its mean and standard deviation do exist, because the tails diminish quickly enough. The Pareto distribution with parameter formula_15 has a mean, but not a standard deviation (loosely speaking, the standard deviation is infinite). The Cauchy distribution has neither a mean nor a standard deviation.\nDiscrete random variable.\nIn the case where X takes random values from a finite data set , with each value having the same probability, the standard deviation is\nformula_16\nNote: The above expression has a built-in bias. See the discussion on Bessel's correction further down below.\nor, by using summation notation,\nformula_17\nIf, instead of having equal probabilities, the values have different probabilities, let have probability , have probability have probability In this case, the standard deviation will be\nformula_18\nContinuous random variable.\nThe standard deviation of a continuous real-valued random variable X with probability density function is\nformula_19\nand where the integrals are definite integrals taken for x ranging over X, which represents the set of possible values of the random variable\u00a0X.\nIn the case of a parametric family of distributions, the standard deviation can often be expressed in terms of the parameters for the underlying distribution. For example, in the case of the log-normal distribution with parameters \u03bc and for the underlying normal distribution, the standard deviation of the log-normal variable is given by the expression\nformula_20\nEstimation.\nOne can find the standard deviation of an entire population in cases (such as standardized testing) where every member of a population is sampled. In cases where that cannot be done, the standard deviation \"\u03c3\" is estimated by examining a random sample taken from the population and computing a statistic of the sample, which is used as an estimate of the population standard deviation. Such a statistic is called an estimator, and the estimator (or the value of the estimator, namely the estimate) is called a sample standard deviation, and is denoted by \"s\" (possibly with modifiers).\nUnlike in the case of estimating the population mean of a normal distribution, for which the sample mean is a simple estimator with many desirable properties (unbiased, efficient, maximum likelihood), there is no single estimator for the standard deviation with all these properties, and unbiased estimation of standard deviation is a very technically involved problem. Most often, the standard deviation is estimated using the \"corrected sample standard deviation\" (using \"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01), defined below, and this is often referred to as the \"sample standard deviation\", without qualifiers. However, other estimators are better in other respects: the uncorrected estimator (using \"N\") yields lower mean squared error, while using \"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01.5 (for the normal distribution) almost completely eliminates bias.\nUncorrected sample standard deviation.\nThe formula for the \"population\" standard deviation (of a finite population) can be applied to the sample, using the size of the sample as the size of the population (though the actual population size from which the sample is drawn may be much larger). This estimator, denoted by \"s\"\"N\", is known as the \"uncorrected sample standard deviation\", or sometimes the \"standard deviation of the sample\" (considered as the entire population), and is defined as follows:\nformula_21\nwhere formula_22 are the observed values of the sample items, and formula_23 is the mean value of these observations, while the denominator\u00a0\"N\" stands for the size of the sample: this is the square root of the sample variance, which is the average of the squared deviations about the sample mean.\nThis is a consistent estimator (it converges in probability to the population value as the number of samples goes to infinity), and is the maximum-likelihood estimate when the population is normally distributed. However, this is a biased estimator, as the estimates are generally too low. The bias decreases as sample size grows, dropping off as 1/\"N\", and thus is most significant for small or moderate sample sizes; for formula_24 the bias is below 1%. Thus for very large sample sizes, the uncorrected sample standard deviation is generally acceptable. This estimator also has a uniformly smaller mean squared error than the corrected sample standard deviation.\nCorrected sample standard deviation.\nIf the \"biased sample variance\" (the second central moment of the sample, which is a downward-biased estimate of the population variance) is used to compute an estimate of the population's standard deviation, the result is\nformula_25\nHere taking the square root introduces further downward bias, by Jensen's inequality, due to the square root's being a concave function. The bias in the variance is easily corrected, but the bias from the square root is more difficult to correct, and depends on the distribution in question.\nAn unbiased estimator for the \"variance\" is given by applying Bessel's correction, using \"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 instead of \"N\" to yield the \"unbiased sample variance,\" denoted \"s\"2:\nformula_26\nThis estimator is unbiased if the variance exists and the sample values are drawn independently with replacement. \"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 corresponds to the number of degrees of freedom in the vector of deviations from the mean, formula_27\nTaking square roots reintroduces bias (because the square root is a nonlinear function which does not commute with the expectation, i.e. often formula_28), yielding the \"corrected sample standard deviation,\" denoted by \"s:\"\nformula_29\nAs explained above, while \"s\"2 is an unbiased estimator for the population variance, \"s\" is still a biased estimator for the population standard deviation, though markedly less biased than the uncorrected sample standard deviation. This estimator is commonly used and generally known simply as the \"sample standard deviation\". The bias may still be large for small samples (\"N\" less than 10). As sample size increases, the amount of bias decreases. We obtain more information and the difference between formula_30 and formula_31 becomes smaller.\nUnbiased sample standard deviation.\nFor unbiased estimation of standard deviation, there is no formula that works across all distributions, unlike for mean and variance. Instead, s is used as a basis, and is scaled by a correction factor to produce an unbiased estimate. For the normal distribution, an unbiased estimator is given by , where the correction factor (which depends on N) is given in terms of the Gamma function, and equals:\nformula_32\nThis arises because the sampling distribution of the sample standard deviation follows a (scaled) chi distribution, and the correction factor is the mean of the chi distribution.\nAn approximation can be given by replacing with , yielding:\nformula_33\nThe error in this approximation decays quadratically (as ), and it is suited for all but the smallest samples or highest precision: for N = 3 the bias is equal to 1.3%, and for N = 9 the bias is already less than 0.1%.\nA more accurate approximation is to replace above with .\nFor other distributions, the correct formula depends on the distribution, but a rule of thumb is to use the further refinement of the approximation:\nformula_34\nwhere denotes the population excess kurtosis. The excess kurtosis may be either known beforehand for certain distributions, or estimated from the data.\nConfidence interval of a sampled standard deviation.\nThe standard deviation we obtain by sampling a distribution is itself not absolutely accurate, both for mathematical reasons (explained here by the confidence interval) and for practical reasons of measurement (measurement error). The mathematical effect can be described by the confidence interval or CI. \nTo show how a larger sample will make the confidence interval narrower, consider the following examples: \nA small population of has only one degree of freedom for estimating the standard deviation. The result is that a 95% CI of the SD runs from 0.45\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0SD to 31.9\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0SD; the factors here are as follows:\nformula_35\nwhere formula_36 is the p-th quantile of the chi-square distribution with k degrees of freedom, and is the confidence level. This is equivalent to the following:\nformula_37\nWith , and . The reciprocals of the square roots of these two numbers give us the factors 0.45 and 31.9 given above.\nA larger population of has 9 degrees of freedom for estimating the standard deviation. The same computations as above give us in this case a 95% CI running from 0.69\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0SD to 1.83\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0SD. So even with a sample population of 10, the actual SD can still be almost a factor 2 higher than the sampled SD. For a sample population , this is down to 0.88\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0SD to 1.16\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0SD. To be more certain that the sampled SD is close to the actual SD we need to sample a large number of points.\nThese same formulae can be used to obtain confidence intervals on the variance of residuals from a least squares fit under standard normal theory, where k is now the number of degrees of freedom for error.\nBounds on standard deviation.\nFor a set of data spanning a range of values R, an upper bound on the standard deviation s is given by . \nAn estimate of the standard deviation for data taken to be approximately normal follows from the heuristic that 95% of the area under the normal curve lies roughly two standard deviations to either side of the mean, so that, with 95% probability the total range of values R represents four standard deviations so that . This so-called range rule is useful in sample size estimation, as the range of possible values is easier to estimate than the standard deviation. Other divisors of the range such that are available for other values of N and for non-normal distributions.\nIdentities and mathematical properties.\nThe standard deviation is invariant under changes in location, and scales directly with the scale of the random variable. Thus, for a constant c and random variables X and Y:\nformula_38\nThe standard deviation of the sum of two random variables can be related to their individual standard deviations and the covariance between them:\nformula_39\nwhere formula_40 and formula_41 stand for variance and covariance, respectively.\nThe calculation of the sum of squared deviations can be related to moments calculated directly from the data. In the following formula, the letter E is interpreted to mean expected value, i.e., mean.\nformula_42\nThe sample standard deviation can be computed as:\nformula_43\nFor a finite population with equal probabilities at all points, we have\nformula_44\nwhich means that the standard deviation is equal to the square root of the difference between the average of the squares of the values and the square of the average value.\nSee computational formula for the variance for proof, and for an analogous result for the sample standard deviation.\nInterpretation and application.\nA large standard deviation indicates that the data points can spread far from the mean and a small standard deviation indicates that they are clustered closely around the mean.\nFor example, each of the three populations {0, 0, 14, 14}, {0, 6, 8, 14} and {6, 6, 8, 8} has a mean of 7. Their standard deviations are 7, 5, and 1, respectively. The third population has a much smaller standard deviation than the other two because its values are all close to 7. These standard deviations have the same units as the data points themselves. If, for instance, the data set {0, 6, 8, 14} represents the ages of a population of four siblings in years, the standard deviation is 5 years. As another example, the population {1000, 1006, 1008, 1014} may represent the distances traveled by four athletes, measured in meters. It has a mean of 1007 meters, and a standard deviation of 5 meters.\nStandard deviation may serve as a measure of uncertainty. In physical science, for example, the reported standard deviation of a group of repeated measurements gives the precision of those measurements. When deciding whether measurements agree with a theoretical prediction, the standard deviation of those measurements is of crucial importance: if the mean of the measurements is too far away from the prediction (with the distance measured in standard deviations), then the theory being tested probably needs to be revised. This makes sense since they fall outside the range of values that could reasonably be expected to occur if the prediction were correct and the standard deviation appropriately quantified. See prediction interval.\nWhile the standard deviation does measure how far typical values tend to be from the mean, other measures are available. An example is the mean absolute deviation, which might be considered a more direct measure of average distance, compared to the root mean square distance inherent in the standard deviation.\nApplication examples.\nThe practical value of understanding the standard deviation of a set of values is in appreciating how much variation there is from the average (mean).\nExperiment, industrial and hypothesis testing.\nStandard deviation is often used to compare real-world data against a model to test the model.\nFor example, in industrial applications the weight of products coming off a production line may need to comply with a legally required value. By weighing some fraction of the products an average weight can be found, which will always be slightly different from the long-term average. By using standard deviations, a minimum and maximum value can be calculated that the averaged weight will be within some very high percentage of the time (99.9% or more). If it falls outside the range then the production process may or not need to be corrected. Statistical tests such as these are particularly important when the testing is relatively expensive. For example, if the product needs to be opened and drained and weighed, or if the product was otherwise used up by the test.\nIn experimental science, a theoretical model of reality is used. Particle physics conventionally uses a standard of \"5 sigma\" for the declaration of a discovery. A five-sigma level translates to one chance in 3.5 million that a random fluctuation would yield the result. This level of certainty was required in order to assert that a particle consistent with the Higgs boson had been discovered in two independent experiments at CERN, also leading to the declaration of the first observation of gravitational waves.\nWeather.\nAs a simple example, consider the average daily maximum temperatures for two cities, one inland and one on the coast. It is helpful to understand that the range of daily maximum temperatures for cities near the coast is smaller than for cities inland. Thus, while these two cities may each have the same average maximum temperature, the standard deviation of the daily maximum temperature for the coastal city will be less than that of the inland city as, on any particular day, the actual maximum temperature is more likely to be farther from the average maximum temperature for the inland city than for the coastal one.\nFinance.\nIn finance, standard deviation is often used as a measure of the risk associated with price-fluctuations of a given asset (stocks, bonds, property, etc.), or the risk of a portfolio of assets (actively managed mutual funds, index mutual funds, or ETFs). Risk is an important factor in determining how to efficiently manage a portfolio of investments because it determines the variation in returns on the asset or portfolio and gives investors a mathematical basis for investment decisions (known as mean-variance optimization). The fundamental concept of risk is that as it increases, the expected return on an investment should increase as well, an increase known as the risk premium. In other words, investors should expect a higher return on an investment when that investment carries a higher level of risk or uncertainty. When evaluating investments, investors should estimate both the expected return and the uncertainty of future returns. Standard deviation provides a quantified estimate of the uncertainty of future returns.\nFor example, assume an investor had to choose between two stocks. Stock A over the past 20 years had an average return of 10 percent, with a standard deviation of 20 percentage points (pp) and Stock B, over the same period, had average returns of 12 percent but a higher standard deviation of 30 pp. On the basis of risk and return, an investor may decide that Stock A is the safer choice, because Stock B's additional two percentage points of return is not worth the additional 10 pp standard deviation (greater risk or uncertainty of the expected return). Stock B is likely to fall short of the initial investment (but also to exceed the initial investment) more often than Stock A under the same circumstances, and is estimated to return only two percent more on average. In this example, Stock A is expected to earn about 10 percent, plus or minus 20 pp (a range of 30 percent to \u221210 percent), about two-thirds of the future year returns. When considering more extreme possible returns or outcomes in future, an investor should expect results of as much as 10 percent plus or minus 60 pp, or a range from 70 percent to \u221250 percent, which includes outcomes for three standard deviations from the average return (about 99.7 percent of probable returns).\nCalculating the average (or arithmetic mean) of the return of a security over a given period will generate the expected return of the asset. For each period, subtracting the expected return from the actual return results in the difference from the mean. Squaring the difference in each period and taking the average gives the overall variance of the return of the asset. The larger the variance, the greater risk the security carries. Finding the square root of this variance will give the standard deviation of the investment tool in question.\nFinancial time series are known to be non-stationary series, whereas the statistical calculations above, such as standard deviation, apply only to stationary series. To apply the above statistical tools to non-stationary series, the series first must be transformed to a stationary series, enabling use of statistical tools that now have a valid basis from which to work.\nGeometric interpretation.\nTo gain some geometric insights and clarification, we will start with a population of three values, . This defines a point P = (x1, x2, x3) in R3. Consider the line L = {}. This is the \"main diagonal\" going through the origin. If our three given values were all equal, then the standard deviation would be zero and P would lie on L. So it is not unreasonable to assume that the standard deviation is related to the \"distance\" of P to L. That is indeed the case. To move orthogonally from L to the point P, one begins at the point:\nformula_45\nwhose coordinates are the mean of the values we started out with. \nA little algebra shows that the distance between P and M (which is the same as the orthogonal distance between P and the line L) formula_46 is equal to the standard deviation of the vector , multiplied by the square root of the number of dimensions of the vector (3 in this case).\nChebyshev's inequality.\nAn observation is rarely more than a few standard deviations away from the mean. Chebyshev's inequality ensures that, for all distributions for which the standard deviation is defined, the amount of data within a number of standard deviations of the mean is at least as much as given in the following table.\nRules for normally distributed data.\nThe central limit theorem states that the distribution of an average of many independent, identically distributed random variables tends toward the famous bell-shaped normal distribution with a probability density function of\nformula_47\nwhere \u03bc is the expected value of the random variables, \u03c3 equals their distribution's standard deviation divided by , and n is the number of random variables. The standard deviation therefore is simply a scaling variable that adjusts how broad the curve will be, though it also appears in the normalizing constant.\nIf a data distribution is approximately normal, then the proportion of data values within z standard deviations of the mean is defined by:\nformula_48\nwhere formula_49 is the error function. The proportion that is less than or equal to a number, x, is given by the cumulative distribution function:\nformula_50\nIf a data distribution is approximately normal then about 68 percent of the data values are within one standard deviation of the mean (mathematically, , where \u03bc is the arithmetic mean), about 95 percent are within two standard deviations (), and about 99.7 percent lie within three standard deviations (). This is known as the \"68\u201395\u201399.7 rule\", or \"the empirical rule\".\nFor various values of z, the percentage of values expected to lie in and outside the symmetric interval, , are as follows:\nStandard deviation matrix.\nThe standard deviation matrix formula_51 is the extension of the standard deviation to multiple dimensions. It is the symmetric square root of the covariance matrix formula_52.\nformula_51 linearly scales a random vector in multiple dimensions in the same way that formula_54 does in one dimension. A scalar random variable formula_55 with variance formula_56 can be written as formula_57, where formula_58 has unit variance. In the same way, a random vector formula_59 in several dimensions with covariance formula_52 can be written as formula_61, where formula_62 is a normalized variable with identity covariance formula_63. This requires that formula_64. There are then infinite solutions for formula_51, and consequently there are multiple ways to whiten the distribution. The symmetric square root of formula_52 is one of the solutions.\nFor example, a multivariate normal vector formula_67 can be defined as formula_68, where formula_69 is the multivariate standard normal.\nRelationship between standard deviation and mean.\nThe mean and the standard deviation of a set of data are descriptive statistics usually reported together. In a certain sense, the standard deviation is a \"natural\" measure of statistical dispersion if the center of the data is measured about the mean. This is because the standard deviation from the mean is smaller than from any other point. The precise statement is the following: suppose are real numbers and define the function:\nformula_79\nUsing calculus or by completing the square, it is possible to show that has a unique minimum at the mean:\nformula_80\nVariability can also be measured by the coefficient of variation, which is the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean. It is a dimensionless number.\nStandard deviation of the mean.\nOften, we want some information about the precision of the mean we obtained. We can obtain this by determining the standard deviation of the sampled mean. Assuming statistical independence of the values in the sample, the standard deviation of the mean (SDOM) is related to the standard deviation of the distribution by:\nformula_81\nwhere N is the number of observations in the sample used to estimate the mean. This can easily be proven with (see basic properties of the variance):\nformula_82\nformula_83\nhence\nformula_84\nResulting in:\nformula_85\nIn order to estimate the standard deviation of the mean it is necessary to know the standard deviation of the entire population \u03c3 beforehand. However, in most applications this parameter is unknown. For example, if a series of 10 measurements of a previously unknown quantity is performed in a laboratory, it is possible to calculate the resulting sample mean and sample standard deviation, but it is impossible to calculate the standard deviation of the mean. However, one can estimate the standard deviation of the entire population from the sample, and thus obtain an estimate for the standard error of the mean.\nRapid calculation methods.\nThe following two formulas can represent a running (repeatedly updated) standard deviation. A set of two power sums and are computed over a set of N values of x, denoted as :\nformula_86\nGiven the results of these running summations, the values N, , can be used at any time to compute the \"current\" value of the running standard deviation:\nformula_87\nWhere N, as mentioned above, is the size of the set of values (or can also be regarded as ).\nSimilarly for sample standard deviation,\nformula_88\nIn a computer implementation, as the two sums become large, we need to consider round-off error, arithmetic overflow, and arithmetic underflow. The method below calculates the running sums method with reduced rounding errors. This is a \"one pass\" algorithm for calculating variance of n samples without the need to store prior data during the calculation. Applying this method to a time series will result in successive values of standard deviation corresponding to n data points as n grows larger with each new sample, rather than a constant-width sliding window calculation.\nFor :\nformula_89\nwhere A is the mean value.\nformula_90\nNote: since or .\nSample variance:\nformula_91\nPopulation variance:\nformula_92\nWeighted calculation.\nWhen the values formula_93 are weighted with unequal weights formula_94, the power sums are each computed as:\nformula_95\nAnd the standard deviation equations remain unchanged. is now the sum of the weights and not the number of samples N.\nThe incremental method with reduced rounding errors can also be applied, with some additional complexity.\nA running sum of weights must be computed for each k from 1 to n:\nformula_96\nand places where is used above must be replaced by formula_97:\nformula_98\nIn the final division,\nformula_99\nand\nformula_100\nor \nformula_101\nwhere n is the total number of elements, and is the number of elements with non-zero weights.\nThe above formulas become equal to the simpler formulas given above if weights are taken as equal to one.\nHistory.\nThe term \"standard deviation\" was first used in writing by Karl Pearson in 1894, following his use of it in lectures. This was as a replacement for earlier alternative names for the same idea: for example, Gauss used \"mean error\".\nStandard deviation index.\nThe standard deviation index (SDI) is used in external quality assessments, particularly for medical laboratories. It is calculated as:\nformula_102\nAlternatives.\nStandard deviation is algebraically simpler, though in practice less robust, than the average absolute deviation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27592", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27592", "title": "Statistical assumption", "text": "Aspect of statistics\nStatistics, like all mathematical disciplines, does not infer valid conclusions from nothing. Inferring interesting conclusions about real statistical populations almost always requires some background assumptions. Those assumptions must be made carefully, because incorrect assumptions can generate wildly inaccurate conclusions.\nHere are some examples of statistical assumptions:\nClasses of assumptions.\nThere are two approaches to statistical inference: \"model-based inference\" and \"design-based inference\". Both approaches rely on some statistical model to represent the data-generating process. In the model-based approach, the model is taken to be initially unknown, and one of the goals is to select an appropriate model for inference. In the design-based approach, the model is taken to be known, and one of the goals is to ensure that the sample data are selected randomly enough for inference.\nStatistical assumptions can be put into two classes, depending upon which approach to inference is used.\nThe model-based approach is the most commonly used in statistical inference; the design-based approach is used mainly with survey sampling. With the model-based approach, all the assumptions are effectively encoded in the model.\nChecking assumptions.\nGiven that the validity of any conclusion drawn from a statistical inference depends on the validity of the assumptions made, it is clearly important that those assumptions should be reviewed at some stage. Some instances\u2014for example where data are lacking\u2014may require that researchers judge whether an assumption is reasonable. Researchers can expand this somewhat to consider what effect a departure from the assumptions might produce. Where more extensive data are available, various types of procedures for statistical model validation are available\u2014e.g. for regression model validation.\nExample: Independence of Observations.\nScenario:\nImagine a study assessing the effectiveness of a new teaching method in multiple classrooms. If the classrooms are not treated as independent entities, but rather as a single unit, the assumption of independence is violated. Students within the same classroom may share common characteristics or experiences, leading to correlated observations.\nConsequence:\nFailure to account for this lack of independence may inflate the perceived impact of the teaching method, as the outcomes within a classroom may be more similar than assumed. This can result in an overestimation of the method's generalizability to diverse educational settings."}
{"id": "27593", "revid": "51070093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27593", "title": "Independence (probability theory)", "text": "When the occurrence of one event does not affect the likelihood of another\nIndependence is a fundamental motion in probability theory, as in statistics and the theory of stochastic processes. Two events are independent, statistically independent, or stochastically independent if, informally speaking, the occurrence of one does not affect the probability of occurrence of the other or, equivalently, does not affect the odds. Similarly, two random variables are independent if the realization of one does not affect the probability distribution of the other.\nWhen dealing with collections of more than two events, two notions of independence need to be distinguished. The events are called pairwise independent if any two events in the collection are independent of each other, while mutual independence (or collective independence) of events means, informally speaking, that each event is independent of any combination of other events in the collection. A similar notion exists for collections of random variables. Mutual independence implies pairwise independence, but not the other way around. In the standard literature of probability theory, statistics, and stochastic processes, independence without further qualification usually refers to mutual independence.\nDefinition.\nFor events.\nTwo events.\nTwo events formula_1 and formula_2 are independent (often written as formula_3 or formula_4, where the latter symbol often is also used for conditional independence) if and only if their joint probability equals the product of their probabilities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nformula_5 indicates that two independent events formula_1 and formula_2 have common elements in their sample space so that they are not mutually exclusive (mutually exclusive if and only if (iff) formula_8). Why this defines independence is made clear by rewriting with conditional probabilities formula_9 as the probability at which the event formula_1 occurs provided that the event formula_2 has or is assumed to have occurred:\nformula_12\nand similarly\nformula_13\nThus, the occurrence of formula_2 does not affect the probability of formula_1, and vice versa. In other words, formula_1 and formula_2 are independent of each other. Although the derived expressions may seem more intuitive, they are not the preferred definition, as the conditional probabilities may be undefined if formula_18 or formula_19 are 0. Furthermore, the preferred definition makes clear by symmetry that when formula_1 is independent of formula_2, formula_2 is also independent of formula_1.\nOdds.\nStated in terms of odds, two events are independent if and only if the odds ratio of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is unity (1). Analogously with probability, this is equivalent to the conditional odds being equal to the unconditional odds:\nformula_24\nor to the odds of one event, given the other event, being the same as the odds of the event, given the other event not occurring:\nformula_25\nThe odds ratio can be defined as\nformula_26\nor symmetrically for odds of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; given &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and thus is 1 if and only if the events are independent.\nMore than two events.\nA finite set of events formula_27 is pairwise independent if every pair of events is independent\u2014that is, if and only if for all distinct pairs of indices formula_28,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA finite set of events is mutually independent if every event is independent of any intersection of the other events\u2014that is, if and only if for every formula_29 and for every k indices formula_30,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis is called the \"multiplication rule\" for independent events. It is not a single condition involving only the product of all the probabilities of all single events; it must hold true for all subsets of events.\nFor more than two events, a mutually independent set of events is (by definition) pairwise independent; but the converse is not necessarily true.\nLog probability and information content.\nStated in terms of log probability, two events are independent if and only if the log probability of the joint event is the sum of the log probability of the individual events:\nformula_31\nIn information theory, negative log probability is interpreted as information content, and thus two events are independent if and only if the information content of the combined event equals the sum of information content of the individual events:\nformula_32\nSee \"\" for details.\nFor real valued random variables.\nTwo random variables.\nTwo random variables formula_33 and formula_34 are independent if and only if (iff) the elements of the \u03c0-system generated by them are independent; that is to say, for every formula_35 and formula_36, the events formula_37 and formula_38 are independent events (as defined above in Eq.1). That is, formula_33 and formula_34 with cumulative distribution functions formula_41 and formula_42, are independent iff the combined random variable formula_43 has a joint cumulative distribution function\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nor equivalently, if the probability densities formula_44 and formula_45 and the joint probability density formula_46 exist,\nformula_47\nMore than two random variables.\nA finite set of formula_48 random variables formula_49 is pairwise independent if and only if every pair of random variables is independent. Even if the set of random variables is pairwise independent, it is not necessarily \"mutually independent\" as defined next.\nA finite set of formula_48 random variables formula_49 is mutually independent if and only if for any sequence of numbers formula_52, the events formula_53 are mutually independent events (as defined above in Eq.3). This is equivalent to the following condition on the joint cumulative distribution function formula_54. A finite set of formula_48 random variables formula_49 is mutually independent if and only if\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt is not necessary here to require that the probability distribution factorizes for all possible formula_57-element subsets as in the case for formula_48 events. This is not required because e.g. formula_59 implies formula_60.\nThe measure-theoretically inclined reader may prefer to substitute events formula_61 for events formula_62 in the above definition, where formula_1 is any Borel set. That definition is exactly equivalent to the one above when the values of the random variables are real numbers. It has the advantage of working also for complex-valued random variables or for random variables taking values in any measurable space (which includes topological spaces endowed by appropriate \u03c3-algebras).\nFor real valued random vectors.\nTwo random vectors formula_64 and formula_65 are called independent if\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;(\\mathbf{x,y}) = F_{\\mathbf{X\nwhere formula_66 and formula_67 denote the cumulative distribution functions of formula_68 and formula_69 and formula_70 denotes their joint cumulative distribution function. Independence of formula_68 and formula_69 is often denoted by formula_73.\nWritten component-wise, formula_68 and formula_69 are called independent if\nformula_76\nFor stochastic processes.\nFor one stochastic process.\nThe definition of independence may be extended from random vectors to a stochastic process. Therefore, it is required for an independent stochastic process that the random variables obtained by sampling the process at any formula_48 times formula_78 are independent random variables for any formula_48.\nFormally, a stochastic process formula_80 is called independent, if and only if for all formula_81 and for all formula_82\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;(x_1,\\ldots,x_n) = F_{X_{t_1\nwhere formula_83.}} Independence of a stochastic process is a property \"within\" a stochastic process, not between two stochastic processes.\nFor two stochastic processes.\nIndependence of two stochastic processes is a property between two stochastic processes formula_80 and formula_85 that are defined on the same probability space formula_86. Formally, two stochastic processes formula_80 and formula_85 are said to be independent if for all formula_81 and for all formula_82, the random vectors formula_91 and formula_92 are independent, i.e. if\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;(x_1,\\ldots,x_n,y_1,\\ldots,y_n) = F_{X_{t_1},\\ldots,X_{t_n\nIndependent \u03c3-algebras.\nThe definitions above (Eq.1 and Eq.2) are both generalized by the following definition of independence for \u03c3-algebras. Let formula_93 be a probability space and let formula_94 and formula_95 be two sub-\u03c3-algebras of formula_96. formula_94 and formula_95 are said to be independent if, whenever formula_99 and formula_100,\nformula_101\nLikewise, a finite family of \u03c3-algebras formula_102, where formula_103 is an index set, is said to be independent if and only if\nformula_104\nand an infinite family of \u03c3-algebras is said to be independent if all its finite subfamilies are independent.\nThe new definition relates to the previous ones very directly:\nformula_106\nUsing this definition, it is easy to show that if formula_33 and formula_34 are random variables and formula_34 is constant, then formula_33 and formula_34 are independent, since the \u03c3-algebra generated by a constant random variable is the trivial \u03c3-algebra formula_121. Probability zero events cannot affect independence so independence also holds if formula_34 is only Pr-almost surely constant.\nProperties.\nSelf-independence.\nNote that an event is independent of itself if and only if\nformula_123\nThus an event is independent of itself if and only if it almost surely occurs or its complement almost surely occurs; this fact is useful when proving zero\u2013one laws.\nExpectation and covariance.\nIf formula_33 and formula_34 are statistically independent random variables, then the expectation operator formula_126 has the property\nformula_127\nand the covariance formula_128 is zero, as follows from\nformula_129\nThe converse does not hold: if two random variables have a covariance of 0 they still may be not independent. \nSimilarly for two stochastic processes formula_80 and formula_85: If they are independent, then they are uncorrelated.\nCharacteristic function.\nTwo random variables formula_33 and formula_34 are independent if and only if the characteristic function of the random vector formula_43 satisfies\nformula_135\nIn particular the characteristic function of their sum is the product of their marginal characteristic functions:\nformula_136\nthough the reverse implication is not true. Random variables that satisfy the latter condition are called subindependent.\nExamples.\nRolling dice.\nThe event of getting a 6 the first time a die is rolled and the event of getting a 6 the second time are \"independent\". By contrast, the event of getting a 6 the first time a die is rolled and the event that the sum of the numbers seen on the first and second trial is 8 are \"not\" independent.\nDrawing cards.\nIf two cards are drawn \"with\" replacement from a deck of cards, the event of drawing a red card on the first trial and that of drawing a red card on the second trial are \"independent\". By contrast, if two cards are drawn \"without\" replacement from a deck of cards, the event of drawing a red card on the first trial and that of drawing a red card on the second trial are \"not\" independent, because a deck that has had a red card removed has proportionately fewer red cards.\nPairwise and mutual independence.\nConsider the two probability spaces shown. In both cases, formula_137 and formula_138. The events in the first space are pairwise independent because formula_139, formula_140, and formula_141; but the three events are not mutually independent. The events in the second space are both pairwise independent and mutually independent. To illustrate the difference, consider conditioning on two events. In the pairwise independent case, although any one event is independent of each of the other two individually, it is not independent of the intersection of the other two:\nformula_142\nformula_143\nformula_144\nIn the mutually independent case, however,\nformula_145\nformula_146\nformula_147\nTriple-independence but no pairwise-independence.\nIt is possible to create a three-event example in which\nformula_148\nand yet no two of the three events are pairwise independent (and hence the set of events are not mutually independent). This example shows that mutual independence involves requirements on the products of probabilities of all combinations of events, not just the single events as in this example.\nConditional independence.\nFor events.\nThe events formula_1 and formula_2 are conditionally independent given an event formula_151 when\nformula_152.\nFor random variables.\nIntuitively, two random variables formula_33 and formula_34 are conditionally independent given formula_155 if, once formula_155 is known, the value of formula_34 does not add any additional information about formula_33. For instance, two measurements formula_33 and formula_34 of the same underlying quantity formula_155 are not independent, but they are conditionally independent given formula_155 (unless the errors in the two measurements are somehow connected).\nThe formal definition of conditional independence is based on the idea of conditional distributions. If formula_33, formula_34, and formula_155 are discrete random variables, then we define formula_33 and formula_34 to be conditionally independent given formula_155 if\nformula_169\nfor all formula_35, formula_36 and formula_172 such that formula_173. On the other hand, if the random variables are continuous and have a joint probability density function formula_174, then formula_33 and formula_34 are conditionally independent given formula_155 if\nformula_178\nfor all real numbers formula_35, formula_36 and formula_172 such that formula_182.\nIf discrete formula_33 and formula_34 are conditionally independent given formula_155, then\nformula_186\nfor any formula_35, formula_36 and formula_172 with formula_173. That is, the conditional distribution for formula_33 given formula_34 and formula_155 is the same as that given formula_155 alone. A similar equation holds for the conditional probability density functions in the continuous case.\nIndependence can be seen as a special kind of conditional independence, since probability can be seen as a kind of conditional probability given no events.\nHistory.\nBefore 1933, independence, in probability theory, was defined in a verbal manner. For example, de Moivre gave the following definition: \u201cTwo events are independent, when they have no connexion one with the other, and that the happening of one neither forwards nor obstructs the happening of the other\u201d. If there are n independent events, the probability of the event, that all of them happen was computed as the product of the probabilities of these n events. Apparently, there was the conviction, that this formula was a consequence of the above definition. (Sometimes this was called the Multiplication Theorem.), Of course, a proof of his assertion cannot work without further more formal tacit assumptions.\nThe definition of independence, given in this article, became the standard definition (now used in all books) after it appeared in 1933 as part of Kolmogorov's axiomatization of probability. Kolmogorov credited it to S.N. Bernstein, and quoted a publication which had appeared in Russian in 1927.\nUnfortunately, both Bernstein and Kolmogorov had not been aware of the work of the Georg Bohlmann. Bohlmann had given the same definition for two events in 1901 and for n events in 1908 In the latter paper, he studied his notion in detail. For example, he gave the first example showing that pairwise independence does not imply mutual independence.\nEven today, Bohlmann is rarely quoted. More about his work can be found in \"On the contributions of Georg Bohlmann to probability theory\" from .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27595", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27595", "title": "Sherri\u00e9 Austin", "text": "Australian retired actress, singer (born 1970)\nSherrie Veronica Krenn (born 28 August 1970), known professionally as Sherri\u00e9 Austin (formerly known as Sherrie Krenn), is an Australian former actress and country music singer. Starting as a singer in her teenage years, Austin initially recorded as one half of the duo Colourhaus, which also featured Phil Radford. After leaving Colourhaus, she moved to the United States in pursuit of a solo career. There, she recorded five studio albums, and charted several singles on the \"Billboard\" Hot Country Songs charts. Her highest charting single was the No.\u00a018 \"Streets of Heaven\" in 2003. Her last album was released on 15 November 2011.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nAustin got her start in music opening for Johnny Cash in Australia at the age of 14. She later moved to the United States where she took up acting. She is most known in the United States for playing the role of Pippa McKenna on \"The Facts of Life\" during its final season.\nIn 1991, she appeared as \"Lady Penelope\" on episode No.\u00a020 of the first season of the television comedy series \"The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air\". In the 1990s, she started a singing career, teaming up with Phil Radford in 1992, to form a duo, Colourhaus, which released one album, \"Water to the Soul\". The song \"Innocent Child\" taken from that album was issued as a single, with \"We Talk to the Angels\" on the B-side, and it peaked at No. 50 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. The Colourhaus song \"Colour Me You\" was on the soundtrack of the \"Rookie of the Year\" episode of the television series \"Baywatch\" on 5 October 1992.\nNashville move.\nAfterwards, Austin moved to Nashville, Tennessee, to pursue a career in country music. Her first solo contract was with Arista Nashville, with the album \"Words\" being released in 1997. It produced singles in \"Lucky in Love\", \"One Solitary Tear\", \"Put Your Heart into It\", and \"Innocent Man\". \"Lucky in Love\" and \"Put Your Heart into It\" both reached Top 40 on the country charts with a peak of No.\u00a034 each.\nHer second and final album for Arista was 1999's \"Love in the Real World\", led off by the No.\u00a029 \"Never Been Kissed\", which was followed by \"Little Bird\". After RCA acquired Arista Records, Austin's publishing company, Reynsong Publishing, formed Wrensong Entertainment and signed to Madacy Entertainment for her next album, \"Followin' a Feelin\"', which produced another single in its lead-off single, a cover of Dolly Parton's \"Jolene\".\nLater, she switched to the independent Broken Bow Records label. Her fourth album of country music, titled \"Streets of Heaven\", produced her biggest country hit in its title track. Following this single was \"Son of a Preacher Man\", a cover of the Dusty Springfield song, which was never included on an album.\nBroadway years.\nAustin moved to New York City in 2005 and appeared in the New York Musical Theater Festival's production of \"Bonnie &amp; Clyde\". \"The New York Times\" commented that she was \"a sultry young country music singer who plays the notorious criminal Bonnie Parker and does for this musical what Reba McEntire did for the 1999 revival of \"Annie Get Your Gun.\" That twang in her voice provides some much-needed authenticity in excellent pop-country numbers like \"Ain't Goin' Back.\" And it's easy to tell by her hip-swiveling poses that this is a woman who knows how to hold a stage.\"\nThe following year, Austin performed in \"Ring of Fire \u2013 The Johnny Cash Musical Show\" at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre. She also performed in the production of \"Warrior\", a musical about the American-Indian athlete Jim Thorpe, where CurtainUp.com described her as \"outstanding\". She returned to Nashville in 2006.\nNashville return.\nAustin co-wrote Danielle Peck's 2007 single \"Bad for Me\", the title track to Blake Shelton's 2008 album \"Startin' Fires\", George Strait's \"Where Have I Been All My Life\" off his 2009 album \"Twang\", and Tim McGraw's duet, with wife Faith Hill, \"Shotgun Rider\" off his \"Let It Go\" album in 2007. Austin left Broken Bow in 2008.\nShe was named one of 2011's \"25 Most Beautiful People\" by \"Nashville Lifestyles Magazine\".\nIn summer 2011, The Sundance Channel announced that Austin and her friend Shane Stevens would be on the second season of \"Girls Who Like Boys Who Like Boys\", which was filmed in Nashville and features women and their gay best friends. The season started 18 November 2011.\n\"Circus Girl\" (2011).\nAustin's most recent album, \"Circus Girl\", her first in eight years, is described as a series of stories interpreted by a strong woman, about women, and for women. Austin feels it's something her female fans have been clamouring for, for quite some time.\n\"The last few years I had been complaining about that fact that there weren\u2019t any females speaking to women above the age of 30, so I started thinking about how I was writing my songs and came up with the idea for \"Friday Night Girls\"... I wanted to write a three-minute song with every \"Sex and the City\" episode that had ever existed, so I did. I quickly noticed that the women in my audiences loved it and so I switched my songwriting focus for a while to concentrate on that audience, who are my peers, to speak to them\", says Austin.\n\"Circus Girl\" was released independently on 15 November 2011.\nDiscography.\nSingles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAwards.\nCountry Music Awards of Australia.\nThe Country Music Awards of Australia (CMAA) (also known as the Golden Guitar Awards) are held in January during the Tamworth Country Music Festival, celebrating recording excellence in the Australian country music industry. They have been held annually since 1973.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27596", "revid": "1303141865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27596", "title": "Stratified sampling", "text": "Sampling from a population which can be partitioned into subpopulations\nIn statistics, stratified sampling is a method of sampling from a population which can be partitioned into subpopulations.\nIn statistical surveys, when subpopulations within an overall population vary, it could be advantageous to sample each subpopulation (stratum) independently. \nStratification is the process of dividing members of the population into homogeneous subgroups before sampling. The strata should define a partition of the population. That is, it should be \"collectively exhaustive\" and \"mutually exclusive\": every element in the population must be assigned to one and only one stratum. Then sampling is done in each stratum, for example: by simple random sampling. The objective is to improve the precision of the sample by reducing sampling error. It can produce a weighted mean that has less variability than the arithmetic mean of a simple random sample of the population.\nIn computational statistics, stratified sampling is a method of variance reduction when Monte Carlo methods are used to estimate population statistics from a known population.\nStrategies.\nA real-world example of using stratified sampling would be for a political survey. If the respondents needed to reflect the diversity of the population, the researcher would specifically seek to include participants of various minority groups such as race or religion, based on their proportionality to the total population as mentioned above. A stratified survey could thus claim to be more representative of the population than a survey of simple random sampling or systematic sampling. Both mean and variance can be corrected for disproportionate sampling costs using stratified sample sizes.\nExample.\nAssume that we need to estimate the average number of votes for each candidate in an election. Assume that a country has 3 towns: Town A has 1 million factory workers, Town B has 2 million office workers and Town C has 3 million retirees. We can choose to get a random sample of size 60 over the entire population but there is some chance that the resulting random sample is poorly balanced across these towns and hence is biased, causing a significant error in estimation (when the outcome of interest has a different distribution, in terms of the parameter of interest, between the towns). Instead, if we choose to take a random sample of 10, 20 and 30 from Town A, B and C respectively, then we can produce a smaller error in estimation for the same total sample size. This method is generally used when a population is not a homogeneous group.\nAdvantages.\nThe reasons to use stratified sampling rather than simple random sampling include\nIf the population density varies greatly within a region, stratified sampling will ensure that estimates can be made with equal accuracy in different parts of the region, and that comparisons of sub-regions can be made with equal statistical power. For example, in Ontario a survey taken throughout the province might use a larger sampling fraction in the less populated north, since the disparity in population between north and south is so great that a sampling fraction based on the provincial sample as a whole might result in the collection of only a handful of data from the north.\nDisadvantages.\nIt would be a misapplication of the technique to make subgroups' sample sizes proportional to the amount of data available from the subgroups, rather than scaling sample sizes to subgroup sizes (or to their variances, if known to vary significantly\u2014e.g. using an F test). Data representing each subgroup are taken to be of equal importance if suspected variation among them warrants stratified sampling. If subgroup variances differ significantly and the data needs to be stratified by variance, it is not possible to simultaneously make each subgroup sample size proportional to subgroup size within the total population. For an efficient way to partition sampling resources among groups that vary in their means, variance and costs, see \"optimum allocation\".\nThe problem of stratified sampling in the case of unknown class priors (ratio of subpopulations in the entire population) can have a deleterious effect on the performance of any analysis on the dataset, e.g. classification. In that regard, minimax sampling ratio can be used to make the dataset robust with respect to uncertainty in the underlying data generating process.\nCombining sub-strata to ensure adequate numbers can lead to Simpson's paradox, where trends that exist in different groups of data disappear or even reverse when the groups are combined.\nMean and standard error.\nThe mean and variance of stratified random sampling are given by:\nformula_1\nformula_2\nwhere\nformula_3number of strata\nformula_4the sum of all stratum sizes\nformula_5size of stratum formula_6\nformula_7sample mean of stratum formula_6\nformula_9number of observations in stratum formula_6\nformula_11sample standard deviation of stratum formula_6\nNote that the term formula_13, which equals formula_14, is a finite population correction and formula_15 must be expressed in \"sample units\". Forgoing the finite population correction gives:\nformula_16\nwhere the formula_17 is the population weight of stratum formula_6.\nSample size allocation.\nFor the proportional allocation strategy, the size of the sample in each stratum is taken in proportion to the size of the stratum. Suppose that in a company there are the following staff:\nand we are asked to take a sample of 40 staff, stratified according to the above categories.\nThe first step is to calculate the percentage of each group of the total.\nThis tells us that of our sample of 40,\nAnother easy way without having to calculate the percentage is to multiply each group size by the sample size and divide by the total population size (size of entire staff):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27600", "revid": "48759054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27600", "title": "Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers Association", "text": "Nonprofit organization\nThe Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, doing business as Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers Association and commonly known as SFWA ( or ) is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization of professional science fiction and fantasy writers. While SFWA is based in the United States, its membership is open to writers worldwide. The organization was founded in 1965 by Damon Knight under the name Science Fiction Writers of America.\n SFWA has about 2,500 members worldwide.\nActive SFWA members may vote for the Nebula Awards, one of the principal English-language science fiction awards.\nMission.\nSFWA informs, supports, promotes, defends and advocates for its members.\nSFWA activities include informing science fiction and fantasy writers on professional matters, protecting their interests, and helping them deal effectively with agents, editors, anthologists, and producers in print and non-print media; encouraging public interest in and appreciation for science fiction and fantasy literature; sponsoring, editing, and disseminating writings, papers, books, pamphlets, and other publications which exemplify science fiction and fantasy literature of high quality; conducting conferences, public discussion groups, forums, lectures, and seminar programs; and furnishing services connected with this stated purpose.\nHistory.\nScience Fiction Writers of America, Inc. was founded in 1965 by Damon Knight in association with a group of writers connected to the Milford Conference, which he also headed. According to Todd McCaffrey, the organization immediately \"acquired great status in its efforts to help J.R.R. Tolkien get fair recompense in America for pirated sales of \"The Lord of the Rings\"\". In 1991, the name of the organization was changed to Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, to reflect the fact that the organization had always included writers working in multiple genres. After the name change, both SFWA and SFFWA were used as acronyms. The acronym SFWA was re-established officially in 1996.\nIn 1973, SFWA awarded an honorary membership to Polish author Stanis\u0142aw Lem. Some SFWA members, notably Philip Jos\u00e9 Farmer, were incensed by Lem's negative opinions of American science fiction, while others opposed Lem's membership because he lived in a Communist country. As a result, in 1976 SFWA rescinded Lem's membership. Several members protested that decision, notably Ursula K. Le Guin, who resigned her membership and refused the Nebula Award for Best Novelette for \"The Diary of the Rose\".\nIn 1982, Lisa Tuttle withdrew her short story \"The Bone Flute\" from the final Nebula ballot, to protest what she saw as excessive campaigning for awards and that voters did not receive copies of nominated works. Her withdrawal was sent after voting had been completed. When informed she had won, she contacted SFWA and told them she refused to accept it. She was told that her reasons for doing so would be announced. Her publisher accepted the award in her place, apparently with no knowledge of her withdrawal, and there was no mention of her objection.\nIn September 2009, SFWA joined the Open Book Alliance to oppose the Google Book Settlement. As a party to the class action suit, SFWA had recently explained its reservations about the settlement and declared its intention to file an objection. \nIn 2013, the \"SFWA Bulletin\" was the subject of a controversy about sexism (see below). This led to a brief hiatus, followed by a reboot of the magazine.\nIn 2014, the original Massachusetts corporation was dissolved and SFWA reincorporated as a California nonprofit 501(c)3 organization with new bylaws.\nIn 2022, the organization filed to do business as the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers Association to reflect the participation of their non-US members.\nActivities.\nSFWA participates in various trade shows and publishing industry events in the United States and abroad, including BookExpo America, the American Library Association Midwinter Conference, the USA Science &amp; Engineering Festival, and several major (and minor) science fiction, fantasy and media conventions. SFWA holds a semi-annual business meeting at the World Science Fiction Convention (Worldcon) when it is held in North America, and at the North American Science Fiction Convention (NASFiC) otherwise.\nSFWA also hosts its own events, which include:\nAdvocacy and support.\nAs an organization, SFWA acts as an advocate to effect important changes within the publishing industry, especially among publishers of science fiction and fantasy, by promoting author-friendly copyright legislation, equitable treatment of authors, and fair contract terms.\nWriter Beware.\nSFWA sponsors Writer Beware, whose mission is to track, expose, and raise awareness of the prevalence of fraud and other questionable activities in and around the publishing industry. Writer Beware exists as a subpage of the SFWA website, which provides the latest information on literary schemes, scams, and pitfalls; the Writer Beware blog, which provides the latest information on literary schemes, scams, and pitfalls; the Writer Beware blog, which provides up-to-the-minute information on specific scams and schemes, along with advice for writers and industry news and commentary; and the Writer Beware Facebook page, which posts links to articles, news items, and warnings of interest to writers, and provides a forum for discussion. Writer Beware receives the support of the Mystery Writers of America and the Horror Writers Association.\nWriter Beware maintains an extensive database of complaints on questionable literary agents, publishers, independent editors, writers\u2019 services, contests, publicity services, and others, and offers a free research and information service for writers. Writer Beware staff assist law enforcement agencies with investigations of literary fraud, and have been instrumental in the convictions of several literary scammers.\nGriefcom.\nGriefcom, or the Grievance Committee, is formed of member volunteers who undertake to mediate writer disputes and grievances between member writers and their publishers.\nEmergency Medical Fund.\nSFWA's Emergency Medical Fund was established to assist eligible writers who have unexpected medical expenses.\nLegal Fund.\nSFWA's Legal Fund was established to create loans for eligible member writers who have writing-related court costs and other related legal expenses.\nEstate Project.\nFounded by longtime SFWA member Bud Webster, the Estate Project is now headed by Mishell Baker. It maintains a list of the estates of deceased SFWA member writers and coordinates with living member writers to make arrangements for their future estates. The Estate Project also accumulates information about authors' archives for member writers, living or dead.\nPublications.\n\"The SFWA Bulletin\".\n\"The SFWA Bulletin\" is a quarterly magazine that SFWA members receive as part of their membership, but it is also available (by subscription) to non-members. The \"Bulletin\" carries nonfiction articles of general interest to writers, especially science fiction and fantasy writers. It accepts submissions, for which the pay rate is 8 cents a word. The current \"Bulletin\" editor is Neil Clarke.\nIn 2013, a controversy about sexism in the \"Bulletin\" led to the resignation of editor Jean Rabe on June 5, 2013. More than 50 authors wrote blog posts in objection to comments by longtime contributors Mike Resnick and Barry N. Malzberg that included references to \"lady editors\" and \"lady writers\" who were \"beauty pageant beautiful\" or a \"knock out\", an article by C. J. Henderson praising Barbie for maintaining \"quiet dignity the way a woman should\", and the \"exploitative\" cover image of no. 200 of the \"Bulletin\" depicting a woman in a chain-mail bikini. Several authors used the occasion to speak out against sexism in science fiction genre circles more broadly. The controversy continued through \"Bulletin\" no. 202, which contained another column by Resnick and Malzberg, discussing the response to their earlier column. Their column framed that response as censorship, referring to their critics as \"liberal fascists\". In February 2014, a proposal to establish an advisory board to oversee content was met by a petition circulated by editor and critic Dave Truesdale supporting freedom of speech in the \"Bulletin\".\nAs a result of the controversy, SFWA president John Scalzi apologized to members, and the \"Bulletin\" was put on hiatus for six months. It reappeared with the Winter 2014 Special Issue, #203, but has been on a reduced schedule, publishing an average of 2 issues per year.\nThe special issue was edited by Tansy Rayner Roberts and Jaym Gates and \"was specially created to be used as an outreach tool for conventions and other events\". The issue's contents and cover were welcomed by some as an antidote to the perceived sexism of past issues though Sue Granquist felt that something looked \"suspiciously like a woman in a burka\".\nThe Forum Binary.\nThe Forum Binary is a biannual publication that functions as SFWA's internal publication of record for members. As such, it is not available to non-members.\nThe SFWA Blog.\nSFWA also publishes short essays and other content relevant to writers on the SFWA Blog.\nMembership.\nMost members live in the United States but membership is open to qualifying writers worldwide. Authors, regardless of nationality or residence, must be professionally published in a qualifying market as listed by SFWA to become SFWA members. At present, all listed qualifying markets publish only in the English language.\nDues for most member categories are $100 annually.\nPresidents.\nSFWA presidents have been:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27606", "revid": "20685249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27606", "title": "Soul Coughing", "text": "American alternative rock band\nSoul Coughing is an American alternative rock band composed of vocalist/guitarist Mike Doughty (also known as M. Doughty), keyboardist/sampler Mark Degli Antoni, bassist Sebastian Steinberg, and drummer Yuval Gabay. They developed a devout fanbase and garnered largely positive response from critics. Steve Huey of AllMusic described the band as \"One of the most unique cult bands of the '90s. Driven by frontman M. Doughty's stream-of-consciousness poetry, Soul Coughing's sound was a willfully idiosyncratic mix of improvisational jazz grooves, oddball samples, hip-hop, electronics, and noisy experimentalism\". Doughty described the band's sound as \"deep slacker jazz\". The group broke up in 2000.\nIn June 2024, the group announced it would reunite for a United States tour in September and October of the same year. It made its first television appearance in decades on \"Jimmy Kimmel Live!\".\nCareer.\nAll four Soul Coughing members were regulars at The Knitting Factory, a New York City nightclub and performance venue that was part of the 1980s and 1990s experimental downtown scene. Doughty was a doorman known for his improvised comedic quasi-raps, while the others appeared at the Knitting Factory in various bands. Doughty, Degli Antoni, and Steinberg all performed in versions of John Zorn's composition \"Cobra\", appearing on \"\" (recorded 1992, released 1995). The four-piece performed for the first time as \"M. Doughty's Soul Coughing\" on June 15, 1992 at the Knitting Factory.\nWithin a year of its formation, the band was signed to Slash Records, a subsidiary of Warner Bros. Records. The group released three albums: \"Ruby Vroom\" (1994), \"Irresistible Bliss\" (1996) and \"El Oso\" (1998), with the latter showing a marked drum and bass influence. \"Irresistible Bliss\" and \"El Oso\" both reached the Billboard 200 albums chart. The band enjoyed minor hit singles with \"Soundtrack to Mary\" and \"Super Bon Bon\".\nIn 1996, Soul Coughing contributed to the AIDS benefit album ', produced by the Red Hot Organization. Also in 1996, one of the group's songs, \"Unmarked Helicopters\", was included in the '. The band also placed songs in the soundtracks to the films \"Batman &amp; Robin\" (\"The Bug\"), \"Tommy Boy\" (\"Is Chicago, Is Not Chicago\") and \"Spawn\" (\"A Plane Scraped Its Belly On A Sooty Yellow Moon\", featuring Roni Size). Their song \"Super Bon Bon\" was included on the soundtrack for the video game \"Gran Turismo 2\" in 1999.\nThe 1998 song \"Circles\" from \"El Oso\" reached No. 8 on the \"Billboard\" Alternative Songs chart, and was used as the soundtrack to a Cartoon Network extended commercial that poked fun at repeating cartoon backgrounds.\nSoul Coughing broke up in 2000. Mark Degli Antoni moved on to a career as a film score composer, while Mike Doughty began a prolific solo career, occasionally revisiting Soul Coughing songs in new styles.\n\"Lust in Phaze\", a greatest hits compilation including a few B-sides, was released in 2002. Rhino Records reissued Soul Coughing's three studio albums on 180-gram black vinyl in 2015, marking the first time \"Ruby Vroom\" had been pressed to vinyl. In 2017, Swedish record label Woah Dad! acquired Soul Coughing's back catalog from Slash Records.\nSoul Coughing was honored with a star on the outside mural of Minneapolis nightclub First Avenue, which recognizes performers who have played sold-out shows or otherwise made major cultural contributions to the iconic venue. Receiving a star \"might be the most prestigious public honor an artist can receive in Minneapolis\", according to journalist Steve Marsh. Soul Coughing was especially popular in Minneapolis, thanks to airplay on alternative radio station Rev 105, and regularly performed there to audiences five to ten times larger than in other cities.\nIn February 2022, Doughty and Steinberg performed together in Los Angeles during Steinberg's set for Watkins Family Hour. The duo performed Soul Coughing songs \"Super Bon Bon\" and \"True Dreams of Wichita\", which marked the first occasion members of Soul Coughing appeared on stage together since the split in 2000.\nAt the end of June 2024, Soul Coughing reformed with all the original members and announced that there would be a short tour with limited shows throughout September and October 2024. On September 12th, in celebration of the 30th anniversary of \"Ruby Vroom\", the band performed \"Super Bon Bon\" live on \"Jimmy Kimmel Live\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27608", "revid": "43215238", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27608", "title": "Science fiction on television", "text": "Television genre\nScience fiction (Sci-fi) first appeared in television programming in the late 1930s, during what is called the Golden Age of Science Fiction. Special effects and other production techniques allow creators to present a living visual image of an imaginary world not limited by the constraints of reality.\nVisual production process and methods.\nThe need to portray imaginary settings or characters with properties and abilities beyond the reach of current reality obliges producers to make extensive use of specialized techniques of television production.\nThrough most of the 20th century, many of these techniques were expensive and involved a small number of dedicated craft practitioners, while the reusability of props, models, effects, or animation techniques made it easier to keep using them. The combination of high initial cost and lower maintenance cost pushed producers into building these techniques into the basic concept of a series, influencing all the artistic choices.\nBy the late 1990s, improved technology and more training and cross-training within the industry made all of these techniques easier to use, so that directors of individual episodes could make decisions to use one or more methods, so such artistic choices no longer needed to be baked into the series concept.\nSpecial effects.\nSpecial effects (or \"SPFX\") have been an essential tool throughout the history of science fiction on television: small explosives to simulate the effects of various rayguns, squibs of blood and gruesome prosthetics to simulate the monsters and victims in horror series, and the wire-flying entrances and exits of George Reeves as Superman.\nThe broad term \"special effects\" includes all the techniques here, but more commonly there are two categories of effects. Visual effects (\"VFX\") involve photographic or digital manipulation of the onscreen image, usually done in post-production. Mechanical or physical effects involve props, pyrotechnics, and other physical methods used during principal photography itself. Some effects involved a combination of techniques; a ray gun might require a pyrotechnic during filming, and then an optical glowing line added to the film image in post-production. Stunts are another important category of physical effects. In general, all kinds of special effects must be carefully planned during pre-production.\nComputer-generated imagery.\n\"Babylon 5\" was the first series to use computer-generated imagery, or \"CGI\", for all exterior space scenes, even those with characters in space suits. The technology has made this more practical, so that today models are rarely used. In the 1990s, CGI required expensive processors and customized applications, but by the 2000s (decade), computing power has pushed capabilities down to personal laptops running a wide array of software.\nModels and puppets.\nModels have been an essential tool in science fiction television since the beginning, when Buck Rogers took flight in spark-scattering spaceships wheeling across a matte backdrop sky. The original \"\" required a staggering array of models; the USS \"Enterprise\" had to be built in several different scales for different needs. Models fell out of use in filming in the 1990s as CGI became more affordable and practical, but even today, designers sometimes construct scale models which are then digitized for use in animation software.\nModels of characters are puppets. Gerry Anderson created a series of shows using puppets living in a universe of models and miniature sets, notably \"Thunderbirds\". \"ALF\" depicted an alien living in a family, while \"Farscape\" included two puppets as regular characters. In \"Stargate SG-1\", the Asgard characters are puppets in scenes where they are sitting, standing, or lying down. In \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\", the characters of Crow T. Robot and Tom Servo, two of the show's main (and most iconic) characters, are puppets constructed from random household items.\nAnimation.\nAs animation is completely free of the constraints of gravity, momentum, and physical reality, it is an ideal technique for science fiction and fantasy on television. In a sense, virtually all animated series allow characters and objects to perform in unrealistic ways, so they are almost all considered to fit within the broadest category of speculative fiction (in the context of awards, criticism, marketing, etc.) The artistic affinity of animation to comic books has led to a large amount of superhero-themed animation, much of this adapted from comics series, while the impossible characters and settings allowed in animation made this a preferred medium for both fantasy and for series aimed at young audiences.\nOriginally, animation was all hand-drawn by artists, though in the 1980s, beginning with \"Captain Power\", computers began to automate the task of creating repeated images; by the 1990s, hand-drawn animation became defunct.\nAnimation in live-action.\nIn recent years as technology has improved, this has become more common, notably since the development of the Massive software application permits producers to include hordes of non-human characters to storm a city or space station. The robotic Cylons in the new version of \"Battlestar Galactica\" are usually animated characters, while the Asgard in \"Stargate SG-1\" are animated when they are shown walking around or more than one is on screen at once.\nScience fiction television economics and distribution.\nIn general, science fiction series are subject to the same financial constraints as other television shows. However, high production costs increase the financial risk, while limited audiences further complicate the business case for continuing production. ' was the first television series to cost more than $100,000 per episode, while ' was the first to cost more than $1\u00a0million per episode.\nMedia fandom.\nOne of the earliest forms of media fandom was Star Trek fandom. Fans of the series became known to each other through the science fiction fandom. In 1968, NBC decided to cancel '. Bjo Trimble wrote letters to contacts in the National Fantasy Fan Foundation, asking people to organize their local friends to write to the network to demand the show remain on the air. Network executives were overwhelmed by an unprecedented wave of correspondence, and they kept the show on the air. Although the series continued to receive low ratings and was canceled a year later, the enduring popularity of the series resulted in Paramount creating a set of movies, and then a new series ', which by the early 1990s had become one of the most popular dramas on American television.\n\"Star Trek\" fans continued to grow in number, and first began organizing conventions in the 1970s. No other show attracted a large organized following until the 1990s, when \"Babylon 5\" attracted both \"Star Trek\" fans and a large number of literary SF fans who previously had not been involved in media fandom. Other series began to attract a growing number of followers. The British series, \"Doctor Who\", has similarly attracted a devoted following.\nIn the late 1990s, a market for celebrity autographs emerged on eBay, which created a new source of income for actors, who began to charge money for autographs that they had previously been doing for free. This became significant enough that lesser-known actors would come to conventions without requesting any appearance fee, simply to be allowed to sell their own autographs (commonly on publicity photos). Today most events with actor appearances are organized by commercial promoters, though a number of fan-run conventions still exist, such as Toronto Trek and Shore Leave.\nThe 1985 series \"Robotech\" is most often credited as the catalyst for the Western interest in anime. The series inspired a few fanzines such as \"Protoculture Addicts\" and \"Animag\" both of which in turn promoted interest in the wide world of anime in general. Anime's first notable appearance at SF or comic book conventions was in the form of video showings of popular anime, untranslated and often low quality VHS bootlegs. Starting in the 1990s, anime fans began organizing conventions. These quickly grew to sizes much larger than other science fiction and media conventions in the same communities; many cities now have anime conventions attracting five to ten thousand attendees. Many anime conventions are a hybrid between non-profit and commercial events, with volunteer organizers handling large revenue streams and dealing with commercial suppliers and professional marketing campaigns.\nFor decades, the majority of science fiction media fandom has been represented by males of all ages and for most of its modern existence, a fairly diverse racial demographic. The most highly publicized demographic for science fiction fans is the male adolescent; roughly the same demographic for American comic books. Female fans, while always present, were far fewer in number and less conspicuously present in fandom. With the rising popularity of fanzines, female fans became increasingly vocal. Starting in the 2000s (decade), genre series began to offer more prominent female characters. Many series featured women as the main characters with males as supporting characters. \"True Blood\" is an example. Also, such shows premises moved away from heroic action-adventure and focused more on characters and their relationships. This has caused the rising popularity of fanfiction, a large majority of which is categorized as slash fanfiction. Female fans comprise the majority of fanfiction writers.\nScience fiction television history and culture.\nAmerican television science fiction.\nAmerican television science fiction has produced \"Lost in Space\", \"\", \"The Twilight Zone,\" and \"The X-Files\", among others.\nBritish television science fiction.\nBritish television science fiction began in 1938 when the broadcast medium was in its infancy with the transmission of a partial adaptation of Karel \u010capek's play \"R.U.R.\". Despite an occasionally chequered history, programmes in the genre have been produced by both the BBC and the largest commercial channel, ITV. \nNigel Kneale's \"The Quatermass Experiment\" (1953) and its sequels have been called \"one of BBC Television's earliest audience successes\" and Kneale became \"one of the most influential television and film writers to emerge in the 1950s\". \"Doctor Who\", which launched in 1963 and ran until 1989, then was revived in 2005, was listed in the \"Guinness World Records\" in 2006 as the longest-running science fiction television show in the world and as the \"most successful\" science fiction series of all time. Other cult British series in the science fiction genre include \"The Tomorrow People\", \"\", \"Blake's 7\", \"Star Cops\" and \"Red Dwarf\".\nCanadian science fiction television.\nScience fiction in Canada was produced by the CBC as early as the 1950s. In the 1970s, CTV produced \"The Starlost\". In the 1980s, Canadian animation studios including Nelvana, began producing a growing proportion of the world market in animation.\nIn the 1990s, Canada became an important player in live action speculative fiction on television, with dozens of series like \"Forever Knight\", \"\", and most notably \"The X-Files\" and \"Stargate SG-1\". Many series have been produced for youth and children's markets, including \"Deepwater Black\" and \"MythQuest\".\nIn the first decade of the 21st century, changes in provincial tax legislation prompted many production companies to move from Toronto to Vancouver. Recent popular series produced in Vancouver include \"The Dead Zone\", \"Smallville\", \"Andromeda\", \"Stargate Atlantis\", \"Stargate Universe\", \"The 4400\", \"Sanctuary\" and the reimagined \"Battlestar Galactica\".\nBecause of the small size of the domestic television market, most Canadian productions involve partnerships with production studios based in the United States and Europe. However, in recent years, new partnership arrangements are allowing Canadian investors a growing share of control of projects produced in Canada and elsewhere.\nAustralian science fiction television.\nAustralia's first locally produced Science Fiction series was \"The Stranger\" (1964\u201365) produced and screened by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Later series made in the 1960s included \"The Interpretaris\" (1966) \"Vega 4\" (1967), and \"Phoenix Five\" (1970). The country's best-known science fiction series was \"Farscape\"; an American co-production, it ran from 1999 to 2003. A significant proportion of Australian produced Science Fiction programmes are made for the teens/young Adults market, including \"The Girl from Tomorrow\", the long-running \"Mr. Squiggle\", \"Halfway Across the Galaxy and Turn Left\", \"Ocean Girl\", \"Crash Zone\", \"Watch This Space\" and \"Spellbinder\".\nOther series like \"Time Trax\", \"Roar\", and \"\" were filmed in Australia, but used mostly US crew and actors.\nJapanese television science fiction.\nJapan has a long history of producing science fiction series for television. Some of the most famous are anime such as Osamu Tezuka's \"Astro Boy\", the Super Robots such as Mitsuteru Yokoyama's \"Tetsujin 28-go\" (\"Gigantor\") and Go Nagai's \"Mazinger Z\", and the Real Robots such as Yoshiyuki Tomino's \"Gundam\" series and Sh\u014dji Kawamori's \"Macross\" series.\nOther primary aspects of Japanese science fiction television are the superhero \"tokusatsu\" (a term literally meaning special effects) series, pioneered by programs such as \"Moonlight Mask\" and \"Planet Prince\". The suitmation technique has been used in long running franchises include Eiji Tsuburaya's Ultra Series, Shotaro Ishinomori's Kamen Rider Series, and the Super Sentai Series.\nIn addition, several dramas utilize science fiction elements as framing devices, but are not labeled as \"tokusatsu\" as they do not utilize actors in full body suits and other special effects.\nContinental European science fiction series.\nGerman series.\nAmong the notable German language productions are:\nDanish series.\nDanish television broadcast the children's TV-series \"Crash\" in 1984 about a boy who finds out that his room is a space ship.\nDutch series.\nEarly Dutch television series were \"Morgen gebeurt het\" (Tomorrow it will happen), broadcast from 1957 to 1959, about a group of Dutch space explorers and their adventures, \"De duivelsgrot\" (The devil's cave), broadcast from 1963 to 1964, about a scientist who finds the map of a cave that leads to the center of the Earth and \"Treinreis naar de Toekomst\" (Train journey to the future) about two young children who are taken to the future by robots who try to recreate humanity, but are unable to give the cloned humans a soul. All three of these television series were aimed mostly at children.\nLater television series were \"Professor Vreemdeling\" (1977) about a strange professor who wants to make plants speak and \"Zeeuws Meisje\" (1997) a nationalistic post-apocalyptic series where the Netherlands has been built full of housing and the highways are filled with traffic jams. The protagonist, a female superhero, wears traditional folkloric clothes and tries to save traditional elements of Dutch society against the factory owners.\nItalian series.\nItalian TV shows include \"A come Andromeda\" (1972) which was a remake of 1962 BBC serial, \"A for Andromeda\" (from the novels of Hoyle and Elliott), \"Geminus\" (1968), \"Il segno del comando\" (1971), \"Gamma\" (1974) and \"La traccia verde\" (1975).\nFrench series.\nFrench series are \"\", French science-fiction/fantasy television series (both co-produced with Canada) and a number of smaller fiction/fantasy television series, including \"Tang\" in 1971, about a secret organization that attempts to control the world with a new super weapon, \"Les atomistes\" and 1970 miniseries \"La brigade des mal\u00e9fices\".\nAnother French-produced science fiction series was the new age animated series (). Anime-influenced animation includes a series of French-Japanese cartoons/anime, including such titles as \"Ulysses 31\" (1981), \"The Mysterious Cities of Gold\" (1982), and \"\u014cban Star-Racers\" (2006).\nSpanish series.\nThe first Spanish SF series was \"Diego Valor\", a 22 episode TV adaption of a radio show hero of the same name based on Dan Dare, aired weekly between 1958 and 1959. Nothing was survived of this series, not a single still; it is not known if the show was even recorded or just a live broadcast.\nThe 60s were dominated by Chicho Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez Serrador and Narciso Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez Menta, who adapted SF works from Golden Age authors and others to a series titled \"Ma\u00f1ana puede ser verdad\". Only 11 episodes were filmed. The 70s saw three important television films, \"Los pajaritos\" (1974), \"La Gioconda est\u00e1 triste\" (1977), and (1972), this last one, about a man who becomes trapped in a telephone booth, while passersby seem unable to help him, won the 1973 International Emmy Award for Fiction.\nThe series \"Plut\u00f3n B.R.B. Nero\" (2008) was a brutal SF comedy by \u00c1lex de la Iglesia, in the line of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\", \"Red Dwarf\", or \"Doctor Who\", with 26 episodes of 35 minutes. Other series of the 2010s were \"Los protegidos\" (2010-2012), \"El barco\" (2011-2013), and \"El internado\" (2007-2010), all three inspired by North American productions, with minor SF elements.\nThe latest success is \"El ministerio del tiempo\" (\"The ministry of time\"), premiered on February 24, 2015 on TVE's main channel La 1. The series follows the exploits of a patrol of the fictional Ministry of Time, which deals with incidents caused by time travel. It has garnered several national prizes in 2015, like the Ondas Prize, and has a thick following on-line, called \"los minist\u00e9ricos\".\nEastern European series.\nSerbia produced \"The Collector\" (), a science fiction television series based upon Zoran \u017divkovi\u0107's story, winner of a World Fantasy Award. \n\"N\u00e1v\u0161t\u011bvn\u00edci\" \"(The Visitors)\" was a Czechoslovak (and Federal German, Swiss and French) TV series produced in 1981 to 1983. The family show aired in a larger number of European countries.\nSignificant creative influences.\nFor a list of notable science fiction series and programs on television, see: List of science fiction television programs.\nPeople who have influenced science fiction on television include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27609", "revid": "3174456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27609", "title": "Skeleton", "text": "Part of the body that forms the supporting structure\nA skeleton is the structural frame that supports the body of most animals. There are several types of skeletons, including the exoskeleton, which is a rigid outer shell that holds up an organism's shape; the endoskeleton, a rigid internal frame to which the organs and soft tissues attach; and the hydroskeleton, a flexible internal structure supported by the hydrostatic pressure of body fluids.\nVertebrates are animals with an endoskeleton centered around an axial vertebral column, and their skeletons are typically composed of bones and cartilages. Invertebrates are other animals that lack a vertebral column, and their skeletons vary, including hard-shelled exoskeleton (arthropods and most molluscs), plated internal shells (e.g. cuttlebones in some cephalopods) or rods (e.g. ossicles in echinoderms), hydrostatically supported body cavities (most), and spicules (sponges). Cartilage is a rigid connective tissue that is found in the skeletal systems of vertebrates and invertebrates.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"skeleton\" comes from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'dried up'. \"Sceleton\" is an archaic form of the word.\nClassification.\nSkeletons can be defined by several attributes. Solid skeletons consist of hard substances, such as bone, cartilage, or cuticle. These can be further divided by location; internal skeletons are endoskeletons, and external skeletons are exoskeletons. Skeletons may also be defined by rigidity, where pliant skeletons are more elastic than rigid skeletons. Fluid or hydrostatic skeletons do not have hard structures like solid skeletons, instead functioning via pressurized fluids. Hydrostatic skeletons are always internal.\nExoskeletons.\nAn exoskeleton is an external skeleton that covers the body of an animal, serving as armor to protect an animal from predators. Arthropods have exoskeletons that encase their bodies, and have to undergo periodic moulting or ecdysis as the animals grow. The shells of molluscs are another form of exoskeleton. Exoskeletons provide surfaces for the attachment of muscles, and specialized appendanges of the exoskeleton can assist with movement and defense. In arthropods, the exoskeleton also assists with sensory perception.\nAn external skeleton can be quite heavy in relation to the overall mass of an animal, so on land, organisms that have an exoskeleton are mostly relatively small. Somewhat larger aquatic animals can support an exoskeleton because weight is less of a consideration underwater. The southern giant clam, a species of extremely large saltwater clam in the Pacific Ocean, has a shell that is massive in both size and weight. \"Syrinx aruanus\" is a species of sea snail with a very large shell.\nEndoskeletons.\nEndoskeletons are the internal support structure of an animal, composed of mineralized tissues, such as the bone skeletons found in most vertebrates. Endoskeletons are highly specialized and vary significantly between animals. They vary in complexity from functioning purely for support (as in the case of sponges), to serving as an attachment site for muscles and a mechanism for transmitting muscular forces. A true endoskeleton is derived from mesodermal tissue. Endoskeletons occur in chordates, echinoderms, and sponges.\nRigidity.\nPliant skeletons are capable of movement; thus, when stress is applied to the skeletal structure, it deforms and then regains its original shape. This skeletal structure is used in some invertebrates, for instance in the hinge of bivalve shells or the mesoglea of cnidarians such as jellyfish. Pliant skeletons are beneficial because only muscle contractions are needed to bend the skeleton; upon muscle relaxation, the skeleton will return to its original shape. Cartilage is one material that a pliant skeleton may be composed of, but most pliant skeletons are formed from a mixture of proteins, polysaccharides, and water. For additional structure or protection, pliant skeletons may be supported by rigid skeletons. Organisms that have pliant skeletons typically live in water, which supports body structure in the absence of a rigid skeleton.\nRigid skeletons are not capable of movement when stressed, creating a strong support system most common in terrestrial animals. Such a skeleton type used by animals that live in water are more for protection (such as barnacle and snail shells) or for fast-moving animals that require additional support of musculature needed for swimming through water. Rigid skeletons are formed from materials including chitin (in arthropods), calcium compounds such as calcium carbonate (in stony corals and mollusks) and silicate (for diatoms and radiolarians).\nHydrostatic skeletons.\nHydrostatic skeletons are flexible cavities within an animal that provide structure through fluid pressure, occurring in some types of soft-bodied organisms, including jellyfish, flatworms, nematodes, and earthworms. The walls of these cavities are made of muscle and connective tissue. In addition to providing structure for an animal's body, hydrostatic skeletons transmit the forces of muscle contraction, allowing an animal to move by alternating contractions and expansions of muscles along the animal's length.\nCytoskeleton.\nThe cytoskeleton (\"cyto-\" meaning 'cell') is used to stabilize and preserve the form of the cells. It is a dynamic structure that maintains cell shape, protects the cell, enables cellular motion using structures such as flagella, cilia and lamellipodia, and transport within cells such as the movement of vesicles and organelles, and plays a role in cellular division. The cytoskeleton is not a skeleton in the sense that it provides the structural system for the body of an animal; rather, it serves a similar function at the cellular level.\nVertebrate skeletons.\nVertebrate skeletons are endoskeletons, and the main skeletal component is bone. Bones compose a unique skeletal system for each type of animal. Another important component is cartilage which in mammals is found mainly in the joint areas. In other animals, such as the cartilaginous fishes, which include the sharks, the skeleton is composed entirely of cartilage. The segmental pattern of the skeleton is present in all vertebrates, with basic units being repeated, such as in the vertebral column and the ribcage.\nBones are rigid organs providing structural support for the body, assistance in movement by opposing muscle contraction, and the forming of a protective wall around internal organs. Bones are primarily made of inorganic minerals, such as hydroxyapatite, while the remainder is made of an organic matrix and water. The hollow tubular structure of bones provide considerable resistance against compression while staying lightweight. Most cells in bones are osteoblasts, osteoclasts, or osteocytes.\nBone tissue is a type of dense connective tissue, a type of mineralized tissue that gives rigidity and a honeycomb-like three-dimensional internal structure. Bones also produce red and white blood cells and serve as calcium and phosphate storage at the cellular level. Other types of tissue found in bones include bone marrow, endosteum and periosteum, nerves, blood vessels and cartilage.\nDuring embryonic development, bones are developed individually from skeletogenic cells in the ectoderm and mesoderm. Most of these cells develop into separate bone, cartilage, and joint cells, and they are then articulated with one another. Specialized skeletal tissues are unique to vertebrates. Cartilage grows more quickly than bone, causing it to be more prominent earlier in an animal's life before it is overtaken by bone. Cartilage is also used in vertebrates to resist stress at points of articulation in the skeleton. Cartilage in vertebrates is usually encased in perichondrium tissue. Ligaments are elastic tissues that connect bones to other bones, and tendons are elastic tissues that connect muscles to bones.\nAmphibians and reptiles.\nThe skeletons of turtles have evolved to develop a shell from the ribcage, forming an exoskeleton. The skeletons of snakes and caecilians have significantly more vertebrae than other animals. Snakes often have over 300, compared to the 65 that is typical in lizards.\nBirds.\nThe skeletons of birds are adapted for flight. The bones in bird skeletons are hollow and lightweight to reduce the metabolic cost of flight. Several attributes of the shape and structure of the bones are optimized to endure the physical stress associated with flight, including a round and thin humeral shaft and the fusion of skeletal elements into single ossifications. Because of this, birds usually have a smaller number of bones than other terrestrial vertebrates. Birds also lack teeth or even a true jaw, instead having evolved a beak, which is far more lightweight. The beaks of many baby birds have a projection called an egg tooth, which facilitates their exit from the amniotic egg.\nFish.\nThe skeleton, which forms the support structure inside the fish is either made of cartilage as in the Chondrichthyes, or bones as in the Osteichthyes. The main skeletal element is the vertebral column, composed of articulating vertebrae which are lightweight yet strong. The ribs attach to the spine and there are no limbs or limb girdles. They are supported only by the muscles. The main external features of the fish, the fins, are composed of either bony or soft spines called rays which, with the exception of the caudal fin (tail fin), have no direct connection with the spine. They are supported by the muscles which compose the main part of the trunk.\nCartilaginous fish, such as sharks, rays, skates, and chimeras, have skeletons made entirely of cartilage. The lighter weight of cartilage allows these fish to expend less energy when swimming.\nMammals.\nMarine mammals.\nTo facilitate the movement of marine mammals in water, the hind legs were either lost altogether, as in the whales and manatees, or united in a single tail fin as in the pinnipeds (seals). In the whale, the cervical vertebrae are typically fused, an adaptation trading flexibility for stability during swimming.\nHumans.\nThe skeleton consists of both fused and individual bones supported and supplemented by ligaments, tendons, muscles and cartilage. It serves as a scaffold which supports organs, anchors muscles, and protects organs such as the brain, lungs, heart and spinal cord. The biggest bone in the body is the femur in the upper leg, and the smallest is the stapes bone in the middle ear. In an adult, the skeleton comprises around 13.1% of the total body weight, and half of this weight is water.\nFused bones include those of the pelvis and the cranium. Not all bones are interconnected directly: There are three bones in each middle ear called the ossicles that articulate only with each other. The hyoid bone, which is located in the neck and serves as the point of attachment for the tongue, does not articulate with any other bones in the body, being supported by muscles and ligaments.\nThere are 206 bones in the adult human skeleton, although this number depends on whether the pelvic bones (the hip bones on each side) are counted as one or three bones on each side (ilium, ischium, and pubis), whether the coccyx or tail bone is counted as one or four separate bones, and does not count the variable wormian bones between skull sutures. Similarly, the sacrum is usually counted as a single bone, rather than five fused vertebrae. There is also a variable number of small sesamoid bones, commonly found in tendons. The patella or kneecap on each side is an example of a larger sesamoid bone. The patellae are counted in the total, as they are constant. The number of bones varies between individuals and with age \u2013 newborn babies have over 270 bones some of which fuse together. These bones are organized into a longitudinal axis, the axial skeleton, to which the appendicular skeleton is attached.\nThe human skeleton takes 20 years before it is fully developed, and the bones contain marrow, which produces blood cells.\nThere exist several general differences between the male and female skeletons. The male skeleton, for example, is generally larger and heavier than the female skeleton. In the female skeleton, the bones of the skull are generally less angular. The female skeleton also has wider and shorter breastbone and slimmer wrists. There exist significant differences between the male and female pelvis which are related to the female's pregnancy and childbirth capabilities. The female pelvis is wider and shallower than the male pelvis. Female pelvises also have an enlarged pelvic outlet and a wider and more circular pelvic inlet. The angle between the pubic bones is known to be sharper in males, which results in a more circular, narrower, and near heart-shaped pelvis.\nInvertebrate skeletons.\nInvertebrates are defined by a lack of vertebral column, and they do not have bone skeletons. Arthropods have exoskeletons and echinoderms have endoskeletons. Some soft-bodied organisms, such as jellyfish and earthworms, have hydrostatic skeletons.\nArthropods.\nThe skeletons of arthropods, including insects, crustaceans, and arachnids, are cuticle exoskeletons. They are composed of chitin secreted by the epidermis. The cuticle covers the animal's body and lines several internal organs, including parts of the digestive system. Arthropods molt as they grow through a process of ecdysis, developing a new exoskeleton, digesting part of the previous skeleton, and leaving the remainder behind. An arthropod's skeleton serves many functions, working as an integument to provide a barrier and support the body, providing appendages for movement and defense, and assisting in sensory perception. Some arthropods, such as crustaceans, absorb biominerals like calcium carbonate from the environment to strengthen the cuticle.\nEchinoderms.\nThe skeletons of echinoderms, such as starfish and sea urchins, are endoskeletons that consist of large, well-developed sclerite plates that adjoin or overlap to cover the animal's body. The skeletons of sea cucumbers are an exception, having a reduced size to assist in feeding and movement. Echinoderm skeletons are composed of stereom, made up of calcite with a monocrystal structure. They also have a significant magnesium content, forming up to 15% of the skeleton's composition. The stereome structure is porous, and the pores fill with connective stromal tissue as the animal ages. Sea urchins have as many as ten variants of stereome structure. Among extant animals, such skeletons are unique to echinoderms, though similar skeletons were used by some Paleozoic animals. The skeletons of echinoderms are mesodermal, as they are mostly encased by soft tissue. Plates of the skeleton may be interlocked or connected through muscles and ligaments. Skeletal elements in echinoderms are highly specialized and take many forms, though they usually retain some form of symmetry. The spines of sea urchins are the largest type of echinoderm skeletal structure.\nMolluscs.\nSome molluscs, such as conchs, scallops, and snails, have shells that serve as exoskeletons. They are produced by proteins and minerals secreted from the animal's mantle.\nSponges.\nThe skeleton of sponges consists of microscopic calcareous or siliceous spicules. The demosponges include 90% of all species of sponges. Their \"skeletons\" are made of spicules consisting of fibers of the protein spongin, the mineral silica, or both. Where spicules of silica are present, they have a different shape from those in the otherwise similar glass sponges.\nCartilage.\nCartilage is a connective skeletal tissue composed of specialized cells called chondrocytes that in an extracellular matrix. This matrix is typically composed of Type II collagen fibers, proteoglycans, and water. There are many types of cartilage, including elastic cartilage, hyaline cartilage, fibrocartilage, and lipohyaline cartilage. Unlike other connective tissues, cartilage does not contain blood vessels. The chondrocytes are supplied by diffusion, helped by the pumping action generated by compression of the articular cartilage or flexion of the elastic cartilage. Thus, compared to other connective tissues, cartilage grows and repairs more slowly.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "27611", "revid": "50454883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27611", "title": "Sarah Michelle Gellar", "text": "American actress (born 1977)\nSarah Michelle Prinze (n\u00e9e\u00a0Gellar ; born April 14, 1977) is an American actress. After being spotted by a talent agent as a young child, she made her film debut at age six in the television film \"An Invasion of Privacy\" (1983). She had her first leading role in the syndicated teen drama series \"Swans Crossing\" (1992), which was followed by her breakthrough as Kendall Hart on the ABC soap opera \"All My Children\" (1993\u20131995), for which she won a Daytime Emmy Award.\nGellar achieved international recognition for her portrayal of Buffy Summers on the WB/UPN supernatural series \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" (1997\u20132003), which earned her nominations for a TCA award and a Golden Globe. Her film credits include \"I Know What You Did Last Summer\" (1997), \"Scream 2\" (1997), \"Cruel Intentions\" (1999), \"Scooby-Doo\" (2002), \"\" (2004), \"The Grudge\" (2004), \"Southland Tales\" (2006), \"TMNT\" (2007), and \"Do Revenge\" (2022).\nOn television, Gellar has starred in \"Ringer\" (2011\u20132012), \"The Crazy Ones\" (2013\u20132014), \"Wolf Pack\" (2023), and ' (2024\u20132025), and provided voice work for \"Robot Chicken\" (2005\u20132018), \"Star Wars Rebels\" (2015\u20132016), and ' (2021). In 2015, she co-founded Foodstirs, an e-commerce baking company. Her cookbook, \"Stirring Up Fun with Food\", was published in 2017.\nEarly life.\nGellar was born in New York City on April 14, 1977. She is the only child of Rosellen (n\u00e9e Greenfield), a nursery school teacher, and Arthur Gellar, a garment worker. Both of her parents are Jewish. In 1984, when she was seven, her parents divorced and she was raised by her mother on Manhattan's Upper East Side. While growing up, she lost contact with her father, from whom she remained estranged until his death in 2001. She once described him as \"non-existent\", and stated: \"My father, you can just say, is not in the picture. I'm not being deliberately evasive about him, it's just that there's so little to say.\" Gellar was a competitive figure skater, once finishing in third place at a New York State regional competition, as well as having a black belt in taekwondo.\nWith her single mother working \"just above the poverty line\", Gellar received a partial scholarship to study at the Columbia Grammar &amp; Preparatory School, where she experienced bullying. She remarked: \"I was different and that's the one thing you can't be at school, because you're ostracised. I didn't have the money these kids had\". As a working child actress, she was not present in class for a considerable amount of time, and recalled having \"more absences in the first month than you're supposed to have for an entire year\". She then briefly attended the Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music &amp; Art and Performing Arts, but dropped out due to acting obligations. Gellar graduated from the Professional Children's School in 1994 as a \"straight A\" student with a 4.0 grade average. As she spent significant time working on \"All My Children\" while \"trying to graduate\", the majority of her senior year was completed through guided study.\nCareer.\nBeginnings and breakthrough (1981\u20131996).\nAt the age of four, Gellar was spotted by an agent in a restaurant in Upper Manhattan. Two weeks later, she auditioned for a part in the television film \"An Invasion of Privacy\". At the audition, she read both her own lines and those of Valerie Harper, impressing the directors enough to cast her in the role. The film aired on CBS in January 1983.\nWhile growing up, Gellar appeared in television commercials for such brands as Burger King, Shake 'n Bake, Duncan Hines, and Avon. A 1982 advertisement for Burger King, in which she claimed the brand made larger and better tasting burgers than competitor McDonald's, was one of the first attack ads in the fast food industry. Executives at McDonald's parent company were so enraged that they sued all parties involved, naming Gellar and reportedly banning her from eating at the food chain. In a 2004 interview, she recalled: \"I wasn't allowed to eat there. It was tough because, when you're a little kid, McDonald's is where all your friends have their birthday parties, so I missed out on a lot of apple pies.\" She was also signed up as a model for Wilhelmina.\nGellar appeared in a safety skit during the September 28, 1982 episode of \"Late Night with David Letterman\". Throughout the 1980s, she guest starred in various television series, such as \"\" and \"Crossbow\", and played minor roles in the films \"Over the Brooklyn Bridge\" (1984), \"Crossroads\" (1986), and \"Funny Farm\" (1988), though her scenes in the latter two were cut. She obtained a larger role as the daughter of a prostitute in the B thriller \"High Stakes\" (1989). At the age of nine, she acted in the off-Broadway production \"The Widow Claire\", as well as in the \"Kids Sing-A-long\" VHS tapes \"Camp Melody\" and \"U.S.S. Songboat\" by Kids Klassics. In 1989, she shared hosting duties with Soleil Moon Frye and Rod Brogan in the syndicated weekly variety show \"Girl Talk\", based on the board game of the same name. It only produced five episodes.\nGellar portrayed 13-year-old Mollie in the initial production of Neil Simon's play \"Jake's Women\", which ran at the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego, California, from March to April 1990. In 1991, she was cast as a young Jacqueline Bouvier in \"A Woman Named Jackie\". The miniseries won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Limited Series. Gellar obtained her first leading role, as a mayor's manipulative daughter, in the 1992 syndicated teen serial \"Swans Crossing\", which chronicled the lives of a group of wealthy teenagers. She felt that playing a \"villainous\" character gave her the call for \"better and more varied acting skills\", while the gig's weekly payment proved a financial aid for Gellar and her mother. The series ran for a 65-episode season and earned her two Young Artist Award nominations for Best Young Actress.\nGellar made her debut on the ABC soap opera \"All My Children\" in 1993, playing Kendall Hart, the long-lost teenage daughter of character Erica Kane (Susan Lucci). As she got the role, Gellar was complimented as having the acting talent and the \"forceful personality\" needed to go up against Lucci's experience; Kendall was supposed to be like a younger version of Erica. Her stint on the show was successful as \"longtime fans of the soap saw her as the second coming of Erica\". Writers showcased her more after her initial reception and she became a household name to the soap opera medium. In 1995, at the age of eighteen, she won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Younger Actress in a Drama Series for the role. The same year, Gellar left the show and moved to Los Angeles to pursue other acting opportunities. In 1996, she filmed the ABC television film \"Beverly Hills Family Robinson\", in which she played a spoiled adolescent.\nWorldwide recognition (1997\u20132003).\nAfter reading the script for Joss Whedon's television series \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", which follows Buffy Summers, a teenager burdened with the responsibility of fighting occult foes and supernatural occurrences, Gellar screen tested for the role of Cordelia Chase. Whedon then asked her to come back in and audition for the title role. The show premiered in March 1997, to widespread critical and popular acclaim. Gellar's Buffy, created to subvert the stereotypical female horror movie victim, was described by \"Entertainment Weekly\" as one of the 100 greatest female characters in American television. \"Buffy\" ran for seven seasons and 144 episodes, and during its broadcast, earned Gellar four Teen Choice Awards, the Saturn Award for Best Genre Television Actress, and a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress \u2013 Television Series Drama. She sang during the series' musical episode \"Once More, with Feeling\", which spawned an original cast album, released in 2002.\nDuring the early airing of \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", Gellar made her first major film appearances in two successful slasher films. In \"I Know What You Did Last Summer\" (1997), she took on the role of ill-fated beauty queen Helen Shivers. \"Washington Post\" found the cast to be \"solid\", in what \"San Francisco Chronicle\" described as a \"competent but uninspired\" film. Budgeted at US$17million, the film made US$125million globally. For her part, Gellar earned a Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Favorite Supporting Actress \u2013 Horror and a MTV Movie Award nomination for Best Breakthrough Performance. In \"Scream 2\" (1997), Gellar played a likewise ill-fated vain character, this time that of Sorority sister Cici Cooper. She filmed her scenes in between shots of \"Buffy\" and had only recently finished work on \"I Know What You Did Last Summer\". Despite the hectic scheduling, she agreed to perform in \"Scream 2\" without having read the script, on the basis of the success of the first film. \"Scream 2\" grossed over US$172million worldwide.\nIn January 1998, Gellar hosted \"Saturday Night Live\" for the first time. She returned as a host in May 1999 and October 2002, and made two cameo appearances in May 2000, including one in which she introduced Britney Spears' performance of \"Don't Let Me Be the Last to Know\". In 1998, she also provided her voice for the Gwendy Doll in \"Small Soldiers\", and for the character of Marie in the \"King of the Hill\" episode \"And They Call It Bobby Love\". Gellar's cameo as a girl sitting in the high school cafeteria in the sleeper hit \"She's All That\" (1999) was soon followed by her first top-billing film role, as a struggling restaurant owner, in the romantic comedy \"Simply Irresistible\" (1999). The film received negative reviews and flopped at the box office, but Roger Ebert found her to be \"lovely\" in what he described as an \"old-fashioned\" comedy.\nIn Roger Kumble's \"Cruel Intentions\" (1999), a modern-day retelling of \"Les Liaisons dangereuses\", Gellar portrayed Kathryn Merteuil, a cocaine addict with an appetite for manipulating people. In his review for the film, Ebert felt that she is \"effective as a bright girl who knows exactly how to use her act as a tramp\", and in an interview with \"Chicago Tribune\", Kumble described her as \"the most professional actor I ever worked with\". The film was a hit at the box office, grossing US$75million worldwide, and went on to become a cult classic. Gellar and co-star Selma Blair obtained the Best Kiss award at the 2000 MTV Movie Awards. In \"Angel\", a spin-off series of \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", Gellar reprised her titular role for a three-episode arc, starting in 1999.\nIn 2000, Gellar appeared as a film studio executive in the HBO series \"Sex and the City\" episode \"Escape from New York\". Her next film, James Toback's independent drama \"Harvard Man\" (2001), in which she starred as the \"sharp and shrewd\" daughter of a mobster, helped her shed her good girl image, along with \"Cruel Intentions\", according to Peter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\". In 2002, Gellar portrayed Daphne Blake in the live action\u2013comedy \"Scooby-Doo\". For the production, she trained with a Hong Kong wire team, and commuted between Queensland and California every two weeks due to her simultaneous commitment to \"Buffy\". Despite negative reviews, A. O. Scott of \"The New York Times\" felt that her performance added \"a snarl of \"Powerpuff\" feminism to her character's ditzy stereotype\", and with a global gross of US$275million, \"Scooby-Doo\" emerged as Gellar's most widely seen film to date. Her role earned her the Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Actress \u2013 Comedy. With Jack Black, she hosted the 2002 MTV Movie Awards, which attracted 7.1million viewers on its June 6 broadcast, achieving the show's highest rating ever at the time.\nDuring her growing film career, Gellar continued to work on \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", but she decided to leave the series after the seventh season. When asked why, she explained, \"This isn't about leaving for a career in movies, or in theater \u2013it's more of a personal decision. I need a rest.\" In her feature in \"Esquire\" magazine, Gellar expressed her pride for her work on \"Buffy\", \"I truly believe that it is one of the greatest shows of all time and it will go down in history as that. And I don't feel that that is a cocky statement. We changed the way that people looked at television.\"\nFilm roles (2004\u20132010).\nAfter the end of \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", Gellar reprised the role of Daphne in \"\" (2004). Like the first film, \"Scooby-Doo 2\" was a commercial success despite a negative critical response. In Takashi Shimizu's \"The Grudge\" (2004), she portrayed Karen Davis, an exchange student in Tokyo who becomes exposed to a supernatural curse. The film received mixed reviews from critics, but was a major box office hit, grossing more than US$110million in North America and US$187million globally. She received a MTV Movie Award nomination for Best Frightened Performance as well as a Teen Choice Award nomination for Choice Movie Actress \u2013 Thriller. Gellar provided her voice for the character Gina Vendetti in \"The Simpsons\" episode \"The Wandering Juvie\", which aired in March 2004, and went on to voice several recurring characters of the animated television series \"Robot Chicken\", starting in 2005. \nGellar starred in Richard Kelly's \"Southland Tales\" (2006) as a psychic adult film star who creates a reality television series based on prophetic visions. Drawn to the \"batshit ambitious\" ideas for the film, she accepted the role before she even read the script. \"Southland Tales\" polarised critics upon its debut at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival and found a limited audience in theaters. However, J. Hoberman for \"Village Voice\" remarked that the director contrived a \"memorable\" comic performance from Gellar, while the film gathered a cult following in subsequent years. In 2006, Gellar briefly reprised the role of Karen in the sequel \"The Grudge 2\", and starred in Asif Kapadia's psychological thriller \"The Return\", as a businesswoman haunted by memories of her childhood and the mysterious death of a young woman. \"The Return\" was a critical and commercial failure, grossing only US$11million. Jeannette Catsoulis of \"The New York Times\" called it a \"career stagnation\".\nIn 2007, Gellar voiced Ella and April O'Neil in \"Happily N'Ever After\" and \"TMNT\", respectively. She starred in the romantic comedy \"Suburban Girl\" and the drama \"The Air I Breathe\", both of which were screened at the 2007 Tribeca Film Festival and released in January 2008. In \"Suburban Girl\", she took on the role of a New York City editor and the love interest of a much older businessman (Alec Baldwin). In \"The Air I Breathe\", Gellar portrayed an up-and-coming pop singer. \"The New York Times\" described the latter as a \"gangster movie with delusions of grandeur\", while \"DVD Talk\" noted that \"her character here has the deepest emotional arc, and she hits all the right notes.\"\nThe psychological thriller \"Possession\", in which Gellar starred as a lawyer whose life is thrown into chaos after a car accident sends her husband and brother-in-law into comas, had a range of release dates in the United States between 2008 and 2009, due to financial problems at Yari Film Group. The film ultimately went to DVD in March 2010. In \"Veronika Decides to Die\", an adaptation of the 1998 novel by Paulo Coelho, Gellar starred as a depressed woman who rediscovers the joy in life when she finds out that she only has days to live following a suicide attempt. Initially released in some countries in 2009 and 2010, the film was distributed domestically in January 2015. Frank Scheck of \"The Hollywood Reporter\" found the actress to be \"reasonably compelling\" in what he called a \"ponderous and silly misfire\".\nHiatus and sporadic output (2011\u20132020).\nGellar took a two-year hiatus from acting following the birth of her daughter in 2009, and in 2011, she signed to star and work as executive producer for The CW's \"Ringer\", in which she played the dual role of twin sisters, one of whom is on the run and manages to hide by assuming the wealthy life of the other. Gellar has stated that part of her decision to return to television was because it allowed her to both work and raise her family. Despite a large fan base, the series received mixed reviews, and was canceled after the first season. For her portrayal, she received several award nominations, including one for the Teen Choice Award for Choice Television Actress \u2013 Drama.\nIn September 2011, Gellar returned as a guest star on \"All My Children\" before the show's ending but not as Kendall Hart; she portrayed a patient at Pine Valley Hospital who tells Maria Santos that she is \"Erica Kane's daughter\", and states that she saw vampires before they became trendy\u2014a reference to \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\". She voiced different characters in the \"American Dad!\" episodes \"Virtual In-Stanity\" and \"Adventures in Hayleysitting\", which aired in November 2011 and December 2012, respectively. On September 30, 2012, she reprised her role of Gina Vendetti in the premiere episode of \"The Simpsons\"' season 24.\nA fan of Robin Williams for years, once Gellar learned that he was making the CBS single-camera sitcom \"The Crazy Ones\" (2013\u20132014), she contacted her friend Sarah de Sa Rego, the wife of Williams' best friend, Bobcat Goldthwait, in order to lobby for a co-starring role. She obtained the part of an advertising director who runs an agency with her father. \"Digital Spy\" felt that Williams \"shares a warm, genuine chemistry with his on-screen offspring Gellar,\" as part of a mixed critical response. The series earned Gellar the People's Choice Award for Favorite Actress in a New Television Series.\nFollowing the conclusion of \"The Crazy Ones\" and the death of Williams, Gellar took another sabbatical from screen acting, stating that she had \"been working [her] entire life\" and \"needed that break\" to focus on raising her children. During that period, she made an appearance as Cinderella in a March 2015 episode of Whitney Avalon's YouTube channel series \"Princess Rap Battle\", voiced a recurring character known as the Seventh Sister in the second season of the animated science fiction series \"Star Wars Rebels\" (2015\u20132016), and guest starred as herself in the series finale of \"The Big Bang Theory\", which aired on May 16, 2019. Gellar was also attached to several television projects that ultimately were not picked up for production. These included a 2016 pilot for a series based on \"Cruel Intentions\", in which she reprised her role of Kathryn Merteuil.\nResurgence (2021\u2013present).\nIn 2021, Gellar voiced Teela in Kevin Smith's \"\", an animated series for Netflix. In 2022, she made her first live-action film appearances in 13 years with brief roles in Smith's \"Clerks III\" and Jennifer Kaytin Robinson's \"Do Revenge\", released in theaters and on Netflix respectively, in the same week. Gellar's part as a headmistress in \"Do Revenge\" was specifically written for her as a tribute to her \"Cruel Intentions\" character. Despite a limited screen time, it was described as a \"sizeable\" and \"unforgettable\" role by Alison Stine of Salon.com and Evan Romano of \"Men's Health\", respectively. Romano considered it a \"brilliant move to let audiences know [that] this movie belongs.\"\nGellar starred as an arson investigator in the Paramount+ supernatural drama series \"Wolf Pack\" (2023), for which she also served as an executive producer. Critics praised her performance but found the series to be \"bereft of a voice\". In another Paramount+ production, the prequel series \"\" (2024\u20132025), she played a forensics expert and the title character's boss. She made a cameo appearance as Helen Shivers, during a dream sequence, in Robinson's sequel \"I Know What You Did Last Summer\" (2025). \nGellar is set to appear in the horror sequel \"\", provide her voice for \"Breaking Bear\", an adult animated series on Tubi, and star in and produce a television adaptation of \"Bad Summer People\". She is slated to reprise her role as Buffy and serve as an executive producer of an upcoming \"Buffy\" series.\nOther ventures.\nActivism and philanthropy.\nGellar has been an active advocate for various charities, including breast cancer research, Project Angel Food, Habitat for Humanity and CARE. Of her charitable pursuits, she said: \"I started because my mother taught me a long time ago that even when you have nothing, there's ways to give back. And what you get in return for that is tenfold. But it was always hard because I couldn't do a lot. I couldn't do much more than just donate money when I was on [\"Buffy\"] because there wasn't time. And now that I have the time, it's amazing.\"\nIn 1999, Gellar helped Habitat for Humanity's project of building homes in Dominican Republic. With Project Angel Food, she delivered healthy meals to people infected with AIDS, and through the Make-A-Wish Foundation, she granted sick children's wishes of meeting her while working on \"Buffy\". In 2007, Gellar was featured in Vaseline's \"Skin Is Amazing\" campaign, in which she agreed to auction nude-posed photos of herself on eBay to raise money for the Coalition of Skin Diseases, an organization which supports clinical research, fosters physician and patient education.\nIn 2011, Gellar joined The Nestl\u00e9 Share the Joy of Reading Program, which promotes reading to young children. The following year, she was presented with the Tom Mankiewicz Leadership Award during the Beastly Ball at the Los Angeles Zoo. In 2013, she hosted the Kidstock Music and Art Festival, an event that benefited the One Voice Scholars Program. In 2014 and 2015, Gellar hosted two fundraisers for Mattel Children's Hospital UCLA. In 2021, she promoted Subaru of America's donation of 100 million meals to Feeding America. In 2025, she collaborated with Alyson Hannigan in GSK's \"Ask2BSure\" campaign, to raise awareness about meningitis and encourage vaccination among teens.\nBusiness and media.\nGellar has graced the covers of numerous magazines throughout her career. She appeared on the August 2\u20138, 1997 cover of \"TV Guide\" and the February 1998 cover of \"Seventeen\". The list went on to include \"Nylon\", \"Marie Claire\", \"Vogue\", \"Glamour\", \"Esquire\", \"Allure\", \"Cosmopolitan\", \"FHM\", \"Rolling Stone\", and \"Elle\", among others. Wearing a black lace bra, she was on the cover of the December 2007 issue of \"Maxim\". She was featured on the cover of \"Gotham\" and their main story in the March 2008 issue. \nIn 1999, Gellar signed on to be the face of Maybelline, becoming the company's first celebrity spokeswoman since Lynda Carter in the late 1970s. She has appeared in advertisements for Got Milk?, Proactiv, Colgate, and Cascade. Drawing on her background in horror films, she has starred in several genre-inspired promotional campaigns, such as \"Killer Skin\", a commercial for Olay that aired during the Super Bowl LIII, Philosophy's \"Rated R\" in 2024, and Uber One's \"I Know What You Could've Saved Last Summer\" in 2025. She also appeared in the music videos for Bree Sharp's \"David Duchovny\" (1999), Marcy Playground's \"Comin' Up From Behind\" (1999), Stone Temple Pilots' \"Sour Girl\" (2000), and Outkast's \"Land of a Million Drums\" (2002).\nIn October 2015, Gellar, along with entrepreneurs Galit Laibow and Greg Fleishman, co-founded Foodstirs, a startup food crafting brand that sold easy-to-make organic baking mixes and kits for families through e-commerce and retail. By 2018, the brand's products were sold at 7,500 retailers nationwide, including Starbucks, Whole Foods, Walmart, WW and Amazon. By 2022, Foodstirs had ceased operations, and Gellar sold off her remaining stake in the company.\nGellar released a cookbook titled \"Stirring up Fun with Food\" on April 18, 2017. The book was co-authored by Gia Russo, and features numerous food crafting ideas.\nPublic image.\nKnown for often playing characters with \"strength, sensitivity and snark\" in the horror genre, Gellar has been viewed as a \"scream queen\" throughout the majority of her career. She has stated that horror offers actresses \"the best roles\" through which they \"can really shine\", and that it is in television where \"women are the stars, but in films we're still struggling to play the leads\". Thus, she feels that she \"couldn't just be the girlfriend or the wife in a film\". She has said: \"So I'll be wherever the good female roles are. I like horror.\" Writing for \"Bloody Disgusting\", Alex DiVincenzo asserted that \"\"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" alone should be enough to cement her horror icon status\", and highlighting some of her roles in the genre, observed: \"Regardless of whether they made it to the end credits, her characters were intelligent, resourceful, and empowering.\" She has ranked 6th among \"The All Time Greatest Horror Scream Queens\" by \"CinemaBlend\", 4th among the \"9 Greatest Scream Queens in All of Horror\" by \"Syfy\", and 8th among the \"10 Best Scream Queens of the '90s\" by \"Screen Rant\".\nBy the late 1990s, Gellar had become a household name, as well as one of Hollywood's \"It Girls\". In 1998, she appeared on \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s Top 12 Entertainers of the Year and the \"Most Beautiful\" list by \"People\" magazine. In 1999, she was voted number one in \"FHM\"'s \"100 Sexiest Women\" of the year. She was featured in the magazine's German, Dutch, South African, Danish and Romanian editions of the list since 1998. Topsocialite.com listed her as the 8th Sexiest woman of the 1990s.\nIn 2002, Gellar was honored with a Woman of the Year Award by \"Glamour\" magazine, and her wax figure by Madame Tussauds, was unveiled as part of the \"Trail of Vampires\" exhibition. Between 2002 and 2008, she was featured on the annual \"Maxim\" \"Hot 100\" list. The magazine named her the 2008 Woman of the Year. She was also featured in Google's Top 10 Women Searches of 2002 and 2003, coming in at No. 8, and was included in UK Channel 4's 100 Greatest Sex Symbols in 2007, ranking at No. 16. Other appearances and listings include \"Glamour\"'s 50 Best Dressed Women in the World in 2004 and 2005, \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s Top 100 TV Icons in 2007, and BuddyTV's 100 Sexiest Women of 2011.\nPersonal life.\nGellar met her future husband, Freddie Prinze Jr., while they were filming the 1997 teen horror film \"I Know What You Did Last Summer\", but the two did not begin dating until 2000. She and Prinze have worked together several times, including when they played each other's respective love interests as Fred and Daphne in \"Scooby-Doo\" and \"\". They were engaged in April 2001 and married in Mexico on September 1, 2002, in a ceremony officiated by Adam Shankman, a director and choreographer with whom Gellar had worked on \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\". In 2007, in honor of their fifth year of marriage, Gellar legally changed her name to Sarah Michelle Prinze. Together, she and Prinze have two children, a daughter born in 2009 and a son born in 2012. The family lives in Los Angeles.\nOn February 10, 2021, Gellar expressed support for her \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" co-star Charisma Carpenter after Carpenter made allegations of abuse against series creator Joss Whedon. She also stated, \"While I am proud to have my name associated with Buffy Summers, I don't want to be forever associated with the name Joss Whedon.\" In an interview with \"The Hollywood Reporter\" published January 18, 2023, Gellar is quoted as saying, \"I'll never tell my full story because I don't get anything out of it.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27612", "revid": "50934903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27612", "title": "Sonic screwdriver", "text": "Fictional tool used by the Doctor in Doctor Who\nThe sonic screwdriver is a fictional multifunctional tool in the British science fiction television programme \"Doctor Who\" and its spin-offs, used by the Doctor. Like the TARDIS, it has become one of the icons of the programme, and spin-off media such as \"The Sarah Jane Adventures\" and \"Torchwood\" have replicated its functions in devices such as the sonic lipstick, sonic blaster, sonic probe, sonic modulator and sonic cane.\nThe sonic screwdriver was introduced in 1968 in the story \"Fury from the Deep\", and used twice more (\"The Dominators\" and \"The War Games\") during the Second Doctor's tenure. It became a popular tool for the Third Doctor and Fourth Doctor. It was written out of the series in 1982 due to the limitations it caused when writing for the show. It then featured briefly in the 1996 \"Doctor Who\" television movie, before making a full return in the 2005 continuation of the series.\nThroughout the programme, there have been many different versions of the sonic screwdriver, as with subsequent Doctors the design of it was changed. It has also been destroyed on a number of occasions, thus leading to the introduction of the next model. Not all iterations of the Doctor have used the sonic screwdriver on screen; the Fifth Doctor in fact opted not to replace his after it was destroyed in \"The Visitation\".\nThe Twelfth Doctor loses his sonic screwdriver to the creator of the Daleks, Davros, after lending it to him when he was a child. In the last episode of Series 9, the Doctor received a new sonic screwdriver from the TARDIS in place of the sonic sunglasses he had been using temporarily in the meantime.\nDespite the Doctor's claim not to entrust his screwdriver to anyone, he lends one to his own doppelg\u00e4nger in \"The Rebel Flesh,\" and again supplies Rory Williams for its third job in his care in \"The Girl Who Waited,\" after having given or loaning Rory one in \"A Good Man Goes to War\" and slipping him one in \"The Big Bang\". Before Rory, he lends the screwdriver to Sarah Jane Smith and Rose Tyler to investigate the computer room class in \"School Reunion\", Afterwards The Doctor made a Sonic Lipstick for Sarah Jane before departing for more adventures. He also gifts one to River Song in \"The Husbands of River Song,\" which is then used by the Tenth Doctor to \"save\" her life in a previous TV story, \"Forest of the Dead.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFunctions.\nThe functions of a sonic screwdriver are based on its power over sound waves, radiation, wavelengths, frequencies, signals, and electromagnetism. It is shown to hack, disable, activate, and otherwise control technology from almost everything, allowing it to remotely control almost any machinery, mechanisms, and computers it is applied to, allowing it to open locks, detonate explosives, remotely activate electronics, override most systems, activate computers, and cause some energy weapons to burst into flames or sparks. There is technology the sonic is unable to interface with, such as wood, or the isomorphic controls seen in \"A Christmas Carol\". It also is capable of causing chemical reactions that allow the Doctor to turn eyeglass lenses black like sunglasses and causing cut barbed wire to regenerate (setting 2428B). It is also capable of detecting, amplifying and controlling certain energies, sound, signals, frequencies, and waves, allowing the Doctor to intercept a teleporting individual and send them where he chooses, scan and identify matter, send out communications, enhance sounds, signals, and frequencies, and acting as a catalyst or conduit for energies. Sonics are also capable of calculations, such as \"The Day of the Doctor\" (2013), when the War Doctor used calculations to allow the sonic to work on wood, the calculations of which appeared partly done on the Tenth Doctor's sonic and completed in the Eleventh's. The War Doctor also used his sonic in tandem with the Tenth and Eleventh's to create a force field wave to repel a Dalek.\nThese are more specific functions of the sonic screwdriver:\nAside from being a tool, the sonic screwdriver can be used and considered as a defensive weapon, which is effective for a few types of assault weapons, but not designed to kill or injure living things as the only way it can really hurt or incapacitate an organism is by emitting painful bursts of sound, or, as of \"Day of the Moon\" (2011) by blasting a green wave of energy to incapacitate a target, though only the Eleventh and Twelfth's sonic has been shown to do the latter.\nHistory.\n1968\u20131982 and 1996.\nThe sonic screwdriver made its first appearance in the serial \"Fury from the Deep\" (1968), written by Victor Pemberton. It was used thereafter by the Second Doctor as a multi-purpose tool, with occasional variations in appearance over the course of the series.\nIts abilities and overall appearance varied greatly during the classic series. The name implies that it operates through the use of sound waves to exert physical forces on objects remotely. During the Second Doctor's tenure, it functioned much as its name implied\u2014using sonic waves to dismantle equipment or to bypass locks. In addition, it was used as a welding torch in Episode Five of \"The Dominators\" (1968). In the audio commentary for \"The Sea Devils\" (1972), Michael Briant claims to have suggested it as a one-off gadget in 1968.\nDuring the Third Doctor's tenure, producer Barry Letts was adamant that the device should not become a cure-all for the series and limited its use to avoid writers becoming over-reliant on it. During this time, the device underwent significant design changes. In \"The Sea Devils\", the Doctor used it to detonate landmines; Michael E. Briant explains that this was feasible, stating that the sonic waves shook the mines. In \"The Three Doctors\" (1972\u201373), the sonic screwdriver is almost unrecognisable, being a unique, one-use prop with a plastic red spherical head. In the DVD commentary, Letts himself remarks on the thickness of the prop and the fact that it belies the idea that it was the regular one, prompting Katy Manning to question whether it was indeed a sonic screwdriver. This was due to the serial being produced out of transmission order: the original sonic screwdriver prop went missing during the recording of \"Carnival of Monsters\" (1973), requiring a new prop to be built for the rest of the season; \"The Three Doctors\" was recorded after \"Carnival\", but set before it, so the screwdriver could be seen to revert to its previous appearance for one story after \"The Three Doctors\" before receiving a more permanent redesign thereafter.\nDuring the first three years of the Fourth Doctor's tenure, producer Philip Hinchcliffe further reduced the use of the sonic screwdriver. Exceptions include \"Robot\" (which was the last story to be produced by Barry Letts), where it was again used to detonate mines, and as a \"miniature sonic lance\" to cut out a lock. Aside from unlocking doors, the device was greatly downplayed during the Fourth Doctor's second and third seasons. It saw a resurgence once Graham Williams took over as producer in 1977. In the final story of season 15, \"The Invasion of Time\", the Fourth Doctor conceded, \"Not even the sonic screwdriver can get me out of this one.\"\nIt featured regularly in season 16 during the Key to Time saga. The Doctor's Time Lady companion Romana constructed a sonic screwdriver of her own similar to the Doctor's. It is depicted as being smaller and sleeker than the Doctor's, and he was sufficiently impressed with her design that he attempted to swap screwdrivers with her in \"The Horns of Nimon\" (1979\u201380). By season 18, both script editor Christopher H Bidmead and producer John Nathan-Turner were eager to downplay the device as much as possible.\nThe sonic screwdriver was written out of the series late in season 19, in the Fifth Doctor serial \"The Visitation\" (1982). It is destroyed by a Terileptil to prevent the Doctor from escaping a holding cell; in response, the Doctor sorrowfully remarked, \"I feel as if you've just killed an old friend.\" Eric Saward later explained in a 2005 DVD interview that this was done on the instructions of producer John Nathan-Turner. Saward had written out the sonic screwdriver, believing that the Doctor had \"a cupboard full of them\" in the TARDIS. On the basis that a device that could help in any situation was very limiting for the script, Nathan-Turner decided that it would not return. The Tenth Doctor joked about the Fifth Doctor's lack of sonic screwdriver in the mini-episode \"Time Crash\" (2007), commenting that he \"went hands-free\" and could \"save the universe using a kettle and some string.\" The device did not appear again for the remainder of the original series.\nIn the \"Doctor Who\" TV Movie (1996) and \"The Night of the Doctor\" (2013), the Seventh (TVM), Eighth (both), and the War Doctor (\"The Night of the Doctor\") were seen to have a new sonic screwdriver with a telescopic mechanism: similar to its predecessors but with subtle differences such as a gold/brass band on the handle, a flat base and a red emitter tip.\n2005\u20132010.\nA redesigned sonic screwdriver appears in the new series, with a blue light in addition to the sound effect. In its first incarnation, the prop used in the new series was fragile and prone to breakage. Over the course of the next two years, the props were continually repaired and modified, with some additions being a new thumb slider design and different colours of wires used in the clear channel when extended.\nFor series 4 (2008), a new design of Screwdriver was commissioned by the BBC. Nick Robatto was hired to make two new props. These featured the final slider design, and redesigned body ridges, among other smaller changes. This design debuted in 2008's \"Partners in Crime\" and continued to be used until the Screwdriver's ultimate destruction in 2010's \"The Eleventh Hour\". This later design has gained the nickname \"Series 3\u20134 Sonic\" (relating to the fact that at the start of Series 3, in \"Smith and Jones\", the first Sonic Screwdriver was supposedly destroyed), even though strictly speaking it first appeared in Series 4.\nIn contrast with Nathan-Turner's attitude that the sonic screwdriver should not be used as a cure-all, the new production team gave it even more functionality than previous versions. Some of the uses in the new series include: repairing electronic equipment; re-attaching materials such as barbed wire; detecting, intercepting and sending signals; remotely operating the TARDIS; burning, cutting, or igniting substances; fusing metal; scanning and identifying substances; amplifying or augmenting sound; modifying mobile phones to enable \"universal roaming\"; disabling alien disguises; resonating concrete; reversing teleportation of another entity. It is sometimes used to disassemble robotic enemies or turn other objects into weapons; healing cuts and wounds. In \"The Parting of the Ways\" (2005) and \"Utopia\" (2007), it is used to operate the TARDIS controls remotely; when the Doctor attempts to counteract the Master's theft of the TARDIS, it is used to limit the TARDIS' destination. In \"Doomsday\" (2006), the Doctor states that the sonic screwdriver does not kill, wound or maim; however, it is sometimes brandished in a threatening manner, such as in \"The Christmas Invasion\" (2005), \"The Impossible Planet\" (2006), \"The Runaway Bride\" (2006), \"The Lazarus Experiment\" (2007), \"The Day of the Doctor\" (2013), and \"The Infinite Quest\" (2007). In \"World War Three\" (2005), when confronted by a group of Slitheen, the Doctor threatens to \"triplicate the flammability\" of a bottle of port wine with the sonic screwdriver, though one of the Slitheen realises he is bluffing. In \"Closing Time\" (2011), ringed energy beams are seen emitted from the device, giving it a more weapon-like appearance, particularly when used to disable a weakened Cyberman at a distance.\nIn \"Smith and Jones\", the sonic screwdriver burns out after the Doctor uses it to amplify the radiation output of a hospital X-ray machine. In the \"Series Three concept Artwork Gallery\",https:// https:// when referring to the burnt out sonic screwdriver, Peter McKinstry says \"the green crystal structure visible under the shattered dome refers back to the TARDIS console crystal. It's the same technology \u2013 the TARDIS's little brother.\" Though initially saddened at the loss of the screwdriver, the Doctor obtains a new one at the conclusion of the episode.\nThe sonic screwdriver is unable to open a \"deadlock seal\", used as a plot device to prevent an easy solution. Russell T Davies once mentioned that he would never make the sonic screwdriver the solution to an episode. In \"Silence in the Library\" (2008), while trying to open a wooden door, the Doctor tells Donna that the sonic screwdriver will not work because the door is made of wood, a fact later restated in \"The Hungry Earth\" (2010); when Rory complains about this, the Doctor counters to not \"diss the sonic.\" The sonic screwdriver's inability to work on wood is clarified in \"In the Forest of the Night\" (2014), when the Doctor states that the sonic screwdriver works by manipulating the moving parts in various machinery: since plant tissue lacks said moving parts, it is unaffected by the sonic screwdriver. In \"The Parting of the Ways\" (2005), the Doctor mentions that when Emergency Program One was activated, the sonic screwdriver would receive a signal from the TARDIS. In \"Forest of the Dead\" (2008), he claims that a few hair-dryers can interfere with the device, though he states that he is \"working on that\".\n2010\u20132015.\nIn \"The Eleventh Hour\" (2010), the malfunctioning sonic screwdriver is destroyed when the Doctor tries to signal the Atraxi ships. The Doctor later receives a new one, which emerges from the newly regenerated TARDIS console. The Eleventh Doctor's sonic screwdriver is larger than its predecessor; it has a green light and metal claws that extend with a flick of the wrist. It is shown to have been created by the TARDIS as part of its automatic regeneration.\nIn \"A Christmas Carol\" (2010), the Doctor advises a young Kazran Sardick to pursue romance while implying that in a similar situation in his own past he had instead gone to his room to \"design a new kind of screwdriver.\"\nAlso in that episode, the sonic screwdriver gets split into two pieces, one of which ends up inside a flying shark. The remaining piece is said to be signalling its other half in an effort to repair itself. The Doctor uses this to send a signal through the half inside the sky shark to open up the clouds. Afterwards, the half not in the shark is left with Kazran Sardick. The Doctor tells Kazran that he can call him for help using the Sonic; though Kazran declines to do so. The Doctor had duplicates of this screwdriver, which he continued to use throughout his travels.\nIn \"Let's Kill Hitler\" (2011), it is explained that instead of having settings, this version operates through a psychic interface, basically doing whatever the user thinks of while pointing and holding down the button. This version of the screwdriver also appears, although never officially announced, to have a flashlight setting, as the Doctor is seen to have it emitting a continuous glow while not uttering the classic sonic noise. Also in the episode, the Doctor uses another modified version of his sonic, which he calls a \"Sonic Cane\". It is similar to a Tuxedo cane, except the top replaced with the upper portion of his screwdriver, with a metal ball cut in fourths attached to the claws.\nAhead of the 50th anniversary special, a mini-episode entitled \"The Night of the Doctor\" (2013) was produced in which the Eighth Doctor uses the sonic screwdriver twice. The Doctor uses his telescopic screwdriver previously seen in the TV movie, rather than his updated steampunk version which had been used in numerous Big Finish audio dramas.\nFor the 50th anniversary special, \"The Day of the Doctor\" (2013), another version was seen in the hands of John Hurt's War Doctor. The design was similar to the one used by Tom Baker's Fourth Doctor. This time the halo and bullet tip had been removed, replaced by a red light as well as a large red dial added to the base. Character Options released a version of this sonic screwdriver on 23 November 2013 at London's ExCel labelling it \"The Other Doctor's Sonic\". It was established as a plot point in that episode that the sonic screwdrivers employed by various Doctor incarnations all use the same software, something the War Doctor exploited by running a calculation over a course of several centuries with the Tenth and Eleventh Doctors seeing the calculation completed through their models. It is also directly implied after the fact that the sonic screwdriver has actually been a part of every doctor's retinue, despite its disappearance for doctors six &amp; seven; the Tenth Doctor says to the Gallifreyan high command, as all thirteen doctors are about to change history by saving the planet, that the calculations for doing what's about to be done have been \"running all my lives.\" In addition, when combined, the screwdrivers of the War, Tenth, and Eleventh Doctor could create a sonic force field blast to repel and destroy a Dalek.\n\"The Magician's Apprentice\" (2015) shows that the sonic screwdriver can create \"an acoustic corridor\" so that the Twelfth Doctor can communicate with a boy trapped in an extraterrestrial mine field. However, when the Doctor discovers that the boy is actually a young Davros, he abandons the boy, leaving the screwdriver behind, though it is revealed that he did save young Davros after all. Davros is shown to have kept the screwdriver in his possession ever since, and the Doctor tells Clara that he no longer has a screwdriver. By that time, the screwdriver had been withered and damaged by time and was seemingly useless.\nSonic sunglasses.\nIn his first appearance at the beginning of series nine of \"Doctor Who\", the Doctor is seen wearing black Ray-Ban sunglasses (\"The Magician's Apprentice\"), and he says that he no longer has his sonic screwdriver. Later, in \"The Witch's Familiar\", he unveils that the sunglasses are actually a wearable version of the screwdriver, claiming that he is \"over\" screwdrivers: \"They spoil the line of your jacket.\" The glasses are used by the Doctor, and Clara on occasion, throughout the ninth series.\nThe sonic sunglasses appears to have the same basic functions as the traditional sonic screwdriver, such as scanning objects, while having features not seen before:\nThe glasses appear to be more susceptible to damage than the screwdriver; in \"The Girl Who Died\", a Viking warrior takes the glasses off the Doctor's face and easily breaks them in half. Nevertheless, the glasses continue to appear via replacement or repair until the end of the season. They return the following season during the Doctor's temporary period of blindness, showing the ability to scan his surroundings and transmit the information to his brain, as well as transmit any data recorded to them. However, while he is able to tell things about a person such as height, weight, gender, age, and even heart rate, he does not get enough detail to know faces, clothing, etc. (\"Extremis\") He was once able to tell that a person was holding a computer tablet, but not what was written on it, as well as 'see' a combination lock but not the numbers. (\"The Pyramid at the End of the World\") In his final adventure, the Doctor uses the glasses briefly to examine the Testimony interface, much to the confusion and irritation of the First Doctor (\"Twice Upon a Time\").\n2015\u20132017.\nIn \"Hell Bent\", the TARDIS gives the Doctor a brand new sonic screwdriver. The new screwdriver has a TARDIS-blue shaft with gold and silver highlights. The upper half is a rectangular light grid that, when switched on, has four different functions: green light with low-pitched sound, blue light with high-pitched sound, green lights that pulse with a pulsing sound, and a blue light chasing pattern with a pulsing sound. The new sonic screwdriver is meant to represent the TARDIS. The Doctor first uses it in \"The Husbands of River Song\" (although he also employs the sonic sunglasses earlier in the episode). The new screwdriver has seen use in the spin-off show \"Class\", where the Doctor increases the voltage of flood lights to expel the Shadow Kin and partially close a rift in space-time. He is shown to have working copies of every version of the Sonic Screwdriver ever seen before in a cup on his desk in \"The Pilot.\" Nardole uses the Fifth Doctor's version when sealing bulkhead doors to keep out Daleks later in the episode.\n2018\u20132022.\nIn \"The Woman Who Fell to Earth\", the Thirteenth Doctor is depicted constructing a new sonic screwdriver out of scrap metal and an orange glowing device from an alien travel capsule. She proudly proclaims that the new screwdriver is forged out of \"Sheffield steel\". This iteration of the sonic screwdriver glows throughout its body with an orange light when activated. It was destroyed by a Dalek in part seven of the Doctor Who Magazine comic strip \"Liberation of the Daleks\" while in the Fourteenth Doctor's possession.\n2023 (60th Anniversary Specials).\nA redesigned sonic screwdriver, made of steel and brass with a long metal protrusion made its debut at San Diego Comic-Con on July 19, 2023. The screwdriver appears to be an amalgamation of different elements from the show such as the TARDIS Roundels, the Daleks' guns and the Master's Laser Screwdriver and was used by the Fourteenth Doctor in the 60th Anniversary Specials.\nIn the first of the specials \"The Star Beast\", this screwdriver is shown to have upgraded functionality, such as being able to draw out maps and graphs, and also being able to create energy shields to block a corridor.\nThe screwdriver plays no part in the second special \"Wild Blue Yonder\", as the Doctor leaves it plugged into the TARDIS to help the machine repair; the TARDIS takes off by itself, with the screwdriver, shortly into the story.\n2023\u2013present.\nIn December 2023, a reinvention of the sonic screwdriver was introduced for the Fifteenth Doctor. The design is radically different from previous versions, with the shape now resembling a remote control rather than a screwdriver. Gatwa revealed a Gallifreyan script on the sonic, which translates to \"the sharpness of the tongue defeats the sharpness of the warrior\", a Rwandan proverb. The sonic also contains a crystal power source and a \"USB\"-style port which allows it to be connected to other technologies.\nAccording to Phil Sims, production designer, Davies initially expected that the Fifteenth Doctor would continue to use the previous Fourteenth Doctor sonic screwdriver, \"the same way he'd inherit the TARDIS\". Davies later changed his mind, believing it was important for \"the new Doctor to have a new sonic\". Michael van Kesteren, prop art director, said that he struggled to come up with a concept; adding that the team had been \"quietly hoping not to have to do another one for a while\", as the creation of the previous sonic was \"such a complicated, time-consuming process\". Sims opened it up as a \"competition\" to the art department, with the brief asking for it to be \"funky\", \"something different\" and not limited to \"a stick that we point at people\". Davies was interested in changing the shape of the sonic as he worried that it looked too much like a gun:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This new Doctor for 2024, I worry that sometimes the old sonic starts to look like a gun \u2014 like a weapon that gets pointed like a weapon. And I wanted to just cool that down and check that out.\nHe also wanted it to be \"something every kid would want for Christmas\". Jason Davies-Redgrave, art department co-ordinator, wanted to think \"as far out of the box\" as he could, and sketched ideas based on a flip phone, a pebble, and an \"alien croissant\". The sketches were divisive at first, with Joel Collins, executive producer, elaborating that \"if you'd got out of bed on the wrong side, you might have looked at what Jason had drawn, gone 'what is that?', and thrown it in the corner\". Davies strongly supported the sketches, specifically the sketch labelled 'Organic Pebble Teddy Bear version'. The art department's challenge was to translate the chosen sketch into a 3D-printed physical prop. The sonic was designed to be \"fully-functioning\" with touch controls. Initially, an \"all-metal version\" was considered, but deemed too expensive. The prop required around 50 component parts, a rechargeable battery, and elastic band technology.\nRelated devices.\n\"The Sarah Jane Adventures\".\nIn the \"Doctor Who\" spin-off series, \"The Sarah Jane Adventures\", Sarah Jane Smith uses a \"sonic lipstick\", which is a gift the Tenth Doctor gave her alongside a new model of K9 and her scanner watch. It functions much like the sonic screwdriver, used primarily for opening and closing locked doors, and for disabling and re-enabling machines; like the sonic screwdriver, it remains ineffective against deadlock seals and wooden objects. A toy version is available.\nCommercial product.\nOwnership of the sonic screwdriver was retained by the BBC. Victor Pemberton told an interviewer for \"Doctor Who Magazine\", \"I'm very cross that the sonic screwdriver\u2014which I invented\u2014has been marketed with no credit to myself. \u2026 It's one thing not to receive any payment, but another not to receive any credit.\"\nThe toy version of the new series design (made by Character Options Ltd.) was slightly larger than the on screen version to accommodate a working sound chip. It also includes an ultraviolet light and changeable invisible ink nib for viewing messages written in the ultraviolet ink.\nA metal version of the sonic screwdriver produced by Wow Stuff mounts a functional set of changeable flat and Phillips heads under a removable cover as well as providing light and sound effects.\nQMx were given the licence to produce accurate replicas of this prop. In 2012, QMx released an \"Artisan Master Series\" replica of this sonic screwdriver, in a strictly limited run of 25, priced at nearly $5,000. These replicas were handmade by original prop-maker Nick Robatto, and have now sold out permanently. QMx later released an Artisan Master Series replica of River Song's sonic screwdriver, limited to a run of 15, also made by original prop maker Nick Robatto, which has also sold out.\nThe Wand Company released a universal remote control styled on the Eleventh Doctor's sonic screwdriver on 3 August 2012. Due to consumer demand, a Tenth Doctor version was released on 31 October 2013. An updated, extending version of the Eleventh Doctor's Sonic Screwdriver, named the Twelfth Doctor's Sonic Screwdriver Universal Remote Control, was released on 8 July 2015, to replace the older version, which is no longer produced.\nUnderground Toys have released the War Doctor's sonic screwdriver; titled \"The Other Doctor's Sonic Screwdriver\", it was released in the UK in November/December 2013 and in the US January 2014.\nCharacter Options have also released toy versions of the Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Eighth Doctors' Sonic Screwdrivers.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27614", "revid": "1306182447", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27614", "title": "Slide guitar", "text": "Guitar technique\nSlide guitar is a technique for playing the guitar that is often used in blues music. It involves playing a guitar while holding a hard object (a slide) against the strings, creating the opportunity for glissando effects and deep vibratos that reflect characteristics of the human singing voice. It typically involves playing the guitar in the traditional position (flat against the body) with the use of a slide fitted on one of the guitarist's fingers. The slide may be a metal or glass tube, such as the neck of a bottle, giving rise to the term bottleneck guitar to describe this type of playing. The strings are typically plucked (not strummed) while the slide is moved over the strings to change the pitch. The guitar may also be placed on the player's lap and played with a hand-held bar (lap steel guitar).\nCreating music with a slide of some type has been traced back to African stringed instruments and also to the origin of the steel guitar in Hawaii. Near the beginning of the 20th century, blues musicians in the Mississippi Delta popularized the bottleneck slide guitar style, and the first recording of slide guitar was by Sylvester Weaver in 1923. Since the 1930s, performers including Robert Johnson, Robert Nighthawk, Earl Hooker, Elmore James, and Muddy Waters popularized slide guitar in electric blues and influenced later slide guitarists in rock music, including the Rolling Stones, George Harrison, Duane Allman, and Ry Cooder. Lap slide guitar pioneers include Oscar \"Buddy\" Woods, \"Black Ace\" Turner, and Freddie Roulette.\nHistory.\nThe technique of using a hard object against a plucked string goes back to the diddley bow derived from a one-stringed African instrument. The diddley bow is believed to be one of the ancestors of the bottleneck style. When sailors from Europe introduced the Spanish guitar to Hawaii in the latter nineteenth century, the Hawaiians slackened some of the strings from the standard guitar tuning to make a chord\u00a0\u2013 this became known as \"slack-key\" guitar, today referred to as an open tuning. With the \"slack-key\" the Hawaiians found it easy to play a three-chord song by moving a piece of metal along the fretboard and began to play the instrument across the lap. Near the end of the nineteenth century, a Hawaiian named Joseph Kekuku became proficient in playing this way using a steel bar against the guitar strings. The bar was called the \"steel\" and was the source of the name \"steel guitar\". Kekuku popularized the method and some sources claim he originated the technique. In the first half of the twentieth century, this so-called \"Hawaiian guitar\" style of playing spread to the US. Sol Ho\u02bbopi\u02bbi was an influential Hawaiian guitarist who in 1919, at age 17, came to the US mainland from Hawaii as a stow-away on a ship heading for San Francisco. Ho\u02bbopi\u02bbi's playing became popular in the late 1920s and he recorded songs like \"Hula Blues\" and \"Farewell Blues\". According to author Pete Madsen, \"[Ho\u02bbopi\u02bbi's playing] would influence a legion of players from rural Mississippi.\"\nMost players of blues slide guitar were from the southern US, particularly the Mississippi Delta, and their music was likely from an African origin handed down to African-American sharecroppers who sang as they toiled in the fields. The earliest Delta blues musicians were largely solo singer-guitarists. W. C. Handy commented on the first time he heard slide guitar in 1903, when a blues player performed in a local train station: \"As he played, he pressed a knife on the strings of the guitar in a manner popularized by Hawaiian guitarists who used steel bars. The effect was unforgettable.\"\nBlues historian G\u00e9rard Herzhaft notes that Tampa Red was one of the first black musicians inspired by the Hawaiian guitarists of the beginning of the century, and he managed to adapt their sound to the blues. Tampa Red, as well as Kokomo Arnold, Casey Bill Weldon, and Oscar Woods adopted the Hawaiian mode of playing longer melodies with the slide instead of playing short riffs as they had done previously.\nIn the early 20th century, steel guitar playing was divided into two streams: bottleneck-style, performed on a traditional Spanish guitar held flat against the body; and lap-style, performed on an instrument specifically designed or modified for the purpose of being played on the performer's lap. The bottleneck-style was typically associated with blues music and was popularized by African-American blues artists. The Mississippi Delta was the home of Robert Johnson, Son House, Charlie Patton, and other blues pioneers who prominently used the slide. The first known recording of the bottleneck style was in 1923 by Sylvester Weaver who recorded two instrumentals, \"Guitar Blues\" and \"Guitar Rag\". Guitarist and author Woody Mann identifies Tampa Red and Blind Willie Johnson as \"developing the most distinctive styles in the recorded idom\" of the time. He adds:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nInfluential early electric slide guitarists.\nWhen the guitar was electrified in the 1930s, it allowed solos on the instrument to be more audible, and thus more prominently featured. In the 1940s, players like Robert Nighthawk and Earl Hooker popularized electric slide guitar; but, unlike their predecessors, they used standard tuning. This allowed them to switch between slide and fretted guitar playing readily, which was an advantage in rhythm accompaniment.\nRobert Nighthawk.\nRobert Nighthawk (born Robert Lee McCollum) recorded extensively in the 1930s as \"Robert Lee McCoy\" with bluesmen such as John Lee \"Sonny Boy\" Williamson (also known as Sonny Boy Williamson I). He performed on acoustic guitar in a style influenced by Tampa Red. Sometime around World War II, after changing his last name to \"Nighthawk\" (from the title of one of his songs), he became an early proponent of electric slide guitar and adopted a metal slide. Nighthawk's sound was extremely clean and smooth, with a very light touch of the slide against the strings. He helped popularize Tampa Red's \"Black Angel Blues\" (later called \"Sweet Little Angel\"), \"Crying Won't Help You\", and \"Anna Lou Blues\" (as \"Anna Lee\") in his electric slide style-songs which later became part of the repertoire of Earl Hooker, B.B. King, and others. His style influenced both Muddy Waters and Hooker. Nighthawk is credited as one who helped bring music from Mississippi into the Chicago blues style of electric blues.\nEarl Hooker.\nAs a teenager, Earl Hooker (a cousin of John Lee Hooker) sought out Nighthawk as his teacher and in the late 1940s the two toured the South extensively. Nighthawk had a lasting impact on Hooker's playing; however, by the time of his 1953 recording of \"Sweet Angel\" (a tribute of sorts to Nighthawk's \"Sweet Little Angel\"), Hooker had developed an advanced style of his own. His solos had a resemblance to the human singing voice and music writer Andy Grigg commented: \"He had the uncanny ability to make his guitar weep, moan and talk just like a person... his slide playing was peerless, even exceeding his mentor, Robert Nighthawk.\" The vocal approach is heard in Hooker's instrumental, \"Blue Guitar\", which was later overdubbed with a unison vocal by Muddy Waters and became \"You Shook Me\". Unusual for a blues player, Hooker explored using a wah-wah pedal in the 1960s to further emulate the human voice.\nElmore James.\nPossibly the most influential electric blues slide guitarist of his era was Elmore James, who gained prominence with his 1951 song \"Dust My Broom\", a remake of Robert Johnson's 1936 song, \"I Believe I'll Dust My Broom\". It features James playing a series of triplets throughout the song which \"Rolling Stone\" magazine called \"one immortal lick\" and is heard in many blues songs to this day. Although Johnson had used the figure on several songs, James' overdriven electric sound made it \"more insistent, firing out a machine-gun triplet beat that would become a defining sound of the early rockers\", writes historian Ted Gioia. Unlike Nighthawk and Hooker, James used a full-chord glissando effect with an open E tuning and a bottleneck. Other popular songs by James, such as \"It Hurts Me Too\" (first recorded by Tampa Red), \"The Sky Is Crying\", \"Shake Your Moneymaker\", feature his slide playing.\nMuddy Waters.\nAlthough Muddy Waters, born McKinley Morganfield, made his earliest recordings using an acoustic slide guitar, as a guitarist, he was best known for his electric slide playing. Muddy Waters helped bring the Delta blues to Chicago and was instrumental in defining the city's electric blues style. He was also one of the pioneers of electric slide guitar. Beginning with \"I Can't Be Satisfied\" (1948), many of his hit songs featured slide, including \"Rollin' and Tumblin'\", \"Rollin' Stone\" (whose name was adopted by the well-known rock band and the magazine), \"Louisiana Blues\", and \"Still a Fool\". Waters used an open G tuning for several of his earlier songs, but later switched to a standard tuning and often used a capo to change keys. He usually played single notes with a small metal slide on his little finger and dampened the strings combined with varying the volume to control the amount of distortion. According to writer Ted Drozdowski, \"One last factor to consider is slide vibrato that is achieved by shaking a slide back and forth. Muddy\u2019s slide vibrato was insane, both manic and controlled. That added to the excitement of his playing.\"\nEarly developments in rock music.\nRock musicians began exploring electric slide guitar in the early 1960s. In the UK, groups such as the Rolling Stones, who were fans of Chicago blues and Chess Records artists in particular, began recording songs by Muddy Waters, Howlin' Wolf, and others. The Stones' second single, \"I Wanna Be Your Man\" (1963), featured a slide guitar break by Brian Jones, which may be the first appearance of a slide on a rock record. Critic Richie Unterberger commented, \"Particularly outstanding was Brian Jones's slide guitar, whose wailing howl gave the tune a raunchy bluesiness missing in the Beatles' more straightforward rock 'n' roll arrangement.\" Jones also played slide on their 1964 single \"Little Red Rooster\", which reached number one on the British charts. One of his last contributions to a Stones recording was his acoustic guitar slide playing on \"No Expectations\", which biographer Paul Trynka describes as \"subtle, totally without bombast or overemphasis... the perfect embodiment of the journey he'd embarked on in 1961.\"\nIn Chicago, Mike Bloomfield frequented blues clubs as early as the late 1950s\u00a0\u2013 by the early 1960s Muddy Waters and harmonica virtuoso Little Walter encouraged him and occasionally allowed him to sit in on jam sessions. Waters recalled: \"Mike was a great guitar player. He learned a lot of slide from me. Plus I guess he picked up a little lick or two from me, but he learned how to play a lot of slide and pick a lot of guitar.\" Bloomfield's slide playing attracted Paul Butterfield and, together with guitarist Elvin Bishop, they formed the classic lineup of the Paul Butterfield Blues Band. Their first album, \"The Paul Butterfield Blues Band\" (1965), features Bloomfield's slide guitar work on the band's adaptations of two Elmore James songs. \"Shake Your Moneymaker\" shows his well-developed slide style and \"Look Over Yonders Wall\" is ranked at number 27 on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the \"100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time\". Around the same time, he recorded with Bob Dylan for the \"Highway 61 Revisited\" album and contributed the distinctive slide guitar to the title track. On the second Butterfield album, \"East-West\" (1966), songs such as \"Walkin' Blues\" and \"Two Trains Running\" include slide playing that brought him to the audience's attention.\nRy Cooder was a child music prodigy and at age 15 began working on bottleneck guitar techniques and learned Robert Johnson songs. In 1964, Cooder, along with Taj Mahal, formed the Rising Sons, one of the earliest blues rock bands. His early guitar work appears on Captain Beefheart's debut \"Safe as Milk\" album (1967) and several songs on Taj Mahal's self-titled 1968 debut album. Also in 1968, he collaborated with the Rolling Stones on recording sessions, which resulted in Cooder playing slide on \"Memo from Turner\". The Jagger/Richards song was later included on the soundtrack to the 1970 film \"Performance\"; \"Rolling Stone\" included it at number 92 on its \"100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time\" list. In 1970, he recorded his own self titled debut album, which included the Blind Willie Johnson classic slide instrumental \"Dark Was the Night, Cold Was the Ground\" (re-recorded in 1984 for the soundtrack to \"Paris, Texas\"). Recognized as a master of slide guitar by 1967, \"Rolling Stone\" magazine ranked him at number eight on their list of the \"100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\" in 2003.\nDuane Allman\u2019s slide-playing with the Allman Brothers Band was one of the formative influences in the creation of Southern rock. He also added memorable slide guitar to Derek and the Dominos\u2019 \"Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs\" album, notably its title track, which was ranked at number 13 on \"Rolling Stone's\" \"100 Greatest Guitar Songs\". Allman, who died in a motorcycle accident at age 24, was hailed by NPR's Nick Morrison as \"the most inventive slide guitarist of his era\". He extended the role of the slide guitar by mimicking the harmonica effects of Sonny Boy Williamson II, most clearly in the Allman Brothers' rendition of Williamson's \"One Way Out\", recorded live at the Fillmore East and heard on their album \"Eat a Peach\".\nTechnique.\nThe slide guitar, according to music educator Keith Wyatt, can be thought of as a \"one-finger fretless guitar\". The placement of a slide on a string determines the pitch, functioning in the manner of a steel guitar. The slide is pressed lightly against the treble strings to avoid hitting against the frets. The frets are used here only as a visual reference, and playing without their pitch-constraint enables the smooth expressive glissandos that typify blues music. This playing technique creates a hybrid of the attributes of a steel guitar and a traditional guitar in that the player's remaining (non-slide) fingers and thumb still have access to the frets, and may be used for playing rhythmic accompaniment or reaching additional notes. The guitar itself may be tuned in the traditional tuning or an open tuning. Most early blues players used open tunings, but most modern slide players use both. The major limitation of open tuning is that usually only one chord or voicing is easily available and is dictated by how the guitar is originally tuned. Two-note intervals can be played by slanting the slide on certain notes.\nIn the sixteenth century, the notes of A\u2013D\u2013G\u2013B\u2013E were adopted as a tuning for guitar-like instruments, and the low E was added later to make E\u2013A\u2013D\u2013G\u2013B\u2013E as the standard guitar tuning. In open tuning the strings are tuned to sound a chord when not fretted, and is most often major. Open tunings commonly used with slide guitar include open D or Vestapol tuning: D\u2013A\u2013D\u2013F\u266f\u2013A\u2013D; and open G or Spanish tuning: D\u2013G\u2013D\u2013G\u2013B\u2013D. Open E and open A, formed by raising each of those tunings a whole tone, are also common. Other tunings are also used, in particular the drop D tuning (low E string tuned down to D) is used by many slide players. This tuning allows for power chords, which contain root, fifth and eighth (octave) notes in the bass strings and conventional tuning for the rest of the strings. Robert Johnson, whose playing has been cited by Eric Clapton, Keith Richards, Jimi Hendrix, and Johnny Winter as being a powerful influence on them, used tunings of standard, open G, open D, and drop D.\nResonator guitars.\nThe National String Instrument Corporation produced the first metal-body resonator guitars in the late 1920s (\"see image at beginning of article\"). Popular with early slide players, these featured a large aluminum cone, resembling an inverted loudspeaker, attached under the instrument's bridge to increase its volume. It was patented in the late 1920s by the Dopyera brothers and became widely used on many types of guitars, and was adapted to the mandolin and ukulele.\nTampa Red played a gold-plated National Tricone style 4, and was one of the first black musicians to record with it. Delta blues pioneer, Son House, played this type of guitar on many songs including the classic, \"Death Letter\". A resonator guitar with a metal body was played by Bukka White (\"Parchman Farm Blues\" and \"Fixin' to Die Blues\").\nLap slide guitar.\n\"Lap slide guitar\" does not refer to a specific instrument, rather a style of playing blues or rock music with the guitar placed horizontally, a position historically known as Hawaiian style. This is a lap-steel guitar, but musicians in these genres prefer the term slide instead of steel; they sometimes play the style with a flat pick or with fingers instead of finger picks. There are various instruments specifically made (or adapted) to play in the horizontal position, including the following:\nLap slide guitar pioneers.\nBuddy Woods was a Louisiana street performer who recorded in the 1930s. He was called \"The Lone Wolf\" after the title of his most successful song, \"Lone Wolf Blues\". Between 1936 and 1938, he recorded ten songs that are today considered classics, including \"Don't Sell It, Don't Give It Away\". Woods recorded five songs for the US Library of Congress in 1940 in Shreveport, Louisiana, including \"Boll Weevil Blues\" and \"Sometimes I Get a Thinkin'\".\n\"Black Ace\" Turner (born Babe Karo Turner), a blues artist from Texas, was befriended and mentored by Buddy Woods. Historian G\u00e9rard Herzhaft said, \"Black Ace is one of the few blues guitarists to have played in the purest Hawaiian style, that is, with the guitar flat on the knees.\" Turner played a square-neck National \"style 2\" Tri-cone metal body guitar and used a glass medicine bottle as a slide. Turner was also a good storyteller, which enabled him to host a radio program in Fort Worth called \"The Black Ace\". His career effectively ended when he entered military service in 1943. His album, \"I Am the Boss Card in Your Hand\", contained Turner's original 1930s recordings as well as new songs recorded in 1960. Turner was featured in a 1962 documentary film entitled \"The Blues\".\nFreddie Roulette (born Frederick Martin Roulette) is a San Francisco-based lap steel blues artist who became interested in the lap steel guitar at an early age and became proficient enough to play in Chicago blues clubs with prominent players. He played an A7 tuning with a slant-bar style and never used finger picks. He earned a spot in Earl Hooker's band and recorded with Hooker in the 1960s. Roulette had played lap steel in other genres before focusing on blues\u00a0\u2013 he stated this helped him add more complex chords to the basic blues played by Hooker and said, \"it worked\". Roulette was recruited to San Francisco in the mid-1970s by Charlie Musselwhite. In 1997, he recorded a solo album, \"Back in Chicago: Jammin' with Willie Kent and the Gents\", which won Best Blues Album of 1997 by \"Living Blues Magazine\". Roulette's contribution to the lap slide guitar was to prove that a lap-played instrument was capable of holding its own in Chicago blues style.\nSlides and steels.\nA slide used around a player's finger can be made with any type of smooth hard material that allows tones to resonate. Different materials cause subtle differences in sustain, timbre, and loudness; glass or metal are the most common choices. Longer slides are used to bridge across all six guitar strings at once, but take away the fretting ability of that finger entirely. A shorter slide allows the fingertip to protrude from the slide and allow that finger to be used to fret.\nImprovised slides are common, including pipes, rings, knives, spoons, and glass bottlenecks. Early blues players sometimes used a knife, such as Blind Willie Johnson (pocket- or penknife) and CeDell Davis (butterknife). Duane Allman used a glass Coricidin medicine bottle. Pink Floyd founder Syd Barrett was fond of using a Zippo lighter as a slide, but this was largely for special effects. Jimi Hendrix also used a cigarette lighter for part of his solo on \"All Along the Watchtower\". It is one of the few recordings with Hendrix on slide, and biographer Harry Shapiro notes he performed it with the guitar on his lap.\nFor guitars designed to be played on the lap, the performer uses a solid piece of steel rather than a hollow tube. The choice of shape and size is a matter of personal preference. The most common steel is a solid metal cylinder with one end rounded into a dome shape. Some lap slide guitar players choose a steel with a deep indentation or groove on each side so it can be held firmly, and may have squared-off ends. The better grip may facilitate playing the rapid vibratos in blues music. This design facilitates hammer-on and pull-off notes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27615", "revid": "148026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27615", "title": "Steel guitar", "text": "Type of guitar or the method of playing the instrument \nA steel guitar () is a guitar played while moving a steel bar or similar hard object against plucked strings. The bar itself is called a \"steel\" and is the source of the name \"steel guitar\". The instrument differs from a conventional guitar in that it has no frets\u2014but markers that look like frets. Conceptually, it is somewhat akin to playing a guitar with one finger (the bar). Known for its smooth, gliding glissandi over every pitch between notes, the instrument can produce a sinuous crying sound and deep vibrato emulating the human singing voice. Typically, the strings are plucked (not strummed) by the fingers of one hand, while the steel tone bar is pressed lightly against the strings and moved by the opposite hand.\nThe idea of creating music with a slide of some type has been traced back to early African instruments, but the modern steel guitar was conceived and popularized in the Hawaiian Islands. The Hawaiians began playing a conventional guitar in a horizontal position across the knees instead of flat against the body, using the bar instead of fingers. Joseph Kekuku developed this manner of playing a guitar, known as \"Hawaiian style\", about 1890 and the technique spread internationally.\nThe sound of Hawaiian music featuring steel guitar became an enduring musical fad in the United States in the first half of the twentieth century and in 1916 recordings of indigenous Hawaiian music outsold all other U.S. musical genres. This popularity spawned the manufacture of guitars designed specifically to be played horizontally. The archetypal instrument is the Hawaiian guitar, also called a lap steel. These early acoustic instruments were not loud enough relative to other instruments, but that changed in 1934 when a steel guitarist named George Beauchamp invented the electric guitar pickup. Electrification allowed these instruments to be heard, and it also meant their resonant chambers were no longer essential. After that, steel guitars could be manufactured in any design, even a rectangular block bearing little or no resemblance to the traditional guitar shape. The result were table-like instruments in a metal frame on legs called \"console steels\", which were technologically improved about 1950 to become the more versatile pedal steel guitar.\nIn the United States, the steel guitar influenced popular music in the early twentieth century, combining with jazz, swing and country music to be prominently heard in Western swing, honky-tonk, gospel and bluegrass. The instrument influenced Blues artists in the Mississippi Delta who embraced the steel guitar sound but continued holding their guitar in the traditional way; they used a tubular object (the neck of a bottle) called a \"slide\" around a finger. This technique, historically called \"bottleneck\" guitar, is now known as \"slide guitar\" and is commonly associated with blues and rock music. Bluegrass artists adapted the Hawaiian style of playing in a resonator guitar known as a \"Dobro\", a type of steel guitar with a reinforced neck, sometimes played with the musician standing and the guitar facing upward held horizontally by a shoulder strap.\nSteel guitar versus traditional Spanish guitar.\nSeveral distinct differences exist in both construction and musical capabilities of the steel guitar and the traditional Spanish (classical) guitar. The steel guitar is capable of producing smooth glissandi, enabling it to glide seamlessly between pitches in a manner reminiscent of the human voice\u2014a feat that is not possible on a traditional fretted guitar. This is the hallmark characteristic of the steel guitar.\nNevertheless, the steel guitar also presents notable limitations. Unlike a classical guitar, where the fingers press individual strings to produce chords and notes, the steel guitar employs a solid steel bar placed across all the strings. This allows the instrument to play chords only in the tunings to which it is set, significantly reducing harmonic flexibility. Functionally, it is akin to playing with a single rigid \"finger\" rather than multiple independent ones.\nNote articulation differs between the two instruments. On a Spanish guitar, lifting the finger from the fretboard immediately silences the sounding note. By contrast, a note on the steel guitar continues to sound until it is manually dampened by the player or another note is played on the same string. A novice player who has not learned this blocking technique, finds the notes are superimposed and blurred together, much like a piano played with the sustain pedal permanently depressed.\nFinally, while frets on a Spanish guitar ensure precise intonation (assuming the instrument is properly tuned), the steel guitar lacks such guides. The performer must place the bar precisely over imaginary fret positions to remain in tune, making accurate pitch control significantly more difficult and demanding greater skill from the performer. The table below compares the two instruments in a simplified general overview, and exceptions abound.\nHistory.\nIn the late 19th century, European sailors and Portuguese vaqueros, hired by Hawaii's king to work cattle ranches, introduced Spanish guitars in the Hawaiian Islands. For whatever reason, Hawaiians did not embrace standard guitar tuning that had been in use for centuries. They re-tuned their guitars to make them sound a major chord when all six strings were strummed, now known as an \"open tuning\". The term for this is \"slack-key\" because certain strings were \"slackened\" to achieve it. With the advent of guitar strings made of steel instead of catgut, new possibilities opened for the islanders. They used some smooth object, usually a piece of pipe or metal, sliding it over the strings to the fourth or fifth position, easily playing a three-chord song. It is physically difficult to hold a steel bar against the strings while holding the guitar against the body (hand supinated) so the Hawaiians placed the guitar across the lap and played it with the hand pronated. Playing this way became popular throughout Hawaii and spread internationally.\nOahu-born Joseph Kekuku became proficient in this style of playing around the end of the 19th century and popularized it\u2014some sources say he invented the steel guitar. He moved to the U.S. and became a vaudeville performer and also toured Europe performing Hawaiian music. The Hawaiian style of playing spread to America and became popular during the first half of the 20th\u00a0century; noted players of the era were Frank Ferera, Sam Ku West, \"King\" Bennie Nawahi and Sol Ho\u02bbopi\u02bbi. Ho\u02bbopi\u02bbi ( ) was perhaps the most famous of the Hawaiians who spread the sound of instrumental lap steel worldwide. This music became popular to the degree that it was called the \"Hawaiian craze\" and was ignited by a number of events.\nThe annexation of Hawaii as a U.S. territory in 1900 stimulated Americans' interest in Hawaiian music and customs. In 1912, a Broadway musical show called \"The Bird of Paradise\" premiered; it featured Hawaiian music and elaborate costumes. The show became quite successful and, to ride this wave of success, it toured the U.S. and Europe, eventually spawning the 1932 film \"Bird of Paradise\". Joseph Kekuku was a member of the show's original cast and toured with the show for eight years. In 1918, \"The Washington Herald\" stated, \"So great is the popularity of Hawaiian music in this country that \"The Bird of Paradise\" will go on record as having created the greatest musical fad this country has ever known\".\nIn 1915, a world's fair called the Panama\u2013Pacific International Exposition was held in San Francisco to celebrate the opening of the Panama Canal and over a nine-month period introduced the Hawaiian style of guitar playing to millions of visitors. In 1916, recordings of indigenous Hawaiian instruments outsold every other genre of music in the U.S.\nRadio broadcasts played a role in fueling the popularity of Hawaiian music. \"Hawaii Calls\" was a program originating in Hawaii and broadcast to the U.S. mainland west coast. It featured the steel guitar, ukulele, and Hawaiian songs sung in English. Subsequently, the program was heard worldwide on over 750 stations. Sol Ho\u02bbopi\u02bbi began broadcasting live from KHJ radio in Los Angeles in 1923. By the 1920s, Hawaiian music instruction for children was becoming common in the U.S. One of the steel guitar's foremost virtuosos, Buddy Emmons, studied at the Hawaiian Conservatory of Music in South Bend, Indiana, at age 11 in 1948.\nThe acceptance of the sound of the steel guitar, then referred to as \"Hawaiian guitars\" or \"lap steels\", spurred instrument makers to produce them in quantity and create innovations in the design to accommodate this style of playing.\nIn the early twentieth century, steel guitar playing branched off into two streams: lap-style, performed on an instrument specifically designed or modified to be played on the performer's lap; and bottleneck-style, performed on a traditional Spanish guitar held flat against the body. The bottleneck-style became associated with blues and rock music, and the horizontal style became associated with several musical genres, including Hawaiian music, country music, Western swing, honky-tonk, bluegrass and gospel.\nUse in musical genres.\nBlues music.\nSolo African-American blues artists popularized the bottleneck-style (slide guitar) near the beginning of the twentieth century. One of the first southern blues musicians to adapt the Hawaiian sound to the blues was Tampa Red, whose playing, says historian G\u00e9rard Herzhaft, \"created a style that has unquestionably influenced all modern blues\". The Mississippi Delta was the home of Robert Johnson, Son House, Charlie Patton and other blues pioneers, who used a prominent tubular slide on a finger. The first known recording of the bottleneck style was in 1923 by Sylvester Weaver, who recorded two instrumentals, \"Guitar Blues\" and \"Guitar Rag\". Western swing pioneers Bob Wills and Leon McAuliffe adapted his song, \"Guitar Rag\", in 1935 for the influential instrumental \"Steel Guitar Rag\". Blues musicians played a conventional Spanish guitar as a hybrid between the two types of guitars, using one finger inserted into a tubular slide or a bottleneck with one finger while using frets with the remaining fingers (usually for rhythm accompaniment). This technique allows the player to finger the frets on some strings and use the slide on others. Slide players may use open tunings or traditional tunings as a matter of personal preference. Lap slide guitar is not a specific instrument but a style of playing a lap steel guitar usually referring to blues or rock music.\nCountry music.\nThe earliest record of a Hawaiian guitar used in country music is believed to be in the early 1920s when cowboy movie star Hoot Gibson brought Sol Ho\u02bbopi\u02bbi to Los Angeles to perform in his band. In 1927, the acoustic duo of Darby and Tarleton expanded the audience for acoustic steel guitar with their Columbia recording of \"Birmingham Jail\" and \"Columbus Stockade Blues\". Jimmie Rodgers featured an acoustic steel guitar on his song \"Tuck Away My Lonesome Blues\" released on January 3, 1930. In the early 1930s, acoustic lap steel guitars were not loud enough to compete with other instruments, a problem that many inventors were trying to remedy.\nResonator guitars.\nIn 1927, the Dopyera brothers patented the resonator guitar, a non-electric device resembling a large inverted loudspeaker cone attached under the bridge of a guitar to make it louder. The name \"Dobro\", a portmanteau of DOpyera and BROthers, became a generic term for this type of guitar, popularized by Pete Kirby (\"Bashful Brother Oswald\") on Nashville's Grand Ole Opry for 30 years with Roy Acuff's band. He played the instrument while standing with the guitar facing upward held horizontally by a shoulder strap. Oswald's Dobro attracted interest and fascination; he said, \"People couldn't understand how I played it and what it was, and they'd always want to come around and look at it.\" Josh Graves (Uncle Josh) further popularized the resonator steel guitar into Bluegrass music with Flatt and Scruggs to the extent that this type of lap steel became an established and familiar fixture in this genre. The dobro fell out of favor in mainstream country music until a bluegrass revival in the 1970s brought it back with younger virtuoso players like Jerry Douglas whose Dobro skills became widely known and emulated.\nElectrification.\nIn 1934, a steel guitarist named George Beauchamp invented the electric guitar pickup. He found that a vibrating metal string in a magnetic field generates a small current that can be amplified and sent to a loudspeaker; his steel guitar was the world's first electric guitar. According to music writer Michael Ross, the first electrified stringed instrument on a commercial recording was a steel guitar played by Bob Dunn on a Western swing tune in 1935. Dunn recorded with Milton Brown and his Musical Brownies.\nWestern swing.\nIn the early 1930s, musicians adopted the newly-electrified lap steel guitar into a type of dance music known as \"Western swing\", a sub-genre of country music combined with jazz swing. The design of this instrument and the way it was played underwent continual change as the music of the genre evolved. In the 1930s, Leon McAuliffe advanced steel guitar technique while playing in the western swing band Bob Wills and his Texas Playboys. In October, 1936, McAuliffe recorded \"Steel Guitar Rag\" with Wills' band on a Rickenbacker B\u20136 lap steel with phenomenal record sales. Steel guitarists felt a need to change tunings for different voicings, so leading players added additional necks with different tunings on the same instrument. The added bulk meant that the instrument could no longer be managed on the player's lap and required placement in a frame with legs and marketed as a \"console\" steel guitar. Prominent layers of that era, including Herb Remington and Noel Boggs, added more necks and eventually played instruments with up to four different necks.\nHonky-tonk.\nBy the late 1940s, the steel guitar featured prominently in \"honky-tonk\" style of country music. Honky-tonk singers who used a lap steel guitar in their musical arrangements included Hank Williams, Lefty Frizzell and Webb Pierce. Most recordings of that era were made on a C6 neck (guitar tuned in a C6 chord), sometimes called a \"Texas tuning\". Using tunings with sixths and ninths became common and identifiable with the steel guitar sound.\nModern country music and pedal steel.\nThe original idea for adding pedals to a console guitar was simply to push a pedal and change the tuning of all the strings into a different tuning and thus obviate the need for an additional neck, but these early efforts were unsuccessful. Around 1948, Paul Bigsby, a motorcycle shop foreman, designed a pedal system. He put pedals on a rack between the two front legs of a console steel guitar to create the pedal steel guitar. The pedals operated a mechanical linkage to apply tension to raise the pitch of certain strings. In 1953, musician Bud Isaacs used Bigsby's invention to change the pitch of only two of the strings, and was the first to push the pedal while notes were still sounding. When Isaacs first used the setup on the 1954 recording of Webb Pierce's song called \"Slowly\", he pushed the pedal while playing a chord, so certain notes could be heard bending up from below into the existing chord to harmonize with the other strings, creating a stunning effect which had not been possible with on a lap steel. It was the birth of a new sound that was particularly embraced by fans of country and western music, and it caused a virtual revolution among steel players who wanted to duplicate it. Almost simultaneously, an entire musical subculture took a radical stylistic tack. Even though pedal steel guitars had been available for over a decade before this recording, the instrument emerged as a crucial element in country music after the success of this song. When the lap steel was thus superseded by the pedal steel, the inherent Hawaiian influence was brought into the new sound of country music emerging in Nashville in the 1950s. This sound became associated with American country music for the ensuing several decades.\nGospel music.\nIn the United States in the 1930s, the steel guitar was introduced into religious music, a tradition called \"Sacred Steel\". The congregation of the House of God, a branch of an African-American Pentecostal denomination, based primarily in Nashville and Indianapolis, embraced the lap steel guitar. The steel guitar often took the place of an organ and its sound bore no resemblance to typical American country music.\nDarick Campbell (1966\u20132020) was a lap steel player for the gospel band, the Campbell Brothers, who took the musical tradition from the church to international fame. Campbell played an electric Hawaiian lap steel: a Fender Stringmaster 8-string (Fender Deluxe-8). Campbell was skilled at mimicking the human singing voice with his guitar. The idea of Campbell's recordings with the Allman Brothers and other Blues and Rock artists was not well-received by church leaders.\nIn the 1980s, a minister's son named Robert Randolph took up the pedal steel as a teenager, popularized it in this genre and received critical acclaim as a musician. Neil Strauss, writing in \"The New York Times\", called Randolph \"one of the most original and talented pedal steel guitarists of his generation\".\nOther world music.\nIndian music.\nThe steel guitar's popularity in India began with a Hawaiian immigrant who settled in Calcutta in the 1940s named Tau Moe (pronounced mo-ay). Moe taught Hawaiian guitar style and made steel guitars, and helped popularize the instrument in India. By the 1960s, the steel had become a common instrument in Indian popular music\u2014later included in film soundtracks. Indian musicians typically play the lap steel while sitting on the floor and have modified the instrument by using, for example, three melody strings (played with steel bar and finger picks), four plucked drone strings, and 12 sympathetic strings to buzz like a sitar. Performing in this manner, the Indian musician Brij Bhushan Kabra adapted the steel guitar to play \"ragas\", traditional Indian compositions and is called the father of the genre of Hindustani Slide Guitar.\nM\u0101ori music.\nThe M\u0101ori in the 1920s readily adopted the instrument following their fascination with musicians like Ernest Ka\u02bbai and David Luela Kaili travelling across New Zealand, fascinated of their informed similar ancestry while also receiving very positively of their performances. Eruera Hita (or stagename \"Mati Hita\") was the pioneer of the instrument among New Zealanders.\nLap steel guitars.\nEarly lap steel guitars were traditional guitars tuned to a chord and modified by raising the strings away from the frets. After the electric pickup was invented, lap steels no longer needed any resonant chamber, thus newer designs began to resemble the traditional guitar shape less and less. These instruments were played resting across musicians' knees. George Beauchamp's invention, which he nicknamed the \"Frying Pan\", was officially called the \"Rickenbacker Electro A\u201322\", an electric lap steel guitar produced from 1931 to 1939. It was the first electric stringed instrument of any kind and was the first electric stringed instrument to be heard on a commercial recording. Steel players, including Noel Boggs and Alvino Rey, immediately embraced the new instrument.\nThe Dobro is a type of acoustic lap steel with a resonator; the word is commonly used as a generic term to describe bluegrass resonator lap steels of any brand. Bluegrass dobro players often use a \"Stevens bar\" which has a deep groove in it to allow the steel to be grasped more firmly so it can be lifted and angled vertically downward slightly for playing single notes. The technique also allows for hammer-on or pull-off notes when there is an adjacent open string. Dobro players often slant the bar horizontally when playing to change an interval between two or more notes played simultaneously on different strings.\nConsole steel guitars.\nThe console steel is any type electric steel guitar that rests on legs in a frame and is designed to be played in a seated position. The console steel usually has multiple necks\u2014up to a maximum of four\u2014each tuned differently. In the evolution of the steel guitar, the console steel is intermediate between the lap steel and the pedal steel.\nPedal steel guitars.\nThe pedal steel guitar is an electric console instrument with one or two necks, each typically with ten strings. The neck tuned to C6 (Texas tuning) is closer to the player and the E9 (Nashville tuning) neck is further from the player. It may have up to ten pedals and a separate volume pedal, and up to eight knee levers are used to alter the tuning of various strings, allowing more varied and complex music than any other steel guitar. As an example, use of the pedals and knee levers in various combinations allows the player to play a major scale without moving the bar. The invention of the instrument was set in motion by the need to play more interesting and varied music that was not possible on previous steel guitars and to obviate the need for additional necks on console steels.\nSteels and slides.\nA \"steel\" is a hard, smooth object pressed against guitar strings and is the reason for the name \"steel guitar\". It may go by many names, including \"steel\", \"tone bar\", \"slide\", \"bottleneck\" and others. A cylindrical-shaped steel with a bullet-shape on one end is typical in console steel and pedal steel playing. Lap steel and Dobro players often use a steel bar with squared-off ends and a deep groove for firmer grip. It has a cross section that resembles a railroad track. Another type of steel is a tubular object around a finger then referred to as a \"slide\"; that style of playing is called \"slide guitar\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27616", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27616", "title": "Sunspot", "text": "Temporary spots on the Sun's surface\nSunspots are temporary spots on the Sun's surface that are darker than the surrounding area. They are regions of reduced surface temperature caused by concentrations of magnetic flux that inhibit convection. Sunspots appear within active regions, usually in pairs of opposite magnetic polarity. Their number varies according to the approximately 11-year solar cycle.\nIndividual sunspots or groups of sunspots may last anywhere from a few days to a few months, but eventually decay. Sunspots expand and contract as they move across the surface of the Sun, with diameters ranging from to . Larger sunspots can be visible from Earth without the aid of a telescope. They may travel at relative speeds, or proper motions, of a few hundred meters per second when they first emerge.\nIndicating intense magnetic activity, sunspots accompany other active region phenomena such as coronal loops, prominences, and reconnection events. Most solar flares and coronal mass ejections originate in these magnetically active regions around visible sunspot groupings. Similar phenomena indirectly observed on stars other than the Sun are commonly called starspots, and both light and dark spots have been measured.\nHistory.\nThe earliest record of sunspots is found in the Chinese \"I Ching\", completed before 800 BC. The text describes that a \"dou\" and \"mei\" were observed in the sun, where both words refer to a small obscuration. The earliest record of a deliberate sunspot observation also comes from China, and dates to 364 BC, based on comments by astronomer Gan De (\u7518\u5fb7) in a star catalogue. By 28 BC, Chinese astronomers were regularly recording sunspot observations in official imperial records.\nThe first clear mention of a sunspot in Western literature is circa 300 BC, by ancient Greek scholar Theophrastus, student of Plato and Aristotle and successor to the latter.\nThe earliest known drawings of sunspots were made by English monk John of Worcester in December 1128.\nSunspots were first observed telescopically in December 1610 by English astronomer Thomas Harriot. His observations were recorded in his notebooks and were followed in March 1611 by observations and reports by Frisian astronomers Johannes and David Fabricius. After Johannes Fabricius' death at the age of 29, his reports remained obscure and were overshadowed by the independent discoveries of and publications about sunspots by Christoph Scheiner and Galileo Galilei. Galileo likely began telescopic sunspot observations around the same time as Harriot; however, Galileo's records did not start until 1612. During the next decades numerous astronomers of that era participated in the pursuit of sunspots. One of these was the famous astronomer Johannes Hevelius who recorded 19 sunspot groups during the period of the early Maunder Minimum (1653-1679) in the book Machina Coelestis.\nIn the early 19th Century, William Herschel was one of the first to hypothesize a connection of sunspots with temperatures on Earth and believed that certain features of sunspots would indicate increased heating on Earth. During his recognition of solar behavior and hypothesized solar structure, he inadvertently picked up the relative absence of sunspots from July 1795 to January 1800 and was perhaps the first to construct a past record of observed or missing sunspots. From this he found that the absence of sunspots coincided with high wheat prices in England. The president of the Royal Society commented that the upward trend in wheat prices was due to monetary inflation. Years later scientists such as Richard Carrington in 1865 and John Henry Poynting in 1884 tried and failed to find a connection between wheat prices and sunspots, and modern analysis finds that there is no statistically significant correlation between wheat prices and sunspot numbers.\nPhysics.\nMorphology.\nSunspots have two main structures: a central umbra and a surrounding penumbra. The umbra is the darkest region of a sunspot and is where the magnetic field is strongest and approximately vertical, or normal, to the Sun's surface, or photosphere. The umbra may be surrounded completely or only partially by a brighter region known as the penumbra. The penumbra is composed of radially elongated structures known as penumbral filaments and has a more inclined magnetic field than the umbra. Within sunspot groups, multiple umbrae may be surrounded by a single, continuous penumbra.\nThe temperature of the umbra is roughly 3000\u20134500\u00a0K, in contrast to the surrounding material at about 5780\u00a0K, leaving sunspots clearly visible as dark spots. This is because the luminance of a heated black body (closely approximated by the photosphere) at these temperatures varies greatly with temperature. Isolated from the surrounding photosphere, a single sunspot would shine brighter than the full moon, with a crimson-orange color.\nIn some forming and decaying sunspots, relatively narrow regions of bright material appear penetrating into or completely dividing an umbra. These formations, referred to as light bridges, have been found to have a weaker, more tilted magnetic field compared to the umbra at the same height in the photosphere. Higher in the photosphere, the light bridge magnetic field merges and becomes comparable to that of the umbra. Gas pressure in light bridges has also been found to dominate over magnetic pressure, and convective motions have been detected.\nThe Wilson effect implies that sunspots are depressions on the Sun's surface.\nLifecycle.\nThe appearance of an individual sunspot may last anywhere from a few days to a few months, though groups of sunspots and their associated active regions tend to last weeks or months. Sunspots expand and contract as they move across the surface of the Sun, with diameters ranging from to .\nFormation.\nAlthough the details of sunspot formation are still a matter of ongoing research, it is widely understood that they are the visible manifestations of magnetic flux tubes in the Sun's convective zone projecting through the photosphere within active regions. Their characteristic darkening occurs due to this strong magnetic field inhibiting convection in the photosphere. As a result, the energy flux from the Sun's interior decreases, and with it, surface temperature, causing the surface area through which the magnetic field passes to look dark against the bright background of photospheric granules.\nSunspots initially appear in the photosphere as small darkened spots lacking a penumbra. These structures are known as solar pores. Over time, these pores increase in size and move towards one another. When a pore gets large enough, typically around in diameter, a penumbra will begin to form.\nDecay.\nMagnetic pressure should tend to remove field concentrations, causing the sunspots to disperse, but sunspot lifetimes are measured in days to weeks. In 2001, observations from the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) using sound waves traveling below the photosphere (local helioseismology) were used to develop a three-dimensional image of the internal structure below sunspots; these observations show that a powerful downdraft lies beneath each sunspot, forms a rotating vortex that sustains the concentrated magnetic field.\nSolar cycle.\nSolar cycles last typically about eleven years, varying from just under 10 to just over 12 years. Over the solar cycle, sunspot populations increase quickly and then decrease more slowly. The point of highest sunspot activity during a cycle is known as solar maximum, and the point of lowest activity as solar minimum. This period is also observed in most other solar activity and is linked to a variation in the solar magnetic field that changes polarity with this period.\nEarly in the cycle, sunspots appear at higher latitudes and then move towards the equator as the cycle approaches maximum, following Sp\u00f6rer's law. Spots from two sequential cycles co-exist for several years during the years near solar minimum. Spots from sequential cycles can be distinguished by direction of their magnetic field and their latitude.\nThe Wolf number sunspot index counts the average number of sunspots and groups of sunspots during specific intervals. The 11-year solar cycles are numbered sequentially, starting with the observations made in the 1750s.\nGeorge Ellery Hale first linked magnetic fields and sunspots in 1908.&lt;ref name=\"doi10.1086/141602\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Hale suggested that the sunspot cycle period is 22\u00a0years, covering two periods of increased and decreased sunspot numbers, accompanied by polar reversals of the solar magnetic dipole field. Horace W. Babcock later proposed a qualitative model for the dynamics of the solar outer layers. The Babcock Model explains that magnetic fields cause the behavior described by Sp\u00f6rer's law, as well as other effects, which are twisted by the Sun's rotation.\nLonger-period trends.\nSunspot numbers also change over long periods. For example, during the period known as the modern maximum from 1900 to 1958 the solar maxima trend of sunspot count was upwards; for the following 60 years the trend was mostly downwards. Overall, the Sun was last as active as the modern maximum over 8,000 years ago.\nSunspot number is correlated with the intensity of solar radiation over the period since 1979, when satellite measurements became available. The variation caused by the sunspot cycle to solar output is on the order of 0.1% of the solar constant (a peak-to-trough range of 1.3\u00a0W\u00b7m\u22122 compared with 1366\u00a0W\u00b7m\u22122 for the average solar constant).\nModern observation.\nSunspots are observed with land-based and Earth-orbiting solar telescopes. These telescopes use filtration and projection techniques for direct observation, in addition to various types of filtered cameras. Specialized tools such as spectroscopes and spectrohelioscopes are used to examine sunspots and sunspot areas. Artificial eclipses allow viewing of the circumference of the Sun as sunspots rotate through the horizon.\nSince looking directly at the Sun with the naked eye permanently damages human vision, amateur observation of sunspots is generally conducted using projected images, or directly through protective filters. Small sections of very dark filter glass, such as a #14 welder's glass, are effective. A telescope eyepiece can project the image, without filtration, onto a white screen where it can be viewed indirectly, and even traced, to follow sunspot evolution. Special purpose hydrogen-alpha narrow bandpass filters and aluminum-coated glass attenuation filters (which have the appearance of mirrors due to their extremely high optical density) on the front of a telescope provide safe observation through the eyepiece.\nApplication.\nDue to their correlation with other kinds of solar activity, sunspots can be used to help predict space weather, the state of the ionosphere, and conditions relevant to short-wave radio propagation or satellite communications. High sunspot activity is celebrated by members of the amateur radio community as a harbinger of excellent ionospheric propagation conditions that greatly increase radio range in the HF bands. During peaks in sunspot activity, worldwide radio communication can be achieved on frequencies as high as the 6-meter VHF band.\nSolar activity (and the solar cycle) have been implicated as a factor in global warming. The first possible example of this is the Maunder Minimum period of low sunspot activity which occurred during the Little Ice Age in Europe. However, detailed studies from multiple paleoclimate indicators show that the lower northern hemisphere temperatures in the Little Ice Age began while sunspot numbers were still high before the start of the Maunder Minimum, and persisted until after the Maunder Minimum had ceased. Numerical climate modelling indicates that volcanic activity was the main driver of the Little Ice Age.\nSunspots themselves, in terms of the magnitude of their radiant-energy deficit, have a weak effect on solar flux. The total effect of sunspots and other magnetic processes in the solar photosphere is an increase of roughly 0.1% in brightness of the Sun in comparison with its brightness at the solar-minimum level. This is a difference in total solar irradiance at Earth over the sunspot cycle of close to formula_1. Other magnetic phenomena which correlate with sunspot activity include faculae and the chromospheric network. The combination of these magnetic factors mean that the relationship of sunspot numbers to Total Solar Irradiance (TSI) over the decadal-scale solar cycle, and their relationship for century timescales, need not be the same. The main problem with quantifying the longer-term trends in TSI lies in the stability of the absolute radiometry measurements made from space, which has improved in recent decades but remains a problem. Analysis shows that it is possible that TSI was actually higher in the Maunder Minimum compared to present-day levels, but uncertainties are high, with best estimates in the range formula_2 with a formula_3 uncertainty range of formula_4.\nSunspots, with their intense magnetic field concentrations, facilitate the complex transfer of energy and momentum to the upper solar atmosphere. This transfer occurs through a variety of mechanisms, including generated waves in the lower solar atmosphere and magnetic reconnection events.\nStarspot.\nIn 1947, G. E. Kron proposed that starspots were the reason for periodic changes in brightness on red dwarfs. Since the mid-1990s, starspot observations have been made using increasingly powerful techniques yielding more and more detail: photometry showed starspot growth and decay and showed cyclic behavior similar to the Sun's; spectroscopy examined the structure of starspot regions by analyzing variations in spectral line splitting due to the Zeeman effect; Doppler imaging showed differential rotation of spots for several stars and distributions different from the Sun's; spectral line analysis measured the temperature range of spots and the stellar surfaces. For example, in 1999, Strassmeier reported the largest cool starspot ever seen rotating the giant K0\u00a0star XX Trianguli (HD\u00a012545) with a temperature of , together with a warm spot of .\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27617", "revid": "39544904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27617", "title": "Stephen Kleene", "text": ""}
{"id": "27619", "revid": "26536202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27619", "title": "Sicily", "text": "Island in the Mediterranean, region of Italy\nSicily (Italian and ), officially the Sicilian Region (; ), is an island in the central Mediterranean Sea and one of the twenty regions of Italy, situated south of the Italian Peninsula in continental Europe. With 4.7 million inhabitants, including 1.2 million in and around the capital city of Palermo, it is both the largest and most populous island in the Mediterranean Sea. \nSicily is named after the Sicels, who inhabited the eastern part of the island during the Iron Age. Sicily has a rich and unique culture in arts, music, literature, cuisine, and architecture. Its most prominent landmark is Mount Etna, the tallest active volcano in Europe, and one of the most active in the world, currently high. The island has a typical Mediterranean climate. It is separated from Calabria by the Strait of Messina. It is one of the five Italian autonomous regions and is considered part of Southern Italy.\nThe earliest archaeological record of human activity on the island dates to around 14,000 BC. By around 750 BC, Sicily had three Phoenician and around twelve Greek colonies along its coasts, becoming one of the centers of Magna Graecia. The Sicilian Wars of 580\u2013265 BC were fought between the Carthaginians and Greeks, and the Punic Wars of 264\u2013146 BC were fought between Rome and Carthage. The Roman province of Sicilia ended with the fall of the Roman Empire in the 5th century AD. Sicily was ruled during the Early Middle Ages by the Vandals, the Ostrogoths, the Byzantine Empire, and the Emirate of Sicily.\nThe Norman conquest of southern Italy led to the creation of the County of Sicily in 1071, which was succeeded by the Kingdom of Sicily in 1130. Following the Sicilian Vespers in 1282, Sicily was ruled by Aragon and then Spain, either in personal union with the crown or by a cadet branch, except for a brief period of Savoy and then Habsburg rule in 1713\u20131735. In 1816, the kingdom unified with the Kingdom of Naples to form the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Following the Expedition of the Thousand, an invasion led by Giuseppe Garibaldi, and a subsequent plebiscite, the island became part of the newly unified Italy in 1860. Sicily was given special status as an autonomous administrative division on 15 May 1946, 18 days before the 1946 Italian institutional referendum.\nHistory.\nThe name \"Sicilia\" was given to the Roman province in 241 BC. It is named after the Sicels, who inhabited the eastern part of the island during the Iron Age. The ancient name of the island is \"Trinacria\" (Greek \u03a4\u03c1\u03b9\u03bd\u03b1\u03ba\u03c1\u03af\u03b1 \"having three headlands\") for its triangular shape, likely a re-interpretation of earlier (Homeric) \"Thrinacia\". The Greek name was rendered as \"Tr\u012bn\u0101cr\u012da\" in classical Latin (Virgil, Ovid).\nPrehistory.\nHumans first colonized Sicily towards the end of the Late Pleistocene, around 16,000 years ago, by people associated with the Epigravettian culture.\nDiscoveries of dolmens on the island (dating to the second half of the third millennium BC) seem to offer new insights into the culture of primitive Sicily. The impact of at least two influences is clear: the European one coming from the Northwest, and the Mediterranean influence of an eastern heritage.31\nAntiquity.\nThe original classical-era inhabitants of Sicily comprised three defined groups of the ancient peoples of Italy: the Sicani, the Elymians and the Sicels. The most prominent and by far the earliest of these were the Sicani, who (Thucydides writes) arrived from the Iberian Peninsula (perhaps Catalonia). Some modern scholars, however, suggest classifying the Sicani as possibly an Illyrian tribe. Important historical evidence has been discovered in the form of cave drawings by the Sicani, dated from the end of the Pleistocene epoch around 8000 BC. The Elymians, thought to have come from the area of the Aegean Sea, became the next tribe to join the Sicanians on Sicily.\nNo evidence survives of warring between tribes, but the Sicanians moved eastwards when the Elymians settled in the northwest corner of the island. The Sicels are thought to have originated in Liguria; they arrived from mainland Italy in 1200 BC and forced the Sicanians to move back across Sicily and to settle in the middle of the island. Other minor Italic groups who settled in Sicily included the Ausones (Aeolian Islands, Milazzo) and the Morgetes of Morgantina.\nThe Phoenician settlements in the western part of the island predate the arrival of Greek colonists. From about 750 BC, the Greeks began to live in Sicily ( \u2013 \"Sikelia\"), establishing many significant settlements. The most important colony was in Syracuse; others grew up at Akragas, Selinunte, Gela, Himera and Zancle. The native Sicani and Sicel peoples became absorbed into the Hellenic culture with relative ease, and the area became part of Magna Graecia along with the coasts of the south of the Italian peninsula, which the Greeks had also colonised. Sicily had fertile soils, and the successful introduction of olives and grape vines fostered profitable trading. Greek culture significantly centered around Greek religion, and the settlers built many temples throughout Sicily, including several in the \"Valley of the Temples\" at Agrigento.\nPolitics on the island became intertwined with those of Greece; Syracuse became desired by the Athenians who set out on the Sicilian Expedition (415\u2013413 BC) during the Peloponnesian War. Syracuse gained Sparta and Corinth as allies and, as a result, defeated the Athenian expedition. The victors destroyed the Athenian army and their ships, selling most of the survivors into slavery.\nThe Greek kingdom of Syracuse controlled most of eastern Sicily while Carthage controlled the western side. The two cultures began to clash, leading to the Greek-Punic wars (between 580 and 265 BC). The Greek states had begun to make peace with the Roman Republic in 205 BC, before the Romans sought to annex Sicily as their republic's first province. Rome attacked Carthage's holdings in Sicily in the First Punic War (264 to 241 BC) and won, making Sicily\u2013with the exception of Syracuse\u2013the first Roman province outside of the Italian Peninsula by 242 BC.\nIn the Second Punic War (218 to 201 BC), the Carthaginians attempted to recapture Sicily. Some of the Greek cities on the island who were loyal to Rome switched sides to help the Carthaginians, prompting a Roman military response. Archimedes, who lived in Syracuse, helped defend his city from Roman invasion; Roman troops killed him after they captured Syracuse in 212 BC. The Carthaginian attempt failed, and Rome became more unrelenting in its annihilation of the invaders; Roman consul M. Valerian told the Roman Senate in 210 BC that \"no Carthaginian remains in Sicily\".\nAs the Roman Republic's granary, Sicily ranked as an important province, divided into two quaestorships: Syracuse to the east and Lilybaeum to the west. Roman rule introduced the Latin language to the island, which underwent a slow process of latinisation but Sicilian culture remained largely Greek and the Greek language did not become extinct on the island, facilitating its re-hellenisation much later under the Byzantines. The prosperity of the island went into sharp decline during the governorship of Verres (73 to 71 BC). In 70 BC, the noted statesman Cicero condemned the misgovernment of Verres in his oration \"In Verrem\".\nVarious groups used the island as a power base at different times: slave insurgents occupied it during the First (135\u2212132 BC) and Second (104\u2212100 BC) Servile Wars. Sextus Pompey had his headquarters there during the Sicilian revolt of 44 to 36 BC. Christianity first appeared in Sicily during the years following AD 200; between this time and AD 313, when Emperor Constantine the Great lifted the prohibition on Christianity, a significant number of Sicilians had become martyrs, including Agatha, Christina, Lucy, and Euplius. Sicily remained a Roman province for around 700 years.\nRoman and Germanic viceregal rule (469\u2013535).\nThe Western Roman Empire began falling apart after the invasion of Vandals, Alans, and Sueves across the Rhine on the last day of 406. Eventually the Vandals, after roaming about western and southern Hispania (present-day Iberia) for 20 years, moved to North Africa in 429 and occupied Carthage in 439. The Franks moved south from present-day Belgium. The Visigoths moved west and eventually settled in Aquitaine in 418; the Burgundians were settled in present-day Savoy in 443.\nThe Vandals found themselves in a position to threaten Sicily \u2013 only 100 miles away from their North African bases. After taking Carthage, the Vandals, personally led by King Gaiseric, laid siege to Palermo in 440 as the opening act in an attempt to wrest the island from Roman rule. The Vandals made another attempt to take the island one year after the 455 sack of Rome, at Agrigento, but were defeated decisively by Ricimir in a naval victory off Corsica in 456. The island remained under Roman rule until 469. The Vandals lost possession of the island 8 years later in 477 to the East Germanic tribe of the Ostrogoths, who then controlled Italy and Dalmatia. The island was returned to the Ostrogoths by payment of tribute to their king Odoacer. He ruled Italy from 476 to 488 in the name of the Byzantine (Eastern Roman) Emperor. The Vandals kept a toehold in Lilybaeum, a port on the west coast. They lost this in 491 after making one last attempt to conquer the island from this port. The Ostrogothic conquest of Sicily (and of Italy as a whole) under Theodoric the Great began in 488. The Byzantine Emperor Zeno had appointed Theodoric as a military commander in Italy. The Goths were Germanic, but Theodoric fostered Roman culture and government and allowed freedom of religion. In 461 from the age of seven or eight until 17 or 18 Theodoric had become a Byzantine hostage; he resided in the great palace of Constantinople, was favored by Emperor Leo I (r.\u2009457\u00a0\u2013\u00a0474) and learned to read, write and do arithmetic.\nByzantine period (535\u2013827).\nAfter taking areas occupied by the Vandals in North Africa, Justinian I retook Italy as an ambitious attempt to recover the lost provinces in the West. The re-conquests marked an end to over 150 years of accommodating policies with tribal invaders. His first target was Sicily, leading to the Gothic War (535\u2013554) between the Ostrogoths and the Eastern Roman Empire, also known as the Byzantine Empire. Justinian's general Belisarius was assigned to the military task. Sicily was used as a base for the Byzantines to conquer the rest of Italy, including Naples, Rome, and Milan. It took five years before the Ostrogoth capital Ravenna fell in 540. However, the new Ostrogoth king Totila counterattacked, moving down the Italian peninsula, plundering and conquering Sicily in 550. Totila was defeated and killed in the Battle of Taginae by Byzantine general Narses in 552 but Italy was in ruins.\nAt the time of the reconquest Greek was still the predominant language spoken on the island. Sicily was invaded by the Arab forces of Caliph Uthman in 652, but the Arabs failed to make permanent gains. They returned to Syria with their booty. Raids seeking loot continued until the mid-8th century.\nThe Eastern Roman Emperor Constans II moved from Constantinople to Syracuse in 660. The following year he launched an assault from Sicily against the Lombard Duchy of Benevento, which occupied most of southern Italy. Rumors that the capital of the empire was to be moved to Syracuse probably cost Constans his life, as he was assassinated in 668. His son Constantine IV succeeded him. A brief usurpation in Sicily by Mezezius was quickly suppressed by this emperor. Contemporary accounts report that the Greek language was widely spoken on the island during this period. In 740 Emperor Leo III the Isaurian transferred Sicily from the jurisdiction of the church of Rome to that of Constantinople, placing the island within the eastern branch of the Church.\nIn 826 Euphemius, the Byzantine commander in Sicily, having apparently killed his wife, forced a nun to marry him. Emperor Michael II caught wind of the matter and ordered general Constantine to end the marriage and cut off Euphemius' head. Euphemius rose up, killed Constantine, and then occupied Syracuse; he, in turn, was defeated and driven out to North Africa. He offered the rule of Sicily to Ziyadat Allah, the Aghlabid Emir of Tunisia, in return for a position as a general and a place of safety. A Muslim army was then sent to the island consisting of Arabs, Berbers, Cretans, and Persians.\nThe Muslim conquest of Sicily was a see-saw affair and met with fierce resistance. It took over a century for Byzantine Sicily to be conquered; the largest city, Syracuse, held out until 878 and the Greek city of Taormina fell in 962. It was not until 965 that all of Sicily was conquered by the Arabs. In the 11th-century Byzantine armies carried out a partial reconquest of the island under George Maniakes, but it was their Norman mercenaries who would eventually complete the island's reconquest at the end of the century.\nArab period (827\u20131091).\nThe language spoken in Sicily under Arab rule was Siculo-Arabic and Arabic influence is present in some Sicilian words today. Although long extinct in Sicily, the language has developed into what is now the Maltese language on the islands of Malta today.\nA description of Palermo was given by Ibn Hawqal, an Arab merchant who visited Sicily in 950. A walled suburb, called the Al-Kasr (the palace), is the centre of Palermo to this day, with the great Friday mosque on the site of the later Roman cathedral. The suburb of al-Khalisa (modern Kalsa) contained the Sultan's palace, baths, a mosque, government offices, and a private prison. Ibn Hawqal estimated there were 7,000 butchers trading in 150 shops. The Muslim rule introduced lemons, oranges and sugar cane, as well as cotton and mulberries for sericulture, and introduced the to improve irrigation systems for agriculture. Around 1050, the western half of Sicily was ethnically and culturally distinct from central and eastern Sicily. During this time, there was also a small Jewish presence in Sicily, evidence seen in the catacombs discovered on the island.\nPalermo was initially ruled by the Aghlabids; later it was the centre of the Emirate of Sicily, which was under the nominal suzerainty of the Fatimid Caliphate. Muslim sovereignty was never absolute across the island, and the creation of three subdivisions served to distinguish different approaches to government. Under the Arab rule the island was divided in three administrative regions, or \"vals\", roughly corresponding to the three \"points\" of Sicily: Val di Mazara in the west; Val Demone in the northeast; and Val di Noto in the southeast. As dhimmis, that is as members of a protected class of approved monotheists, the Eastern Orthodox Christians were allowed freedom of religion, but had to pay a tax, the jizya (in lieu of the obligatory alms tax, the zakat, paid by Muslims), and were restricted from active participation in public affairs. Western Sicily was more Islamized and heavily populated by Arabs, allowing for full and direct administration; by contrast, the northeast region of Val Demone remained majority Christian and often resistant to Muslim rule, prompting a focus on tax collection and maintaining public order, as a result, revolts by Byzantine Sicilians continuously occurred in the east where Greek-speaking Christians predominated. Parts of the island were re-occupied before revolts were quashed. By the 11th century, the Emirate of Sicily began to fragment as intra-dynastic quarreling fractured the Muslim government.\nNorman Sicily (1038\u20131198).\nIn 1038, seventy years after losing their last cities in Sicily, the Byzantines under the Greek general George Maniakes invaded the island together with their Varangian and Norman mercenaries. Maniakes was killed in a Byzantine civil war in 1043 before completing a reconquest and the Byzantines withdrew. Later the Normans invaded in 1061 and after taking Apulia and Calabria, Roger I occupied Messina with an army of 700 knights. In 1068, Roger I was victorious at Misilmeri. Most crucial was the siege of Palermo, whose fall in 1071 eventually resulted in all Sicily coming under Norman control. The conquest was completed in 1091 when they captured Noto the last Arab stronghold. Palermo continued to be the capital under the Normans. The Normans formed a small but violent ruling class. They destroyed many of the Arab towns in Sicily, and very few physical remains survive from the Arab era.\nThe Norman Hauteville family appreciated and admired the rich and layered culture in which they now found themselves. They also introduced into Sicily their own culture, customs, and politics from Normandy. Many Normans in Sicily adopted the habits and comportment of Muslim rulers and their Byzantine subjects in dress, language, literature, even to the extent of having palace eunuchs and, according to some accounts, a harem.\nWhile Roger I died in 1101, his wife Adelaide ruled until 1112 when their son Roger II of Sicily came of age. Having succeeded his brother Simon as Count of Sicily, Roger II was ultimately able to raise the status of the island to a kingdom in 1130, along with his other holdings, which included the Maltese Islands and the Duchies of Apulia and Calabria. Roger II appointed the powerful Greek George of Antioch to be his \"emir of emirs\" and continued the syncretism of his father. During this period, the Kingdom of Sicily was prosperous and politically powerful, becoming one of the wealthiest states in all of Europe\u2014even wealthier than the Kingdom of England.\nThe court of Roger II became the most luminous centre of culture in the Mediterranean, both from Europe and the Middle East, like the multi-ethnic Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba, then only just eclipsed. This attracted scholars, scientists, poets, artists, and artisans of all kinds. Laws were issued in the language of the community to whom they were addressed in Norman Sicily, at the time when the culture was still heavily Arab and Greek. Governance was by rule of law which promoted justice. Muslims, Jews, Byzantine Greeks, Lombards, and Normans worked together fairly amicably. During this time many extraordinary buildings were constructed.\nHowever this situation changed as the Normans imported immigrants from Normandy, England, Lombardy, Piedmont, Provence and Campania to secure the island. Linguistically, the island shifted from being one-third Greek- and two-thirds Arabic-speaking at the time of the Norman conquest to becoming fully Latinised. In terms of religion the island became completely Roman Catholic (bearing in mind that until 1054 the Churches owing allegiance to the Pope and the Patriarch of Constantinople belonged to one Church); Sicily before the Norman conquest was under the Eastern Orthodox Patriarch. After Pope Innocent III made him Papal Legate in 1098, Roger I created several Catholic bishoprics while still allowing the construction of 12 Greek-speaking monasteries (the Greek language, monasteries, and 1500 parishes continued to exist until the adherents of the Greek Rite were forced in 1585 to convert to Catholicism or leave; a small pocket of Greek-speakers still live in Messina).\nKingdom of Sicily (1198\u20131860).\nAfter a century, the Norman Hauteville dynasty died out; the last direct descendant and heir of Roger II, Constance, married Emperor Henry VI. This eventually led to the crown of Sicily being passed to the Hohenstaufen dynasty, who were Germans from Swabia. The last of the Hohenstaufens, Frederick II, the only son of Constance, was one of the greatest and most cultured men of the Middle Ages. His mother's will had asked Pope Innocent III to undertake the guardianship of her son. Frederick was four when at Palermo, he was crowned King of Sicily in 1198. Frederick received no systematic education and was allowed to run free in the streets of Palermo. There he picked up the many languages he heard spoken, such as Arabic and Greek, and learned some of the lore of the Jewish community. At age twelve, he dismissed Innocent's deputy regent and took over the government; at fifteen he married Constance of Aragon, and began his reclamation of the imperial crown. Subsequently, due to Muslim rebellions, Frederick II destroyed the remaining Muslim presence in Sicily, estimated at 60,000 people, moving all to the city of Lucera in Apulia between 1221 and 1226.\nConflict between the Hohenstaufen house and the Papacy led, in 1266, to Pope Innocent IV crowning the French prince Charles, count of Anjou and Provence, as the king of both Sicily and Naples.\nStrong opposition to French officialdom due to mistreatment and taxation saw the local peoples of Sicily rise up, leading in 1282 to an insurrection known as the War of the Sicilian Vespers, which eventually saw almost the entire French population on the island killed. During the war, the Sicilians turned to Peter III of Aragon, son-in-law of the last Hohenstaufen king, for support after being rejected by the Pope. Peter gained control of Sicily from the French, who, however, retained control of the Kingdom of Naples. A crusade was launched in August 1283 against Peter III and the Crown of Aragon by Pope Martin IV (a pope from \u00cele-de-France), but it failed. The wars continued until the peace of Caltabellotta in 1302, which saw Peter's son Frederick III recognized as the king of the Isle of Sicily, while Charles II was recognized as the king of Naples by Pope Boniface VIII. Sicily was ruled as an independent kingdom by relatives of the kings of Aragon until 1409 and then as part of the Crown of Aragon.\nIn October 1347, in Messina, Sicily, the Black Death first arrived in Europe.\nBetween the 15th and 18th centuries, waves of Greeks from the Peloponnese (such as the Maniots) and Arvanites migrated to Sicily in large numbers to escape persecution after the Ottoman conquest of the Peloponnese. They brought with them Eastern Orthodoxy as well as the Greek and Arvanitika languages, once again adding onto the extensive Byzantine/Greek influence.\nThe onset of the Spanish Inquisition in 1492 led to Ferdinand II decreeing the expulsion of all Jews from Sicily. The eastern part of the island was hit by destructive earthquakes in 1542 and 1693. Just a few years before the latter earthquake, the island was struck by a plague. The earthquake in 1693 took an estimated 60,000 lives. There were revolts during the 17th century, but these were quelled with force, especially the revolts of Palermo and Messina. North African slave raids discouraged settlement along the coast until the 19th century. The Treaty of Utrecht in 1713 saw Sicily assigned to the House of Savoy; however, this period of rule lasted only seven years, as it was exchanged for the island of Sardinia with Emperor Charles VI of the Austrian Habsburg Dynasty.\nWhile the Austrians were concerned with the War of the Polish Succession, a Bourbon prince, Charles from Spain was able to conquer Sicily and Naples. At first Sicily was able to remain as an independent kingdom under personal union, while the Bourbons ruled over both from Naples. However, the advent of Napoleon's First French Empire saw Naples taken at the Battle of Campo Tenese and Bonapartist King of Naples was installed. Ferdinand III, the Bourbon, was forced to retreat to Sicily which he was still in control of with the help of British naval protection.\nFollowing this, Sicily joined the Napoleonic Wars, and subsequently the British under Lord William Bentinck established a military and diplomatic presence on the island to protect against a French invasion. Sicilian volunteers joined the British military to form the Royal Sicilian Regiment, which saw action at the Battle of Maida and then transferred to Iberia. After the wars were won, Sicily and Naples formally merged as the Two Sicilies under the Bourbons. Major revolutionary movements occurred in 1820 and 1848 against the Bourbon government with Sicily seeking independence; the second of which, the 1848 revolution resulted in a short period of independence for Sicily. However, in 1849 the Bourbons retook control of the island and dominated it until 1860.\nItalian unification.\nThe Expedition of the Thousand led by Giuseppe Garibaldi captured Sicily in 1860, as part of the . The conquest started at Marsala, and native Sicilians joined him in the capture of the southern Italian peninsula. Garibaldi's march was completed with the siege of Gaeta, where the final Bourbons were expelled and Garibaldi announced his dictatorship in the name of Victor Emmanuel II of Kingdom of Sardinia. Sicily became part of the Kingdom of Sardinia after a referendum in which more than 75% of Sicily voted in favour of the annexation on 21 October 1860 (although not everyone was allowed to vote). As a result of the proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy, Sicily became part of the kingdom on 17 March 1861.\nThe Sicilian economy (and the wider \"mezzogiorno\" economy) remained relatively underdeveloped after the Italian unification, in spite of the strong investments made by the Kingdom of Italy in terms of modern infrastructure, and this caused an unprecedented wave of emigration. In 1894, organisations of workers and peasants known as the \"Fasci Siciliani\" protested against the bad social and economic conditions of the island, but they were suppressed in a few days.\nThis period was also characterized by the first contact between the Sicilian Mafia (the crime syndicate also known as Cosa Nostra) and the Italian government. The Mafia's origins are still uncertain, but it is generally accepted that it emerged in the 18th century initially in the role of private enforcers hired to protect the property of landowners and merchants from the groups of \"briganti\" who frequently pillaged the countryside and towns. The battle against the Mafia made by the Kingdom of Italy was controversial and ambiguous. The Carabinieri (the military police of Italy) and sometimes the Royal Italian Army were often involved in fights against the mafia members, but their efforts were frequently useless because of the weakness of the Italian judicial system and cooperation between the mafia and local governments.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nThe Messina earthquake of 28 December 1908 killed more than 80,000 people.\nIn the 1920s, the fascist regime began taking stronger military action, led by Cesare Mori (nicknamed the \"Iron Prefect\" for his iron-fisted campaigns), against the Sicilian Mafia, the first that ended with considerable success. An Allied invasion of Sicily during World War II began on 10 July 1943. In preparation for the invasion, the Allies revitalised the Mafia to aid them. The invasion of Sicily contributed to the 25 July crisis; in general, the Allied victors were warmly embraced by Sicilians.\nIn the aftermath of World War II, Italy became a republic in 1946. Under the Constitution of Italy, Sicily is one of five regions with autonomy. Both the partial Italian land reform and special funding from the Italian government's \"Cassa per il Mezzogiorno\" (\"Fund for the South\") from 1950 to 1984 helped the Sicilian economy. During this period, the economic and social condition of the island was generally improved because of investments in infrastructure (such as motorways and airports) and the creation of industrial and commercial areas. In the 1980s, the Mafia was weakened by another campaign led by magistrates Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino. Between 1990 and 2005, the unemployment rate fell from about 23% to 11%.\nThe Cosa Nostra has traditionally been the most powerful group in Sicily, especially around Palermo. A police investigation in the summer of 2019 confirmed strong links between the Palermo area Sicilian Mafia and American organized crime, particularly the Gambino crime family. According to \"La Repubblica\", \"Off they go, through the streets of Passo di Rigano, Boccadifalco, Torretta and at the same time, Brooklyn, Staten Island, [and] New Jersey. Because from Sicily to the US, the old mafia has returned.\"\nGeography.\nSicily has a roughly triangular shape, earning it the name \"Trinacria\".\nTo the north-east, it is separated from Calabria and the rest of the Italian mainland by the Strait of Messina, about wide in the north, and about wide in the southern part. The northern and southern coasts are each about long measured as a straight line, while the eastern coast measures around ; total coast length is estimated at . The total area of the island is , while the Autonomous Region of Sicily (which includes the smaller surrounding islands of Lipari, Egadi, Ustica, and Pantelleria) has an area of .\nThe terrain of inland Sicily is mostly hilly and is intensively cultivated wherever possible. Along the northern coast, the mountain ranges of Madonie, , Nebrodi, , and Peloritani, , are an extension of the mainland Apennines. The cone of Mount Etna dominates the eastern coast. In the southeast lie the lower Hyblaean Mountains, . The mines of the Enna and Caltanissetta districts were part of a leading sulphur-producing area throughout the 19th century, but have declined since the 1950s.\nSicily and its surrounding small islands have some highly active volcanoes. This is due to Sicily being geographically on the northern edge of the African Plate. Mount Etna is the largest active volcano in Europe and casts black ash over the island with its recurrent eruptions. It stands high as of September 2024. It is the highest mountain in Italy south of the Alps. Etna covers an area of with a basal circumference of . This makes it the largest of the three active volcanoes in Italy, being about two and a half times the height of the next largest, Mount Vesuvius. In Greek mythology, the deadly monster Typhon was trapped under the mountain by Zeus, the god of the sky. Mount Etna is widely regarded as a cultural symbol and icon of Sicily.\nThe Aeolian Islands in the Tyrrhenian Sea, to the northeast of mainland Sicily form a volcanic complex. The three volcanoes of Vulcano, Stromboli and Lipari are also active, although the last is usually dormant. Off the southern coast of Sicily, the underwater volcano of Ferdinandea, which is part of the larger Empedocles volcano, last erupted in 1831. It is located between the coast of Agrigento and the island of Pantelleria (which itself is a dormant volcano).\nThe autonomous region also includes several neighbouring islands: the Aegadian Islands, the Aeolian Islands, Pantelleria and Lampedusa. From a geographical perspective, also forming a part of Sicily is the Maltese Archipelago, the islands constitute the republic of Malta.\nMountains.\nThe mountains of Sicily form a significant part of the island's diverse landscape, with Mount Etna, one of the world's most active volcanoes, being the highest and most notable peak. Other important mountain ranges include the Nebrodi, Madonie and Peloritani mountains ranges.\nRivers.\nSeveral rivers drain the island, most of which flow through the central area and enter the sea at the south of the island. The Salso flows through parts of Enna and Caltanissetta before entering the Mediterranean Sea at the port of Licata. To the east, the Alcantara flows through the province of Messina and enters the sea at Giardini Naxos, and the Simeto, which flows into the Ionian Sea south of Catania. Other important rivers on the island are the Belice and Platani in the southwest.\nClimate.\nSicily has for the most part a typical Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\") with mild and wet winters and hot, dry summers with changeable intermediate seasons. On the coasts, especially in the southwest, the climate is affected by the African currents and summers can be hot.\nSnow falls above 900 metres, but it can fall in the hills. The interior mountains, especially Nebrodi, Madonie, and Etna, enjoy a mountain climate, with heavy snowfalls during winter. The summit of Mount Etna is usually snow-capped from October to May.\nIn the summer, the sirocco \u2013 the wind from the Sahara \u2013 can be felt. Rainfall is scarce, and in some provinces a water crisis can occur.\nAccording to the Regional Agency for Waste and Water, on 10 August 1999, the weather station of Catenanuova (EN) recorded an unofficial maximum temperature of . On 11 August 2021, a new highest temperature record for Europe with a reading of was set near the city of Syracuse. Total precipitation is highly variable, generally increasing with elevation. In general, the southern and southeast coast receives the least rainfall (less than ), and the northern and northeastern highlands the most (over ).\nFlora and fauna.\nSicily is an often-quoted example of man-made deforestation, which has occurred since Roman times when the island was turned into an agricultural region. This gradually dried the climate, leading to a decline in rainfall and the drying of rivers. The central and southwest provinces are practically devoid of forest. In Northern Sicily, there are three important forests; near Mount Etna, in the Nebrodi Mountains and in the Bosco della Ficuzza Natural Reserve near Palermo. The Nebrodi Mountains Regional Park, established on 4 August 1993 and covering , is the largest protected natural area of Sicily; it contains the largest forest in Sicily, the Caronia. The Hundred Horse Chestnut (), in Sant'Alfio, on the eastern slopes of Mount Etna, is the largest and oldest known chestnut tree in the world at 2,000\u20134,000 years old.\nSicily has a wide variety of fauna. Species include the European wildcat, red fox, least weasel, pine marten, fallow deer, wild boar, crested porcupine, European hedgehog, common toad, \"Vipera aspis\", golden eagle, peregrine falcon, Eurasian hoopoe and black-winged stilt. Roe deer were driven to extinction on the island. The Sicilian wolf (\"Canis lupus cristaldii\") was an endemic wolf subspecies that was driven to extinction in the 20th century. During the Late Pleistocene, a species of dwarf elephant, Palaeoloxodon mnaidriensis inhabited the island, with its latest records on Sicily dating to around 20,000 years ago.\nThe Riserva naturale dello Zingaro (Zingaro Natural Reserve) is one of the best examples of unspoiled coastal wilderness in Sicily.\nMarine Life of the Straits of Messina includes varieties of birds and marine life, including larger species such as greater flamingo and fin whale.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2024, 4.75 million people live in Sicily, making it the fourth most populated region in Italy. In the first century after the Italian unification, Sicily had one of the most negative net migration rates among the regions of Italy because of the emigration of millions of people to Northern Italy, other European countries, North America, South America and Australia. Like the South of Italy and Sardinia, immigration to the island is very low compared to other regions of Italy because workers tend to head to Northern Italy instead, due to better employment and industrial opportunities. According to ISTAT figures from 2017, show around 175,000 immigrants out of the total 5,029,615 population; Romanians make up the largest immigrant community with more than 50,000, followed by Tunisians, Moroccans, Sri Lankans, Albanians, and others mostly from Eastern Europe. As of 31 December 2020, there were 186,195 foreigners resident in the region. As in the rest of Italy, the official language is Italian and the primary religion is Roman Catholicism.\nEmigration.\nSicilian emigration started shortly after Italian unification and has continued into the present day. The aforementioned factors, along with a failed land reform, resulted in an unprecedented wave of Sicilians emigrating, first to the United States between the 1880s and the 1920s and later to northern Italy; since the 1960s, other population destinations include Belgium, France, Germany, Switzerland, as well as Australia and South America. An estimated 10 million people of Sicilian origin live around the world.\nThe trend of emigration, particularly among young Sicilians leaving the island in search of employment elsewhere in Italy and abroad, continues in early 21st century. Sicily remains the Italian region with the highest number of expatriates: as of 2017, over 750,000 Sicilians, 14.4% of the island's population, lived abroad. \nLargest cities.\nThese are the ten largest cities of Sicily:\nReligion.\nAs in most Italian regions, Roman Catholicism is the predominant religious denomination in Sicily, and the church still plays an important role in the lives of most people. There is also a notable small minority of Eastern-rite Byzantine Catholics which has a mixed congregation of ethnic Albanians; it is operated by the Italo-Albanian Catholic Church. Most people still attend church weekly or at least for religious festivals, and many people get married in churches. There was a wide presence of Jews in Sicily for at least 1,400 years and possibly for more than 2,000 years. Some scholars believe that the Sicilian Jewry are partial ancestors of the Ashkenazi Jews. However, much of the Jewish community faded away when they were expelled from the island in 1492. Islam was present during the Emirate of Sicily, although Muslims were also expelled. Today, mostly due to immigration to the island, there are also several religious minorities, such as Jehovah's Witnesses, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, and Sikhism. There are also a some Evangelical Christians who live on the island. As of 2020, there are approximately 4,989,921 Roman Catholics in Sicily constituting about 99.2% of the island's population. Additionally there are also about 23,120 members of the Italo-Albanian Catholic Church also living in Sicily constituting roughly 0.5% of the population.\nPolitics.\nThe politics of Sicily takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democracy, whereby the President of Regional Government is the head of government, and of a pluriform multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the Regional Government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Sicilian Regional Assembly. The capital of Sicily is Palermo.\nTraditionally, Sicily votes for centre-right parties during elections. From 1943 to 1951, there was also a separatist political party called Sicilian Independence Movement (\"Movimento Indipendentista Siciliano\", MIS). Their most successful result was at the 1946 general election, when MIS obtained 0.7% of national votes (8.8% of votes in Sicily), and four seats. However, the movement lost all their seats following the 1948 general election and the 1951 regional election. Even though it has never been formally disbanded, today the movement is no longer part of the politics of Sicily. After World War II, Sicily became a stronghold of the Christian Democracy. Sicily is now governed by a centre-right coalition. Renato Schifani is the current President and has served since 2022.\nAdministrative divisions.\nAdministratively, Sicily is divided into 3 metropolitan cities and 6 \"free municipal consortiums\" (\"libero consorzio comunale\"), each with a capital city of the same name as the province. Small surrounding islands are also part of various Sicilian provinces: the Aeolian Islands (Messina), isle of Ustica (Palermo), Aegadian Islands (Trapani), isle of Pantelleria (Trapani) and Pelagian Islands (Agrigento).\nEconomy.\nThanks to regular growth, Sicily is the eighth largest regional economy of Italy in terms of total GDP (see List of Italian regions by GDP). A series of reforms and investments in agriculture, such as the introduction of modern irrigation systems, has made this important industry competitive. In the 1970s, some factories were opened, resulting in growth in the industrial sector. In recent years the service industry has become more important due to the opening of several shopping malls and some modest growth in financial and telecommunication activities. Tourism is an important source of income for the island, which attracts visitors due to its rich natural and historical heritage. Today Sicily is investing a large amount of money into the development of its hospitality industry, to attract even more tourism. However, Sicily continues to have a GDP per capita below the Italian average, and higher unemployment than the rest of Italy.\nAgriculture.\nSicily has long been noted for its fertile soil, which is the result of past volcanic eruptions. The local agriculture is also helped by the pleasant climate of the island. The main agricultural products are wheat, citrons, oranges \"(Arancia Rossa di Sicilia IGP)\", lemons, tomatoes \"(Pomodoro di Pachino IGP)\", olives, olive oil, artichokes, prickly pear \"(Fico d'India dell'Etna DOP)\", almonds, grapes, pistachios \"(Pistacchio di Bronte DOP)\" and wine. Cattle and sheep are raised. The production of cheese is particularly important thanks to the Ragusano DOP and the Pecorino Siciliano DOP. Ragusa is noted for its honey (\"Miele Ibleo\") and chocolate (\"Cioccolato di Modica IGP\") products.\nSicily is the third largest wine producer in Italy, after Veneto and Emilia Romagna (and Italy is the world's largest wine producer). The region is known mainly for fortified Marsala wines. In recent decades the wine industry has improved, new winemakers are experimenting with less-well-known native varieties, and Sicilian wines have become better known. The best known local variety is Nero d'Avola named after Avola, a town not far from Syracuse. Other important native varieties are: Nerello Mascalese, used to make the Etna Rosso DOC wine; Frappato, a component of the Cerasuolo di Vittoria DOCG wine; Moscato di Pantelleria (also known as \"Zibibbo\"), which is used to make different Pantelleria wines; Malvasia di Lipari, used for the Malvasia di Lipari DOC wine; and Catarratto, mostly used to make a white wine, Alcamo DOC. Furthermore, in Sicily, high-quality wines are also produced using non-native varieties like Syrah, Chardonnay and Merlot.\nSicily is also known for its liqueurs, such as Amaro Averna, produced in Caltanissetta, and the local limoncello.\nFishing is another fundamental resource for Sicily. It has important tuna, sardine, swordfish and European anchovy fisheries. Mazara del Vallo is the largest fishing centre in Sicily and one of the most important in Italy.\nIndustry and manufacturing.\nImprovements in Sicily's road system have helped to promote industrial development. The region has three important industrial districts:\nIn Palermo there are important shipyards (such as Fincantieri), mechanical factories of famous Italian companies as Ansaldo Breda, publishing and textile industries. Chemical industries are also in the Province of Messina (Milazzo) and in the Province of Caltanissetta (Gela).\nThere are petroleum, natural gas and asphalt fields in the Southeast (mostly near Ragusa) and massive deposits of halite in Central Sicily. The Province of Trapani is one of the largest sea salt producers in Italy.\nStatistics.\nGDP growth.\nSicily's GDP (nominal and per capita) growth between 2000 and 2008 was as follows:\nEconomic sectors.\nSectors of the Sicilian economy in 2006:\nUnemployment rate.\nThe unemployment rate was 21.5% in 2018 and was one of the highest in Italy and Europe.\nTransport.\nRoads.\nHighways have been built and expanded in the last four decades. The most prominent Sicilian roads are the motorways (known as ) in the north of the island. Much of the motorway network is elevated on pillars due to the island's mountainous terrain. Other main roads in Sicily are the \"Strade Statali\", such as the SS.113 that connects Trapani to Messina (via Palermo), the SS.114 Messina-Syracuse (via Catania) and the SS.115 Syracuse-Trapani (via Ragusa, Gela and Agrigento).\nRailways.\nThe first railway in Sicily was opened in 1863 (Palermo-Bagheria) and today all of the Sicilian provinces are served by a network of railway services, linking to most major cities and towns; this service is operated by Trenitalia. Of the of railway tracks in use, over 60% has been electrified whilst the remaining are serviced by diesel engines. 88% of the lines (1.209\u00a0km) are single-track and only are double-track serving the two main routes, Messina-Palermo (Tyrrhenian) and Messina-Catania-Syracuse (Ionian), which are the main lines of this region. Of the narrow-gauge railways the Ferrovia Circumetnea is the only one that still operates, going round Mount Etna. From the major cities of Sicily, there are services to Naples, Rome and Milan; this is achieved by the trains being loaded onto ferries which cross the Strait.\nIn Catania there is an underground railway service (metropolitana di Catania); in Palermo the national railway operator Trenitalia operates a commuter rail (Palermo metropolitan railway service), the Sicilian Capital is also served by 4 AMAT (Comunal Public Transport Operator) tramlines; Messina is served by a tramline.\nAirports.\nSicily has several airports that serve numerous Italian and European destinations and some extra-European.\nPorts.\nBy sea, Sicily is served by several ferry routes and cargo ports, and in all major cities, cruise ships dock on a regular basis.\nStrait of Messina Bridge.\nThe Strait of Messina Bridge is a proposed suspension bridge across the Strait of Messina, connecting Torre Faro in Sicily with Villa San Giovanni on the Italian peninsula.\nWhile a bridge across the Strait of Messina had been proposed since ancient times, the first detailed plan was made in the 1990s for a suspension bridge. The project was cancelled in 2006 under prime minister Romano Prodi. On 6 March 2009, as part of a massive new public works programme, prime minister Silvio Berlusconi's government announced that construction of the Messina Bridge would indeed go ahead, pledging \u20ac1.3\u00a0billion as a contribution to the total cost, estimated at \u20ac6.1\u00a0billion. The project was cancelled again on 26 February 2013, by prime minister Mario Monti's government, due to budget constraints. A decade later, the project was revived again with a decree by Giorgia Meloni's government, on 16 March 2023, which received presidential approval on 31 March 2023.\nThe bridge was fully approved by the Meloni government in August 2025, with construction set to begin in the autumn of 2025. It will be the longest suspension bridge in the world when it opens in 2032. The bridge would also be part of the Berlin\u2013Palermo railway axis (Line 1) of the Trans-European Transport Networks (TEN-T).\nTourism.\nSicily's sunny, dry climate, scenery, cuisine, history, and architecture attract many tourists from the rest of Italy and abroad. The tourist season peaks in the summer months, although people visit the island all year round. Mount Etna, the beaches, the archaeological sites, and major cities such as Palermo, Catania, Syracuse and Ragusa are the favourite tourist destinations, but the old town of Taormina and the neighbouring seaside resort of Giardini Naxos draw visitors from all over the world, as do the Aeolian Islands, Erice, Terrasini, Castellammare del Golfo, Cefal\u00f9, Agrigento, the Pelagie Islands and Capo d'Orlando. The last features some of the best-preserved temples of the ancient Greek period. Many Mediterranean cruise ships stop in Sicily, and many wine tourists also visit the island.\nSome scenes of several Hollywood and Cinecitt\u00e0 films were shot in Sicily. This increased the attraction of Sicily as a tourist destination.\nUNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nThere are seven UNESCO World Heritage Sites on Sicily. By the order of inscription:\nArchaeological sites.\nBecause many different cultures settled, dominated or invaded the island, Sicily has a huge variety of archaeological sites. Also, some of the most notable and best preserved temples and other structures of the Greek world are located in Sicily. Here is a short list of the major archaeological sites:\nThe excavation and restoration of one of Sicily's best known archaeological sites, the Valley of the Temples in Agrigento, was at the direction of the archaeologist Domenico Antonio Lo Faso Pietrasanta, Fifth Duke of Serradifalco, known in archaeological circles simply as \"Serradifalco\". He also oversaw the restoration of ancient sites at Segesta, Selinunte, Siracusa and Taormina.\nCastles.\nIn Sicily there are hundreds of castles, the most relevant are:\nCoastal towers.\nThe coastal towers in Sicily (\"Torri costiere della Sicilia\") are 218 old watchtowers along the coast. In Sicily, the first coastal towers date back to the late Norman period. From 1360 the threat came from the south, from North Africa to Maghreb, mainly to Barbary pirates and corsairs of Barbary Coast. In 1516, the Turks settled in Algiers, and from 1520, the corsair Hayreddin Barbarossa under the command of Ottoman Empire operated from that harbour.\nMost existing towers were built on architectural designs of the Florentine architect Camillo Camilliani from 1583 to 1584 and involved the coastal periple of Sicily. The typology changed completely in '800, because of the new higher fire volumes of cannon vessels, the towers were built on the type of Martello towers that the British built in the UK and elsewhere in the British Empire. The decline of Mediterranean piracy caused by the Second Barbary War led to a smaller number of coastal towers built during the 19th century.\nHistorical and artistical villages.\nSicily has many small and picturesque villages, 24 of them have been selected by (), a non-profit private association of small Italian towns of strong historical and artistic interest, that was founded on the initiative of the Tourism Council of the National Association of Italian Municipalities. These villages are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCulture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To have seen Italy without having seen Sicily is to not have seen Italy at all, for Sicily is the clue to everything.\u2014\u200a\nSicily has long been associated with the arts; many poets, writers, philosophers, intellectuals, architects and painters have roots on the island. Among the earliest illuminaries there are Gorgias and Empedocles, two highly noted Sicilian-Greek philosophers, while the Syracusan-Greek Epicharmus is held to be the inventor of comedy. One of the most famous intellectuals in Greek antiquity was Archimedes, a Syracuse native who is recognized as one of the greatest mathematicians of all time.\nArt.\nAmong the Sicilian artists who succeeded in bringing to the international stage a language of strong civic engagement while at the same time narrating the history of the island, Mario Bardi, a representative of Existential realism, stands out. His painting, characterized by dramatic tones and a constant attention to labour and social tensions, offers a collective and powerful portrayal of Sicily.\nArchitecture.\nBaglio are traditional living structures in Western Sicily.\nCeramics.\nTerracotta ceramics from the island are well known, the art of ceramics on Sicily goes back to the original ancient peoples named the Sicanians, it was then perfected during the period of Greek colonisation and is still prominent and distinct to this day. Nowadays, Caltagirone is one of the most important centres in Sicily for the artistic production of ceramics and terra-cotta sculptures. Famous painters include Renaissance artist Antonello da Messina, Pietro Novelli, Bruno Caruso, Renato Guttuso and Greek born Giorgio de Chirico who is commonly dubbed the \"father of Surrealist art\" and founder of the metaphysical art movement. The most noted architects are Filippo Juvarra (one of the most important figures of the Italian Baroque) and Ernesto Basile.\nSicilian Baroque.\nThe Sicilian Baroque has a unique architectural identity. Noto, Caltagirone, Catania, Ragusa, Modica, Scicli and particularly Acireale contain some of Italy's best examples of Baroque architecture, carved in the local red sandstone. Noto provides one of the best examples of the Baroque architecture brought to Sicily. The Baroque style in Sicily was largely confined to buildings erected by the church, and palazzi built as private residences for the Sicilian aristocracy. The earliest examples of this style in Sicily lacked individuality and were typically heavy-handed pastiches of buildings seen by Sicilian visitors to Rome, Florence, and Naples. However, even at this early stage, provincial architects had begun to incorporate certain vernacular features of Sicily's older architecture. By the middle of the 18th century, when Sicily's Baroque architecture was noticeably different from that of the mainland, it has a unique freedom of design that is difficult to characterize in words.\nMusic and film.\nPalermo hosts the Teatro Massimo which is the largest opera house in Italy and the third largest in all of Europe. In Catania there is another important opera house, the Teatro Massimo Bellini with 1,200 seats, which is considered one of the best European opera houses for its acoustics. Sicily's composers vary from Vincenzo Bellini, Sigismondo d'India, Giovanni Pacini and Alessandro Scarlatti, to contemporary composers such as Salvatore Sciarrino and Silvio Amato.\nMany films of Italian cinema have been filmed in Sicily, amongst the most noted of which are: Visconti's \"La Terra Trema\" and \"Il Gattopardo\", Pietro Germi's \"Divorzio all'Italiana\" and \"Sedotta e Abbandonata\", Tornatore's \"Cinema Paradiso\".\nThe annual Taormina Film Fest takes places in Taormina.\nLiterature.\nThe Sicilian School was a small community of Sicilian and mainland Italian poets gathered around Frederick II, most of them belonging to his imperial court in Palermo, which was highly influential on Italian literature. Headed by Giacomo da Lentini, they produced more than 300 poems of courtly love between 1230 and 1266, the experiment being continued after Frederick's death by his son, Manfred. Giacomo da Lentini is credited with the invention of the sonnet.\nThese poets drew inspiration from the troubadour poetry of Occitania written in langue d'oc, which applied the feudal code of honor to the relation between a man (acting as the vassal) and a woman (acting as king or superior). This is a reversal of the traditional role of women, traditionally dependent on men, and marks a new awareness in medieval society: the decadence of feudalism with the increasing power of the middle class, causes a shift in the reading public, the epic (traditionally devoted to great military pursuits) gradually giving way to the lyric (generally focused on love). In the lower Middle Ages more and more women were reading books than ever before and poetry tried to adapt to their point of view and their newly acquired role in society.\nThis features Occitan poetry, then very influential in Italy. What distinguishes the Sicilian School from the troubadours, however, is the introduction of a kinder, gentler type of woman than that found in their Occitan models; one who was nearer to Dante's madonnas and Petrarch's Laura, though much less characterised psychologically. The poems of the Sicilians hardly portray real women or situations (Frederick's song cannot be read as autobiographical), but the style and language are remarkable, since the Sicilians (as Dante called them) created the first Italian literary standard by enriching the existing vernacular base, probably inspired by popular love songs, with new words of Latin and Proven\u00e7al origin.\nSome of the most noted figures among modern writers and poets are Luigi Pirandello (Nobel laureate, 1934), Salvatore Quasimodo (Nobel laureate, 1959), Giovanni Verga (the father of the \"Italian Verismo\"), Domenico Tempio, Giovanni Meli, Luigi Capuana, Mario Rapisardi, Federico de Roberto, Leonardo Sciascia, Vitaliano Brancati, Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa, Elio Vittorini, Vincenzo Consolo and Andrea Camilleri (noted for his novels and short stories with the fictional character Inspector Salvo Montalbano as protagonist). On the political side notable philosophers include Gaetano Mosca and Giovanni Gentile who wrote \"The Doctrine of Fascism\".\nLanguages.\nToday, in Sicily, most people are bilingual and speak both Italian and Sicilian, a Romance language distinct from Italian. Some Sicilian words are loanwords from Greek, Catalan, Norman, French, Arabic, Spanish and other languages. Varieties related to Sicilian are also spoken in Calabria and Salento. Nowadays, the use of Sicilian is limited to informal contexts (mostly in family) and in a majority of cases it is replaced by the so-called \"regional Italian of Sicily\", a variety of Italian that is influenced by Sicilian. Sicilian had a significant influence on the Maltese language.\nSicilian was an early influence in the development of the first Italian standard, although its use remained confined to an intellectual elite. This was a literary language in Sicily created under the auspices of Frederick II and his court of notaries, or \"Magna Curia\", which, headed by Giacomo da Lentini, also gave birth to the Sicilian School, widely inspired by troubadour literature. Its linguistic and poetic heritage was later assimilated into the literary Florentine dialect use by Dante Alighieri, the father of modern Italian. Dante, in his , claims that \"In effect, this vernacular seems to deserve higher praise than the others since all the poetry written by Italians can be called Sicilian\". It is in this language that appeared the first sonnet, whose invention is attributed to Giacomo da Lentini himself.\nOther languages are spoken in Sicily. Within the province of Palermo, four towns are home to speakers of Arb\u00ebresh varieties. Arb\u00ebresh is the name given to varieties of Albanian spoken in Italy. In the eastern part of the island, there are Gallo-Italic varieties known as Gallo-Italic of Sicily, which are related to the other Gallo-Italic languages spoken in most of northern Italy and in other isolated pockets of southern Italy. It dates back to migrations from northern Italy during the reign of Roger I, the Norman Grand Count of Sicily, and his successors. Towns inhabited by the new immigrants became known as the \"Lombard communities\" (, ). The settlers, known as the Lombards of Sicily, actually came principally from the Aleramici fiefdoms of southern Montferrat, comprising today south-eastern Piedmont and north-western Liguria, \"Lombardy\" being the name for the whole of northern Italy during the Middle Ages. In addition to a common place of origin, the colonizers brought their Gallo-Italic languages. These languages added to the Gallic influence of the developing Sicilian language (influences which included Norman and Old Occitan) to become the Gallo-Italic of Sicily language family.\nScience.\nCatania has one of the four laboratories of the Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (National Institute for Nuclear Physics) in which there is a cyclotron that uses protons both for nuclear physics experiments and for particle therapy to treat cancer (proton therapy). Noto has one of the largest radio telescopes in Italy that performs geodetic and astronomical observations. There are observatories in Palermo and Catania, managed by the (National Institute for Astrophysics). In the \"Observatory of Palermo\" the astronomer Giuseppe Piazzi discovered the first and the largest asteroid to be identified Ceres (today considered a dwarf planet) on 1 January 1801; Catania has two observatories, one of which is situated on Mount Etna at .\nSyracuse is also an experimental centre for solar technologies through the creation of the project Archimede solar power plant that is the first concentrated solar power plant to use molten salt for heat transfer and storage which is integrated with a combined-cycle gas facility. All the plant is owned and operated by Enel. The touristic town of Erice is also an important science place thanks to the Ettore Majorana Foundation and Centre for Scientific Culture which\nembraces 123 schools from all over the world, covering all branches of science, offering courses, seminars, workshops, and annual meetings. It was founded by the physicist Antonino Zichichi in honour of another scientist of the island, Ettore Majorana known for the Majorana equation and Majorana fermions. Sicily's famous scientists also include Stanislao Cannizzaro (chemist), Giovanni Battista Hodierna and Niccol\u00f2 Cacciatore (astronomers).\nEducation.\nSicily has four universities:\nCuisine.\nSicilian cuisine is the style of cooking on the island of Sicily. It shows traces of all cultures that have existed on the island of Sicily over the last two millennia. Although its cuisine has much in common with Italian cuisine, Sicilian food also has Greek, Spanish, Jewish, Maghrebi, and Arab influences. The Sicilian cook Mithaecus, born during 5th century BC, is credited with having brought knowledge of Sicilian gastronomy to Greece: his cookbook was the first in Greek, therefore he was the earliest cookbook author in any language whose name is known.\nMuch of the island was initially settled by Greek colonists, who left a preference for fish, wheat, olives, grapes, broad beans, chickpeas, lentils, almonds, pistachios, and fresh vegetables.\nArab influences on Sicilian cuisine trace to the Arab domination of Sicily in the 10th and early 11th centuries, and include the use of sugar, citrus, rice, raisins, pine nuts and spices such as saffron, nutmeg, and cinnamon. Norman influences are also found, such as in the fondness for meat dishes. The Jewish community, who lived in the island, also left their mark on the Sicilian cuisine, they were responsible for introducing garlic fried in olive oil into the sauce. Later, the Spanish introduced numerous items from the New World, including cocoa, maize, peppers, zucchini, potatoes, and tomatoes, along with other produce. Much of the island's cuisine encourages the use of fresh vegetables such as eggplant, artichoke, and tomatoes, and fish such as tuna, sea bream, sea bass, cuttlefish, and swordfish. In Trapani in the extreme western corner of the island, North African influences are clear in the use of couscous.\nThe island has a long history of producing a variety of noted cuisines and wines, to the extent that Sicily is sometimes nicknamed \"God's Kitchen\" because of this. Every part of Sicily has its speciality (e.g. Cassata is typical of Palermo although available everywhere in Sicily, as is Granita). The ingredients are typically rich in taste while remaining affordable to the general public. The savoury dishes of Sicily are viewed to be healthy, using fresh vegetables and fruits, such as tomatoes, artichokes, olives (including olive oil), citrus, apricots, aubergines, onions, beans, raisins commonly coupled with seafood, freshly caught from the surrounding coastlines, including tuna, sea bream, sea bass, cuttlefish, swordfish, sardines, and others.\nThe most well-known part of Sicilian cuisine is the rich sweet dishes including ice creams and pastries. Cannoli (singular: \"cannolo\"), a tube-shaped shell of fried pastry dough filled with a sweet filling usually containing ricotta, is strongly associated with Sicily worldwide. Biancomangiare, biscotti ennesi (cookies native to Enna), braccilatte (a Sicilian version of doughnuts), buccellato, ciarduna, pignoli, Biscotti Regina, giurgiulena, frutta martorana, cassata, pignolata, granita, cuccidati (a variety of fig cookie; also known as buccellati) and cucc\u00eca are some notable sweet dishes.\nLike the cuisine of the rest of southern Italy, pasta plays an important part in Sicilian cuisine, as does rice; for example with arancini. As well as using some other cheeses, Sicily has spawned some of its own, using both cow's and sheep's milk, such as pecorino and caciocavallo. Spices used include saffron, nutmeg, clove, pepper, and cinnamon, which were introduced by the Arabs. Parsley is used abundantly in many dishes. Although Sicilian cuisine is commonly associated with sea food, meat dishes, including goose, lamb, goat, rabbit, and turkey, are also found in Sicily. It was the Normans and Swabians who first introduced a fondness for meat dishes to the island. Some varieties of wine are produced from vines that are relatively unique to the island, such as the Nero d'Avola made near the baroque town of Noto.\nSports.\nThe most popular sport in Sicily is football, which came to the fore in the late 19th century under the influence of the English. Some of the oldest football clubs in Italy are from Sicily: the three most successful are Palermo, Catania, and Messina, which have played 29, 17 and 5 seasons in the Serie A respectively. No club from Sicily has ever won Serie A, but football is still deeply embedded in local culture and all over Sicily most towns have a representative team.\nPalermo and Catania have a heated rivalry and compete in the Sicilian derby together. Palermo is the only team in Sicily to have played on the European stage, in the UEFA Cup. In the island, the most noted footballer is Salvatore Schillaci, who won the Golden Boot at the 1990 FIFA World Cup with Italy. Other noted players include Giuseppe Furino, Pietro Anastasi, Francesco Coco, Christian Rigan\u00f2, and Roberto Galia. There have also been some noted managers from the island, such as Carmelo Di Bella and Franco Scoglio.\nAlthough football is the most popular sport in Sicily, the island also has participants in other fields. Amatori Catania have competed in the top Italian national rugby union league called National Championship of Excellence. They have even participated at the European level in the European Challenge Cup. Competing in the basketball variation of Serie A is Orlandina Basket from Capo d'Orlando in the province of Messina, where the sport has a reasonable following. Various other sports that are played to some extent include volleyball, handball, and water polo. Previously, in motorsport, Sicily held the prominent Targa Florio sports car race that took place in the Madonie Mountains, with the start-finish line in Cerda. The event was started in 1906 by Sicilian industrialist and automobile enthusiast Vincenzo Florio, and ran until it was canceled due to safety concerns in 1977.\nFrom 28 September to 9 October 2005 Trapani was the location of Acts 8 and 9 of the Louis Vuitton Cup. This sailing race featured, among other entrants, all boats that took part in the 2007 America's Cup.\nPopular culture and Traditional items.\nEach town and city has its own patron saint, and the feast days are marked by colourful processions through the streets with marching bands and displays of fireworks.\nSicilian religious festivals also include the \"presepe vivente\" (living nativity scene), which takes place at Christmas time. Deftly combining religion and folklore, it is a constructed mock 19th-century Sicilian village, complete with a nativity scene, and has people of all ages dressed in the costumes of the period, some impersonating the Holy Family, and others working as artisans of their particular assigned trade. It is normally concluded on Epiphany, often highlighted by the arrival of the magi on horseback.\nOral tradition plays a large role in Sicilian folklore. Many stories passed down from generation to generation involve a character named \"Giuf\u00e0\". Anecdotes from this character's life preserve Sicilian culture as well as convey moral messages.\nSicilians also enjoy outdoor festivals, held in the local square or \"piazza\" where live music and dancing are performed on stage, and food fairs or \"sagre\" are set up in booths lining the square. These offer various local specialties, as well as typical Sicilian food. Normally these events are concluded with fireworks. A noted \"sagra\" is the \"Sagra del Carciofo\" or \"Artichoke Festival\", which is held annually in Ramacca in April. The most important traditional event in Sicily is the carnival. Famous carnivals are in Acireale, Misterbianco, Regalbuto, Patern\u00f2, Sciacca, Termini Imerese.\nThe Opera dei Pupi (Opera of the Puppets; Sicilian: \u00d2pira d\u00ee pupi) is a marionette theatrical representation of Frankish romantic poems such as the Song of Roland or \"Orlando furioso\" that is one of the characteristic cultural traditions of Sicily. The sides of donkey carts are decorated with intricate, painted scenes; these same tales are enacted in traditional puppet theatres featuring hand-made marionettes of wood. The opera of the puppets and the Sicilian tradition of \"cantastor\u00ee\" (singers of tales) are rooted in the Proven\u00e7al troubadour tradition in Sicily during the reign of Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, in the first half of the 13th century. A great place to see this marionette art is the puppet theatres of Palermo. The Sicilian marionette theatre Opera dei Pupi was proclaimed in 2001 and inscribed in 2008 in the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists.\nToday, there are only a few troupes that maintain the tradition. They often perform for tourists. However, there are no longer the great historical families of marionettists, such as the Greco of Palermo; the Canino of Partinico and Alcamo; Crimi, Trombetta and Napoli of Catania, Pennisi and Macri of Acireale, Profeta of Licata, Gargano and Grasso of Agrigento. One can, however, admire the richest collection of marionettes at the Museo Internazionale delle Marionette Antonio Pasqualino and at the Museo Etnografico Siciliano Giuseppe Pitr\u00e8 in Palermo. Other elaborate marionettes are on display at the Museo Civico Vagliasindi in Randazzo.\nThe Sicilian cart is an ornate, colourful style of a horse- or donkey-drawn cart native to Sicily. Sicilian woodcarver George Petralia states that horses were mostly used in the city and flat plains, while donkeys or mules were more often used in rough terrain for hauling heavy loads. The cart has two wheels and is primarily handmade out of wood with iron components.\nThe Sicilian coppola is a traditional kind of flat cap typically worn by men in Sicily. First used by English nobles during the late 18th century, the \"tascu\" began being used in Sicily in the early 20th century as a driving cap, usually worn by car drivers. The \"coppola\" is usually made in tweed. Today it is widely regarded as a definitive symbol of Sicilian heritage.\nFlag and emblem.\nThe Flag of Sicily, regarded as a regional icon, was first adopted in 1282, after the Sicilian Vespers of Palermo. It is characterised by the presence of the triskeles in the middle, depicting the head of Medusa and three wheat ears representing the extreme fertility of the land of Sicily. In early mythology, when Medusa was slain and beheaded by Perseus, the Medusa head was placed in the centre of Athena's shield.\nPalermo and Corleone were the first two cities to found a confederation against the Angevin rule. The triskeles symbol came to be on the Sicilian flag in 1943 during World War II when Andrea Finocchiaro Aprile led an independence movement, in collaboration with the allies. Their plan was to help Sicily become independent and form a free republic. The colours, likewise introduced in the 1940s, respectively represent the cities of Palermo and Corleone. The separatist behind the movement used a yellow and red flag with the Trinacria in the centre of it. When World War II ended, Sicily was recognized as an autonomous region in the Italian Republic.\nThe flag became the official public flag of the \"Regione Siciliana\" in January 2000, after the passing of an apposite regional law which advocates its use on public buildings, schools and city halls along with the national Italian flag and the European one.\nFamiliar as an ancient symbol of the region, the Triskelion is also featured on Greek coins of Syracuse, such as coins of Agathocles (317\u2013289 BC).The symbol dates back to when Sicily was part of Magna Graecia, the colonial extension of Greece beyond the Aegean. The triskelion was revived, as a neoclassic \u2013 and non-Bourbon \u2013 emblem for the new Napoleonic Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, by Joachim Murat in 1808. In the case of Sicily, the triskelion symbol is said to represent the three capes (headlands or promontories of the island of Sicily, namely: Pelorus (Peloro, Tip of Faro, Messina: North-East); Pachynus (Passero, Syracuse: South); and Lilyb\u00e6um (Lilibeo, Cape Boeo, Marsala: West), which form three points of a triangle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27620", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27620", "title": "Walk (Sheepshead)", "text": ""}
{"id": "27621", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27621", "title": "Leasters (Sheepshead)", "text": ""}
{"id": "27622", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27622", "title": "Schmear (Sheepshead)", "text": ""}
{"id": "27623", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27623", "title": "Schneider (Sheepshead)", "text": ""}
{"id": "27624", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27624", "title": "Long (Sheepshead)", "text": ""}
{"id": "27625", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27625", "title": "Blind (Sheepshead)", "text": ""}
{"id": "27627", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27627", "title": "Variations of Sheepshead", "text": ""}
{"id": "27628", "revid": "50619428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27628", "title": "Stanley Milgram", "text": "American social psychologist\nStanley Milgram (August 15, 1933 \u2013 December 20, 1984) was an American social psychologist known for his controversial experiments on obedience conducted in the 1960s during his professorship at Yale.\nMilgram was influenced by the events of the Holocaust, especially the trial of Adolf Eichmann, in developing the experiment. After earning a PhD in social psychology from Harvard University, he taught at Yale, Harvard, and then for most of his career as a professor at the City University of New York Graduate Center, until his death in 1984.\nMilgram gained notoriety for his obedience experiment conducted in the basement of Linsly-Chittenden Hall at Yale University in 1961, three months after the start of the trial of German Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann in Jerusalem. The experiment found, unexpectedly, that a very high proportion of subjects would fully obey the instructions, albeit reluctantly. Milgram first described his research in a 1963 article in the \"Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology\" and later discussed his findings in greater depth in his 1974 book, \".\"\nHis other small-world experiment, while at the University of Iowa, led researchers to analyze the degree of connectedness, including the six degrees of separation concept. Later in his career, Milgram developed a technique for creating interactive hybrid social agents (called cyranoids), which has since been used to explore aspects of social- and self-perception.\nHe is widely regarded as one of the most important figures in the history of social psychology. A \"Review of General Psychology\" survey, published in 2002, ranked Milgram as the 46th-most-cited psychologist of the 20th century.\nBiography.\nEarly life, education, and family.\nMilgram was born in 1933 in New York City (the Bronx) to Jewish parents. His parents were Adele (born Israel) and Samuel Milgram (1898\u20131953), who had immigrated to the United States from Romania and Hungary respectively during World War I. He was the second of three children. Milgram's immediate and extended family were both affected by the Holocaust. After the war, relatives of his who had survived Nazi concentration camps and bore concentration camp tattoos stayed with the Milgram family in New York for a time.\nHis Bar Mitzvah speech in 1946 was on the subject of the plight of the European Jews and the impact that the events of World War II would have on Jewish people around the world. He said, upon becoming a man under Jewish law: \"As I ... find happiness in joining the ranks of Israel, the knowledge of the tragic suffering of my fellow Jews ... makes this ... an occasion to reflect upon the heritage of my people\u2014which now becomes mine. ... I shall try to understand my people and do my best to share the responsibilities which history has placed upon all of us.\" He later wrote to a friend from childhood: \"I should have been born into the German-speaking Jewish community of Prague in 1922 and died in a gas chamber some 20 years later. How I came to be born in the Bronx Hospital, I'll never quite understand.\"\nMilgram's interest in the Holocaust had its basis in what his biographer, Professor Thomas Blass, referred to as Milgram's \"lifelong identification with the Jewish people\". Author Kirsten Fermaglich wrote that Milgram as an adult had \"a personal conflict as a Jewish man who perceived himself both as an outsider, a victim of the Nazi destruction, and as an insider, as scientist.\" Alexandra stated that Milgram's Jewish identity led to his focus on the Holocaust and his obedience-to-authority research. He shared this as well with Herbert Winer, one of his obedience study subjects, who noted after speaking to Milgram about the experiment that \"Milgram was very Jewish. I was Jewish. We talked about this. There was obviously a motive behind neutral research.\"\nMilgram married his wife, Alexandra, in a ceremony at the Brotherhood Synagogue in Greenwich Village in Manhattan on December 10, 1961, and they had two children, Michele and Marc. At the time of his death, Milgram lived in New Rochelle, New York.\nMilgram's father worked as a baker, providing a modest income for his family until his death in 1953 (upon which Stanley's mother took over the bakery). Milgram attended public elementary school and James Monroe High School in the Bronx. (One of Milgram's classmates at James Monroe High School was Philip Zimbardo, the architect of the Stanford prison experiment. Milgram and Zimbardo also shared an affinity for the popular television program \"Candid Camera\" and an admiration for its creator, Allen Funt.)\nBy the time he was college age, his family had moved to nearby Queens. In 1954, Milgram received his bachelor's degree in political science from Queens College in New York, He also studied at Brooklyn College \"Psychology of Personality\" and \"An Eclectic Approach to Social Psychology\". He applied to a PhD program in social psychology at Harvard University, and was initially rejected due to an insufficient background in psychology (he had not taken any undergraduate courses in psychology at Queens College). He was eventually accepted to Harvard in 1954.\nAcademic career.\nIn 1960, Milgram received a PhD in social psychology from Harvard. He became an assistant professor at Yale in the fall of 1960. He served as an assistant professor in the Department of Social Relations at Harvard from 1963 to 1966 on a three-year contract. The contract was then extended for one additional year, but with the lower rank of a lecturer.\nIn 1967 he accepted an offer to become a tenured full professor at the City University of New York Graduate Center, and he taught at City University until he died in 1984. Milgram had a number of significant influences, including psychologists Solomon Asch and Gordon Allport.\nDeath.\nMilgram died on December 20, 1984, aged 51, of a heart attack in New York City. It was his fifth heart attack. He left behind a widow, Alexandra \"Sasha\" Milgram, a daughter, Michele Sara, and a son, Marc Daniel.\nObedience to authority.\nIn 1963, Milgram submitted the results of his obedience experiments in the article \"Behavioral Study of Obedience\". In the ensuing controversy, the American Psychological Association held up his application for membership for a year because of questions about the ethics of his work, but eventually did grant him full membership. Ten years later, in 1974, Milgram published \"Obedience to Authority\". He won the AAAS Prize for Behavioral Science Research in 1964, mostly for his work on the social aspects of obedience. Inspired in part by the 1961 trial of Adolf Eichmann, his models were later also used to explain the 1968 My Lai massacre (including authority training in the military, depersonalizing the \"enemy\" through racial and cultural differences, etc.). He produced a film depicting his experiments, which are considered classics of social psychology.\nAn article in \"American Psychologist\" sums up Milgram's obedience experiments: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Milgram's basic paradigm, a subject walks into a laboratory believing that they are about to take part in a study of memory and learning. After being assigned the role of a teacher, the subject is asked to teach word associations to a fellow subject (who in reality is a collaborator of the experimenter). The teaching method, however, is unconventional\u2014administering increasingly higher electric shocks to the learner. Once the presumed shock level reaches a certain point, the subject is thrown into a conflict. On the one hand, the strapped learner demands to be set free, he appears to suffer pain, and going all the way may pose a risk to his health. On the other hand, the experimenter, if asked, insists that the experiment is not as unhealthy as it appears to be, and that the teacher must go on. In sharp contrast to the expectations of professionals and laymen alike, some 65% of all subjects continue to administer shocks up to the very highest levels.\nAccording to Milgram, \"the essence of obedience consists in the fact that a person comes to view himself as the instrument for carrying out another person's wishes, and he therefore no longer sees himself as responsible for his actions. Once this critical shift of viewpoint has occurred in the person, all of the essential features of obedience follow.\" Thus, \"the major problem for the subject is to recapture control of his own regnant processes once he has committed them to the purposes of the experimenter.\" Besides this hypothetical agentic state, Milgram proposed the existence of other factors accounting for the subject's obedience: politeness, awkwardness of withdrawal, absorption in the technical aspects of the task, the tendency to attribute impersonal quality to forces that are essentially human, a belief that the experiment served a desirable end, the sequential nature of the action, and anxiety.\nA competing explanation of Milgram's results invokes belief perseverance as the underlying factor. What \"people cannot be counted on is to realize that a seemingly benevolent authority is in fact malevolent, even when they are faced with overwhelming evidence which suggests that this authority is indeed malevolent. Hence, the underlying cause for the subjects' striking conduct could well be conceptual, and not the alleged 'capacity of man to abandon his humanity . . . as he merges his unique personality into larger institutional structures.'\"\nInspired by the horrific events of Nazi Germany, Milgram's obedience experiments have been used to explain a range of social influences on the individual\u2014including how police interrogators can get innocent people to confess to crimes they did not commit. At the same time, these experiments have come under attack. Some critics questioned whether subjects sensed the unreality of the situation. Others questioned the relevance of the laboratory setting to the real world.\nThe most devastating criticisms involved the ethics of the basic experimental design. Professor Milgram, for his part, felt that such misgivings were traceable to the unsavory nature of his results: \"Underlying the criticism of the experiment,\" Milgram wrote, \"is an alternative model of human nature, one holding that when confronted with a choice between hurting others and complying with authority, normal people reject authority.\"\nDaniel Raver looks back:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Even though Milgram's personal interests were diverse, his greatest contribution to psychology came through one set of experiments, but in that set he contributed monumentally. He helped justify a science some dismiss as unimportant, contributed to the understanding of humanity, and, even if by way of attacks against him, contributed to the consideration of the treatment of research participants.\nSmall-world phenomenon.\nThe six degrees of separation concept was examined in Milgram's 1967 \"small-world experiment\", which tracked chains of acquaintances in the United States. In the experiment, Milgram sent several packages to 160 random people living in Omaha, Nebraska, asking them to forward the package to a friend or acquaintance who they thought would bring the package closer to a set final individual, a stockbroker from Boston, Massachusetts. Each \"starter\" received instructions to mail a folder via the U.S. Post Office to a recipient, but with some rules. Starters could only mail the folder to someone they actually knew personally on a first-name basis. When doing so, each starter instructed their recipient to mail the folder ahead to one of the latter's first-name acquaintances with the same instructions, with the hope that their acquaintance might by some chance know the target recipient.\nGiven that starters knew only the target recipient's name and address, they had a seemingly impossible task. Milgram monitored the progress of each chain via returned \"tracer\" postcards, which allowed him to track the progression of each letter. Surprisingly, he found that the very first folder reached the target in just four days and took only two intermediate acquaintances. Overall, Milgram reported that chains varied in length from two to ten intermediate acquaintances, with a median of five intermediate acquaintances (i.e. six degrees of separation) between the original sender and the destination recipient.\nMilgram's \"six degrees\" theory has been severely criticized. He did not follow up on many of the sent packages, and as a result, scientists are unconvinced that there are merely \"six degrees\" of separation. Elizabeth DeVita\u2013Raebu has discussed potential problems with Milgram's experiment.\nIn 2008, a study by Microsoft showed that the average chain of contacts between users of its '.NET Messenger Service' (later called Microsoft Messenger service) was 6.6 people.\nLost letter experiment.\nMilgram developed a technique, called the \"lost letter\" experiment, for measuring how helpful people are to strangers who are not present, and their attitudes toward various groups. Several sealed and stamped letters were planted in public places, addressed to various entities, such as individuals, favorable organizations like medical research institutes, and stigmatized organizations such as \"Friends of the Nazi Party\". Milgram found most of the letters addressed to individuals and favorable organizations were mailed, while most of those addressed to stigmatized organizations were not.\nAnti-social behavior experiment.\nIn 1970\u201371, Milgram conducted experiments which attempted to find a correlation between media consumption (in this case, watching television) and anti-social behavior. The experiment presented the opportunity to steal money, donate to charity, or neither, and tested whether the rate of each choice was influenced by watching similar actions in the ending of a specially crafted episode of the popular series \"Medical Center\".\nCyranoids.\nIn 1977 Milgram began piloting an experimental procedure that aimed to operationalize the mind-body fusion fantasy explored in the Edmond Rostand play \"Cyrano de Bergerac\". In the story, Cyrano supplies Christian with amorous prose so that they may jointly woo Roxane (each being incapable, given their respective physical and linguistic limitations, of doing so on their own).\nMilgram trained speech shadowers to replicate in real-time spontaneous prose supplied by a remote \"source\" by-way-of discreet radio transmission during face-to-face dialogue with na\u00efve \"interactants\". In homage to Cyrano, he referred to the hybrid agent formed by combining the words of one individual with the body of another as a \"cyranoid\". In his studies, interactants repeatedly failed to detect that their interlocutors were merely speech shadowing for third parties, implicitly and explicitly attributing to them communicative autonomy. Milgram referred to this phenomenon as the \"cyranic illusion\". This illusion held even in circumstances involving high disparity between shadower and source, such as when he sourced for child shadowers while being interviewed by panels of teachers (na\u00efve to the deception) tasked with assessing each child's intellectual abilities.\nMilgram hoped that the cyranoid method could evolve into a useful means of interactively exploring phenomena related to social behavior and self-perception (e.g., racial, gender, and age-based stereotyping and behavioral confirmation). Though he continued to develop the methodology through 1984 (the year of his death), he never prepared a formal publication detailing his cyranoid experiments.\nIn 2014, social psychologists at the London School of Economics published the first replications of Milgram's original pilots. Robb Mitchell has explored cyranoids as an experiential learning tool within the classroom (having children shadow for teachers during teaching exercises). Cyranoids have also been used in installation art to explore social experiences whereby people encounter those familiar to them through the bodies of strangers.\nReferences in media.\nIn 1975, CBS presented a made-for-television movie about obedience experiments, \"The Tenth Level\", with William Shatner as Stephen Hunter, a Milgram-like scientist. Milgram was a consultant for the film, though the accuracy of the film has been contested by Milgram himself.\nIn 1980, musician Peter Gabriel wrote a song called \"We Do What We're Told (Milgram's 37)\", referring to the number of subjects who administered the maximum shock in another one of the experiments - 37 out of 40. While it was played live on his 1980 tour, Gabriel did not release a studio version of the song until 1986, on his 5th album \"So\".\nMilgram 18 was reproduced to test the participants in a 2008 television special \"The Heist\". Created by Derren Brown and Andy Nyman for British station Channel 4, the Milgram experiment helped determine which would be given the opportunity to rob a (fake) armoured bank van.\nMilgram is a character in Chip Kidd's novel \"The Learners\" (2008), overseeing his experiments at Yale.\nIn March 2010, French television channel France 2 broadcast \"Jusqu'o\u00f9 va la t\u00e9l\u00e9\", describing the results of a fake game show that they had run 80 times (each time independently, and with a new contestant and audience). The contestants received instructions to administer what they thought would be near fatal electric shocks to another \"contestant\" (really an actor) when they erred on memorized word-associations. The vast majority followed instructions even as the \"victim\" screamed.\nIn 2015, an experimental biopic about Milgram called \"Experimenter\" was released, directed by Michael Almereyda. Peter Sarsgaard stars as Stanley Milgram.\nIn 2020, an online project known as the MILGRAM project portrays how a human would act if faced with the decision of being a prison guard to 10 different murderers. The project is still ongoing and has yet to be confirmed on its roots.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27629", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27629", "title": "Senegal River", "text": "River in West Africa\nSenegal River at Dagana, Senegal\n Average monthly flow (m3/s) at the Dagana hydrometric station over the period 1903\u20131974\nThe Senegal River ( or \"Senegal\" - compound of the\u00a0Serer term \"Seen\" or \"Sene\" or \"Sen\" (from\u00a0Roog Seen, Supreme Deity in\u00a0Serer religion) and \"O Gal\" (meaning \"body of water\")); , , , ) is a river in West Africa; much of its length marks part of the border between Senegal and Mauritania. It has a drainage basin of , a mean flow of , and an annual discharge of . Important tributaries are the Fal\u00e9m\u00e9 River, Karakoro River, and the Gorgol River. The river divides into two branches once it passes Ka\u00e9di. The left branch, called the Dou\u00e9, runs parallel to the main river to the north. After the two branches rejoin a few kilometers downstream of Podor.\nIn 1972 Mali, Mauritania and Senegal founded the Organisation pour la mise en valeur du fleuve S\u00e9n\u00e9gal (OMVS) to manage the river basin. Guinea joined in 2005. As of 2012[ [update]], only very limited use was made of the river for the transportation of goods and passengers. The OMVS have looked at the feasibility of creating a navigable channel in width between the small town of Ambid\u00e9di in Mali and Saint-Louis, a distance of . It would give landlocked Mali a direct route to the Atlantic Ocean.\nThe aquatic fauna in the Senegal River basin is closely associated with that of the Gambia River basin, and the two are usually combined under a single ecoregion known as the Senegal-Gambia Catchments. Only three species of frogs and one fish are endemic to this ecoregion.\nThe river has two large dams along its course, the Manantali Dam in Mali and the Maka-Diama Dam downstream on the Mauritania-Senegal border. In between is the F\u00e9lou Hydroelectric Plant, built in 1927, but replaced in 2014. The construction of the Gouina Hydroelectric Plant upstream of Felou at Gouina Falls began in 2013.\nGeography.\nThe Senegal's headwaters are the Semef\u00e9 (Bakoye) and Bafing rivers which both originate in Guinea; they form a small part of the Guinea\u2013Mali border before coming together at Bafoulab\u00e9 in Mali. From there, the Senegal river flows west and then north through Talari Gorges near Galougo and over the Gouina Falls, then flows more gently past Kayes, where it receives the Kolimbin\u00e9. After flowing together with the Karakoro, it prolongs the former's course along the Mali\u2013Mauritania border for some tens of kilometers till Bakel where it flows together with the Fal\u00e9m\u00e9 River, which also has its source in Guinea, subsequently runs along a small part of the Guinea-Mali frontier to then trace most of the Senegal-Mali border up to Bakel. The Senegal further flows through semi-arid land in the north of Senegal, forming the border with Mauritania and into the Atlantic. In Kaedi it accepts the Gorgol from Mauritania. Flowing through Bogh\u00e9 it reaches Richard Toll where it is joined by the Ferlo coming from inland Senegal's Lac de Guiers. It passes through Rosso and, approaching its mouth, around the Senegalese island on which the city of Saint-Louis is located, to then turn south. It is separated from the Atlantic Ocean by a thin strip of sand called the Langue de Barbarie before it pours into the ocean itself.\nThe river has two large dams along its course, the multi-purpose Manantali Dam in Mali and the Maka-Diama Dam downstream on the Mauritania-Senegal border, near the outlet to the sea, preventing access of salt water upstream. In between Manantali and Maka-Diama is the F\u00e9lou Hydroelectric Plant which was originally completed in 1927 and uses a weir. The power station was replaced in 2014. In 2013, construction of the Gouina Hydroelectric Plant upstream of Felou at Gouina Falls began.\nThe Senegal River has a drainage basin of , a mean flow of , and an annual discharge of . Important tributaries are the Fal\u00e9m\u00e9 River, Karakoro River, and the Gorgol River.\nDownstream of Ka\u00e9di the river divides into two branches. The left branch called the Dou\u00e9 runs parallel to the main river to the north. After the two branches rejoin a few kilometres downstream of Pondor. The long strip of land between the two branches is called the \u00cele \u00e1 Morfil.\nIn 1972 Mali, Mauritania and Senegal founded the Organisation pour la mise en valeur du fleuve S\u00e9n\u00e9gal (OMVS) to manage the river basin. Guinea joined in 2005.\nAt the present time, only very limited use is made of the river for the transport of goods and passengers. The OMVS have looked at the feasibility of creating a navigable channel in width between the small town of Ambid\u00e9di in Mali and Saint-Louis, a distance of . It would give landlocked Mali a direct route to the Atlantic Ocean.\nThe aquatic fauna in the Senegal River basin is closely associated with that of the Gambia River basin, and the two are usually combined under a single ecoregion known as the Senegal-Gambia Catchments. Although the species richness is moderately high, only three species of frogs and one fish are endemic to this ecoregion.\nHistory.\nThe area was previously occupied by the Serer people, who following their religious and ethnic persecution by Islamic forces in the 11th century, resulted in the Serer exodus to the south. \nThe existence of the Senegal River was known to the early Mediterranean civilizations. It or some other river was called \"Bambotus\" by Pliny the Elder (possibly from Phoenician \"behemoth\" for hippopotamus) and \"Nias\" by Claudius Ptolemy. It was visited by Hanno the Carthaginian around 450 BCE at his navigation from Carthage through the pillars of Herakles to Theon Ochema (Mount Cameroon?) in the Gulf of Guinea. There was trade from here to the Mediterranean World, until the destruction of Carthage and its west African trade net in 146 BCE.\nArab sources.\nIn the Early Middle Ages (c. 800 CE), the Senegal River restored contact with the Mediterranean world with the establishment of the Trans-Saharan trade route between Morocco and the Ghana Empire. Arab geographers, like al-Masudi of Baghdad (957), al-Bakri of Spain (1068) and al-Idrisi of Sicily (1154), provided some of the earliest descriptions of the Senegal River. Early Arab geographers believed the upper Senegal River and the upper Niger River were connected to each other, and formed a single river flowing from east to west, which they called the \"Western Nile\". (In fact, some of the headwaters of the Senegal River are near the Niger River in Mali and Guinea.) It was believed to be either a western branch of the Egyptian Nile River or drawn from the same source (variously conjectured to some great internal lakes of the Mountains of the Moon, or Ptolemy's Gir (\u0393\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1) or the Biblical Gihon stream).\nArab geographers Abd al-Hassan Ali ibn Omar (1230), Ibn Said al-Maghribi (1274) and Abulfeda (1331), label the Senegal as the \"Nile of Ghana\" (Nil Gana or Nili Ganah).\nAs the Senegal River reached into the heart of the gold-producing Ghana Empire and later the Mali Empire, Trans-Saharan traders gave the Senegal its famous nickname as the \"River of Gold\". The Trans-Saharan stories about the \"River of Gold\" reached the ears of Sub-Alpine European merchants that frequented the ports of Morocco and the lure proved irresistible. Arab historians report at least three separate Arab maritime expeditions - the last one organized by a group of eight \"mughrarin\" (\"wanderers\") of Lisbon (before 1147) - that tried to sail down the Atlantic coast, possibly in an effort find the mouth of the Senegal.\nCartographic representation.\nDrawing from Classical legend and Arab sources, the \"River of Gold\" found its way into European maps in the 14th century. In the Hereford Mappa Mundi (c. 1300), there is a river labelled \"Nilus Fluvius\" drawn \"parallel\" to the coast of Africa, albeit without communication with Atlantic (it ends in a lake). It depicts some giant ants digging up gold dust from its sands, with the note \"Hic grandes formice auream serican [or servant] arenas\" (\"Here great ants guard gold sands\"). In the mappa mundi made by Pietro Vesconte for the c. 1320 atlas of Marino Sanuto, there is an unnamed river stemming from the African interior and opening in the Atlantic ocean. The 1351 Medici-Laurentian Atlas shows both the Egyptian Nile and the western Nile stemming from the same internal mountain range, with the note that \"Ilic coligitur aureaum\". The portolan chart of Giovanni da Carignano (1310s-20s) has the river with the label, \"iste fluuis exit de nilo ubi multum aurum repperitur\".\nIn the more accurately-drawn portolan charts, starting with the 1367 chart of Domenico and Francesco Pizzigano and carried on in the 1375 Catalan Atlas, the 1413 chart of the Catalan \"converso\" Mecia de Viladestes, etc. the \"River of Gold\" is depicted (if only speculatively), draining into the Atlantic Ocean somewhere just south of Cape Bojador. The legend of Cape Bojador as a terrifying obstacle, the 'cape of no return' to European sailors, emerged around the same time (possibly encouraged by Trans-Saharan traders who did not want to see their land route sidestepped by sea).\nThe river is frequently depicted with a great river island midway, the \"Island of Gold\", first mentioned by al-Masudi, and famously called \"\"Wangara\" by al-Idrisi and \"Palolus\"\" in the 1367 Pizzigani brothers chart. It is conjectured that this riverine \"island\" is in fact just the Bambuk-Bur\u00e9 goldfield district, which is practically surrounded on all sides by rivers - the Senegal river to the north, the Fal\u00e9m\u00e9 River to the west, the Bakhoy to the east and the Niger and Tinkisso to the south.\nThe 1413 portolan chart of gives perhaps the most detailed depiction of the early state of European knowledge about the Senegal River prior to the 1440s. Viladestes labels it \"River of Gold\" (\"\"riu del or\") and locates it a considerable distance south of Cape Bojador (\"buyeter\") - indeed, south of a mysterious \"cap de abach\"\" (possibly Cape Timris). There are extensive notes about the plentifulness of ivory and gold in the area, including a note that reads\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"This river is called Wad al-Nil and also is called the River of Gold, for one can here obtain the gold of Palolus. And know that the greater part of those that live here occupy themselves collecting gold on the shores of the river which, at its mouth, is a league wide, and deep enough for the largest ship of the world.\"\nThe galley of Jaume Ferrer is depicted off the coast on the left, with a quick note about his 1346 voyage. The golden round island at the mouth of the Senegal River is the indication (customary on portolan charts) of river mouth bars or islands - in this case, probably a reference to the Langue de Barbarie or the island of Saint-Louis). The first town, by the mouth of the Senegal, is called \"isingan\" (arguably the etymological source of the term \"Senegal\"). East of that, the Senegal forms a riverine island called \"\"insula de bronch\" (\u00cele \u00e0 Morfil). By its shores lies the city of \"tocoror\" (Takrur). Above it is a depiction of the Almoravid general Abu Bakr ibn Umar (\"Rex Bubecar\") on a camel. Further east, along the river, is the seated emperor (mansa) of Mali (\"Rex Musa Meli\", prob. Mansa Musa), holding a gold nugget. His capital, \"civitat musa meli\"\" is shown on the shores of the river, and the range of the Emperor of Mali's sway is suggested by all the black banners (an inscription notes \"This lord of the blacks is called Musa Melli, Lord of Guinea, the greatest noble lord of these parts for the abundance of the gold which is collected in his lands\". Curiously, there is a defiant gold-bannered town south of the river, labelled \"tegezeut\" (probably the Ta'adjast of al-Idrisi), and might be an inchoate reference to Djenn\u00e9.\nEast of Mali, the river forms a lake or \"Island of Gold\" shown here studded with river-washed gold nuggets (this is what the Pizzigani brothers called the island of \"Palolus\", and most commentators take to indicate the Bambuk-Bur\u00e9 goldfields). It is connected by many streams to the southerly \"mountains of gold\" (labelled \"\"montanies del lor\", the Futa Djallon/Bambouk Mountains and Loma Mountains of Sierra Leone). It is evident the Senegal river morphs east, unbroken, into the Niger River - the cities of \"tenbuch\" (Timbuktu), \"geugeu\" (Gao) and \"mayna\"\" (Niamey? or a misplaced Niani?) are denoted along the same single river. South of them (barely visible) are what seem like the towns of Kukiya (on the eastern shore of the Island of Gold), and east of that, probably Sokoto (called \"Zogde\" in the Catalan Atlas) and much further southeast, probably Kano.\nNorth of the Senegal-Niger are the various oases and stations of the trans-Saharan route (\"\"Tutega\" = Tijigja, \"Anzica\" = In-Zize, \"Tegaza\" = Taghaza, etc.) towards the Mediterranean coast. There is an unlabeled depiction of a black African man on a camel traveling from \"Uuegar\"\" (prob. Hoggar) to the town of \"Organa\" (\"\"ciutat organa\", variously identified as Kanem or Ouargla or possibly even a misplaced depiction of Ghana - long defunct, but, on the other hand, contemporaneous with the depicted Abu Bakr). Nearby sits its Arab-looking king (\"Rex Organa\"\") holding a scimitar. The River of Gold is sourced at a circular island, what seem like the Mountains of the Moon (albeit unlabeled here). From this same source also flows north the White Nile towards Egypt, which forms the frontier between the Muslim \"king of Nubia\" (\"\"Rex Onubia\", his range depicted by crescent-on-gold banners) and the Christian Prester John (\"Preste Joha\"), i.e. the emperor of Ethiopia in the garb of a Christian bishop (coincidentally, this is the first visual depiction of Prester John on a portolan chart).\nUniquely, the Viladestes map shows another river, south of the Senegal, which it labels the \"flumen gelica\" (poss. \"angelica\"), which some have taken to depict the Gambia River. In the 1459 mappa mundi of Fra Mauro, drawn a half-century later, after the Portuguese had already visited the Senegal (albeit still trying to respect Classical sources), shows \"two\" parallel rivers running east to west, both of them sourced from the same great internal lake (which, Fra Mauro asserts, is also the same source as the Egyptian Nile). Mauro names the two parallel rivers differently,calling one \"flumen Mas\" (\"Mas River\"), the other the \"canal dal oro\" (\"Channel of Gold\"), and makes the note that \"Inne larena de questi do fiume se trova oro de paiola\" (\"In the sands of both these rivers gold of 'palola' may be found\"), and nearer to the sea, \"Qui se racoce oro\" (\"Here gold is collected\"), and finally, on the coast, \"Terra de Palmear\" (\"Land of Palms\"). It is notable that Fra Mauro knew of the error of Henry the Navigator's captains about the Daklha inlet, which Mauro carefully labels \"\"Reodor\"\" (\"Rio do Ouro\", Western Sahara), distinctly from the \"Canal del Oro\" (Senegal River).\nEuropean contact.\nChristian Europeans soon began attempting to find the sea route to the mouth of the Senegal. The first known effort may have been by the Genoese brothers Vandino and Ugolino Vivaldi, who set out down the coast in 1291 in a pair of ships (nothing more is heard of them). In 1346, the Majorcan sailor, Jaume Ferrer set out on a galley with the explicit objective of finding the \"River of Gold\" (\"Riu de l'Or\"), where he heard that most people along its shores were engaged in the collection of gold and that the river was wide and deep enough for the largest ships. Nothing more is heard of him either. In 1402, after establishing the first European colony on the Canary Islands, the French Norman adventurers Jean de B\u00e9thencourt and Gadifer de la Salle set about immediately probing the African coast, looking for directions to the mouth of Senegal.\nThe project of finding the Senegal was taken up in the 1420s by the Portuguese Prince Henry the Navigator, who invested heavily to reach it. In 1434, one of Henry's captains, Gil Eanes, finally surpassed Cape Bojador and returned to tell about it. Henry immediately dispatched a follow-up mission in 1435, under Gil Eanes and Afonso Gon\u00e7alves Baldaia. Going down the coast, they turned around the al-Dakhla peninsula in the Western Sahara and emerged into an inlet, which they excitedly believed to be the mouth of the Senegal River. The name they mistakenly bestowed upon the inlet - \"Rio do Ouro\" - is a name it would remain stuck with down to the 20th century.\nRealizing the mistake, Henry kept pressing his captains further down the coast, and in 1445, the Portuguese captain Nuno Trist\u00e3o finally reached the Langue de Barbarie, where he noticed the desert end and the treeline begin, and the population change from 'tawny' Sanhaja Berbers to 'black' Wolof people. Bad weather or lack of supplies prevented Trist\u00e3o from actually reaching the mouth of the Senegal River, but he rushed back to Portugal to report he had finally found the \"Land of the Blacks\" (\"Terra dos Negros\"), and that the \"Nile\" was surely nearby. Shortly after (possibly still within that same year) another captain, Dinis Dias (sometimes given as Dinis Fernandes) was the first known European since antiquity to finally reach the mouth of the Senegal River. However, Dias did not sail upriver, but instead kept sailing down the Grande C\u00f4te to the bay of Dakar.\nThe very next year, in 1446, the Portuguese slave-raiding fleet of Lan\u00e7arote de Freitas arrived at the mouth of the Senegal. One of its captains, Est\u00eav\u00e3o Afonso, volunteered to take a launch to explore upriver for settlements, thus becoming the first European to actually enter the Senegal river. He didn't get very far. Venturing ashore at one point along the river bank, Afonso tried to kidnap two Wolof children from a woodsman's hut. But he ran into their father, who proceeded to chase the Portuguese back to their launch and gave them such a beating that the explorers gave up on going any further, and turned back to the waiting caravels.\nSometime between 1448 and 1455, the Portuguese captain Louren\u00e7o Dias opened regular trade contact on the Senegal River, with the Wolof statelets of Waalo (near the mouth of the Senegal River) and Cayor (a little below that), drumming up a profitable business exchanging Mediterranean goods (notably, horses) for gold and slaves. Chronicler Gomes Eanes de Zurara, writing in 1453, still called it the \"Nile River\", but Alvise Cadamosto, writing in the 1460s, was already calling it the \"Senega\" [\"sic\"], and it is denoted as \"Rio do \u00c7anag\u00e0\" on most subsequent Portuguese maps of the age. Cadamosto relates the legend that both the Senegal and the Egyptian Nile were branches of the Biblical Gihon River that stems from the Garden of Eden and flows through Ethiopia. He also notes that the Senegal was called \"the Niger\" by the ancients - probably a reference to Ptolemy's legendary 'Nigir' (\u039d\u03b9\u03b3\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1) (below the Gir), which would be later identified by Leo Africanus with the modern Niger River. Much the same story is repeated by Marmol in 1573, with the additional note that both the Senegal River and Gambia River were tributaries of the Niger River. However, the contemporary African atlas of Venetian cartographer Livio Sanuto, published in 1588, sketches the Senegal, the Niger and the Gambia as three separate, parallel rivers.\nPortuguese chronicler Jo\u00e3o de Barros (writing in 1552) says the river's original local Wolof name was \"Ovedech\" (which according to one source, comes from \"vi-dekh\", Wolof for \"this river\"). His contemporary, Dami\u00e3o de G\u00f3is (1567) records it as \"Sonedech\" (from \"sunu dekh\", Wolof for \"our river\"). Writing in 1573, the Spanish geographer Luis del Marmol Carvajal asserts that the Portuguese called it \"Zenega\", the 'Zeneges' (Berber Zenaga) called it the \"Zenedec\", the 'Gelofes' (Wolofs) call it \"Dengueh\", the 'Tucorones' (Fula Toucouleur) called it \"Mayo\", the '\u00c7aragoles' (Soninke Sarakole of Ngalam) called it \"Colle\" and further along (again, Marmol assuming Senegal was connected to the Niger), the people of Bagamo' (Bambara of Bamako?) called it \"Zimbala\" (Jimbala?) and the people of Timbuktu called it the \"Y\u00e7a\".\nEtymology.\nThe 16th-century chronicler Jo\u00e3o de Barros asserts the Portuguese renamed it \"Senegal\" because that was the personal name of a local Wolof chieftain who frequently conducted business with the Portuguese traders. But this etymology is doubtful (e.g. the ruler of Senegalese river state of Waalo bears the title 'Brak', and Cadamosto gives the personal name of the Senegal river chieftain as \"Zucholin\"). The confusion may have arisen because Cadamosto says the Portuguese interacted frequently with a certain Wolof chieftain south of the river, somewhere on the Grande C\u00f4te, which he refers to as \"Budomel\". \"Budomel\" is almost certainly a reference to the ruler of Cayor, a combination of his formal title (\"Damel\"), prefixed by the generic Wolof term \"bor\" (\"lord\"). Curiously, Budomel is reminiscent of \"Vedamel\" already used by the Genoese back in the 14th century as an alternative name of the Senegal River. It is almost certain that the Genoese \"Vedamel\" are corruptions from the Arabic, either \"Wad al-mal\" (\"River of Treasure\", i.e. Gold) or, alternatively, \"Wad al-Melli\" (\"River of Mali\") or even, by transcription error, \"Wad al-Nill\" (\"River of Nile\").\nOther etymological theories for \"Senegal\" abound. A popular one, first proposed by Fr. David Boilat (1853), was that \"Senegal\" comes from the Wolof phrase \"sunu gaal\", meaning \"our canoe\" (more precisely, \"our pirogue\"). Bailot speculates the name probably arose as a misunderstanding, that when a Portuguese captain came across some Wolof fishermen and asked them what the name of the river was, they believed he was asking who their fishing boat belonged to, and replied simply \"it is our canoe\" (\"sunu gaal\"). The \"our canoe\" theory has been popularly embraced in modern Senegal for its charm and appeal to national solidarity (\"we're all in one canoe\", etc.).\nMore recent historians suggest the name \"Senegal\" is probably a derivation of \"Azenegue\", the Portuguese term for the Saharan Berber Zenaga people that lived north of it.\nA strong challenge to this theory is that \"Senegal\" is much older, and might derive from \"Sanghana\" (also given as Isenghan, Asengan, Singhanah), a city described by the Arab historian al-Bakri in 1068 as located by the mouth of the Senegal River (straddling both banks) and the capital of a local kingdom. The location \"Senegany\" is depicted in 1351 Genoese map known as the Medici Atlas (Laurentian Gaddiano portolan). This town (\"Isingan\") is fantastically depicted in the 1413 portolan map of Majorcan cartographer . The name itself might be of Berber Zenaga origin, speculatively related to 'Ismegh' ('black slave', analogous to the Arabic 'abd) or 'sagui nughal' ('border'). Some sources claim 'Isinghan' remained the usual Berber term to refer to the Wolof kingdom of Cayor.\nSome Serer people from the south have advanced the claim that the river's name is originally derived from the compound of the Serer term \"Sene\" (from Rog Sene, Supreme Deity in Serer religion) and \"O Gal\" (meaning \"body of water\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27631", "revid": "49329041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27631", "title": "Subset", "text": "Set whose elements all belong to another set\nIn mathematics, a set \"A\" is a subset of a set \"B\" if all elements of \"A\" are also elements of \"B\"; \"B\" is then a superset of \"A\". It is possible for \"A\" and \"B\" to be equal; if they are unequal, then \"A\" is a proper subset of \"B\". The relationship of one set being a subset of another is called inclusion (or sometimes containment). \"A\" is a subset of \"B\" may also be expressed as \"B\" includes (or contains) \"A\" or \"A\" is included (or contained) in \"B\". A \"k\"-subset is a subset with \"k\" elements.\nWhen quantified, formula_1 is represented as formula_2\nOne can prove the statement formula_1 by applying a proof technique known as the element argument:Let sets \"A\" and \"B\" be given. To prove that formula_4\nThe validity of this technique can be seen as a consequence of universal generalization: the technique shows formula_5 for an arbitrarily chosen element \"c\". Universal generalisation then implies formula_6 which is equivalent to formula_4 as stated above.\nDefinition.\nIf \"A\" and \"B\" are sets and every element of \"A\" is also an element of \"B\", then:\n*\"A\" is a subset of \"B\", denoted by formula_1, or equivalently,\n* \"B\" is a superset of \"A\", denoted by formula_9\nIf \"A\" is a subset of \"B\", but \"A\" is not equal to \"B\" (i.e. there exists at least one element of B which is not an element of \"A\"), then: \n*\"A\" is a proper (or strict) subset of \"B\", denoted by formula_10, or equivalently,\n* \"B\" is a proper (or strict) superset of \"A\", denoted by formula_11\nThe empty set, written formula_12 or formula_13 has no elements, and therefore is vacuously a subset of any set \"X\". \n\u2282 and \u2283 symbols.\nSome authors use the symbols formula_29 and formula_30 to indicate subset and superset respectively; that is, with the same meaning as and instead of the symbols formula_31 and formula_32. For example, for these authors, it is true of every set \"A\" that formula_33 (a reflexive relation).\nOther authors prefer to use the symbols formula_29 and formula_30 to indicate proper (also called strict) subset and proper superset respectively; that is, with the same meaning as and instead of the symbols formula_36 and formula_37 This usage makes formula_31 and formula_29 analogous to the inequality symbols formula_40 and formula_41 For example, if formula_42 then \"x\" may or may not equal \"y\", but if formula_43 then \"x\" definitely does not equal \"y\", and \"is\" less than \"y\" (an irreflexive relation). Similarly, using the convention that formula_29 is proper subset, if formula_4 then \"A\" may or may not equal \"B\", but if formula_46 then \"A\" definitely does not equal \"B\".\nExamples of subsets.\nAnother example in an Euler diagram:\nPower set.\nThe set of all subsets of formula_51 is called its power set, and is denoted by formula_52.\nThe inclusion relation formula_31 is a partial order on the set formula_52 defined by formula_55. We may also partially order formula_52 by reverse set inclusion by defining formula_57\nFor the power set formula_58 of a set \"S\", the inclusion partial order is\u2014up to an order isomorphism\u2014the Cartesian product of formula_59 (the cardinality of \"S\") copies of the partial order on formula_60 for which formula_61 This can be illustrated by enumerating formula_62, and associating with each subset formula_63 (i.e., each element of formula_64) the \"k\"-tuple from formula_65 of which the \"i\"th coordinate is 1 if and only if formula_66 is a member of \"T\".\nThe set of all formula_67-subsets of formula_14 is denoted by formula_69, in analogue with the notation for binomial coefficients, which count the number of formula_67-subsets of an formula_71-element set. In set theory, the notation formula_72 is also common, especially when formula_67 is a transfinite cardinal number.\nformula_74\nformula_75\nformula_76\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27632", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27632", "title": "Strict subset", "text": ""}
{"id": "27633", "revid": "7957594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27633", "title": "Stonehenge", "text": "Prehistoric monument in England\nStonehenge is a prehistoric megalithic structure on Salisbury Plain in Wiltshire, England, west of Amesbury. It consists of an outer ring of vertical sarsen standing stones, each around high, wide, and weighing around 25 tons, topped by connecting horizontal lintel stones which are held in place with mortise and tenon joints\u2014a feature unique among contemporary monuments. Inside is a ring of smaller bluestones. Inside, these are free-standing trilithons, two bulkier vertical sarsens joined by a single lintel. The whole monument, now in ruins, is aligned towards the sunrise on the summer solstice and sunset on the winter solstice. The stones are set within earthworks in the middle of the densest complex of Neolithic and Bronze Age monuments in England, including several hundred \"tumuli\" (burial mounds).\nStonehenge was constructed in several phases beginning about 3100 BC and continuing until about 1600\u00a0BC. The famous circle of large sarsen stones was placed between 2600 BC and 2400 BC. The surrounding circular earth bank and ditch, which constitute the earliest phase of the monument, have been dated to about 3100 BC. Radiocarbon dating suggests that the bluestones were given their current positions between 2400 and 2200 BC, although they may have been at the site as early as 3000 BC.\nOne of the most famous landmarks in the United Kingdom, Stonehenge is regarded as a British cultural icon. It has been a legally protected scheduled monument since the Ancient Monuments Protection Act 1882 was passed. The site and its surroundings were added to UNESCO's list of World Heritage Sites in 1986. Stonehenge is owned by the Crown Estate and managed by English Heritage; the surrounding land is owned by the National Trust.\nStonehenge could have been a burial ground from its earliest beginnings. Deposits containing human bone date from as early as 3000 BC, when the ditch and bank were first dug, and continued for at least another 500 years.\nEtymology.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" cites \u00c6lfric's 10th-century glossary, in which \"henge-cliff\" is given the meaning 'precipice', or stone; thus, the \"stanenges\" or \"Stanheng\" \"not far from Salisbury\" recorded by 11th-century writers are \"stones supported in the air\". In 1740, William Stukeley notes: \"Pendulous rocks are now called henges in Yorkshire\u00a0... I doubt not, Stonehenge in Saxon signifies the hanging stones.\" Christopher Chippindale's \"Stonehenge Complete\" gives the derivation of the name \"Stonehenge\" as coming from the Old English words 'stone', and either 'hinge' (because the stone lintels hinge on the upright stones) or 'to hang' or 'gallows' or 'instrument of torture' (though elsewhere in his book, Chippindale cites the 'suspended stones' etymology).\nThe \"henge\" portion has given its name to a class of monuments known as henges. Archaeologists define henges as earthworks consisting of a circular banked enclosure with an internal ditch. As often happens in archaeological terminology, this is a holdover from antiquarian use.\nEarly history.\nMike Parker Pearson, leader of the Stonehenge Riverside Project based around Durrington Walls, noted that Stonehenge appears to have been associated with burial from the earliest period of its existence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Stonehenge was a place of burial from its beginning to its zenith in the mid third [\"sic\"] millennium B.C. The cremation burial dating to Stonehenge's sarsen stones phase is likely just one of many from this later period of the monument's use and demonstrates that it was still very much a domain of the dead.\nStonehenge evolved in several construction phases spanning at least 1500 years. There is evidence of large-scale construction on and around the monument, perhaps extending the landscape's time frame to 6500 years. Dating and understanding the various phases of activity are complicated by disturbance of the natural chalk by periglacial effects and animal burrowing, poor quality early excavation records, and a lack of accurate, scientifically verified dates. The modern phasing most generally agreed to by archaeologists is detailed below. Features mentioned in the text are numbered and shown on the plan, right.\nBefore the monument (from 8000 BC).\nArchaeologists have found four, or possibly five, large Mesolithic postholes (one may have been a natural tree throw), which date to around 8000 BC, beneath the site of the tourist car park that was in use until 2013. These held pine posts around in diameter, which were erected and eventually rotted in place. Three of the posts (and possibly four) were aligned east\u2013west, which may have had ritual significance. Another Mesolithic astronomical site in Britain is Warren Field in Aberdeenshire, which is considered the world's oldest lunisolar calendar, corrected yearly by observing the midwinter solstice. Similar but later sites have been found in Scandinavia. A settlement that may have been contemporaneous with the posts has been found at Blick Mead, a reliable year-round spring from Stonehenge.\nSalisbury Plain was still wooded, but 4,000 years later, during the earlier Neolithic, people built a causewayed enclosure at Robin Hood's Ball and long barrow tombs in the surrounding landscape. In approximately 3500 BC, a Stonehenge Cursus was built north of the site as the first farmers began clearing the trees and developing the area. Other previously overlooked stone or wooden structures and burial mounds may date as far back as 4000 BC; charcoal from the Blick Mead camp has been dated to that time. The University of Buckingham's Humanities Research Institute believes that the community who built Stonehenge lived there for several millennia, making it potentially \"one of the pivotal places in the history of the Stonehenge landscape.\"\nStonehenge 1 (c.\u20093100 BC).\nThe first monument consisted of a circular bank and ditch enclosure made of Late Cretaceous (Santonian Age) Seaford chalk, measuring about in diameter, with a large entrance to the north east and a smaller one to the south. It stood in open grassland on a slightly sloping spot. The builders placed the bones of deer and oxen in the bottom of the ditch, as well as some worked flint tools. The bones were considerably older than the antler picks used to dig the ditch, and the people who buried them had looked after them for some time prior to burial. The ditch was continuous but had been dug in sections, like the ditches of the earlier causewayed enclosures in the area. The chalk dug from the ditch was piled up to form the bank. This first stage is dated to around 3100 BC, after which the ditch began to silt up naturally. Within the outer edge of the enclosed area is a circle of 56 pits, each about in diameter, known as the Aubrey holes after John Aubrey, the 17th-century antiquarian who was thought to have first identified them. These pits and the bank and ditch together are known as the Palisade or Gate Ditch. The pits may have contained standing timbers creating a timber circle, although there is no excavated evidence of them. A recent excavation has suggested that the Aubrey Holes may have originally been used to erect a bluestone circle. If this were the case, it would advance the earliest known stone structure at the monument by some 500 years.\nIn 2013, a team of archaeologists, led by Parker Pearson, excavated more than 50,000 cremated bone fragments, from 63 individuals, buried at Stonehenge. These remains were originally buried individually in the Aubrey holes, but were exhumed in 1920 during an excavation by William Hawley, who considered them unimportant and in 1935 re-buried them together in one hole, Aubrey Hole 7. Physical and chemical analysis of the remains has shown that the cremated were almost equally men and women, and included some children. There is evidence that the underlying chalk beneath the graves was crushed by substantial weight, so the team concluded that the first bluestones brought from Wales were probably used as grave markers. Radiocarbon dating of the remains has put the date of the site 500 years earlier than previously estimated, to around 3000 BC. A 2018 study of the strontium content of the bones found that many of the individuals buried there around the time of construction had probably come from near the source of the bluestone in Wales and had not extensively lived in the area of Stonehenge before death.\nBetween 2017 and 2021, studies by Parker Pearson and his team suggested that the bluestones used in Stonehenge had been moved there following dismantling of a stone circle of identical size to the first known Stonehenge circle () at the Welsh site of Waun Mawn in the Preseli Hills. It had contained bluestones, one of which showed evidence of having been reused in Stonehenge. The stone was identified by its unusual pentagonal shape and by luminescence soil dating from the filled-in sockets which showed the circle had been erected around 3400\u20133200 BC, and dismantled around 300\u2013400 years later, consistent with the dates attributed to the creation of Stonehenge. The cessation of human activity in that area at the same time suggested migration as a reason, but it is believed that other stones may have come from other sources.\nStonehenge 2 (c.\u20092900 BC).\nThe second phase of construction occurred approximately between 2900 and 2600 BC. The number of postholes dating to the early third millennium BC suggests that some form of timber structure was built within the enclosure during this period. Further standing timbers were placed at the northeast entrance, and a parallel alignment of posts ran inwards from the southern entrance. The postholes are smaller than the Aubrey Holes, being only around in diameter, and are much less regularly spaced. The bank was purposely reduced in height, and the ditch continued to silt up.\nAt least twenty-five of the Aubrey Holes are known to have contained later, intrusive, cremation burials dating to the two centuries after the monument's inception. It seems that whatever the holes' original function was, it became a funerary one during Phase two. Thirty further cremations were placed in the enclosure's ditch and at other points within the monument, mostly in the eastern half. Stonehenge is therefore interpreted as functioning as an enclosed cremation cemetery at this time, the earliest known cremation cemetery in the British Isles. Fragments of unburnt human bone have also been found in the ditch-fill. Dating evidence is provided by the late Neolithic grooved ware pottery found in association with the features of this phase.\nStonehenge 3 I (c.\u20092600 BC).\nArchaeological excavation has indicated that around 2600 BC, the builders abandoned timber in favour of stone and dug two concentric arrays of holes (the Q and R Holes) in the centre of the site. These stone sockets are only partly known (hence, on present evidence, are sometimes described as forming 'crescents'); however, they could be the remains of a double ring. Again, there is little firm dating evidence for this phase. The holes held up to 80 standing stones (shown blue on the plan), only 43 of which can be traced today. It is generally accepted that the bluestones (some of which are made of dolerite, an igneous rock), were transported by the builders from the Preseli Hills, away in modern-day Pembrokeshire in Wales. Another theory is that they were brought much nearer to the site as glacial erratics by the Irish Sea Glacier although there is no evidence of glacial deposition within southern central England. A 2019 publication announced that evidence of Megalithic quarrying had been found at quarries in Wales identified as a source of Stonehenge's bluestone, indicating that the bluestone was quarried by human agency and not transported by glacial action.\nThe long-distance human transport theory was bolstered in 2011 by the discovery of a megalithic bluestone quarry at Craig Rhos-y-felin, near Crymych in Pembrokeshire, which is the most likely source of some of the stones. Other standing stones may well have been small sarsens (sandstone), used later as lintels. The stones, which weighed about two tons, could have been moved by lifting and carrying them on rows of poles and rectangular frameworks of poles, as recorded in China, Japan, and India. It is not known whether the stones were taken directly from their quarries to Salisbury Plain or were the result of the removal of a venerated stone circle from Preseli to Salisbury Plain to \"merge two sacred centres into one, to unify two politically separate regions, or to legitimise the ancestral identity of migrants moving from one region to another\". Evidence of a stone circle at Waun Mawn near Preseli, which could have contained some or all of the stones in Stonehenge, has been found, including a hole from a rock that matches the unusual cross-section of a Stonehenge bluestone \"like a key in a lock\". Each monolith measures around in height, between wide and around thick.\nWhat was to become known as the Altar Stone was believed to have been derived from the Senni Beds, perhaps from east of the Preseli Hills in the Brecon Beacons. Work announced in 2024 by a team from Curtin University, who analysed the chemical composition of fragments of rock that had fallen off the Altar Stone, and dated them, found that the best match was with rocks in the Orcadian Basin (which includes Caithness, Orkney, and the Moray Firth regions of north-eastern Scotland). The researchers stated that this implies the stone was transported some , and thus demonstrates cultural links between Southern England and Northern Scotland.\nThe north-eastern entrance was widened at this time, so that it precisely matched the direction of the midsummer sunrise and midwinter sunset for the period. This phase of the monument was abandoned unfinished; however, the small standing stones were apparently removed, and the Q and R holes were purposefully backfilled.\nThe Heel Stone, a Tertiary sandstone, may also have been erected outside the north-eastern entrance during this period. It cannot be accurately dated and may have been installed at any time during phase 3. At first, it was accompanied by a second stone, which is no longer visible. Two, or possibly three, large portal stones were set up just inside the north-eastern entrance, of which only one, the fallen Slaughter Stone, long, now remains. Other features, loosely dated to phase 3, include the four Station Stones, two of which stood atop mounds. The mounds are known as \"barrows\" although they do not contain burials. Stonehenge Avenue, a parallel pair of ditches and banks leading to the River Avon, was also added.\nStonehenge 3 II (2600 BC to 2400 BC).\nDuring the next major phase of activity, 30 enormous Oligocene\u2013Miocene sarsen stones (shown grey on the plan) were brought to the site. They came from a quarry around north of Stonehenge, in West Woods, Wiltshire. The stones were dressed and fashioned with mortise and tenon joints before 30\u00a0sarsens were erected in a circle of standing stones approximately in diameter, with a ring of 30\u00a0lintel stones resting on top. The lintels were fitted to one another using tongue and groove joints \u2013 a woodworking method, again. Each standing stone was around high, wide, and deep, weighing around 26\u00a0tons. Each had clearly been worked with the final visual effect in mind: The orthostats widen slightly towards the top to keep their perspective constant when viewed from the ground, while the lintel stones curve slightly to continue the circular appearance of the earlier monument.\nThe inward-facing surfaces of the stones are smoother and more finely worked than the outer surfaces. The average thickness of the stones is and the average distance between them is . A total of 75 stones would have been needed to complete the circle (60 stones) and the trilithon horseshoe (15 stones). It was thought the ring might have been left incomplete, but an exceptionally dry summer in 2013 revealed patches of parched grass which may correspond to the location of missing sarsens. The lintel stones are each around long, wide and thick. The tops of the lintels are above the ground.\nWithin this circle stood five trilithons of dressed sarsen stone arranged in a horseshoe shape across, with its open end facing northeast. These huge stones, ten uprights and five lintels, weigh up to 50 tons each. They were linked using complex jointing. They are arranged symmetrically. The smallest pair of trilithons were around tall, the next pair a little higher, and the largest, single trilithon in the south-west corner would have been tall. Only one upright from the Great Trilithon still stands, of which is visible, and a further is below ground. The images of a 'dagger' and 14 'axeheads' have been carved on stone 53, one of the sarsens; further axehead carvings have been seen on the outer faces of stones 3, 4, and 5. The carvings are difficult to date but are morphologically similar to late Bronze Age weapons. Early 21st-century laser scanning of the carvings supports this interpretation. The pair of trilithons in the north-east is the smallest, measuring around in height; the largest, which is in the south-west of the horseshoe, is almost tall.\nThis ambitious phase has been radiocarbon dated to between 2600 and 2400 BC, slightly earlier than the Stonehenge Archer, discovered in the outer ditch of the monument in 1978, and the two sets of burials, known as the Amesbury Archer and the Boscombe Bowmen, discovered to the west. Analysis of animal teeth found away at Durrington Walls, thought by Parker Pearson to be the 'builders camp', suggests that, during some period between 2600 and 2400 BC, as many as 4,000 people gathered at the site for the mid-winter and mid-summer festivals; the evidence showed that the animals had been slaughtered around nine months or 15 months after their spring birth. Strontium isotope analysis of the animal teeth showed that some had been brought from as far afield as the Scottish Highlands for the celebrations.\nAt about the same time, a large timber circle and a second avenue were constructed at Durrington Walls overlooking the River Avon. The timber circle was oriented towards the rising Sun on the midwinter solstice, opposing the solar alignments at Stonehenge. The avenue was aligned with the setting Sun on the summer solstice and led from the river to the timber circle. Evidence of huge fires on the banks of the Avon between the two avenues also suggests that both circles were linked. They were perhaps used as a procession route on the longest and shortest days of the year. Parker Pearson speculates that the wooden circle at Durrington Walls was the centre of a 'land of the living', whilst the stone circle represented a 'land of the dead', with the Avon serving as a journey between the two.\nStonehenge 3 III (2400 BC to 2280 BC).\nLater in the Bronze Age, although the exact details of activities during this period are still unclear, the bluestones appear to have been re-erected. They were placed within the outer sarsen circle and may have been trimmed in some way. Like the sarsens, a few have timber-working-style cuts, suggesting that during this phase they may have been linked to lintels and part of a larger structure.\nStonehenge 3 IV (2280 BC to 1930 BC).\nThis phase saw further rearrangement of the bluestones. They were arranged in a circle between the two rings of sarsens and in an oval at the centre of the inner ring. Some archaeologists argue that some of these bluestones were from a second group brought from Wales. All the stones formed well-spaced uprights without any of the linking lintels inferred in Stonehenge 3 III. The Altar Stone may have been moved within the oval at this time and re-erected vertically. Although this would seem the most impressive phase of work, Stonehenge 3 IV was rather shabbily built compared to its immediate predecessors, as the newly reinstalled bluestones were not well-founded and began to fall over. However, only minor changes were made after this phase.\nStonehenge 3 V (1930 BC to 1600 BC).\nSoon afterwards, the northeastern section of the Phase 3 IV bluestone circle was removed, creating a horseshoe-shaped setting (the Bluestone Horseshoe) which mirrored the shape of the central sarsen Trilithons. This phase is contemporary with the Seahenge site in Norfolk.\nAfter the monument (1600 BC on).\nThe Y and Z Holes are the last known construction at Stonehenge, built about 1600 BC, and the last usage of them was probably during the Iron Age. Roman coins and medieval artefacts have been found in or around the monument, but it is unknown whether it was in continuous use throughout British prehistory and beyond, or exactly how it would have been used. Notable is the massive Iron Age hillfort known as Vespasian's Camp (despite its name, not a Roman site), built alongside the Avenue near the Avon. A decapitated seventh-century Saxon man was excavated from Stonehenge in 1923. The site was known to scholars during the Middle Ages and since then it has been studied and adopted by numerous groups.\nFunction and construction.\nStonehenge was produced by a culture that left no written records. Many aspects of Stonehenge, such as how it was built and for what purposes it was used, remain subject to debate. A number of myths surround the stones. The site, specifically the great trilithon, the encompassing horseshoe arrangement of the five central trilithons, the heel stone, and the embanked avenue, are aligned to the sunset of the winter solstice and the opposing sunrise of the summer solstice. A natural landform at the monument's location followed this line, and may have inspired its construction. It has been conjectured that the design of the monument included a celestial observatory function, which might allow prediction of eclipse, solstice, equinox and other celestial events important to the builders' belief system. The excavated remains of culled animal bones suggest that people may have gathered at the site for the winter rather than the summer.\nThere is little or no direct evidence revealing the construction techniques used by the Stonehenge builders. Over the years, various authors have suggested that supernatural or anachronistic methods were used, often asserting that the stones could not have been moved otherwise due to their massive size. However, conventional techniques, using Neolithic technology as basic as shear legs, have been demonstrably effective at moving and placing stones of a similar size. The most common theory of how prehistoric people moved megaliths has them creating a track of logs along which the large stones were rolled. Another megalith transport theory involves the use of a type of sleigh running on a track greased with animal fat. An experiment with a sleigh carrying a 40-ton slab of stone was successfully conducted near Stonehenge in 1995; a team of more than 100 workers managed to push and pull the slab along the journey from the Marlborough Downs.\nProposed functions for the site include usage as an astronomical observatory or as a religious site. In the 1960s, Gerald Hawkins described in detail how the site was apparently set out to observe the Sun and Moon over a recurring 56-year cycle. More recently, two major new theories have been proposed. Geoffrey Wainwright, president of the Society of Antiquaries of London, and Timothy Darvill, of Bournemouth University, have suggested that Stonehenge was a place of healing\u2014the primeval equivalent of Lourdes. They argue that this accounts for the high number of burials in the area and for the evidence of trauma deformity in some of the graves. However, they do concede that the site was probably multifunctional and used for ancestor worship as well. Isotope analysis indicates that some of the buried individuals were from other regions. A teenage boy buried approximately 1550 BC was raised near the Mediterranean Sea; a metal worker from 2300 BC dubbed the \"Amesbury Archer\" grew up near the Alpine foothills of Germany; and the \"Boscombe Bowmen\" probably arrived from Wales or Brittany, France.\nOn the other hand, Mike Parker Pearson of Sheffield University has suggested that Stonehenge was part of a ritual landscape and was joined to Durrington Walls by their corresponding avenues and the River Avon. He suggests that the area around Durrington Walls henge was a place of the living, whilst Stonehenge was a domain of the dead. A journey along the Avon to reach Stonehenge was part of a ritual passage from life to death, to celebrate past ancestors and the recently deceased. Both explanations were first mooted in the twelfth century by Geoffrey of Monmouth, who extolled the curative properties of the stones and was also the first to advance the idea that Stonehenge was constructed as a funerary monument. \nThere are other hypotheses and theories. According to a team of British researchers led by Mike Parker Pearson of the University of Sheffield, Stonehenge may have been built as a symbol of \"peace and unity\", indicated in part by the fact that at the time of its construction, Britain's Neolithic people were experiencing a period of cultural unification.\nStonehenge megaliths include smaller bluestones and larger sarsens (a term for silicified sandstone boulders found in the chalk downs of southern England). The bluestones are composed of dolerite, tuff, rhyolite, or sandstone. The igneous bluestones appear to have originated in the Preseli hills of southwestern Wales, about from the monument. The sandstone Altar Stone may have originated in east Wales. Analysis published in 2020 indicates the sarsens came from West Woods, about from the monument.\nResearchers from the Royal College of Art in London have discovered that the monument's igneous bluestones possess \"unusual acoustic properties\": when struck, they produce a \"loud clanging noise\". Rocks with such acoustic properties are frequent in the Carn Melyn ridge of Presili; the Presili village of Maenclochog (Welsh for bell or ringing stones) used local bluestones as church bells until the 18th century. According to the team, these acoustic properties could explain why certain bluestones were hauled such a long distance, a major technical accomplishment at the time. In certain ancient cultures, rocks that ring out, known as lithophonic rocks, were believed to possess mystical or healing powers, and Stonehenge has a history of association with rituals. The presence of these \"ringing rocks\" seems to support the hypothesis that Stonehenge was a \"place for healing\" put forward by Darvill, who consulted with the researchers.\nStonehenge-builders and DNA studies.\nThere is evidence to suggest that despite the introduction of farming in the British Isles, the practice of cereal cultivation fell out of favour between 3300 and 1500 BC, with much of the population following a pastoralist subsistence pattern focused on hazelnut gathering and pig and cattle rearing. A majority of Stonehenge's major phases of construction occurred during this period, during which evidence of large-scale agriculture is equivocal. Similar associations between non-cereal farming subsistence patterns and monumental construction are seen at Poverty Point and Sannai Maruyama.\nStonehenge I and II.\nResearchers studying DNA extracted from Neolithic human remains across Britain determined that the people who built Stonehenge I and II were closely related to Iberian and Central European Early and Middle Neolithic populations, modelled as having about 75% ancestry from Early European Farmers who came from the Eastern Mediterranean, travelling west from there, and 25% ancestry coming from Western Hunter-Gatherers from western Europe. These farmers moved to Iberia before heading north, reaching Britain in about 4,000 BC. Most of the ancestry of British Neolithic farmers came from the people who followed this route, with a minor contribution from groups who followed the Danube into Central and Western Europe. Their agricultural techniques seem to have come originally from Anatolia, and their mixture appears to have happened primarily on the continent before the Neolithic farmers migrated to Britain.\nAt the time of their arrival, Britain was inhabited by hunter-gatherer groups, the first inhabitants of the island after the last Ice Age ended about 11,700 years ago. The farmers replaced most of the hunter-gatherer population in the British Isles without mixing much with them.\nDespite their mostly Aegean ancestry, the paternal (Y-DNA) lineages of Neolithic farmers in Britain were almost exclusively of Western Hunter-Gatherer origin. This was also the case among other megalithic-building populations in northwest Europe, meaning that these populations were descended from a mixture of hunter-gatherer males and farmer females. The dominance of Western Hunter-Gatherer male lineages in Britain and northwest Europe is also reflected in a general 'resurgence' of hunter-gatherer ancestry, predominantly from males, across western and central Europe in the Middle Neolithic.\nStonehenge III (megalithic structure).\nAt the time the megalithic Stonehenge 3 II was constructed (2600\u20132400 BC) by Neolithic people, the Bell Beaker people arrived, around 2,500 BC, migrating from mainland Europe. They lived side by side for ca. 500 years, with the Bell Beaker people probably incorporating the henge-structures into their belief-system.\nThe earliest British individuals associated with the Beaker culture, most likely speakers of Indo-European languages whose ancestors migrated from the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe, were similar to those from the Rhine. Eventually, there was again a large population replacement in Britain. More than 90% of Britain's Neolithic gene pool was replaced with the arrival of the Bell Beaker people, who had approximately 50% Western Steppe Herders ancestry.\nRoman era.\nIn 1979, Richard J. C. Atkinson applied newly developed stratigraphical techniques to dispose of the theory that the Roman army had attempted to demolish the monument as a centre for druidic resistance: the stone fragments he previously thought were incorporated into the fourth- or fifth-century AD stratigraphy he now assigned to the original builders dressing the stones, or to quarrying of material in the Middle Bronze Age. An excavation in 2008, together with an analysis of earlier excavations, suggested that during the Roman era the monument was the site of substantial activity, beyond mere casual occupation. Coins from the late fourth century, a large quantity of Roman-era pottery, and pit-buried bones of food animals indicated that the location had importance as a ritual or ceremonial site. The end of a square-cut trench, incorporating a bluestone slab and containing a Roman coin, was interpreted as a grave.\nMedieval period.\nA decapitated skeleton of a male, aged 28\u201332, was excavated by William Hawley in 1926. It was found within the stone circles, close to Y-Hole\u00a09 on the central axis. Radiocarbon analysis allocates a date of between 600\u2013690 AD to the find. The grave was shallow, and it had been necessary to cram the body into the space, breaking most of the ribs. The head was placed on top. Archaeologist Mike Pitts interprets this sacrificial or judicial execution as evidence that Stonehenge retained significance in the Middle Ages. He identifies the post holes found near the grave as suggestive of a gallows, thus affording a link with the contemporary name of \"henge\"\u2014hanging. Aubrey Burl, however, contends that the name refers to the shape of the trilithons, which resemble a gibbet for multiple hangings.\nModern history.\nArchaeological research and restoration.\n1600\u20131900.\nThroughout recorded history, Stonehenge and its surrounding monuments have attracted attention from antiquarians and archaeologists. John Aubrey was one of the first to examine the site with a scientific eye in 1666, and, in his plan of the monument, he recorded the pits that now bear his name, the Aubrey holes. William Stukeley continued Aubrey's work in the early eighteenth century, but also took an interest in the surrounding monuments, identifying (somewhat incorrectly) the Cursus and the Avenue. He also began excavating many of the barrows in the area, and it was his interpretation of the landscape that linked it to the Druids. Stukeley was so fascinated with Druids that he originally named Disc Barrows Druids' Barrows.\nThe most accurate early plan of Stonehenge was that made by Bath architect John Wood, the Elder, in 1740. His original annotated survey has now been computer-redrawn and published. Importantly, Wood's plan was made before the collapse of the southwest trilithon, which fell in 1797 and was restored in 1958.\nWilliam Cunnington was the next to formally assess the area in the early nineteenth century. He excavated some 24 barrows before digging in and around the stones, discovering charred wood, animal bones, pottery, and urns. He also identified the hole in which the Slaughter Stone once stood. Richard Colt Hoare supported Cunnington's work and excavated some 379 barrows on Salisbury Plain, including some 200 in the area around the Stones, some excavated in conjunction with William Coxe. To alert future diggers to their work, they were careful to leave initialled metal tokens in each barrow they opened. Cunnington's finds are displayed at the Wiltshire Museum. In 1877, Charles Darwin dabbled in archaeology at the stones, experimenting with the rate at which remains sink into the earth, for his book \"The Formation of Vegetable Mould Through the Action of Worms\".\nStone 22 fell during a fierce storm on 31 December 1900.\n1901\u20132000.\nWilliam Gowland oversaw the first major restoration of the monument in 1901, which involved straightening and concrete-setting of sarsen stone number 56, which was in danger of falling. In straightening the stone, he moved it about half a metre from its original position. Gowland also took the opportunity to further excavate the monument in what was the most scientific dig to date, revealing more about the erection of the stones than the previous 100 years of work had done. During the 1920 restoration, William Hawley, who had excavated nearby Old Sarum, excavated the base of six stones and the outer ditch. He also located a bottle of port wine in the Slaughter Stone socket left by Cunnington, helped to rediscover Aubrey's pits inside the bank, and located the concentric circular holes outside the Sarsen Circle called the Y and Z Holes.\nRichard J. C. Atkinson, Stuart Piggott and J. F. S. Stone re-excavated much of Hawley's work in the 1940s and 1950s, and discovered the carved axes and daggers on the sarsen stones. Atkinson's work was instrumental in advancing understanding of the monument's three major phases of construction.\nIn 1958, the stones were restored again, when three of the standing sarsens were re-erected and set in concrete bases. The last restoration was carried out in 1963 after stone 23 of the Sarsen Circle fell over. It was again re-erected, and the opportunity was taken to concrete three more stones. Later archaeologists, including Christopher Chippindale of the Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of Cambridge, and Brian Edwards of the University of the West of England, campaigned to give the public more knowledge of the various restorations and, in 2004, English Heritage included pictures of the work in progress in its book \"Stonehenge: A History in Photographs\".\nIn 1966 and 1967, prior to the construction of a new car park at the site, the area of land immediately northwest of the stones was excavated by Faith and Lance Vatcher. They discovered the Mesolithic postholes dating from between 7000 and 8000 BC, as well as a length of a palisade ditch\u00a0\u2014a V-cut ditch into which timber posts had been inserted that remained there until they rotted away. Subsequent aerial archaeology suggests that this ditch runs from the west to the north of Stonehenge, near the avenue.\nExcavations were once again carried out in 1978 by Atkinson and John Evans, during which they discovered the remains of the Stonehenge Archer in the outer ditch. In 1979, rescue archaeology was needed alongside the Heel Stone after a cable-laying ditch was mistakenly dug on the roadside, revealing a new stone hole next to the Heel Stone.\nIn the early 1980s, Julian C. Richards led the Stonehenge Environs Project, a detailed study of the surrounding landscape. The project successfully dated features such as the Lesser Cursus, Coneybury Henge, and several other smaller features.\nIn 1993, the way that Stonehenge was presented to the public was called 'a national disgrace' by the House of Commons Public Accounts Committee. Part of English Heritage's response to this criticism was to commission research to collate and summarize all the archaeological work conducted at the monument to date. This two-year research project culminated in the publication in 1995 of the monograph \"Stonehenge in its landscape\", the first to present the complex stratigraphy and the finds recovered from the site. It presented a rephasing of the monument.\n21st century.\nMore recent excavations include a series of digs conducted between 2003 and 2008 known as the Stonehenge Riverside Project, led by Mike Parker Pearson. The project mainly investigated other monuments in the landscape and their relationship to the stones\u2014notably, Durrington Walls, where another \"Avenue\" leading to the River Avon was discovered. The point where Stonehenge Avenue meets the river was also excavated, revealing a previously unknown circular area that likely housed four additional stones, most likely serving as a marker for the avenue's starting point.\nIn April 2008, Tim Darvill of the University of Bournemouth and Geoff Wainwright of the Society of Antiquaries began another dig inside the stone circle to retrieve datable fragments of the original bluestone pillars. They were able to date the erection of some bluestones to 2300 BC, although this may not reflect the earliest erection of stones at Stonehenge. They also discovered organic material dating to 7000 BC, which, along with the Mesolithic postholes, supports the site having been in use at least 4,000 years before Stonehenge was started. In August and September 2008, as part of the Riverside Project, Julian C. Richards and Mike Pitts excavated Aubrey Hole 7, removing the cremated remains from several Aubrey Holes that had been excavated by Hawley in the 1920s, and re-interred in 1935. A licence for the removal of human remains at Stonehenge had been granted by the Ministry of Justice in May 2008, in accordance with the \"Statement on burial law and archaeology\" issued in May 2008. One of the conditions of the licence was that the remains should be reinterred within two years and that, in the intervening period, they should be kept safely, privately, and decently.\nA new landscape investigation was conducted in April 2009. A shallow mound, rising to about , was identified between stones 54 (inner circle) and 10 (outer circle), clearly separated from the natural slope. It has not been dated, but speculation that it represents careless backfilling following earlier excavations seems disproved by its representation in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century illustrations. There is some evidence that, as an uncommon geological feature, it could have been deliberately incorporated into the monument at the outset. A circular, shallow bank, little more than high, was found between the Y and Z hole circles, with a further bank lying inside the \"Z\" circle. These are interpreted as the spread of spoil from the original Y and Z holes, or, more speculatively, as hedge banks planted deliberately to screen activities within.\nIn 2010, the Stonehenge Hidden Landscape Project discovered a \"henge-like\" monument less than away from the main site. This new hengiform monument was subsequently revealed to be located \"at the site of Amesbury 50\", a round barrow in the Cursus Barrows group.\nIn November 2011, archaeologists from the University of Birmingham announced the discovery of evidence of two huge pits positioned within the Stonehenge Cursus pathway, aligned in celestial position towards midsummer sunrise and sunset when viewed from the Heel Stone. The discovery was made as part of the Stonehenge Hidden Landscape Project which began in the summer of 2010. The project uses a non-invasive geophysical imaging technique to reveal and visually recreate the landscape. According to team leader Vince Gaffney, this discovery may provide a direct link between the rituals and astronomical events to activities within the Cursus at Stonehenge.\nIn December 2011, geologists from the University of Leicester and the National Museum of Wales announced the discovery of the source of some of the rhyolite fragments found in the Stonehenge debitage. These fragments do not seem to match any of the standing stones or bluestone stumps. The researchers have identified the source as a long rock outcrop called Craig Rhos-y-felin (), near Pont Saeson in north Pembrokeshire, located from Stonehenge.\nIn 2014, the University of Birmingham announced findings including evidence of adjacent stone and wooden structures and burial mounds near Durrington, Wiltshire, overlooked previously, that may date as far back as 4000 BC. An area extending to was studied to a depth of three metres with ground-penetrating radar equipment. As many as 17 new monuments revealed nearby may be Late Neolithic monuments resembling Stonehenge. The interpretation suggests a complex of numerous related monuments. Also included in the discovery is that the cursus track is terminated by two wide, extremely deep pits, whose purpose is still a mystery.\nOrigin of sarsens, bluestones and other modern developments.\nIn July 2020, a study led by David Nash of the University of Brighton concluded that the large sarsen stones were \"a direct chemical match\" to those found at West Woods near Marlborough, Wiltshire, some 15 miles (25 km) north of Stonehenge. A core sample, originally extracted in 1958, had recently been returned. First, the fifty-two sarsens were analysed using methods including x-ray fluorescence spectrometry to determine their chemical composition, which revealed they were mostly similar. The core was then destructively analysed and compared with stone samples from various locations in southern Britain. Fifty of the fifty-two megaliths were found to match sarsens in West Woods, thereby identifying the probable origin of the stones.\nDuring 2017 and 2018, excavations by professor Parker Pearson's team at Waun Mawn, a large stone circle site in the Preseli Hills, suggested that the site had originally housed a diameter stone circle of the same size as Stonehenge's original bluestone circle, also orientated towards the midsummer solstice.\nThe circle at Waun Mawn also contained a hole from one stone which had a distinctive pentagonal shape, very closely matching the one pentagonal stone at Stonehenge (stonehole 91 at Waun Mawn and stone 62 at Stonehenge). Soil dating of the sediments within the revealed stone holes, via optically stimulated luminescence (OSL), suggested the absent stones at Waun Mawn had been erected around 3400\u20133200 BC, and removed around 300\u2013400 years later, a date consistent with theories that the same stones were moved and used at Stonehenge, before later being reorganised into their present locations and supplemented with local sarsens as was already understood. Human activity at Waun Mawn ceased around the same time which has suggested that some people may have migrated to Stonehenge. It has also been suggested that stones from other sources may have been added to Stonehenge, perhaps from other dismantled circles in the region.\nFurther work in 2021 by Parker Pearson's team concluded that the Waun Mawn circle had never been completed, and of the stones which might once have stood at the site, no more than 13 had been removed in antiquity.\nIn February 2021, archaeologists announced the discovery of \"vast troves of Neolithic and Bronze Age artifacts\" while conducting excavations for the proposed highway tunnel near Stonehenge. The find included Bronze Age graves, late Neolithic pottery, and a C-shaped enclosure on the intended site of the Stonehenge road tunnel. The remains also contained a shale object in one of the graves, burnt flint in a C-shaped enclosure, and the final resting place of a baby.\nIn January 2022, archaeologists announced the discovery of thousands of prehistoric pits during an electromagnetic induction field survey around Stonehenge. Based on the shapes of the pits and the artifacts found inside, the study's lead author, Philippe De Smedt, concluded that prehistoric humans excavated six of the nine large pits. One of the oldest was about 10000 years old and contained hunting tools.\nIn August 2024, the journal Nature published research from a team at Curtin University in Australia identifying the origin of the Altar Stone, which is partially buried by a collapsed sarsen stone, as having come from the Orcadian Basin in northeast Scotland, some 700 km away.\nFolklore.\n\"Heel Stone\", \"Friar's Heel\", or \"Sun-Stone\".\nThe Heel Stone lies northeast of the sarsen circle, beside the end portion of Stonehenge Avenue. It is roughly textured, above ground, and leans in towards the stone circle. It has been known by many names in the past, including \"Friar's Heel\" and \"Sun-stone\". At the Summer solstice an observer standing within the stone circle, looking northeast through the entrance, would see the Sun rise in the approximate direction of the Heel Stone, and the Sun has often been photographed over it.\nA folk tale relates the origin of the Friar's Heel reference.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Devil bought the stones from a woman in Ireland, wrapped them up, and brought them to Salisbury plain. One of the stones fell into the Avon, the rest were carried to the plain. The Devil then cried out, \"No-one will ever find out how these stones came here!\" A friar replied, \"That's what you think!\", whereupon the Devil threw one of the stones at him and struck him on the heel. The stone stuck in the ground and is still there.\n\"Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable\" attributes this tale to Geoffrey of Monmouth. Though book eight of Geoffrey's \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" describes how Stonehenge was built, the two stories are entirely different.\nThe name is not unique; a monolith with the same name was recorded in the nineteenth century by the antiquarian Charles Warne at Long Bredy in Dorset.\nArthurian legend.\nThe twelfth-century \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (\"History of the Kings of Britain\"), by Geoffrey of Monmouth, includes a legend of Stonehenge's origin, describing how Stonehenge was brought from Ireland with the help of the wizard Merlin. Geoffrey's story spread widely, with variations of it appearing in adaptations of his work, such as Wace's Norman French \"Roman de Brut\", Layamon's Middle English \"Brut\", and the Welsh \"Brut y Brenhinedd\".\nAccording to the tale, the stones of Stonehenge were healing stones, which giants had brought from Africa to Ireland. They had been raised on Mount Killaraus to form a stone circle, known as the Giant's Ring or Giant's Round. The fifth-century king Aurelius Ambrosius wished to build a great memorial to the British Celtic nobles slain by the Saxons at Salisbury. Merlin advised him to use the Giant's Ring. The king sent Merlin and Uther Pendragon (King Arthur's father) with 15,000 men to bring it from Ireland. They defeated an Irish army led by Gillomanius, but were unable to move the huge stones. With Merlin's help, they transported the stones to Britain and re-erected them as they had stood. Mount Killaraus may refer to the Hill of Uisneach. Although the tale is fiction, archaeologist Mike Parker Pearson suggests it may hold a \"grain of truth\" as the Stonehenge bluestones were likely brought from the Waun Mawn stone circle on the Irish Sea coast of Wales.\nAnother legend tells how the invading Saxon king Hengist invited British Celtic warriors to a feast but treacherously ordered his men to massacre the guests, killing 420 of them. Hengist erected Stonehenge on the site to show his remorse.\nSixteenth century to present.\nStonehenge has changed ownership several times since King Henry VIII acquired Amesbury Abbey and its surrounding lands. In 1540, Henry gave the estate to the Earl of Hertford. It subsequently passed to Lord Carleton and then the Marquess of Queensberry. The Antrobus family of Cheshire bought the estate in 1824.\nAcquisition for the nation.\nStonehenge was one of several lots put up for auction in 1915 by Sir Cosmo Gordon Antrobus, after he inherited the estate from his brother. The auction by Knight Frank &amp; Rutley estate agents in Salisbury was held on 21 September 1915 and included \"Lot 15. Stonehenge with about 30 acres, 2 rods, 37 perches [12.44\u00a0ha] of adjoining downland.\"\nCecil Chubb bought the site for \u00a36,600 (\u00a3 in 2023) and gave it to the nation three years later, with certain conditions attached. Although it has been speculated that he purchased it at the suggestion of \u2013 or even as a present for \u2013 his wife, in fact, he bought it on a whim, believing a local man should be the new owner.\nSaving the skyline.\nThe plot bought by Chubb and gifted to the nation was only in size, and various buildings stood within clear sight of the monument, the most prominent being Stonehenge Aerodrome. Some from the stones, the aerodrome was built during the First World War for the Royal Flying Corps and its large stone and brick hangars dominated the skyline.\nIn the dry valley at Stonehenge Bottom, a main road junction was built between what would later be designated as the A303 and A344 roads, along with several cottages and a cafe.\nIn 1927, the land around Stonehenge was put up for auction in three plots. Plot A lay immediately west of the monument and included the (by now disused) Stonehenge Aerodrome, Plot B was to the south on the other side of the main road, and Plot C on the north side included part of the Stonehenge Cursus.\nThere was developer interest, and in August 1927, a subscription fund was launched to \"save the skyline\" of the monument. The subscription made rapid progress, with George V as the lead subscriber, and by October 1927 \u00a38,000 had been raised, which was enough to purchase Plot A and start the demolition of the aerodrome. The fund continued for a number of years to secure the remaining land around the henge for the nation, with fundraising for Plot C continuing through 1929.\nThe land was taken into the management of the National Trust to preserve. The last large aircraft hangar was removed in 1930, and by the middle of the 1930s, the aerodrome site was cleared.\nMore recently, the land has been part of a grassland reversion scheme, returning the surrounding fields to native chalk grassland. This process continued in 2022 when the National Heritage Lottery Fund (NHLF) gave a grant to the National Trust to acquire another 170 hectares of the Stonehenge Landscape.\nNeopaganism.\nDuring the twentieth century, Stonehenge began to revive as a place of religious significance, this time by adherents of Neopaganism and New Age beliefs, particularly the Neo-druids. The historian Ronald Hutton would later remark that \"it was a great, and potentially uncomfortable, irony that modern Druids had arrived at Stonehenge just as archaeologists were evicting the ancient Druids from it.\" The first such Neo-druidic group to make use of the megalithic monument was the Ancient Order of Druids, who performed a mass initiation ceremony there in August 1905, in which they admitted 259 new members into their organisation. This assembly was largely ridiculed in the press, which mocked the fact that the Neo-druids were dressed up in costumes consisting of white robes and fake beards.\nThe earlier rituals were complemented by the Stonehenge Free Festival, loosely organised by the Polytantric Circle, held between 1972 and 1984, during which time the number of midsummer visitors had risen to around 30,000. However, in 1985, the site was closed to festivalgoers by a High Court injunction. A consequence of the end of the festival in 1985 was the violent confrontation between the police and New Age travellers that became known as the Battle of the Beanfield, when police blockaded a convoy of travellers to prevent them from approaching Stonehenge. Beginning in 1985, the year of the confrontation, no access to the stones at Stonehenge was allowed for any religious purpose. This \"exclusion-zone\" policy continued for almost fifteen years: until just before the arrival of the twenty-first century, visitors were not allowed to go into the stones at times of religious significance, the winter and summer solstices, and the vernal and autumnal equinoxes.\nFollowing a European Court of Human Rights ruling obtained by campaigners such as Arthur Uther Pendragon, the restrictions were lifted. The ruling recognized that members of any genuine religion have a right to worship in their own church, and Stonehenge is a place of worship to Neo-Druids, Pagans and other \"Earth based' or 'old' religions. Meetings were organised by the National Trust and others to discuss the arrangements. In 1998, a party of 100 people was allowed access, and these included astronomers, archaeologists, Druids, locals, pagans, and travellers. In 2000, an open summer solstice event was held, and about seven thousand people attended. In 2001, the numbers increased to about 10,000. \nSetting and access.\nWhen Stonehenge was first opened to the public, it was possible to walk among and even climb on the stones, but they were roped off in 1977 due to serious erosion. Visitors are no longer permitted to touch the stones but are able to walk around the monument from a short distance away. English Heritage does, however, permit access during the summer and winter solstice, and the spring and autumn equinox. Additionally, visitors can make special bookings to access the stones throughout the year. Approximately 30,000 local residents are entitled to free admission to Stonehenge under an agreement made in 1921.\nAs motorised traffic increased, the setting of the monument began to be affected by the proximity of the two roads \u2013 on the north side the A344 to Shrewton and Devizes which passed within three metres of the Heel Stone, and to the south the A303, a trunk route connecting London with Devon and Cornwall. In 1979, the Department of the Environment proposed moving visitor facilities into the dip of Stonehenge Bottom. In 1985, a commission set up by English Heritage recommended closing the A344 and building a visitor centre on Army land north of the monument to replace the \"woefully inadequate\" facilities and cater for an expected 1 million visitors per year.\nThe access situation and the proximity of the two roads continued to draw criticism, highlighted by a 2006 National Geographic survey. In the survey of conditions at 94 leading World Heritage Sites, 400 conservation and tourism experts ranked Stonehenge 75th in the list of destinations, declaring it to be \"in moderate trouble\". The controversy surrounding re-routing of the roads led to the scheme being cancelled on multiple occasions. In December 2007, the government announced that plans to build a Stonehenge road tunnel under the landscape and create a permanent visitors' centre had been cancelled on cost grounds.\nIn 2009, the government gave approval for a \u00a325\u00a0million scheme to create a smaller visitors' centre and close the A344, although this was dependent on funding and local authority planning consent. In 2010, Wiltshire Council granted planning permission for a centre to the west, and English Heritage confirmed that funds to build it would be available, supported by a \u00a310m grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund. In June 2013, the A344 was closed to begin the work of removing the section of road and replacing it with grass. The centre, designed by Denton Corker Marshall, opened to the public in December 2013.\nAn announcement in November 2020 stated that a plan to construct a four-lane tunnel to take traffic below the site had been approved. This was intended to eliminate the section of the A303 that runs close to the circle. The plan had received opposition from a group of \"archaeologists, environmentalists and modern-day druids\" according to \"National Geographic\" but was supported by others who wanted to \"restore the landscape to its original setting and improve the experience for visitors\". Opponents of the plan were concerned that artifacts underground in the area would be lost, or that excavation in the area could destabilize the stones, leading to their sinking, shifting, or even falling. In July 2023, the Department for Transport announced that, despite the original planning application having been overturned by the High Court in 2021, the Transport Secretary, Mark Harper, had approved plans for a road tunnel. In February 2024, the High Court in London rejected a fresh bid by campaigners to stop construction of the road tunnel. A further legal challenge was made in the High Court in July 2024. Although the High Court dismissed this action in October 2024, the incoming Labour government had already announced in July that the tunnel would 'not move forward'.\nIn March 2025, English Heritage announced that planning permission had been granted for two buildings to be constructed near the visitor facilities: a 'Learning Centre' to the east of the shuttle bus turning circle and a 'Neolithic classroom' near the existing recreated Neolithic village. These are due to open in the autumn of 2026.\nVandalism.\nThe site has been subject to intermittent vandalism for centuries. Until the 17th century, stones disappeared from the site to be employed at building sites. In the 19th century, tourists employed chisels to cut rock chips off the megaliths as souvenirs.\nAlthough the first years of the \"Free Festival\" (annual, from 1975 onwards) saw \"very little vandalism\", Stonehenge had to be fenced off from 1978 onwards. Later, repeated vandalism in the 1980s and 1990s led the authorities to deploy up to hundreds of police, erect barriers around Stonehenge, and impose exclusion zones up to six kilometres from the archaeological monument. The vandalism of 1984 included defacing the monument with purple spray paint. The government went so far as to close Stonehenge to protect it from vandalism, but in the face of public outcry, the government opted to reopen it.\nIn 2008, two men used a hammer and a screwdriver to take a small chip the size of a 10p coin from the side of the Heel Stone, in what authorities described as \"the first vandalism in decades\".\nIn 2020, the British transport minister was accused of vandalism when he decided that the road through the Stonehenge area would be converted into a tunnel that would pass in the immediate vicinity. The project was decades old, but had repeatedly been delayed because of its cost or the effects on archaeological remains. The historian Tom Holland opined that \"To inflict this act of vandalism on this landscape seems unbelievable.\" Tunnel opponents considered it \"state-sponsored vandalism\" even as their case was defeated in court in 2024.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical context\nOther monuments in the Stonehenge ritual landscape\nAbout Stonehenge and replicas of Stonehenge\nFiction\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSimilar sites\nSites with similar sunrise or sunset alignments\nMuseums with collections from the World Heritage Site\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27636", "revid": "38318840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27636", "title": "Sima Qian", "text": "Chinese historian (c. 145 \u2013 c. 86 BCE)\nSima Qian (c.\u2009145\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200986\u00a0BC) was a Chinese historian during the early Han dynasty. He is considered the father of Chinese historiography for the \"Shiji\" (sometimes translated into English as \"Records of the Grand Historian\"), a general history of China covering more than two thousand years from the rise of the legendary Yellow Emperor and formation of the first Chinese polity to the reign of Emperor Wu of Han, during which Sima wrote. As the first universal history of the world as it was known to the ancient Chinese, the \"Shiji\" served as a model for official histories for subsequent dynasties across the Sinosphere until the 20th century.\nSima Qian's father, Sima Tan, first conceived of the ambitious project of writing a complete history of China, but had completed only some preparatory sketches at the time of his death. After inheriting his father's position as court historian in the imperial court, he was determined to fulfill his father's dying wish of composing and putting together this epic work of history. However, in 99\u00a0BC, he would fall victim to the Li Ling affair for speaking out in defense of the general, who was blamed for an unsuccessful campaign against the Xiongnu. Given the choice of being executed or castrated, he chose the latter in order to finish his historical work. Although he is universally remembered for the \"Records\", surviving works indicate that he was also a gifted poet and prose writer, and he was instrumental in the creation of the \"Taichu\" calendar, which was officially promulgated in 104\u00a0BC.\nSima was acutely aware of the importance of his work to posterity and its relationship to his own personal suffering. In the postface of the \"Records\", he implicitly compared his universal history of China to the classics of his day, the \"Guoyu\" by Zuo Qiuming, \"Li Sao\" by Qu Yuan, and the \"Art of War\" by Sun Bin, pointing out that their authors all suffered great personal misfortunes before their lasting monumental works could come to fruition. Sima Qian is also depicted in the \"Wu Shuang Pu\" by Jin Guliang.\nEarly life and education.\nSima Qian was born at Xiayang in Zuopingyi (near present-day Hancheng, Shaanxi). He was probably born around 145\u00a0BC, although some sources say he was born about 135\u00a0BC. Around 136\u00a0BC, his father Sima Tan was appointed to the position of \"grand historian\" ( , alternatively \"grand scribe\" or \"grand astrologer\") at the imperial court. The grand historian was a relatively low-ranking official whose main duty was to formulate the yearly calendar, identifying which days were ritually auspicious or inauspicious, and present it to the emperor prior to the new year. His other duties included traveling with the emperor for important rituals and recording daily events both at the court and around the country. By his account, by the age of ten Sima was able to \"read the old writings\" and was considered to be a promising scholar. Sima grew up in a Confucian environment, and Sima always regarded his historical work as an act of Confucian filial piety.\nIn 126\u00a0BC, around the age of 20, Sima Qian began an extensive tour around China as it existed in the Han dynasty. He started his journey from the imperial capital, Chang'an (modern Xi'an), then went south across the Yangtze to Changsha Kingdom (modern Hunan), where he visited the Miluo River site where the Warring States\u2013era poet Qu Yuan was traditionally said to have drowned himself. He then went to seek the burial place of the legendary rulers Yu the Great on Mount Xianglu and Shun in the Jiuyi Mountains (modern Ningyuan County, Hunan). He then went north to Huaiyin (modern Huai'an, Jiangsu) to see the grave of Han dynasty general Han Xin, then continued north to Qufu, the hometown of Confucius, where he studied ritual and other traditional subjects.\nAs Han court official.\nAfter his travels, Sima was chosen to be a Palace Attendant in the government, whose duties were to inspect different parts of the country with Emperor Wu in 122\u00a0BC. Sima married young and had one daughter. In 110\u00a0BC, at the age of 35, Sima Qian was sent westward on a military expedition against some \"barbarian\" tribes. That year, his father fell ill due to the distress of not being invited to attend the Imperial Feng Sacrifice. Suspecting that his time was running out, he summoned his son back home to take over the historical work he had begun. Sima Tan wanted to follow the \"Spring and Autumn Annals\", the first chronicle in the history of Chinese literature.\nIt appears that Sima Tan was only able to put together an outline of the work before he died. The postface of the completed \"Shiji\", there is a short essay on the six philosophical schools that is explicitly attributed to Sima Tan. Otherwise, there are only fragments of the \"Shiji\" that are speculated to be authored by Sima Tan or based on his notes. Fueled by his father's inspiration, Sima Qian spent much of the subsequent decade authoring and compiling the \"Shiji\" (sometimes translated into English as \"Records of the Grand Historian\") and completed it before 91\u00a0BC, probably around 94\u00a0BC. Three years after the death of his father, Sima Qian assumed his father's previous position as \"taishi\". In 105\u00a0BC, Sima was among the scholars chosen to reform the calendar. As a senior imperial official, Sima was also in the position to offer counsel to the emperor on general affairs of state.\nLi Ling affair.\nIn 99\u00a0BC, Sima became embroiled in the Li Ling affair, where Li Ling and Li Guangli, two military officers who led a campaign against the Xiongnu in the north, were defeated and taken captive. Emperor Wu attributed the defeat to Li Ling, with all government officials subsequently condemning him for it. Sima was the only person to defend Li Ling, who had never been his friend but whom he respected. Emperor Wu interpreted Sima's defence of Li as an attack on his brother-in-law, Li Guangli, who had also fought against the Xiongnu without much success, and sentenced Sima to death. At that time, execution could be commuted either by money or castration. Since Sima did not have enough money to atone for his \"crime\", he chose the latter and was then thrown into prison, where he endured three years. He described his pain thus: \"When you see the jailer you abjectly touch the ground with your forehead. At the mere sight of his underlings you are seized with terror ... Such ignominy can never be wiped away.\" Sima called his castration \"the worst of all punishments\".\nIn 96 BC, on his release from prison, Sima chose to live on as a palace eunuch to complete his histories, rather than commit suicide as was expected of a gentleman-scholar who had been disgraced by being castrated. As Sima Qian himself explained in his \"Letter to Ren An\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nIf even the lowest slave and scullion maid can bear to commit suicide, why should not one like myself be able to do what has to be done? But the reason I have not refused to bear these ills and have continued to live, dwelling in vileness and disgrace without taking my leave, is that I grieve that I have things in my heart which I have not been able to express fully, and I am shamed to think that after I am gone my writings will not be known to posterity. Too numerous to record are the men of ancient times who were rich and noble and whose names have yet vanished away. It is only those who were masterful and sure, the truly extraordinary men, who are still remembered.\nI too have ventured not to be modest but have entrusted myself to my useless writings. I have gathered up and brought together the old traditions of the world which were scattered and lost. I have examined the deeds and events of the past and investigated the principles behind their success and failure, their rise and decay [...] in one hundred and thirty chapters. I wished to examine into all that concerns heaven and man, to penetrate the changes of the past and present, completing all as the work of one family. But before I had finished my rough manuscript, I met with this calamity. It is because I regretted that it had not been completed that I submitted to the extreme penalty without rancor. When I have truly completed this work, I shall deposit it in the Famous Mountain. If it may be handed down to men who will appreciate it, and penetrate to the villages and great cities, then though I should suffer a thousand mutilations, what regret should I have?&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nLater years and death.\nUpon his release from prison in 97/96 BC, Sima Qian continued to serve in the Han court as \"zhongshuling\" (), a court archivist position reserved for eunuchs with considerable status and with higher pay than his previous position of historian.\nThe \"Letter to Ren An\" was written by Sima Qian in reply to Ren An in response to the latter's involvement in Crown Prince Liu Ju's rebellion in 91 BC. This is the last record of Sima Qian in contemporary documents. The letter is a reply to a lost letter by Ren An to Sima Qian, perhaps asking Sima Qian to intercede on his behalf as Ren An was facing execution for accusations of being an opportunist and displaying equivocal loyalty to the emperor during the rebellion. In his reply, Sima Qian stated that he is a mutilated man with no influence at court. Some later historians claimed that Sima Qian himself became implicated in the rebellion as a result of his friendship with Ren An and was executed as part of the purge of the crown prince's supporters in court; however, the earliest-attested record of this account dates from the 4th century. Moreover, it has also been pointed out that Sima Qian would have been reluctant to render substantive aid to Ren An, given the severe consequences that he suffered for supporting General Li Ling, as well as Ren An's failure to act on his behalf during the Li Ling affair. Although there are many theories regarding the exact dating as well as the true nature and purpose of the \"Letter to Ren An\", one common interpretation suggests that the letter, in part, tacitly expressed a refusal to play an active role in securing a reduced punishment for Ren An.\nThe early-20th-century scholar Wang Guowei stated that there are no reliable records establishing when Sima Qian died. He and most modern historians believe that Sima Qian spent his last days as a scholar in reclusion () after leaving the Han court, perhaps dying around the same time as Emperor Wu in 87/86 BC.\n\"Shiji\".\nFormat.\nThe \"Shiji\" totals over 500,000 characters in length, organized into 130 chapters. While the style and form of Chinese historiography was not static over time, the \"Shiji\" created a permanent standard for quality and style for later scholars. Before Sima, histories focused on recounting particular events or the affairs of a specific region; his idea of a general history guided later historiographers, like Sima Guang and Zheng Qiao (), authors of the \"Zizhi Tongjian\" (1084) and \"Tongzhi\" (1161) respectively. While the traditional format by which official histories would be organized was codified later by Ban Gu in the \"Book of Han\" (111\u00a0AD), historians consider the \"Shiji\" to have informed Ban's work.\nThe \"jizhuanti\" () format divides a work into several different types of chapters, most prominently 'basic annals' (; \"benji\") and 'ordered biographies' (; \"liezhuan\"). \"Benji\" contain biographies for each sovereign, ordered chronologically and organized by dynasty; \"liezhuan\" contain biographies of influential individuals outside the nobility, sometimes for one prominent individual, but often for two or more people who, in Sima's judgment, played comparably important roles. In addition to these namesake categories, there are chapters falling under the categories of 'tables' (; \"biao\") collating graphical chronologies of royalty and nobility, and 'treatises' (; \"shu\") giving historical accounts of topics like music, ritual, or economics. Most importantly, the 'house chronicles' (; \"shijia\") document important events during each ruler's reign for each state within the Zhou dynasty, as well as histories of the noble houses established during the Han.\nThe \"Shiji\" includes 12 basic annals, 10 tables, 8 treatises, 30 house chronicles, and 70 ordered biographies; with the final ordered biography serving as the postface. This final chapter details the background of how the \"Shiji\" was composed and compiled, and gives brief justifications for the inclusion of the major topics, events, and individuals in the work. As part of the background, the postface provides a short sketch of the history of the Sima clan, from legendary times to his father Sima Tan. It also details the dying words of Sima Tan, tearfully exhorting the author to compose the present work, and contains a biographical sketch of the author himself. The postface concludes with a self-referential description of the postface as the 70th and last of the Ordered Biographies chapters.\nInfluences and legacy.\nSima was greatly influenced by Confucius's \"Spring and Autumn Annals\", which on the surface is a succinct chronology from the events of the reigns of the twelve dukes of Lu from 722 to 484\u00a0BC. Many Chinese scholars have and still do view how Confucius ordered his chronology as the ideal example of how history should be written, especially with regards to what he chose to include and to exclude, and his choice of words as indicating moral judgments. Seen in this light, the \"Spring and Autumn Annals\" are a moral guide to the proper way of living. Sima took this view himself as he explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt [\"Spring and Autumn Annals\"] distinguishes what is suspicious and doubtful, clarifies right and wrong, and settles points which are uncertain. It calls good good and bad bad, honours the worthy, and condemns the unworthy. It preserves states which are lost and restores the perishing family. It brings to light what was neglected and restores what was abandoned.\nSima saw the \"Shiji\" as belonging to the same tradition, as he explained in the introduction to chapter 61:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSome people say \"It is Heaven's way, without distinction of persons, to keep the good perpetually supplied.\" Can we say then that Boyi and Shuqi were good men or not? They clung to righteousness and were pure in their deeds yet they starved to death ... Robber Zhi day after day killed innocent men, making mincemeat of their flesh ... But in the end he lived to a great old age. For what virtue did he deserve this? ... I find myself in much perplexity. Is this so-called \"Way of Heaven\" right or wrong?\n To resolve this theodical problem, Sima argued that while the wicked may succeed and the good may suffer in their own life-times, it is the historian who ensures that in the end good triumphs. For Sima, the writing of history was no mere antiquarian pursuit, but was rather a vital moral task as the historian would \"preserve memory\", and thereby ensure the ultimate victory of good over evil. Sima wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSu Qin and his two brothers all achieved fame among the feudal lords as itinerant strategists. Their policies laid great stress upon stratagems and shifts of power. But because Su Qin died a traitor's death, the world has united in scoffing at him and has been loath to study his policies ... Su Qin arose from the humblest beginnings to lead the Six States in the Vertical Alliance, and this is evidence that he possessed an intelligence surpassing the ordinary person. For this reason I have set forth this account of his deeds, arranging them in proper chronological order, so that he may not forever suffer from an evil reputation and be known for nothing else.\nSuch a moralizing approach to history with the historian high-guiding the good and evil to provide lessons for the present could be dangerous for the historian as it could bring down the wrath of the state onto the historian as happened to Sima himself. As such, the historian had to tread carefully and often expressed his judgements in a circuitous way designed to fool the censor.\nSima himself stated he was writing in this tradition in the conclusion to chapter 110, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen Confucius wrote the \"Spring and Autumn Annals\", he was very open in treating the reigns of Yin and Huan, the early dukes of Lu; but when he came to the later period of Dukes Ding and Ai, his writing was much more covert. Because in the latter case he was writing about his own times, he did not express his judgements frankly, but used subtle and guarded language.\nBearing this in mind, not everything that Sima wrote should be understood as conveying didactic moral lessons. But several historians have suggested that parts of the \"Shiji\", such as where Sima placed his section on Confucius's use of indirect criticism in the part of the book dealing with the Xiongnu \"barbarians\" might indicate his disapproval of the foreign policy of the Emperor Wu.\nIn writing the \"Shiji\", Sima initiated a new writing style by presenting history in a series of biographies. His work extends over 130 chapters\u2014not in historical sequence, but divided into particular subjects, including annals, chronicles, and treatises\u2014on music, ceremonies, calendars, religion, economics, and extended biographies. Sima's work influenced the writing style of other histories outside of China as well, such as the Korean \"Samguk sagi\". Sima adopted a new method in sorting out the historical data and a new approach to writing historical records. At the beginning of the \"Shiji\", Sima declared himself a follower of Confucius's approach in the \"Analects\" to \"hear much but leave to one side that which is doubtful, and speak with due caution concerning the remainder\". Reflecting these rigorous analytic methods, Sima declared that he would not write about periods of history where there was insufficient documentation. As such, Sima wrote \"the ages before the Ch'in dynasty are too far away and the material on them too scanty to permit a detailed account of them here\". In the same way, Sima discounted accounts in the traditional records that were \"ridiculous\" such as the pretense that Prince Tan could via the use of magic make the clouds rain grain and horses grow horns. Sima constantly compared accounts found in the manuscripts with what he considered reliable sources like Confucian classics like the \"Classic of Poetry\", \"Book of Documents\", \"Book of Rites\", \"Classic of Music\", \"I Ching\" and \"Spring and Autumn Annals\". When Sima encountered a story that could not be cross-checked with the Confucian classics, he systemically compared the information with other documents. Sima mentioned at least 75 books he used for cross-checking. Furthermore, Sima often questioned people about historical events they had experienced. Sima mentioned after one of his trips across China that: \"When I had occasion to pass through Feng and Beiyi I questioned the elderly people who were about the place, visited the old home of Xiao He, Cao Can, Fan Kuai and Xiahou Ying, and learned much about the early days. How different it was from the stories one hears!\" Reflecting the traditional Chinese reverence for age, Sima stated that he preferred to interview the elderly as he believed that they were the most likely to supply him with correct and truthful information about what had happened in the past. During one of this trips, Sima mentioned that he was overcome with emotion when he saw the carriage of Confucius together with his clothes and various other personal items that had belonged to Confucius.\nInnovations and unique features.\nDespite his very large debts to Confucian tradition, Sima was an innovator in four ways. To begin with, Sima's work was concerned with the history of the known world. Previous Chinese historians had focused on only one dynasty and/or region. Sima's history of 130 chapters began with the legendary Yellow Emperor and extended to his own time, and covered not only China, but also neighboring nations like Korea and Vietnam. In this regard, Sima was significant as the first Chinese historian to treat the peoples living to the north of the Great Wall like the Xiongnu as human beings who were implicitly the equals of the Middle Kingdom, instead of the traditional approach which had portrayed the Xiongnu as savages who had the appearance of humans, but the minds of animals. In his comments about the Xiongnu, Sima refrained from evoking claims about the innate moral superiority of the Han over the \"northern barbarians\" that were the standard rhetorical tropes of Chinese historians in this period. Likewise, Sima in his chapter about the Xiongnu condemns those advisors who pursue the \"expediency of the moment\", that is advise the Emperor to carry policies such as conquests of other nations that bring a brief moment of glory, but burden the state with the enormous financial and often human costs of holding on to the conquered land. Sima was engaging in an indirect criticism of the advisors of the Emperor Wu who were urging him to pursue a policy of aggression towards the Xiongnu and conquer all their land, a policy to which Sima was apparently opposed.\nSima also broke new ground by using more sources like interviewing witnesses, visiting places where historical occurrences had happened, and examining documents from different regions and/or times. Before Chinese historians had tended to use only reign histories as their sources. The \"Shiji\" was further very novel in Chinese historiography by examining historical events outside of the courts, providing a broader history than the traditional court-based histories had done. Lastly, Sima broke with the traditional chronological structure of Chinese history. Sima instead had divided the \"Shiji\" into five divisions: the basic annals which comprised the first 12 chapters, the chronological tables which comprised the next 10 chapters, treatises on particular subjects which make up 8 chapters, accounts of the ruling families which take up 30 chapters, and biographies of various eminent people which are the last 70 chapters. The annals follow the traditional Chinese pattern of court-based histories of the lives of various emperors and their families. The chronological tables are graphs recounting the political history of China. The treatises are essays on topics such as astronomy, music, religion, hydraulic engineering and economics. The last section dealing with biographies covers individuals judged by Sima to have made a major impact on the course of history, regardless of whether they were of noble or humble birth and whether they were born in the central states, the periphery, or barbarian lands. Unlike traditional Chinese historians, Sima went beyond the androcentric, nobility-focused histories by dealing with the lives of women and men such as poets, bureaucrats, merchants, comedians/jesters, assassins, and philosophers. The treatises section, the biographies sections and the annals section relating to the Qin dynasty (as a former dynasty, there was more freedom to write about the Qin than there was about the reigning Han dynasty) that make up 40% of the \"Shiji\" have aroused the most interest from historians and are the only parts of the \"Shiji\" that have been translated into English.\nWhen Sima placed his subjects was often his way of expressing obliquely moral judgements. Empress L\u00fc and Xiang Yu were the effective rulers of China during reigns Hui of the Han and Yi of Chu, respectively, so Sima placed both their lives in the basic annals. Likewise, Confucius is included in the fourth section rather the fifth where he properly belonged as a way of showing his eminent virtue. The structure of the \"Shiji\" allowed Sima to tell the same stories in different ways, which allowed him to pass his moral judgements. For example, in the basic annals section, the Emperor Gaozu is portrayed as a good leader whereas in the section dealing with his rival Xiang Yu, the Emperor is portrayed unflatteringly. Likewise, the chapter on Xiang presents him in a favorable light whereas the chapter on Gaozu portrays him in more darker colors. At the end of most of the chapters, Sima usually wrote a commentary in which he judged how the individual lived up to traditional Chinese values like filial piety, humility, self-discipline, hard work and concern for the less fortunate. Sima analyzed the records and sorted out those that could serve the purpose of \"Shiji\". He intended to discover the patterns and principles of the development of human history. Sima also emphasized, for the first time in Chinese history, the role of individual men in affecting the historical development of China and his historical perception that a country cannot escape from the fate of growth and decay.\nUnlike the \"Book of Han\", which was written under the supervision of the imperial dynasty, \"Shiji\" was a privately written history since he refused to write \"Shiji\" as an official history covering only those of high rank. The work also covers people of the lower classes and is therefore considered a \"veritable record\" of the darker side of the dynasty. In Sima's time, literature and history were not seen as separate disciplines as they are now, and Sima wrote his \"magnum opus\" in a very literary style, making extensive use of irony, sarcasm, juxtaposition of events, characterization, direct speech and invented speeches, which led the American historian Jennifer Jay to describe parts of the \"Shiji\" as reading more like a historical novel than a work of history. For an example, Sima tells the story of a Chinese eunuch named Zhonghang Yue who became an advisor to the Xiongnu kings. Sima provides a long dialogue between Zhonghang and an envoy sent by the Emperor Wen of China during which the latter disparages the Xiongnu as \"savages\" whose customs are barbaric while Zhonghang defends the Xiongnu customs as either justified and/or as morally equal to Chinese customs, at times even morally superior as Zhonghang draws a contrast between the bloody succession struggles in China where family members would murder one another to be Emperor vs. the more orderly succession of the Xiongnu kings. The American historian Tamara Chin wrote that though Zhonghang did exist, the dialogue is merely a \"literacy device\" for Sima to make points that he could not otherwise make. The favorable picture of the traitor Zhonghang who went over to the Xiongnu who bests the Emperor's loyal envoy in an ethnographic argument about what is the morally superior nation appears to be Sima's way of attacking the entire Chinese court system where the Emperor preferred the lies told by his sycophantic advisors over the truth told by his honest advisors as inherently corrupt and depraved. The point is reinforced by the fact that Sima has Zhonghang speak the language of an idealized Confucian official whereas the Emperor's envoy's language is dismissed as \"mere twittering and chatter\". Elsewhere in the \"Shiji\" Sima portrayed the Xiongnu less favorably, so the debate was almost certainly more Sima's way of criticizing the Chinese court system and less genuine praise for the Xiongnu.\nSima has often been criticized for \"historizing\" myths and legends as he assigned dates to mythical and legendary figures from ancient Chinese history together with what appears to be suspiciously precise genealogies of leading families over the course of several millennia (including his own where he traces the descent of the Sima family from legendary emperors in the distant past). However, archaeological discoveries in recent decades have confirmed aspects of the \"Shiji\", and suggested that even if the sections of the \"Shiji\" dealing with the ancient past are not totally true, at least Sima wrote down what he believed to be true. In particular, archaeological finds have confirmed the basic accuracy of the \"Shiji\" including the reigns and locations of tombs of ancient rulers.\nLiterary figure.\nSima's \"Shiji\" is respected as a model of biographical literature with high literary value and still stands as a textbook for the study of classical Chinese. Sima's works were influential to Chinese writing, serving as ideal models for various types of prose within the neo-classical (\"renaissance\" ) movement of the Tang\u2013Song period. The great use of characterisation and plotting also influenced fiction writing, including the classical short stories of the middle and late medieval period (Tang-Ming) as well as the vernacular novel of the late imperial period. Sima had immense influence on historiography not only in China, but also in Japan and Korea. For centuries afterwards, the \"Shiji\" was regarded as the greatest history book written in Asia. Sima is little known in the English-speaking world as a full translation of the \"Shiji\" in English has not yet been completed.\nHis influence was derived primarily from the following elements of his writing: his skillful depiction of historical characters using details of their speech, conversations, and actions; his innovative use of informal, humorous, and varied language; and the simplicity and conciseness of his style. Even the 20th-century literary critic Lu Xun regarded \"Shiji\" as \"the historians' most perfect song, a 'Li Sao' without the rhyme\" () in his \"Outline of Chinese Literary History\" ().\nOther literary works.\nSima's famous letter to his friend Ren An about his sufferings during the Li Ling Affair and his perseverance in writing \"Shiji\" is today regarded as a highly admired example of literary prose style, studied widely in China even today. The \"Letter to Ren An\" contains the quote, \"Men have always had but one death. For some it is as weighty as Mount Tai; for others it is as insignificant as a goose down. The difference is what they use it for.\" () This quote has become one of the most well known in all of Chinese literature. In modern times, Chairman Mao paraphrased this quote in a speech in which he paid tribute to a fallen PLA soldier.\nSima Qian wrote eight rhapsodies (\"fu\"), which are listed in the bibliographic treatise of the \"Book of Han\". All but one, the \"Rhapsody in Lament for Gentlemen who do not Meet their Time\" () have been lost, and even the surviving example is probably not complete.\nAstronomer/astrologer.\nSima and his father both served as the \"taishi\" (\u592a\u53f2) of the Former Han dynasty, a position which includes aspects of being a historian, a court scribe, calendarist, and court astronomer/astrologer. At that time, the astrologer had an important role, responsible for interpreting and predicting the course of government according to the influence of the Sun, Moon, and stars, as well as other astronomical and geological phenomena such as solar eclipses and earthquakes, which depended on revising and upholding an accurate calendar.\nBefore compiling \"Shiji\", Sima Qian was involved in the creation of the 104\u00a0BC \"Taichu\" Calendar \u592a\u521d\u66a6 (\u592a\u521d became the new era name for Emperor Wu and means \"supreme beginning\"), a modification of the Qin calendar. This is the first Chinese calendar whose full method of calculation (\u66a6\u6cd5) has been preserved.\nThe minor planet \"12620 Simaqian\" is named in his honour.\nFamily.\nSima Qian is the son of court astrologer () Sima Tan, who is a descendant of Qin general Sima Cuo (), the commander of Qin army in the state's conquest of Ba and Shu.\nBefore his castration, Sima Qian was recorded to have two sons and a daughter. While little is recorded of his sons, his daughter later married Yang Chang () of the Yang clan of Hongnong, and had sons Yang Zhong () and Yang Yun (; died c. February 55 BC) It was Yang Yun who hid his grandfather's great work, and decided to release it during the reign of Emperor Xuan.\nUnsubstantiated descendants.\nAccording to local legend, Sima Qian had two sons, the older named Sima Lin () and younger named Sima Guan (), who fled the capital to Xu Village () in what is now Shanxi province during the Li Ling affair, for fear of falling victim to familial extermination. They changed their surnames to Tong () and F\u00e9ng (), respectively, to hide their origins while continuing to secretly offer sacrifices to the Sima ancestors. To this day, people living in the village with surnames Feng and Tong are forbidden from intermarrying on the grounds that the relationship would be incestuous.\nAccording to the \"Book of Han\", Wang Mang sent an expedition to search for and ennoble a male-line descent of Sima Qian as (\"Viscount of Historical Mastery\"), although it was not recorded who received this title of nobility. A Qing dynasty stele \"Records of the Renovation of the Temple of the Grand Historian\" () erected in the nearby county seat Han City () claims that the title was given to the grandson of Sima Lin.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27637", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27637", "title": "Structural geology", "text": "Science of the description and interpretation of deformation in the Earth's crust\nStructural geology is the study of the three-dimensional distribution of rock units with respect to their deformational histories. The primary goal of structural geology is to use measurements of present-day rock geometries to uncover information about the history of deformation (strain) in the rocks, and ultimately, to understand the stress field that resulted in the observed strain and geometries. This understanding of the dynamics of the stress field can be linked to important events in the geologic past; a common goal is to understand the structural evolution of a particular area with respect to regionally widespread patterns of rock deformation (e.g., mountain building, rifting) due to plate tectonics.\nUse and importance.\nThe study of geologic structures has been of prime importance in economic geology, both petroleum geology and mining geology. Folded and faulted rock strata commonly form traps that accumulate and concentrate fluids such as petroleum and natural gas. Similarly, faulted and structurally complex areas are notable as permeable zones for hydrothermal fluids, resulting in concentrated areas of base and precious metal ore deposits. Veins of minerals containing various metals commonly occupy faults and fractures in structurally complex areas. These structurally fractured and faulted zones often occur in association with intrusive igneous rocks. They often also occur around geologic reef complexes and collapse features such as ancient sinkholes. Deposits of gold, silver, copper, lead, zinc, and other metals, are commonly located in structurally complex areas.\nStructural geology is a critical part of engineering geology, which is concerned with the physical and mechanical properties of natural rocks. Structural fabrics and defects such as faults, folds, foliations and joints are internal weaknesses of rocks which may affect the stability of human engineered structures such as dams, road cuts, open pit mines and underground mines or road tunnels.\nGeotechnical risk, including earthquake risk can only be investigated by inspecting a combination of structural geology and geomorphology. In addition, areas of karst landscapes which reside atop caverns, potential sinkholes, or other collapse features are of particular importance for these scientists. In addition, areas of steep slopes are potential collapse or landslide hazards.\nEnvironmental geologists and hydrogeologists need to apply the tenets of structural geology to understand how geologic sites impact (or are impacted by) groundwater flow and penetration. For instance, a hydrogeologist may need to determine if seepage of toxic substances from waste dumps is occurring in a residential area or if salty water is seeping into an aquifer.\nPlate tectonics is a theory developed during the 1960s which describes the movement of continents by way of the separation and collision of crustal plates. It is in a sense structural geology on a planet scale, and is used throughout structural geology as a framework to analyze and understand global, regional, and local scale features.\nMethods.\nStructural geologists use a variety of methods to (first) measure rock geometries, (second) reconstruct their deformational histories, and (third) estimate the stress field that resulted in that deformation.\nGeometries.\nPrimary data sets for structural geology are collected in the field. Structural geologists measure a variety of planar features (bedding planes, foliation planes, fold axial planes, fault planes, and joints), and linear features (stretching lineations, in which minerals are ductilely extended; fold axes; and intersection lineations, the trace of a planar feature on another planar surface).\nMeasurement conventions.\nThe inclination of a planar structure in geology is measured by \"strike and dip\". The strike is the line of intersection between the planar feature and a horizontal plane, taken according to the right hand convention, and the dip is the magnitude of the inclination, below horizontal, at right angles to strike. For example; striking 25 degrees East of North, dipping 45 degrees Southeast, recorded as N25E,45SE. &lt;br&gt;\nAlternatively, dip and dip direction may be used as this is absolute. Dip direction is measured in 360 degrees, generally clockwise from North. For example, a dip of 45 degrees towards 115 degrees azimuth, recorded as 45/115. Note that this is the same as above.\nThe term \"hade\" is occasionally used and is the deviation of a plane from vertical i.e. (90\u00b0-dip).\nFold axis plunge is measured in dip and dip direction (strictly, plunge and azimuth of plunge). The orientation of a fold axial plane is measured in strike and dip or dip and dip direction.\nLineations are measured in terms of dip and dip direction, if possible. Often lineations occur expressed on a planar surface and can be difficult to measure directly. In this case, the lineation may be measured from the horizontal as a \"rake\" or \"pitch\" upon the surface.\nRake is measured by placing a protractor flat on the planar surface, with the flat edge horizontal and measuring the angle of the lineation clockwise from horizontal. The orientation of the lineation can then be calculated from the rake and strike-dip information of the plane it was measured from, using a stereographic projection.\nIf a fault has lineations formed by movement on the plane, e.g.; slickensides, this is recorded as a lineation, with a rake, and annotated as to the indication of throw on the fault.\nGenerally it is easier to record strike and dip information of planar structures in dip/dip direction format as this will match all the other structural information you may be recording about folds, lineations, etc., although there is an advantage to using different formats that discriminate between planar and linear data.\nPlane, fabric, fold and deformation conventions.\nThe convention for analysing structural geology is to identify the planar structures, often called \"planar fabrics\" because this implies a textural formation, the linear structures and, from analysis of these, unravel deformations.\nPlanar structures are named according to their order of formation, with original sedimentary layering the lowest at S0. Often it is impossible to identify S0 in highly deformed rocks, so numbering may be started at an arbitrary number or given a letter (SA, for instance). In cases where there is a bedding-plane foliation caused by burial metamorphism or diagenesis this may be enumerated as S0a.\nIf there are folds, these are numbered as F1, F2, etc. Generally the axial plane foliation or cleavage of a fold is created during folding, and the number convention should match. For example, an F2 fold should have an S2 axial foliation.\nDeformations are numbered according to their order of formation with the letter D denoting a deformation event. For example, D1, D2, D3. Folds and foliations, because they are formed by deformation events, should correlate with these events. For example, an F2 fold, with an S2 axial plane foliation would be the result of a D2 deformation.\nMetamorphic events may span multiple deformations. Sometimes it is useful to identify them similarly to the structural features for which they are responsible, e.g.; M2. This may be possible by observing porphyroblast formation in cleavages of known deformation age, by identifying metamorphic mineral assemblages created by different events, or via geochronology.\nIntersection lineations in rocks, as they are the product of the intersection of two planar structures, are named according to the two planar structures from which they are formed. For instance, the intersection lineation of a S1 cleavage and bedding is the L1-0 intersection lineation (also known as the cleavage-bedding lineation).\nStretching lineations may be difficult to quantify, especially in highly stretched ductile rocks where minimal foliation information is preserved. Where possible, when correlated with deformations (as few are formed in folds, and many are not strictly associated with planar foliations), they may be identified similar to planar surfaces and folds, e.g.; L1, L2. For convenience some geologists prefer to annotate them with a subscript S, for example Ls1 to differentiate them from intersection lineations, though this is generally redundant.\nStereographic projections.\nStereographic projection is a method for analyzing the nature and orientation of deformation stresses, lithological units and penetrative fabrics wherein linear and planar features (structural strike and dip readings, typically taken using a compass clinometer) passing through an imagined sphere are plotted on a two-dimensional grid projection, facilitating more holistic analysis of a set of measurements. Stereonet developed by Richard W. Allmendinger is widely used in the structural geology community.\nRock macro-structures.\nOn a large scale, structural geology is the study of the three-dimensional interaction and relationships of stratigraphic units within terranes of rock or geological regions.\nThis branch of structural geology deals mainly with the orientation, deformation and relationships of stratigraphy (bedding), which may have been faulted, folded or given a foliation by some tectonic event. This is mainly a geometric science, from which \"cross sections\" and three-dimensional \"block models\" of rocks, regions, terranes and parts of the Earth's crust can be generated.\nStudy of regional structure is important in understanding orogeny, plate tectonics and more specifically in the oil, gas and mineral exploration industries as structures such as faults, folds and unconformities are primary controls on ore mineralisation and oil traps.\nModern regional structure is being investigated using seismic tomography and seismic reflection in three dimensions, providing unrivaled images of the Earth's interior, its faults and the deep crust. Further information from geophysics such as gravity and airborne magnetics can provide information on the nature of rocks imaged to be in the deep crust.\nRock microstructures.\nRock microstructure or \"texture\" of rocks is studied by structural geologists on a small scale to provide detailed information mainly about metamorphic rocks and some features of sedimentary rocks, most often if they have been folded. \nTextural study involves measurement and characterisation of foliations, crenulations, metamorphic minerals, and timing relationships between these structural features and mineralogical features. \nUsually this involves collection of hand specimens, which may be cut to provide petrographic thin sections which are analysed under a petrographic microscope.\nKinematics.\nGeologists use rock geometry measurements to understand the history of strain in rocks. Strain can take the form of brittle faulting and ductile folding and shearing. Brittle deformation takes place in the shallow crust, and ductile deformation takes place in the deeper crust, where temperatures and pressures are higher.\nStress fields.\nBy understanding the constitutive relationships between stress and strain in rocks, geologists can translate the observed patterns of rock deformation into a stress field during the geologic past. The following list of features are typically used to determine stress fields from deformational structures.\nModeling.\nFor economic geology such as petroleum and mineral development, as well as research, modeling of structural geology is becoming increasingly important. 2D and 3D models of structural systems such as anticlines, synclines, fold and thrust belts, and other features can help better understand the evolution of a structure through time. Without modeling or interpretation of the subsurface, geologists are limited to their knowledge of the surface geological mapping. If only reliant on the surface geology, major economic potential could be missed by overlooking the structural and tectonic history of the area.\nCharacterization of the mechanical properties of rock.\nThe mechanical properties of rock play a vital role in the structures that form during deformation deep below the earth's crust. The conditions in which a rock is present will result in different structures that geologists observe above ground in the field. The field of structural geology tries to relate the formations that humans see to the changes the rock went through to get to that final structure. Knowing the conditions of deformation that lead to such structures can illuminate the history of the deformation of the rock.\nTemperature and pressure play a huge role in the deformation of rock. At the conditions under the earth's crust of extreme high temperature and pressure, rocks are ductile. They can bend, fold or break. Other vital conditions that contribute to the formation of structure of rock under the earth are the stress and strain fields.\nStress-strain curve.\nStress is a pressure, defined as a directional force over area. When a rock is subjected to stresses, it changes shape. When the stress is released, the rock may or may not return to its original shape. That change in shape is quantified by strain, the change in length over the original length of the material in one dimension. Stress induces strain which ultimately results in a changed structure.\nElastic deformation refers to a reversible deformation. In other words, when stress on the rock is released, the rock returns to its original shape. Reversible, linear, elasticity involves the stretching, compressing, or distortion of atomic bonds. Because there is no breaking of bonds, the material springs back when the force is released. This type of deformation is modeled using a linear relationship between stress and strain, i.e. a Hookean relationship.\nformula_1\nWhere \u03c3 denotes stress, formula_2 denotes strain, and E is the elastic modulus, which is material dependent. The elastic modulus is, in effect, a measure of the strength of atomic bonds.\nPlastic deformation refers to non-reversible deformation. The relationship between stress and strain for permanent deformation is nonlinear. Stress has caused permanent change of shape in the material by involving the breaking of bonds.\nOne mechanism of plastic deformation is the movement of dislocations by an applied stress. Because rocks are essentially aggregates of minerals, we can think of them as poly-crystalline materials. Dislocations are a type of crystallographic defect which consists of an extra or missing half plane of atoms in the periodic array of atoms that make up a crystal lattice. Dislocations are present in all real crystallographic materials.\nHardness.\nHardness is difficult to quantify. It is a measure of resistance to deformation, specifically permanent deformation. There is precedent for hardness as a surface quality, a measure of the abrasiveness or surface-scratching resistance of a material. If the material being tested, however, is uniform in composition and structure, then the surface of the material is only a few atomic layers thick, and measurements are of the bulk material. Thus, simple surface measurements yield information about the bulk properties. Ways to measure hardness include:\nIndentation hardness is used often in metallurgy and materials science and can be thought of as resistance to penetration by an indenter.\nToughness.\nToughness can be described best by a material's resistance to cracking. During plastic deformation, a material absorbs energy until fracture occurs. The area under the stress-strain curve is the work required to fracture the material. The toughness modulus is defined as:\nformula_3\nWhere formula_4 is the ultimate tensile strength, and formula_5 is the strain at failure. The modulus is the maximum amount of energy per unit volume a material can absorb without fracturing. From the equation for modulus, for large toughness, high strength and high ductility are needed. These two properties are usually mutually exclusive. Brittle materials have low toughness because low plastic deformation decreases the strain (low ductility). Ways to measure toughness include: Page impact machine and Charpy impact test.\nResilience.\nResilience is a measure of the elastic energy absorbed of a material under stress. In other words, the external work performed on a material during deformation. The area under the elastic portion of the stress-strain curve is the strain energy absorbed per unit volume. The resilience modulus is defined as:\nformula_6\nwhere formula_7 is the yield strength of the material and E is the elastic modulus of the material. To increase resilience, one needs increased elastic yield strength and decreased modulus of elasticity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "27638", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27638", "title": "Spermatozoon", "text": ""}
{"id": "27640", "revid": "48439861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27640", "title": "Samuel Beckett", "text": "Irish playwright and poet (1906\u20131989)\nSamuel Barclay Beckett (; 13 April 1906 \u2013 22 December 1989) was an Irish playwright, poet, novelist, and literary critic. Writing in both English and French, his literary and theatrical works feature bleak, impersonal, and tragicomic episodes of life, coupled with black comedy and literary nonsense. Beckett is widely regarded as one of the most influential and important writers of the 20th century, credited with transforming modern theatre. As a major figure of Irish literature, he is best known for his tragicomedy play \"Waiting for Godot\" (1953). For his foundational contribution to both literature and theatre, Beckett received the 1969 Nobel Prize in Literature, \"for his writing, which\u2014in new forms for the novel and drama\u2014in the destitution of modern man acquires its elevation.\"\nDuring his early career, Beckett worked as a literary critic and commentator, and in 1930 he took up a role as a lecturer in Dublin. He wrote his first novel \"Dream of Fair to Middling Women\" in 1932, which influenced many of his later works, but it was not published until after his death. Around this time, Beckett also began studying artistic expressions and art history, particularly of paintings displayed at the National Gallery of Ireland. He maintained a close friendship with Irish writer James Joyce throughout his life, and cited him as a major inspiration for his works. As a resident of Paris for most of his adult life, Beckett wrote in both French and English, sometimes under the pseudonym Andrew Belis. His later literary works, especially his plays, became increasingly austere and minimalistic as his career progressed, involving more aesthetic and linguistic experimentation, with techniques of stream of consciousness repetition and self-reference. During the Second World War, Beckett became a member of the French Resistance group Gloria SMH (R\u00e9seau Gloria) and was awarded the Croix de Guerre in 1949.\nHis works were well received by critics and theatre audiences during his own lifetime, and his career spanned both Ireland and France, with short stints in Germany and Italy. During these terms, Beckett collaborated with many actors, actresses and theatre directors for his plays, including Jack MacGowran, Billie Whitelaw, Jocelyn Herbert, and Walter Asmus. Beckett's works are known for their existential themes, and these made them an important part of 20th-century plays and dramas. In 1961, he shared the inaugural Prix International with Jorge Luis Borges. He was also the first Saoi of the Aosd\u00e1na, having been elected to the position in 1984.\nBeckett is considered to be one of the last modernist writers and a key figure in what Martin Esslin called the \"Theatre of the Absurd.\" He died in 1989 and was buried at the Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse. His most well-known play, \"Waiting for Godot\", has since become a centrepiece of modernist literature, and in a public poll conducted by London's Royal National Theatre in 1998, it was voted as \"the most significant English-language play of the 20th century.\"\nEarly life.\nSamuel Barclay Beckett was born in the Dublin suburb of Foxrock on 13 April 1906, the son of William Frank Beckett (1871\u20131933), a quantity surveyor of Huguenot descent, and Maria Jones Roe, a nurse. His parents were both 35 when he was born, and had married in 1901. Beckett had one elder brother named Frank Edward (1902\u20131954). At the age of five, he attended a local playschool in Dublin, where he started to learn music, and then moved to Earlsfort House School near Harcourt Street in Dublin. The Becketts were members of the Church of Ireland; raised as an Anglican, Beckett later became agnostic, a perspective which informed his writing.\nBeckett's family home, Cooldrinagh, was a large house and garden complete with a tennis court built in 1903 by Beckett's father. The house and garden, its surrounding countryside where he often went walking with his father, the nearby Leopardstown Racecourse, the Foxrock railway station, and Harcourt Street station would all feature in his prose and plays.\nAround 1919 or 1920, he went to Portora Royal School in Enniskillen, which Oscar Wilde had also attended. He left in 1923 and entered Trinity College Dublin, where he studied modern literature and Romance languages, and received his bachelor's degree in 1927. A natural athlete, he excelled at cricket as a left-handed batsman and a left-arm medium-pace bowler. Later, he played for Dublin University and played two first-class games against Northamptonshire. As a result, he became the only Nobel literature laureate to have played first-class cricket and thus to appear in Wisden.\nEarly writings.\nBeckett studied French, Italian, and English at Trinity College Dublin from 1923 to 1927 (one of his tutors \u2013 not a teaching role in TCD \u2013 was the Berkeley scholar A. A. Luce, who introduced him to the work of Henri Bergson). He was elected a Scholar in Modern Languages in 1926. Beckett graduated with a BA and, after teaching briefly at Campbell College in Belfast, took up the post of \"lecteur d'anglais\" at the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure in Paris from November 1928 to 1930. While there, he was introduced to Irish author James Joyce by Thomas MacGreevy, a poet and close confidant of Beckett who also worked there. This meeting had a profound effect on the young man. Beckett assisted Joyce in various ways, one of which was research towards the book that became \"Finnegans Wake\".\nIn 1929, Beckett published his first work, a critical essay titled \"Dante... Bruno. Vico.. Joyce\". The essay defends Joyce's work and method, chiefly from allegations of wanton obscurity and dimness, and was Beckett's contribution to \"Our Exagmination Round His Factification for Incamination of Work in Progress\" (a book of essays on Joyce which also included contributions by Eugene Jolas, Robert McAlmon, and William Carlos Williams). Beckett's close relationship with Joyce and his family cooled, however, when he rejected the advances of Joyce's daughter Lucia. Beckett's first short story, \"Assumption\", was published in Jolas's periodical \"transition\". The next year he won a small literary prize for his hastily composed poem \"Whoroscope\", which draws on a biography of Ren\u00e9 Descartes that Beckett happened to be reading when he was encouraged to submit.\nIn 1930, Beckett returned to Trinity College as a lecturer. In November 1930, he presented a paper in French to the Modern Languages Society of Trinity on the Toulouse poet Jean du Chas, founder of a movement called \"le Concentrisme\". It was a literary parody, for Beckett had in fact invented the poet and his movement that claimed to be \"at odds with all that is clear and distinct in Descartes\". Beckett later insisted that he had not intended to fool his audience. When Beckett resigned from Trinity at the end of 1931, his brief academic career was at an end. He commemorated it with the poem \"Gnome\", which was inspired by his reading of Johann Wolfgang Goethe's \"Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship\" and eventually published in \"The Dublin Magazine\" in 1934:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Spend the years of learning squanderingCourage for the years of wanderingThrough a world politely turningFrom the loutishness of learning\nBeckett travelled throughout Europe. He spent some time in London, where in 1931 he published \"Proust\", his critical study of French author Marcel Proust. Two years later, following his father's death, he began two years' treatment with Tavistock Clinic psychoanalyst Dr. Wilfred Bion. Aspects of it became evident in Beckett's later works, such as \"Watt\" and \"Waiting for Godot\". In 1932, he wrote his first novel, \"Dream of Fair to Middling Women\", but after many rejections from publishers decided to abandon it (it was eventually published in 1992). Despite his inability to get it published, however, the novel served as a source for many of Beckett's early poems, as well as for his first full-length book, the 1933 short-story collection \"More Pricks Than Kicks\".\nBeckett published essays and reviews, including \"Recent Irish Poetry\" (in \"The Bookman\", August 1934) and \"Humanistic Quietism\", a review of his friend Thomas MacGreevy's \"Poems\" (in \"The Dublin Magazine\", July\u2013September 1934). They focused on the work of MacGreevy, Brian Coffey, Denis Devlin and Blanaid Salkeld, despite their slender achievements at the time, comparing them favourably with their Celtic Revival contemporaries and invoking Ezra Pound, T. S. Eliot, and the French symbolists as their precursors. In describing these poets as forming \"the nucleus of a living poetic in Ireland\", Beckett was tracing the outlines of an Irish poetic modernist canon.\nIn 1935 \u2013 the year that he successfully published a book of his poetry, \"Echo's Bones and Other Precipitates\" \u2013 Beckett worked on his novel \"Murphy\". In May, he wrote to MacGreevy that he had been reading about film and wished to go to Moscow to study with Sergei Eisenstein at the Gerasimov Institute of Cinematography. In mid-1936 he wrote to Eisenstein and Vsevolod Pudovkin to offer himself as their apprentice. Nothing came of this, however, as Beckett's letter was lost owing to Eisenstein's quarantine during the smallpox outbreak, as well as his focus on a script re-write of his postponed film production. In 1936, a friend had suggested he look up the works of Arnold Geulincx, which Beckett did and he took many notes. The philosopher's name is mentioned in \"Murphy\" and the reading apparently left a strong impression. \"Murphy\" was finished in 1936 and Beckett departed for extensive travel around Germany, during which time he filled several notebooks with lists of noteworthy artwork that he had seen and noted his distaste for the Nazi savagery that was overtaking the country. Returning to Ireland briefly in 1937, he oversaw the publication of \"Murphy\" (1938), which he translated into French the following year. He fell out with his mother, which contributed to his decision to settle permanently in Paris. Beckett remained in Paris following the outbreak of World War II in 1939, preferring, in his own words, \"France at war to Ireland at peace\". His was soon a known face in and around Left Bank caf\u00e9s, where he strengthened his allegiance with Joyce and forged new ones with artists Alberto Giacometti and Marcel Duchamp, with whom he regularly played chess. Sometime around December 1937, Beckett had a brief affair with Peggy Guggenheim, who nicknamed him \"Oblomov\" (after the character in Ivan Goncharov's novel).\nIn January 1938 in Paris, Beckett was stabbed in the chest and nearly killed when he refused the solicitations of a notorious pimp (who went by the name of Prudent). Joyce arranged a private room for Beckett at the hospital. The publicity surrounding the stabbing attracted the attention of Suzanne Dechevaux-Dumesnil, who knew Beckett slightly from his first stay in Paris. This time, however, the two would begin a lifelong companionship. At a preliminary hearing, Beckett asked his attacker for the motive behind the stabbing. Prudent replied: \"Je ne sais pas, Monsieur. Je m'excuse\" [\"I do not know, sir. I apologise\"]. Beckett eventually dropped the charges against his attacker \u2013 partially to avoid further formalities, partly because he found Prudent likeable and well-mannered. After his own near-fatal stabbing in 2022, author Salman Rushdie referenced Beckett's example when talking about his reasons for not interviewing his attacker.\nFor Beckett, the 1930s was a decade of artistic exploration. He started to take a serious interest in art history, frequenting Ireland's National Gallery, studying a range of painters and movements (specifically the Dutch Golden Age), and even visiting private collections. In 1933 Beckett applied for the position of assistant curator at London's National Gallery. Later, in the winter of 1936\u201337, having sailed from Cobh in East Cork to Hamburg on 26 September 1936, he took a deep dive into Germany's galleries and underground collections. This lasting engagement with the visual arts seeped into his creative process, often shaping his literary output and incentivising him to collaborate with artists such as Joan Mitchell and Genevi\u00e8ve Asse.\nWorld War II and French Resistance.\nAfter the German occupation of France in 1940, Beckett joined the French Resistance, working as a courier for the \"R\u00e9seau Gloria\" network. On several occasions over the next two years he was nearly caught by the Gestapo. In August 1942, his network was betrayed and he and Suzanne fled south on foot to the safety of the small village of Roussillon, Vaucluse. During the two years that Beckett stayed in Roussillon he indirectly helped the Maquis engage in sabotage operations against German occupational forces in the Vaucluse mountains, though Beckett rarely spoke about his wartime work in later life. He was awarded the Croix de guerre and the Resistance Medal by the French government for his efforts in fighting the German occupation; to the end of his life, however, Beckett would refer to his work with the French Resistance as \"boy scout stuff\".\nWhile in hiding in Roussillon, Beckett continued work on the novel \"Watt\". He started the novel in 1941 and completed it in 1945, but it was not published until 1953; however, an extract had appeared in the Dublin literary periodical \"Envoy\". After the war, he returned to France in 1946 where he worked as a stores manager at the Irish Red Cross Hospital based in Saint-L\u00f4. Beckett described his experiences in an untransmitted radio script, \"The Capital of the Ruins\".\nFame: novels and the theatre.\nIn 1945, Beckett returned to Dublin for a brief visit. During his stay, he had a revelation in his mother's room: his entire future direction in literature appeared to him. Beckett had felt that he would remain forever in the shadow of Joyce, certain to never beat him at his own game. His revelation prompted him to change direction and acknowledge both his own stupidity and his interest in ignorance and impotence:\n\"I realised that Joyce had gone as far as one could in the direction of knowing more, [being] in control of one's material. He was always adding to it; you only have to look at his proofs to see that. I realised that my own way was in impoverishment, in lack of knowledge and in taking away, in subtracting rather than in adding.\"\nKnowlson argues that \"Beckett was rejecting the Joycean principle that knowing more was a way of creatively understanding the world and controlling it ... In future, his work would focus on poverty, failure, exile and loss \u2013 as he put it, on man as a 'non-knower' and as a 'non-can-er.'\" The revelation \"has rightly been regarded as a pivotal moment in his entire career\". Beckett fictionalised the experience in his play \"Krapp's Last Tape\" (1958). While listening to a tape he made earlier in his life, Krapp hears his younger self say \"clear to me at last that the dark I have always struggled to keep under is in reality my most...\", at which point Krapp fast-forwards the tape (before the audience can hear the complete revelation). Beckett later explained to Knowlson that the missing words on the tape are \"precious ally\".\nIn 1946, Jean-Paul Sartre's magazine Les Temps modernes published the first part of Beckett's short story \"Suite\" (later to be called \"\", or \"The End\"), not realising that Beckett had only submitted the first half of the story; co-editor Simone de Beauvoir refused to publish the second part. Beckett also began to write his fourth novel, \"Mercier et Camier\", which was not published until 1970. The novel preceded his most famous work, the play (\"Waiting for Godot)\", which was written not long afterwards. More importantly, \"Mercier and Camier\" was Beckett's first long work written in French, the language of most of his subsequent works which were strongly supported by J\u00e9r\u00f4me Lindon, director of his Parisian publishing house , including the poioumenon \"trilogy\" of novels: \"Molloy\" (1951); (1951), \"Malone Dies\" (1958); (1953), \"The Unnamable\" (1960). Despite being a native English speaker, Beckett wrote in French because, as he himself claimed, it was easier for him thus to write \"without style\".\n\"Waiting for Godot\", like most of his works after 1947, was first written in French. Beckett worked on the play between October 1948 and January 1949. His partner, Suzanne Dechevaux-Dumesnil, was integral to its success. Dechevaux-Dumesnil became his agent and sent the manuscript to multiple producers until they met Roger Blin, the soon-to-be director of the play.\nBlin's knowledge of French theatre and vision, alongside Beckett's knowing what he wanted the play to represent, contributed greatly to its success. In a much-quoted article, the critic Vivian Mercier wrote that Beckett \"has achieved a theoretical impossibility\u2014a play in which nothing happens, that yet keeps audiences glued to their seats. What's more, since the second act is a subtly different reprise of the first, he has written a play in which nothing happens, twice.\" The play was published in 1952 and premi\u00e8red in 1953 in Paris; an English translation was performed two years later. The play was a critical, popular, and controversial success in Paris. It opened in London in 1955 to mainly negative reviews, but the tide turned with positive reactions from Harold Hobson in \"The Sunday Times\" and, later, Kenneth Tynan. After the showing in Miami, the play became extremely popular, with highly successful performances in the US and Germany. The play is a favourite: it is not only performed frequently but has globally inspired playwrights to emulate it. This is the sole play the manuscript of which Beckett never sold, donated or gave away. He refused to allow the play to be translated into film but did allow it to be played on television.\nDuring this time in the 1950s, Beckett became one of several adults who sometimes drove local children to school; one such child was Andr\u00e9 Roussimoff, who later became a famous professional wrestler under the name Andr\u00e9 the Giant. They had a surprising amount of common ground and bonded over their love of cricket, with Roussimoff later recalling that the two rarely talked about anything else. Beckett translated all of his works into English himself, with the exception of \"Molloy\", for which he collaborated with Patrick Bowles. The success of \"Waiting for Godot\" opened up a career in theatre for its author. Beckett went on to write successful full-length plays, including (\"Endgame\") (1957), \"Krapp's Last Tape\" (1958, written in English), \"Happy Days\" (1961, also written in English), and \"Play\" (1963). In 1961, Beckett received the International Publishers' Formentor Prize in recognition of his work, which he shared that year with Jorge Luis Borges.\nLater life and death.\nThe 1960s were a time of change for Beckett, both on a personal level and as a writer. In 1961, he married Suzanne in a secret civil ceremony in England (its secrecy due to reasons relating to French inheritance law). The success of his plays led to invitations to attend rehearsals and productions around the world, leading eventually to a new career as a theatre director. In 1957, he had his first commission from the BBC Third Programme for a radio play, \"All That Fall.\" He continued writing sporadically for radio and extended his scope to include cinema and television. He began to write in English again, although he also wrote in French until the end of his life. He bought some land in 1953 near a hamlet about northeast of Paris and built a cottage for himself with the help of some locals.\nFrom the late 1950s until his death, Beckett had a relationship with Barbara Bray, a widow who worked as a script editor for the BBC. Knowlson wrote of them: \"She was small and attractive, but, above all, keenly intelligent and well-read. Beckett seems to have been immediately attracted by her and she to him. Their encounter was highly significant for them both, for it represented the beginning of a relationship that was to last, in parallel with that with Suzanne, for the rest of his life.\" Bray died in Edinburgh on 25 February 2010.\nIn 1969 the avant-garde filmmaker Rosa von Praunheim shot an experimental short film portrait about Beckett, which he named after the writer.\nIn October 1969 while on holiday in Tunis with Suzanne, Beckett heard that he had won the 1969 Nobel Prize in Literature. Anticipating that her intensely private husband would be saddled with fame from that moment on, Suzanne called the award a \"catastrophe\". While Beckett did not devote much time to interviews, he sometimes met the artists, scholars, and admirers who sought him out in the anonymous lobby of the Hotel PLM Saint-Jacques in Paris \u2013 where he arranged his appointments and often had lunch \u2013 near his Montparnasse home. Although Beckett was an intensely private man, a review of the second volume of his letters by Roy Foster on 15 December 2011 issue of \"The New Republic\" reveals Beckett to be not only unexpectedly amiable but frequently prepared to talk about his work and the process behind it.\nSuzanne died on 17 July 1989. Confined to a nursing home and suffering from emphysema and possibly Parkinson's disease, Beckett died on 22 December 1989. The two were interred together in the cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse in Paris and share a simple granite gravestone that follows Beckett's directive that it should be \"any colour, so long as it's grey\".\nWorks.\nBeckett's career as a writer can be roughly divided into three periods: his early works, up until the end of World War II in 1945; his middle period, stretching from 1945 until the early 1960s, during which he wrote what are probably his best-known works; and his late period, from the early 1960s until Beckett's death in 1989, during which his works tended to become shorter and his style more minimalist.\nEarly works.\nBeckett's earliest works are generally considered to have been strongly influenced by the work of his friend James Joyce. They are erudite and seem to display the author's learning merely for its own sake, resulting in several obscure passages. The opening phrases of the short-story collection \"More Pricks than Kicks\" (1934) afford a representative sample of this style:\nIt was morning and Belacqua was stuck in the first of the canti in the moon. He was so bogged that he could move neither backward nor forward. Blissful Beatrice was there, Dante also, and she explained the spots on the moon to him. She shewed him in the first place where he was at fault, then she put up her own explanation. She had it from God, therefore he could rely on its being accurate in every particular.\nThe passage makes reference to Dante's \"Commedia\", which can serve to confuse readers not familiar with that work. It also anticipates aspects of Beckett's later work: the physical inactivity of the character Belacqua; the character's immersion in his own head and thoughts; the somewhat irreverent comedy of the final sentence.\nSimilar elements are present in Beckett's first published novel, \"Murphy\" (1938), which also explores the themes of insanity and chess (both of which would be recurrent elements in Beckett's later works). The novel's opening sentence hints at the somewhat pessimistic undertones and black humour that animate many of Beckett's works: \"The sun shone, having no alternative, on the nothing new\". \"Watt\", written while Beckett was in hiding in Roussillon during World War II, is similar in terms of themes but less exuberant in its style. It explores human movement as if it were a mathematical permutation, presaging Beckett's later preoccupation\u2014in both his novels and dramatic works\u2014with precise movement.\nBeckett's 1930 essay \"Proust\" was strongly influenced by Schopenhauer's pessimism and laudatory descriptions of saintly asceticism. At this time Beckett began to write creatively in the French language. In the late 1930s, he wrote a number of short poems in that language and their sparseness\u2014in contrast to the density of his English poems of roughly the same period, collected in \"Echo's Bones and Other Precipitates\" (1935)\u2014seems to show that Beckett, albeit through the medium of another language, was in process of simplifying his style, a change also evidenced in \"Watt\".\nMiddle period.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nwho may tell the tale\nof the old man?\nweigh absence in a scale?\nmete want with a span?\nthe sum assess\nof the world's woes?\nnothingness\nin words enclose?\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nFrom \"Watt\" (1953)\nAfter World War II, Beckett turned definitively to the French language as a vehicle. It was this, together with the \"revelation\" experienced in his mother's room in Dublin\u2014in which he realised that his art must be subjective and drawn wholly from his own inner world\u2014that would result in the works for which Beckett is best remembered today.\nDuring the 15 years following the war, Beckett produced four major full-length stage plays: \"En attendant Godot\" (written 1948\u20131949; \"Waiting for Godot\"), \"Fin de partie\" (1955\u20131957; \"Endgame\"), \"Krapp's Last Tape\" (1958), and \"Happy Days\" (1961). These plays\u2014which are often considered, rightly or wrongly, to have been instrumental in the so-called \"Theatre of the Absurd\"\u2014deal in a darkly humorous way with themes similar to those of the roughly contemporary existentialist thinkers. The term \"Theatre of the Absurd\" was coined by Martin Esslin in a book of the same name; Beckett and \"Godot\" were centrepieces of the book. Esslin argued these plays were the fulfilment of Albert Camus's concept of \"the absurd\"; this is one reason Beckett is often falsely labelled as an existentialist (this is based on the assumption that Camus was an existentialist, though he in fact broke off from the existentialist movement and founded his own philosophy). Though many of the themes are similar, Beckett had little affinity for existentialism as a whole.\nBroadly speaking, the plays deal with the subject of despair and the will to survive in spite of that despair, in the face of an uncomprehending and incomprehensible world. The words of Nell\u2014one of the two characters in \"Endgame\" who are trapped in ashbins, from which they occasionally peek their heads to speak\u2014can best summarise the themes of the plays of Beckett's middle period: \"Nothing is funnier than unhappiness, I grant you that. ... Yes, yes, it's the most comical thing in the world. And we laugh, we laugh, with a will, in the beginning. But it's always the same thing. Yes, it's like the funny story we have heard too often, we still find it funny, but we don't laugh any more.\"\nBeckett's outstanding achievements in prose during the period were the three novels \"Molloy\" (1951), \"Malone meurt\" (1951; \"Malone Dies\") and \"L'innommable\" (1953: \"The Unnamable\"). In these novels\u2014sometimes referred to as a \"trilogy\", though this is against the author's own explicit wishes\u2014the prose becomes increasingly bare and stripped down. \"Molloy\", for instance, still retains many of the characteristics of a conventional novel (time, place, movement, and plot) and it makes use of the structure of a detective novel. In \"Malone Dies\", movement and plot are largely dispensed with, though there is still some indication of place and the passage of time; the \"action\" of the book takes the form of an interior monologue. Finally, in \"The Unnamable\", almost all sense of place and time are abolished, and the essential theme seems to be the conflict between the voice's drive to continue speaking so as to continue existing, and its almost equally strong urge towards silence and oblivion. Despite the widely held view that Beckett's work, as exemplified by the novels of this period, is essentially pessimistic, the will to live seems to win out in the end; witness, for instance, the famous final phrase of \"The Unnamable\": \"you must go on, I can't go on, I'll go on\".\nAfter these three novels, Beckett struggled for many years to produce a sustained work of prose, a struggle evidenced by the brief \"stories\" later collected as \"Texts for Nothing\". In the late 1950s, however, he created one of his most radical prose works, \"Comment c'est\" (1961; \"How It Is\"). An early variant version of \"Comment c'est\", \"L'Image\", was published in the British arts review, \"X: A Quarterly Review\" (1959), and is the first appearance of the novel in any form. This work relates the adventures of an unnamed narrator crawling through the mud while dragging a sack of canned food. It was written as a sequence of unpunctuated paragraphs in a style approaching telegraphese: \"You are there somewhere alive somewhere vast stretch of time then it's over you are there no more alive no more than again you are there again alive again it wasn't over an error you begin again all over more or less in the same place or in another as when another image above in the light you come to in hospital in the dark\". Following this work, it was almost another decade before Beckett produced a work of non-dramatic prose. \"How It Is\" is generally considered to mark the end of his middle period as a writer.\nLate works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\ntime she stopped\nsitting at her window\nquiet at her window\nonly window\nfacing other windows\nother only windows\nall eyes\nall sides\nhigh and low\ntime she stopped\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nFrom \"Rockaby\" (1980)\nThroughout the 1960s and into the 1970s, Beckett's works exhibited an increasing tendency\u2014already evident in much of his work of the 1950s\u2014towards compactness. This has led to his work sometimes being described as minimalist. The extreme example of this, among his dramatic works, is the 1969 piece \"Breath\", which lasts for only 35 seconds and has no characters (though it was likely intended to offer ironic comment on \"Oh! Calcutta!\", the theatrical revue for which it served as an introductory piece).\nIn his theatre of the late period, Beckett's characters\u2014already few in number in the earlier plays\u2014are whittled down to essential elements. The ironically titled \"Play\" (1962), for instance, consists of three characters immersed up to their necks in large funeral urns. The television drama \"Eh Joe\" (1963), which was written for the actor Jack MacGowran, is animated by a camera that steadily closes into a tight focus upon the face of the title character. The play \"Not I\" (1972) consists almost solely of, in Beckett's words, \"a moving mouth with the rest of the stage in darkness\". Following from \"Krapp's Last Tape\", many of these later plays explore memory, often in the form of a forced recollection of haunting past events in a moment of stillness in the present. They also deal with the theme of the self-confined and observed, with a voice that either comes from outside into the protagonist's head (as in \"Eh Joe\") or else another character comments on the protagonist silently, by means of gesture (as in \"Not I\"). Beckett's most politically charged play, \"Catastrophe\" (1982), which was dedicated to V\u00e1clav Havel, deals relatively explicitly with the idea of dictatorship. After a long period of inactivity, Beckett's poetry experienced a revival during this period in the ultra-terse French poems of \"mirlitonnades\", with some as short as six words. These defied Beckett's usual scrupulous concern to translate his work from its original into the other of his two languages; several writers, including Derek Mahon, have attempted translations, but no complete version of the sequence has been published in English.\nBeckett's late style saw him experiment with technology to create increasingly transdisciplinary works. This sampling of a range of artistic mediums and styles \u2013 classical music, painting, sculpture, television, and literature \u2013 to create a new and original form, or genre, is evident in his television plays. In works like \"Ghost Trio\" (broadcast in 1977) and \"Nacht und Tr\u00e4ume\" (broadcast in 1983) Beckett uses a musical frame (taking excerpts from Beethoven and Schubert, respectively) to structure his text and borrows well-known images from art history to create evocative stills that suggest themes of longing, ambiguity, hope, and suffering. Such experimentation with genre, music, and the visual arts, characterises Beckett's work during the 1970s and '80s.\nBeckett's prose pieces during the late period were not as prolific as his theatre, as suggested by the title of the 1976 collection of short prose texts \"Fizzles\" (which the American artist Jasper Johns illustrated). Beckett experienced something of a renaissance with the novella \"Company\" (1980), which continued with \"Ill Seen Ill Said\" (1982) and \"Worstward Ho\" (1983), later collected in \"Nohow On\". In these three \"'closed space' stories,\" Beckett continued his pre-occupation with memory and its effect on the confined and observed self, as well as with the positioning of bodies in space, as the opening phrases of \"Company\" make clear: \"A voice comes to one in the dark. Imagine.\" \"To one on his back in the dark. This he can tell by the pressure on his hind parts and by how the dark changes when he shuts his eyes and again when he opens them again. Only a small part of what is said can be verified. As for example when he hears, You are on your back in the dark. Then he must acknowledge the truth of what is said.\" Themes of aloneness and the doomed desire to successfully connect with other human beings are expressed in several late pieces, including \"Company\" and \"Rockaby\".\nIn the hospital and nursing home where he spent his final days, Beckett wrote his last work, the 1988 poem \"What is the Word\" (\"Comment dire\"). The poem grapples with an inability to find words to express oneself, a theme echoing Beckett's earlier work, though possibly amplified by the sickness he experienced late in life.\nCollaborators.\nJack MacGowran.\nJack MacGowran was the first actor to perform a one-man show based on the works of Beckett. He debuted \"End of Day\" in Dublin in 1962, revising it as \"Beginning To End\" (1965). The show went through further revisions before Beckett directed it in Paris in 1970; MacGowran won the 1970\u20131971 Obie for Best Performance By an Actor when he performed the show off-Broadway as \"Jack MacGowran in the Works of Samuel Beckett.\" Beckett wrote the radio play \"Embers\" and the teleplay \"Eh Joe\" specifically for MacGowran. The actor also appeared in various productions of \"Waiting for Godot\" and \"Endgame,\" and did several readings of Beckett's plays and poems on BBC Radio; he also recorded the LP \"MacGowran Speaking Beckett\" for Claddagh Records in 1966.\nBillie Whitelaw.\nBillie Whitelaw worked with Beckett for 25 years on such plays as \"Not I\", \"Eh Joe\", \"Footfalls\" and \"Rockaby.\" She first met Beckett in 1963. In her autobiography \"Billie Whitelaw... Who He?,\" she describes their first meeting in 1963 as \"trust at first sight\". Beckett went on to write many of his experimental theatre works for her. She came to be regarded as his muse, the \"supreme interpreter of his work\", perhaps most famous for her role as the mouth in \"Not I\". She said of the play \"Rockaby\": \"I put the tape in my head. And I sort of look in a particular way, but not at the audience. Sometimes as a director, Beckett comes out with absolute gems and I use them a lot in other areas. We were doing \"Happy Days\" and I just did not know where in the theatre to look during this particular section. And I asked, and he thought for a bit and then said, 'Inward' \". She said of her role in \"Footfalls\": \"I felt like a moving, musical Edvard Munch painting and, in fact, when Beckett was directing \"Footfalls\" he was not only using me to play the notes but I almost felt that he did have the paintbrush out and was painting.\" \"Sam knew that I would turn myself inside out to give him what he wanted\", she explained. \"With all of Sam's work, the scream was there, my task was to try to get it out.\" She stopped performing his plays in 1989 when he died.\nJocelyn Herbert.\nThe English stage designer Jocelyn Herbert was a close friend and influence on Beckett until his death. She worked with him on such plays as \"Happy Days\" (their third project) and \"Krapp's Last Tape\" at the Royal Court Theatre. Beckett said that Herbert became his closest friend in England: \"She has a great feeling for the work and is very sensitive and doesn't want to bang the nail on the head. Generally speaking, there is a tendency on the part of designers to overstate, and this has never been the case with Jocelyn.\"\nWalter Asmus.\nThe German director Walter D. Asmus began his working relationship with Beckett in the Schiller Theatre in Berlin in 1974 and continued until 1989, the year of the playwright's death. Asmus has directed all of Beckett's plays internationally.\nLegacy.\nOf all the English-language modernists, Beckett's work represents the most sustained attack on the realist tradition. He opened up the possibility of theatre and fiction that dispense with conventional plot and the unities of time and place to focus on essential components of the human condition. V\u00e1clav Havel, John Banville, Aidan Higgins, Tom Stoppard, Harold Pinter and Jon Fosse have publicly stated their indebtedness to Beckett's example. He has had a wider influence on experimental writing since the 1950s, from the Beat generation to the happenings of the 1960s and after. In an Irish context, he has exerted great influence on poets such as Derek Mahon and Thomas Kinsella, as well as writers like Trevor Joyce and Catherine Walsh who proclaim their adherence to the modernist tradition as an alternative to the dominant realist mainstream.\nMany major 20th-century composers including Luciano Berio, Gy\u00f6rgy Kurt\u00e1g, Morton Feldman, Pascal Dusapin, Philip Glass, Roman Haubenstock-Ramati and Heinz Holliger have created musical works based on Beckett's texts. His work has also influenced numerous international writers, artists and filmmakers including Edward Albee, Sam Shepard, Avigdor Arikha, Paul Auster, J. M. Coetzee, Richard Kalich, Douglas Gordon, Bruce Nauman, Anthony Minghella, Damian Pettigrew, Charlie Kaufman and Brian Patrick Butler.\nBeckett is one of the most influential, widely discussed, and highly prized of 20th-century authors, inspiring a critical industry to rival that which has sprung up around James Joyce. He has divided critical opinion. Some early philosophical critics, such as Sartre and Theodor Adorno, praised him, one for his revelation of absurdity, the other for his works' critical refusal of simplicities; others such as Georg Luk\u00e1cs condemned him for 'decadent' lack of realism.\nSince Beckett's death, all rights for the performance of his plays are handled by the Beckett estate, currently managed by Edward Beckett (the author's nephew). The estate has a controversial reputation for maintaining firm control over how Beckett's plays are performed and does not grant licences to productions that do not adhere to the writer's stage directions.\nHistorians interested in tracing Beckett's bloodline were, in 2004, granted access to confirmed trace samples of his DNA to conduct molecular genealogical studies to facilitate precise lineage determination.\nSome of the best-known pictures of Beckett were taken by photographer John Minihan, who photographed him between 1980 and 1985 and developed such a good relationship with the writer that he became, in effect, his official photographer. Some consider one of these to be among the top three photographs of the 20th century. It was the theatre photographer, John Haynes, however, who took possibly the most widely reproduced image of Beckett: it is used on the cover of the Knowlson biography, for instance. This portrait was taken during rehearsals of the San Quentin Drama Workshop at the Royal Court Theatre in London, where Haynes photographed many productions of Beckett's work. An Post, the Irish postal service, issued a commemorative stamp of Beckett in 1994. The Central Bank of Ireland launched two Samuel Beckett Centenary commemorative coins on 26 April 2006: \u20ac10 Silver Coin and \u20ac20 Gold Coin.\nOn 10 December 2009, the new bridge across the River Liffey in Dublin was opened and named the Samuel Beckett Bridge in his honour. Reminiscent of a harp on its side, it was designed by the celebrated Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava, who had also designed the James Joyce Bridge situated further upstream and opened on Bloomsday (16 June) 2003. Attendees at the official opening ceremony included Beckett's niece Caroline Murphy, his nephew Edward Beckett, poet Seamus Heaney and Barry McGovern. A ship of the Irish Naval Service, the L\u00c9 \"Samuel Beckett\" (P61), is named for Beckett. An Ulster History Circle blue plaque in his memory is located at Portora Royal School, Enniskillen, County Fermanagh.\nIn La Fert\u00e9-sous-Jouarre, the town where Beckett had a cottage, the public library and one of the local high schools bear his name.\nHappy Days Enniskillen International Beckett Festival is an annual multi-arts festival celebrating the work and influence of Beckett. The festival, founded in 2011, is held at Enniskillen, Northern Ireland where Beckett spent his formative years studying at Portora Royal School.\nIn 1983, the Samuel Beckett Award was established for writers who, in the opinion of a committee of critics, producers and publishers, showed innovation and excellence in writing for the performing arts. In 2003, The Oxford Samuel Beckett Theatre Trust was formed to support the showcasing of new innovative theatre at the Barbican Centre in the City of London.\nMusic for three Samuel Beckett plays (\"Words and Music\", \"Cascando\", and \"...but the clouds...\"), was composed by Martin Pearlman which was commissioned by the 92nd Street Y in New York for the Beckett centennial and produced there and at Harvard University.\nIn 2022 James Marsh filmed a biopic of Beckett entitled \"Dance First\", with Gabriel Byrne and Fionn O'Shea playing Beckett at different stages of his life. The film was made available through Sky Cinema in 2023.\nArchives.\nSamuel Beckett's prolific career is spread across archives around the world. Significant collections include those at the Harry Ransom Center, Washington University in St. Louis, the University of Reading, Trinity College Dublin, and Houghton Library. Given the scattered nature of these collections, an effort has been made to create a digital repository through the University of Antwerp.\nSelected works by Beckett.\nDramatic works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProse.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
