{"id": "20664", "revid": "13294494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20664", "title": "The Mickey Mouse Club", "text": "American variety television show\nThe Mickey Mouse Club is an American variety television show that aired intermittently from 1955 to 1996 and briefly returned to social media in 2017. Created by Walt Disney and produced by Walt Disney Productions, the program was first televised for four seasons, from 1955 to 1959, by ABC. This original run featured a regular, but ever-changing cast of mostly child, tween or teen performers. ABC broadcast reruns weekday afternoons during the 1958\u20131959 season, airing right after \"American Bandstand\". The show was revived three times after its initial 1955\u20131959 run on ABC, first from 1977 to 1979 for first-run syndication as The New Mickey Mouse Club, then from 1989 to 1996 as The All-New Mickey Mouse Club (also known to fans as MMC from 1993 to 1996) airing on Disney Channel, and again from 2017 to 2018 with the moniker Club Mickey Mouse airing on internet social media.\nThe character of Mickey Mouse appeared in every show, not only in vintage cartoons originally made for theatrical release, but also in the opening, interstitial, and closing segments made especially for the show. In both the vintage cartoons and new animated segments, Mickey was voiced by his creator Walt Disney, who had previously voiced the character theatrically from \"Steamboat Willie\" to \"Fun and Fancy Free\".\nBefore the TV series.\nThe first official theater-based Mickey Mouse Club began on June 29, 1929, at the Fox Dome Theatre in Venice, California, alongside a showing of the Mickey Mouse short \"The Gallopin' Gaucho\". This would later expand to other states, including the Fox Theatre in Sheboygan, Wisconsin, on November 30 and the Elsinore Theater in Salem, Oregon, on December 21, with more than 60 other movie theaters hosting clubs across the country by March 31. The Club released its first issue of the \"Official Bulletin of the Mickey Mouse Club\" on April 15, 1930. By 1932, the club had one million members, and in 1933, its first UK club opened at Darlington's Arcade Cinema. This didn't last long as Disney began to phase out the club in 1935.\nThe original: 1955\u20131959 show.\nMembers.\n\"The Mickey Mouse Club\" was hosted by Jimmie Dodd, a songwriter and the Head Mouseketeer, who provided leadership both on and off the screen. In addition to his other contributions, he often provided short segments encouraging younger viewers to make the right moral choices. These little \"homilies\" became known as \"Doddisms\". Roy Williams, a staff artist at Disney, also appeared in the show as the Big Mouseketeer. Williams suggested that the Mickey and Minnie Mouse ears should be worn by the show's cast members. Inspired by a visual gag in \"The Karnival Kid\", he helped create these ears, along with Chuck Keehne, Hal Adelquist, and Bill Walsh.\nThe main cast members were called Mouseketeers, and they performed in a variety of musical and dance numbers, as well as some informational segments. The most popular of the Mouseketeers constituted the so-called red team, who appeared each day in the show\u2019s opening roll call and closing segments. Nine of those Red Team Mouseketeers were kept under contract for the entire run of the show (1955\u20131959):\nOther Mouseketeers who were Red Team members, but weren't under contract for the entire run included:\nThe remaining Mouseketeers, who were members of the white or blue teams, were Don Agrati (who was later known as Don Grady when he starred as \"Robbie\" on \"My Three Sons\"), Sherry Alberoni, Billie Jean Beanblossom, Eileen Diamond, Dickie Dodd (not related to Jimmie Dodd), Mary Espinosa, Bonnie Lynn Fields, Judy Harriet, Linda Hughes, Dallas Johann, John Lee Johann, Bonni Lou Kern, Charlie Laney, Larry Larsen, Paul Petersen, Lynn Ready, Mickey Rooney Jr., Tim Rooney, Mary Sartori, Bronson Scott, Margene Storey, Ronnie Steiner, and Mark Sutherland. Larry Larsen, on only for the 1956\u201357 season, was the oldest Mouseketeer, being born in 1939, and Bronson Scott, on only the 1955\u201356 season, was the youngest Mouseketeer, being born in July 1947. Among the thousands who auditioned, but did not make the cut, were future Oscar-winning vocalist/songwriter Paul Williams and future Primetime Emmy Award-winning actress Candice Bergen.\nThe 39 Mouseketeers and the seasons in which they were featured (with the team color to which they belonged are listed for each season):\nNotes: Cole and Day were originally blue &amp; white team members, but were promoted to the red team later in the first season.\nJohann, Petersen, and the Rooney brothers were all let go early in the first season. Dallas's brother John Lee replaced him, while Dodd and Steiner were hired as replacements for the Rooney brothers.\nFor the show's fourth season, only a small amount of new footage was filmed and was interspliced with material from previous seasons. Only six of the Mouseketeers\u2014Funicello, Gillespie, Tracey, Burgess, Pendleton, and O'Brien\u2014were believed to have been called back for the filming of new material, while Cole and Baird were merely used for some publicity material.\nAdult co-hosts.\nOther notable non-Mouseketeer performers appeared in several dramatic segments:\nThese non-Mouseketeers primarily appeared in several original serials filmed for the series, only some of which have appeared in reruns. Other Mouseketeers were also featured in some of the serials, particularly Annette Funicello and Darlene Gillespie.\nMajor serials.\nMajor serials included:\nMusic.\nThe opening theme, \"The Mickey Mouse March\", was written by the show's primary adult host, Jimmie Dodd. It was also reprised at the end of each episode, with the slower \"it's time to say goodbye\" verse. A shorter version of the opening title was used later in the series, in syndication, and on Disney Channel reruns. Dodd also wrote many other songs used in individual segments throughout the series.\nShow themes.\nEach day of the week had a special show theme, which was reflected in the several segments. The themes were:\nScheduling and air times.\nThe series ran on ABC Television for an hour each weekday in the 1955 and the 1956 seasons (from 5:00 - 6:00\u00a0pm ET), and only a half-hour weekdays in 1957, the final season to feature new programming. Although the show returned for a 1958 season, these programs were repeats from the first two seasons, recut into a half-hour format. \"The Mickey Mouse Club\" was featured on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, and \"Walt Disney's Adventure Time\", featuring reruns of \"The Mickey Mouse Club\" serials and several re-edited segments from \"Disneyland\" and \"Walt Disney Presents\", appeared on Tuesdays and Thursdays.\nCancellation.\nAlthough the show remained popular, ABC decided to cancel it after its fourth season ended, because Disney and the ABC network could not come to terms for its renewal. The cancellation of the show in September 1959 was attributed to several factors: the Disney studios did not explain high profit margins from merchandise sales, sponsors were uninterested in educational programming for children, and many commercials were needed to pay for the show. After canceling \"The Mickey Mouse Club\", ABC also refused to let Disney air the show on another network. Walt Disney filed a lawsuit against ABC, and won the damages in a settlement the following year, but he had to agree that both the \"Mickey Mouse Club\" and \"Zorro\" could not be aired on any major network. This left \"Walt Disney Presents\" (initially titled \"Disneyland\", later retitled \"Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color\" when it moved to NBC) as the only Disney series that was left on prime time until 1972 when \"The Mouse Factory\" went on the air. The prohibition, which prevented major U.S. broadcast networks from airing the original \"Mickey Mouse Club\" (or any later version of it), was disputed when Disney acquired ABC in 1996. Although it would not air on ABC again, Disney ran it on Disney Channel's \"Vault Disney\" block from 1998 to 2002.\nAustralian tour.\nAlthough the series had been ended in America, many members of the cast assembled for highly successful tours of Australia in 1959 and 1960. The television series was very successful in Australia, and was still running on Australian television. The cast surprised Australian audiences, as by then they had physically matured and in some cases, bore little resemblance to the cast of youths with whom Australians were so familiar. Mainstream television did not reach Australia until 1956, so the series screened well into the 1960s when the back catalog expired.\nSyndication.\nIn response to continuing audience demand, the original \"Mickey Mouse Club\" went into edited syndicated half-hour reruns that enjoyed wide distribution starting in the fall of 1962, achieving strong ratings especially during its first three seasons in syndicated release. Because of its popularity in some markets, a few stations continued to carry it into 1968 before the series was finally withdrawn from syndication. Some new features were added such as \"Fun with Science\" or \"Professor Wonderful\" (with scientist Julius Sumner Miller) and \"Marvelous Marvin\" in the 1964\u20131965 season; Jimmie Dodd appeared in several of these new segments before his death in November 1964. Several markets expanded the program back to an hour's daily run time during the 1960s repeat cycle by adding locally produced and hosted portions involving educational subjects and live-audience participation of local children, in a manner not unlike \"Romper Room\".\nIn response to an upsurge in demand from baby boomers entering adulthood, the show again went into syndicated reruns from January 20, 1975, until January 14, 1977. It has since been rerun on cable specialty channels Disney in the United States and Family in Canada. The original \"Mickey Mouse Club\" films aired five days a week on the Disney Channel from its launch in 1983 until the third version of the series began in 1989. The last airing of the edited 1950s material was on Disney Channel's \"Vault Disney\" from 1997 to September 2002. During the baseball seasons in 1975 and 1976, WGN-TV in Chicago, Illinois, aired the show on a delayed basis due to Cubs baseball coverages.\nReunions.\nAnnette Funicello and Tim Considine were reunited on \"The New Mickey Mouse Club\" in 1977. Darlene Gillespie and Cubby O'Brien were also reunited on another episode of the same series.\nOf the 39 original Mouseketeers, 31 were reunited for a TV special, which aired on \"Disney's Wonderful World\", in November 23, 1980. Paul Williams \u2013 who hosted the special \u2013 and Tim Considine were named Honorary Mouseketeers during the special.\nCast members Annette Funicello, Bobby Burgess, Tommy Cole, Sharon Baird, Don Grady, and Sherry Alberoni were reunited on the 100th episode of \"The All-New Mickey Mouse Club\", during the show's third season in 1990.\nMouseketeers Doreen Tracey, Cubby O'Brien, Sherry Alberoni, Sharon Baird, Don Grady, Cheryl Holdridge, Bobby Burgess, Karen Pendleton, Tommy Cole, and Mary Espinosa performed together at Disneyland in the fall of 2005, in observance of Disneyland's 50th birthday, and the 50th anniversary of the television premiere of \"The Mickey Mouse Club\".\n1977\u20131979 revival: \"The New Mickey Mouse Club\".\nIn 1977, Walt Disney Productions revived the concept, but modernized the show cosmetically, with a disco re-recording of the theme song and a more ethnically diverse group of young cast members. The sets were brightly colored and simpler than the detailed black-and-white artwork of the original. Like the original, nearly every day's episode included a vintage cartoon, though usually in color from the late 1930s onward. The 1977 Mouseketeers were part of the halftime show of Super Bowl XI on January 9, 1977.\nSerials.\nSerials were usually old Disney movies, cut into segments for twice-weekly inclusion. Movies included \"Third Man on the Mountain\", \"The Misadventures of Merlin Jones\" and its sequel \"The Monkey's Uncle\" (both starring Tommy Kirk), \"Emil and the Detectives\" (retitled \"The Three Skrinks\"), \"Tonka\" (retitled \"A Horse Called Comanche\"), \"The Horse Without a Head\" (about a toy horse), and \"Toby Tyler\" (starring Kevin Corcoran). In addition, one original serial was produced, \"The Mystery of Rustler's Cave\", starring Kim Richards and Robbie Rist. Often shown were scenes from animated Disney films, from \"Snow White\" to \"The Jungle Book\" billed as \"Mouseka Movie Specials\".\nTheme days.\nTheme days were:\nSyndication.\nThe series debuted on January 17, 1977, on 38 local television stations in the United States, and by June of that same year, when the series was discontinued, about 70 stations in total had picked up the series. Additional stations picked up the canceled program, which continued to run until January 12, 1979; 130 new episodes, with much of the original material repackaged and a bit of new footage added, and a shortened version of the theme song, was produced to start airing September 5, 1977. Since the 1970s, the series has aired only briefly and sporadically in reruns, and only on Disney Channel's Vault Disney nighttime block (1997\u20132002). Unlike its 1950s predecessor and the 1989/1990s series that followed, which had DVD releases of select episodes in July 2005, this version has not had a DVD release and has been largely forgotten by many, including many kids of the 1970s who made it their club. On November 20, 1977, \"The Mouseketeers at Walt Disney World\" was shown on \"The Wonderful World of Disney\". WGN-TV in Chicago, Illinois, also aired this version on a delayed basis in 1977 and 1978 during the Cubs baseball season due to game coverages. Action for Children's Television successfully got the show canceled because of their objections to the types of commercials that aired during the program. It also aired on BBC One in the United Kingdom from 1978 to 1980, and on TVB Pearl in Hong Kong from 1978.\nCast.\nThe cast of 12 (five boys and seven girls) had a more diverse multiethnic background than the 1950s version. Several 1977\u20131978 cast members went on to become TV stars and other notable icons.\nThe show's most notable alumna was Lisa Whelchel (born in 1963, in Littlefield, Texas), who later starred in the NBC television sitcom \"The Facts of Life\", which ran from 1979 to 1988, before becoming a well-known Christian author, and overall runner-up, and winner of the $100,000 viewers' choice award, on the of the CBS television reality series \"Survivor\". Mouseketeer Julie Piekarski (born in 1963 in St. Louis, Missouri) also appeared with Lisa Whelchel on the first season of \"The Facts of Life\". Kelly Parsons (born in 1964, in Coral Gables, Florida) went on to become a beauty queen and runner-up to Miss USA.\nOther Mouseketeers (from seasons 1\u20132) from the 1977 show:\nDisney voice actor and sound effects editor Wayne Allwine voiced Mickey Mouse in the animated lead-ins for the show, replacing Jimmy MacDonald, who in 1947 had replaced Walt Disney as the voice of Mickey for theatrical short cartoons. Walt Disney was the original voice of Mickey, voiced Mickey for the original 1954\u20131959 run, and provided the voice for animated introductions to the original TV show, but he died in 1966. Following MacDonald's tenure, Allwine provided the voice for the character up to his death in 2009.\nFuture rock musician Courtney Love (wife of Nirvana lead singer Kurt Cobain) claims to have auditioned for a part on the show, reading a poem by Sylvia Plath; she was not selected.\nFormer Mouseketeers Annette Funicello and serial star Tim Considine guest-starred in one episode; former Mouseketeers Darlene Gillespie and Cubby O'Brien were also reunited on another episode.\nTheme song and soundtrack.\nThe lyrics of the \"Mickey Mouse Club March\" theme song were slightly different from the original, with two additional lines: \"He's our favorite Mouseketeer; we know you will agree\" and \"Take some fun and mix in love, our happy recipe\".\nA soundtrack album was released with the show.\nA new rendition of the \"Mickey Mouse Club March\" was made later on in 1999 by Mannheim Steamroller, a contemporary band, in hopes of connecting new-age children and their parents who watched the \"Mickey Mouse Club\".\nDistribution.\nThis incarnation was not distributed by Disney only; while Disney did produce the series, it was co-produced and distributed by SFM Entertainment, which also handled 1970s-era syndication of the original 1950s series. (Disney since reacquired only distribution rights.)\n1989\u20131994 revival: \"The All-New Mickey Mouse Club\".\nReruns of the original \"The Mickey Mouse Club\" began airing on Disney Channel with its 1983 launch. While the show was popular with younger audiences, Disney Channel executives felt it had become dated over the years, particularly because it was aired in black-and-white. Their answer was to create a brand-new, rebooted version of the club, one targeted at contemporary audiences. The all-new \"club members\" wore Mouseketeer varsity jackets instead of Mickey Mouse ears. This show was called \"The All-New Mickey Mouse Club\" (also known as \"MMC\" to fans).\nThis version of the series features a number of cast members who went on to achieve global success in entertainment, including actor Ryan Gosling, future NSYNC members Justin Timberlake and JC Chasez, singers Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera, actress Keri Russell, voice actress Deedee Magno, future En Vogue member Rhona Bennett, singer Chase Hampton, and Hallmark Channel movie star Nikki DeLoach.\nThroughout the show's run, Fred Newman was the main adult co-host from the beginning of the series until season six. In the first season, Newman was joined by other co-host Mowava Pryor. She was then replaced by Terri Eoff from the fourth until the sixth season. By the show's final season, two original members, Chase Hampton and Tiffini Hale, became the co-hosts.\nThis was also the first version of the club to have any studio audience, though only a moderate-sized group.\nFormer Mouseketeer Don Grady guest-starred in the season-one finale. Grady, along with fellow Mouseketeers Annette Funicello, Bobby Burgess, Tommy Cole, Sharon Baird, and Sherry Alberoni, were reunited on the 100th episode, during the show's third season. Funicello later appeared on the show again, in an interview with the Mouseketeer Lindsey Alley.\nScheduling and air times.\nFor the first five seasons, the series aired Monday through Friday at 5:30 pm. The show's sixth season aired Monday to Thursday. In its final season, it aired Thursdays only at 7:00 pm (later moved a half hour later, to 7:30 pm). The series premiered Monday, April 24, 1989, ended production in October 1994, and aired its last original episode in 1996. Seasons three and five had the most episodes at 55 each, with seasons one, two, and seven running about 45 episodes. Seasons four and six had about 36 episodes each.\nSkits.\nThe show was known for its sketch comedy. Some of the sketches played off famous movies, musicals, and even cartoons, as well as holiday-related skits. During the final season, some of the skits showed everyday occurrences in the lives of adolescents.\nMusic videos.\nThe series featured music videos of the Mouseketeers singing their versions of popular songs in front of a live studio audience or at locations within Walt Disney World. This became one of the most popular segments. Due to the age of both the performers and the target demographic, lyrics with objectionable content were generally edited out of the songs and replaced with more appropriate language.\nLive concerts and performances.\nA unique feature of the show was the Mouseketeers performing concerts on different days (which were usually taped the day before or in the summer, when the kids had more time). During the final season, the concerts were replaced primarily by live performances that featured singing and dancing in front of the audience.\nTheme days.\nThis version maintained the \"theme day\" format from the previous two versions. When Disney decided to revamp the show for its final season, the show was reduced to a single weekly airing, shown only on Thursdays. Although still produced as a daily series during the final season taping in 1994, Disney Channel, after canceling the series once season-seven production had ended, decided to air the final season in a weekly format, therefore stretching the first-run episodes into early 1996. The final season premiered in May 1995, almost a year after production had started and more than six months after the series finale was taped.\nTheme days were:\nMouseketeer roster.\nThe adult co-hosts for the show were Fred Newman (1989\u20131993), Mowava Pryor (1989\u20131990), Terri Misner Eoff (1991\u20131993), Tiffini Hale (1994), and Chase Hampton (1994).\nThe 35 Mouseketeers and the seasons in which they were featured are:\nNote: For the show's fourth season, Albert Fields, Tiffini Hale, Chase Hampton, Deedee Magno, and Damon Pampolina were featured in segments as the Party, primarily in footage separate from the rest of the cast.\n\"Emerald Cove\".\nThe last three seasons of MMC had a prerecorded drama series called \"Emerald Cove\" with the older cast members:\n2017 revival: \"Club Mickey Mouse\".\n\"The Mickey Mouse Club\" was rebooted under the name \"Club Mickey Mouse\" with a new set of Mouseketeers in September 2017, and for the first time, the series was made available on Facebook and Instagram, rather than its original half hour to full hour format on television, and is more like a reality show than a variety show, with about 90% of its content being behind the scenes. The series is unrelated to a Malaysian TV series of the same name produced around the same time, which bears more resemblance to the structure of previous \"Mickey Mouse Club\" productions. \nThis incarnation of \"The Mickey Mouse Club\" featured eight Mouseketeers who ranged in age from 15 to 18: Regan Aliyah, Jenna Alvarez, Ky Baldwin, Gabe De Guzman, Leanne Tessa Langston, Brianna Mazzola, Sean Oliu, and Will Simmons. The Mouseketeers were also joined by the guest star Todrick Hall, who also served as a mentor to the cast during the casting, and Jennifer Chia as the host.\nThe series was produced by Disney Digital Network. No new episodes or music videos have been produced since 2018, as DDN had undergone financial difficulties and shut down the year after, effectively canceling \"Club Mickey Mouse\".\nInternational revivals.\n2015 Korean revival: \"The Mickey Mouse Club\".\nA new version of the series debuted on July 23, 2015, on Disney Channel Korea. The format of revival included musical performances, games, and skits, as same as the original one in the US. The series had two pilot episodes and 10 regular episodes. The Mouseketeers consisted of nine members of S.M. Entertainment's pre-debut trainees team SM Rookies, consisting of five boys \u2013 Mark, Jeno, Haechan, Jaemin, and Jisung \u2013 and four girls \u2013 Koeun, Hina, Herin, and Lami.\nThe series was hosted by Leeteuk of boy band Super Junior.\nThe show ended on December 17 the same year.\n2017\u20132021 Malaysian revival: \"Club Mickey Mouse\".\n\"Club Mickey Mouse\" was created in Malaysia. The format included musical performances, games and comedy sketches.\nThe series was hosted by YouTube personality, Charis Ow, and premiered on Disney Channel Asia on September 15, 2017. The series was renewed for a second season, which premiered on July 6, 2018, and a third season which premiered on June 14, 2019. All members appeared as guest stars (except Dheena Menon) on Episode 14 (\"Friends in Need, Indeed!\") on Disney Channel Asia Original Series, \"Wizards of Warna Walk\".\nCharis and Dheena did not return for the following the season. Disney Channel Asia subsequently cast two new Mouseketeers for an audition, Eric and Melynna. Following the shutdown of the channel, season four of \"Club Mickey Mouse\" aired in 2021 exclusively on Disney+ Hotstar, instead, and SKTV Kids in 2023.\nIn November 2021, the fourth season of the show aired on Disney+ in selected territories. The series was removed from Disney+ on May 26, 2023, amid the Disney+ and Hulu purge.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20665", "revid": "597034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20665", "title": "Minos", "text": "Mythological king of Crete\nIn Greek mythology, Minos ( ; , ]) was a king of Crete, son of Zeus and Europa. Every nine years, he made King Aegeus pick seven young boys and seven young girls to be sent to Daedalus's creation, the labyrinth, to be eaten by the Minotaur. After his death, King Minos became a judge of the dead in the underworld alongside Rhadamanthus and Aeacus.\nArcheologist Sir Arthur Evans used King Minos as the namesake for the Minoan civilization of Crete. The Minoan palace at Knossos is sometimes referred to as the \"Palace of Minos\" though there is no evidence that Minos was a real person.\nLiterary Minos.\nMinos appears in Greek literature as the king of Knossos as early as Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\". Thucydides tells us Minos was the most ancient man known to build a navy.He reigned over Crete and the islands of the Aegean Sea three generations before the Trojan War. He lived at Knossos for nine years, where he received instruction from Zeus in the legislation he gave to the island. He was the author of the Cretan constitution and the founder of its naval supremacy.\nOn the Athenian stage, Minos was one who had strong character, but was also a cruel tyrant. When Asterius died, Minos was boasting to himself that he deserved the rule while shunning the gods. According to Homer, Minos conversed with Zeus every nine years, for educational purposes. Being the only one who received lessons from Zeus made Minos receive great praise. However, he was the heartless exactor of the tribute of Athenian youths to feed to the Minotaur, in revenge for the death of his son Androgeus during a riot (see Theseus). While Minos had stern character and was the law of the land, he was also cruel; this made Minos one who was respected but also greatly feared.\nLater rationalization.\nTo reconcile the contradictory aspects of his character, as well as to explain how Minos governed Crete over a period spanning so many generations, two kings by the name of Minos were assumed by later poets and rationalizing mythologists, such as Diodorus Siculus and Plutarch - \"putting aside the mythological element\", as he claims - in his life of Theseus.\nAccording to this view, the first King Minos was the son of Zeus and Europa and the brother of Rhadamanthys and Sarpedon. This was the 'good' king Minos, and he was held in such esteem by the Olympian gods that, after he died, he was made one of the three \"Judges of the Dead\", alongside his brother Rhadamanthys and half-brother Aeacus. The wife of this \"Minos I\" was said to be Itone (daughter of Lyktos) or Crete (a nymph or daughter of his stepfather Asterion), and he had a single son named Lycastus, his successor as King of Crete.\nLycastus had a son named Minos, after his grandfather, born by Lycastus's wife, Ida, daughter of Corybas. \"Minos II\"\u2014the \"bad\" king Minos\u2014is the son of this Lycastus, and was a far more colorful character than his father and grandfather. This is the Minos in the myths of Theseus, Pasipha\u00eb, the Minotaur, Daedalus, Glaucus, and Nisus. Unlike Minos I, Minos II fathered numerous children, including Androgeus, Catreus, Deucalion, Ariadne, Phaedra, and Glaucus\u2014all born to him by his wife, Pasipha\u00eb. Through Deucalion, he was the grandfather of King Idomeneus, who led the Cretans to the Trojan War.\nFamily.\nBy his wife, Pasipha\u00eb (or some say Crete), the daughter of the Sun (Helios), and mother of the Minotaur, he fathered Ariadne, Androgeus, Deucalion, Phaedra, Glaucus, Catreus, Acacallis, and Xenodice. By a nymph, Pareia, he had four sons, Eurymedon, Nephalion, Chryses, and Philolaus, whom Heracles killed in revenge for the murder of the latter's two companions. By Dexithea, one of the Telchines, he had a son called Euxanthius. By Androgeneia of Phaistos, he had Asterion, who commanded the Cretan contingent in the war between Dionysus and the Indians. Also given as his children are Euryale, possibly the mother of Orion with Poseidon, and Pholegander, eponym of the island Pholegandros. Minos, along with his brothers, Rhadamanthys and Sarpedon, was raised by King Asterion (or Asterius) of Crete. When Asterion died, his throne was claimed by Minos, who, according to some sources, banished his brothers.\nMythological Minos.\nAsterion, king of Crete, adopted the three sons of Zeus and Europa: Minos, Sarpedon, and Rhadamanthus. According to the \"Odyssey\" (Book XIX l. 203, as interpreted by Plato in \"Laws\" 624), Minos consulted with Zeus every nine years. He got his laws straight from Zeus himself. When Minos's son Androgeos won the Panathenaic Games, the king, Aegeus, sent him to Marathon to fight a bull, resulting in the death of Androgeos. Outraged, Minos went to Athens to avenge his son, and on the way, he camped at Megara, where Nisos lived. Learning that Nisos's strength came from his hair, Minos gained the love of Scylla and her aid in cutting off her father's hair so that he could conquer the city. After his triumph, he punished Scylla for her treachery against her father by tying her to a boat and dragging her until she drowned. On arriving in Attica, he asked Zeus to punish the city, and the god struck it with plague and hunger. An oracle told the Athenians to meet any of Minos's demands if they wanted to escape the punishment. Minos then asked Athens to send seven boys and seven girls to Crete every nine years to be sacrificed to the Minotaur (the offspring from the zoophilic encounter of Minos's wife Pasipha\u00eb with the Cretan Bull that the king refused to surrender to Poseidon) which he had placed within a labyrinth he commanded his architect Daedalus to build. The Minotaur was defeated by the hero Theseus with the help of Minos's daughter Ariadne.\nGlaucus.\nGlaucus was playing with a ball or mouse and suddenly disappeared one day. The Curetes told the Cretans, \"A marvelous creature has been born amongst you: whoever finds the true likeness of this creature will also find the child.\"\nThree times a day, the calf changed color from white to red to black. Polyidus of Argos observed the similarity to the ripening of the fruit of the mulberry plant, and Minos sent him to find Glaucus.\nSearching for the boy, Polyidus saw an owl driving bees away from a wine cellar in Minos's palace. Inside the wine cellar was a cask of honey, with Glaucus dead inside. Minos demanded Glaucus be brought back to life, though Polyidus objected. Minos ordered Polyidus to be entombed with the body. When a snake appeared nearby, Polyidus killed it immediately. Another snake came for the first, and after seeing its mate dead, the second serpent left and brought back an herb, bringing the first snake back to life. Following this example, Polyidus used the same herb to resurrect Glaucus.\nMinos refused to let Polyidus leave Crete until he taught Glaucus the art of divination. Polyidus did so, but then, at the last moment before leaving, he asked Glaucus to spit in his mouth. Glaucus did so and forgot everything he had been taught.\nPoseidon, Daedalus and Pasipha\u00eb.\nMinos justified his accession as king and prayed to Poseidon for a sign. Poseidon sent a giant white bull out of the sea. Minos was committed to sacrificing the bull to Poseidon but then decided to substitute a different bull. Poseidon cursed Pasipha\u00eb, Minos's wife, in rage, with a mad passion for the bull. Daedalus built her a wooden cow, which she hid inside. The bull mated with the wooden cow, and Pasipha\u00eb was impregnated by the bull, giving birth to a horrible monster, again named Asterius, the Minotaur, half-man half bull. Daedalus then built a complicated \"chamber that with its tangled windings perplexed the outward way\" called the Labyrinth, and Minos put the Minotaur in it. To make sure no one would ever know the secret of who the Minotaur was and how to get out of the Labyrinth (Daedalus knew both of these things), Minos imprisoned Daedalus and his son, Icarus, along with the monster. Daedalus and Icarus flew away on wings Daedalus invented, but Icarus's wings melted because he flew too close to the sun. Icarus fell into the sea and drowned.\nTheseus.\nMinos's son Androgeus won every game in a contest hosted by Aegeas of Athens. Alternatively, the other contestants were jealous of Androgeus and killed him. Minos was angry and declared war on Athens. He offered the Athenians peace if they sent Minos seven young men and seven virgin maidens to feed the Minotaur yearly (which corresponded directly to the Minoans' meticulous records of lunar alignments \u2013 a full moon falls on the equinoxes once every eight years). This continued until Theseus killed the Minotaur with the help of Ariadne, Minos's lovestruck daughter.\nNisus.\nMinos was also part of the King Nisus story. Nisus was King of Megara and was invincible as long as a lock of crimson hair still existed, hidden in his white hair. Minos attacked Megara, but Nisus knew he could not be beaten because he still had his lock of crimson hair. His daughter, Scylla, fell in love with Minos and proved it by cutting the crimson hair off her father's head. Nisus died, and Megara fell to Crete. Minos spurned Scylla for disobeying her father. She was changed into a shearer bird, relentlessly pursued by her father, who was a falcon.\nDeath.\nMinos searched for Daedalus by traveling from city to city, asking a riddle; he presented a spiral seashell and asked for it to be strung all the way through. When he reached Camicus, Sicily, King Cocalus, knowing Daedalus would be able to solve the riddle, fetched the old man. He tied the string to an ant, which walked through the seashell, stringing it all the way through. Minos then knew Daedalus was in the court of King Cocalus and demanded he be handed over. Cocalus managed to convince him to take a bath first; then Cocalus's daughters and Daedalus, with Minos trapped in the tub, scalded him to death with boiling water.\nAfter his death, Minos became a judge of the dead in Hades together with his half-brother Aeacus and his full-brother Rhadamanthus. Rhadamanthus judged the souls of Asians, Aeacus judged Europeans, and Minos had the deciding vote.\nMinos in art.\nOn Cretan coins, Minos is represented as bearded, wearing a diadem, curly-haired, haughty, and dignified, like the traditional portraits of his reputed father, Zeus. He frequently occurs on painted vases and sarcophagus bas-reliefs, with Aeacus and Rhadamanthus as underworld judges and in connection with the Minotaur and Theseus.\nIn Michelangelo's famous fresco, \"The Last Judgment\" (located in the Sistine Chapel), Minos appears as a judge of the underworld, surrounded by a crowd of devils. With his tail coiled around him and two donkey ears (symbol of stupidity), Minos judges the damned as they are brought down to hell (see \"Inferno\", Second Circle).\nIn poetry.\nIn the \"Aeneid\" of Virgil, Minos was the judge of those who had been given the death penalty on a false charge - Minos sits with a huge urn and decides whether a soul should go to Elysium or Tartarus with the help of a silent jury. Radamanthus, his brother, is a judge at Tartarus who decides upon suitable punishments for sinners there.\nIn Dante Alighieri's \"Divine Comedy\" story \"Inferno\", Minos is depicted as having a snake-like tail. He sits at the entrance to the second circle in the \"Inferno\", which is the beginning of Hell proper. There, he judges the sins of each soul and assigns it to its appropriate punishment by indicating the circle to which it must descend. He does this by circling his tail around his body the appropriate number of times. He can also speak to clarify the soul's location within the circle indicated by the wrapping of his tail.\nAstronomy.\nMinor planet 6239 Minos is named after Minos. Its orbit being relatively close to Earth's, it is deemed as a potentially hazardous asteroid.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20666", "revid": "1316535959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20666", "title": "Metre Convention", "text": "1875 international standardization treaty\nThe Metre Convention (), also known as the Treaty of the Metre, is an international treaty that was signed in Paris on 20 May 1875 by representatives of 17 nations: Argentina, Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Brazil, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Peru, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden and Norway, Switzerland, Ottoman Empire, United States of America, and Venezuela.\nThe treaty created the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM), an intergovernmental organization, under the authority of the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) and the supervision of the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM). These organizations coordinate international metrology and the development of internationally recognized systems of measurement.\nThe Metre Convention established a permanent organizational structure for member governments to act in common accord on all matters relating to units of measurement. The governing organs of the BIPM are:\nThe headquarters or secretariat of the BIPM is at Saint-Cloud, France. It employs around 70 people and hosts BIPM's formal meetings.\nInitially the scope of the Metre Convention covered only units of mass and length. In 1921, at the sixth meeting of the CGPM, convention was amended to its scope to other fields in physics. In 1960, at the eleventh meeting of the CGPM, its system of units was named the International System of Units (, abbreviated SI).\nThe Metre Convention provides that only nations can be members of the BIPM. In 1999, the CGPM created in the status of associate, to allow non-member states and economic entities to participate in some activities of the BIPM through their national metrology institutes (NMIs).\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the CGPM had 64 members and 37 associates.\nMembership in the CGPM requires payment of substantial fees. Being in arrears with these payments over a span of years has led to expulsion of some former members.\nBackground.\nBefore the French Revolution, which started in 1789, French units of measurement were based on the Carolingian system, introduced by the first Holy Roman Emperor Charlemagne (800\u2013814 AD) which in turn were based on ancient Roman measures. Charlemagne brought a consistent system of measures across the entire empire. However, after his death, the empire fragmented and many rulers introduced their own variants of the units of measure.\nSome of Charlemagne's units of measure, such as the (the king's foot) remained virtually unchanged for about a thousand years, while others, such as the (ell \u2013 used to measure cloth) and the (pound) varied dramatically from locality to locality. By the time of the revolution, the number of units of measure had grown to the extent that it was almost impossible to keep track of them.\nIn England in 1215, clause 25 of Magna Carta required that the same standards of measurement be applied throughout the realm. The wording of the clause emphasized that \"There is to be a single measure ... throughout our realm\". Five centuries later, when in 1707 England and Scotland were united into a single kingdom, the Scots agreed to use the same units of measure that were already established in England. During the eighteenth century, in order to facilitate trade, Peter the Great, Czar of Russia adopted the English system of measure.\nFrom 1668 to 1776 the French standard of length was the Toise of Ch\u00e2telet which was fixed outside the Grand Ch\u00e2telet in Paris. In 1735 two geodetic standards were calibrated against the Toise of Ch\u00e2telet. One of them, the Toise of Peru was used for the French Geodesic Mission to the Equator. In 1766 the Toise of Peru became the official standard of length in France and was renamed Toise of the Academy ().\nProfusion of units of measures was a practical problem of importance before the French Revolution and its reform was one of the items on the agenda of National Assembly. In 1799, after the remeasurement of the Paris meridian arc () between Dunkirk and Barcelona by Delambre and Mechain, the metre was defined as a quarter of a 10-millionth of the Earth circumference or 3 (French feet) and 11.296 (lines) of the Toise of the academy. Talleyrand, an influential leader of the Assembly invited British and American participation in the establishment of a new system, but in the event, the Assembly went it alone and introduced the metre and the kilogram which were to form the basis of the metric system, manufacturing prototypes which, in 1799, were lodged with Archives.\nBetween 1840 and 1870, a number of countries definitively adopted the metric system as their system of measure including France, Spain, many South American republics and many of the Italian and German states (the Netherlands had adopted the system in 1817).\nIn 1863, the International Postal Union used grams to express permitted weights of letters. In the 1860s, inspections of the prototype metre revealed wear and tear at the measuring faces of the bar and also that the bar was wont to flex slightly when in use.\nCartography and the metre.\nThe American Revolution, in which the United States was supported by France and Spain, led to the founding of the Survey of the Coast in 1807 and the creation of the Office of Standard Weights and Measures in 1830. During the mid-19th century, the metre was adopted in Khedivate of Egypt an autonomous tributary state of the Ottoman Empire for cadastral surveying. In continental Europe, adoption of the metric system and a better standardisation of units of measurement marked the Technological Revolution, a period in which German Empire would challenge United Kingdom as the foremost industrial nation in Europe. This was accompanied by development in cartography which was a prerequisite for both military operations and the creation of the infrastructures needed for industrial development such as railways. During the process of unification of Germany, geodesists called for the establishment of an International Bureau of Weights and Measures in Europe.\nSwiss, American, Spanish and Egyptian cartography.\nThe Helvetic Republic adopted the metric system by law in 1801. In 1805, a Swiss immigrant Ferdinand Rudolph Hassler brought copies of the French metre and kilogram to the United States. In 1830 the Congress decided to create uniform standards for length and weight in the United States. Hassler was mandated to work out the new standards and proposed to adopt the metric system. The United States Congress opted for the British Parliamentary Standard Yard of 1758 and the British Troy Pound of 1824 as length and weight standards. Nevertheless, Ferdinand Rudolph Hassler's use of the metre and the creation of the Office of Standard Weights and Measures as an office within the Coast Survey contributed to the introduction of the Metric Act of 1866 allowing the use of the metre in the United States.\nIn 1816, Ferdinand Rudolph Hassler was appointed first Superintendent of the Survey of the Coast. Trained in geodesy in Switzerland, France and Germany, Hassler had brought a standard metre made in Paris to the United States in October 1805. He designed a baseline apparatus which instead of bringing different bars in actual contact during measurements, used only one bar calibrated on the Committee meter, an authenthic copy of the , and optical contact. In 1830, Hassler became head of the Office of Weights and Measures, which became a part of the Survey of the Coast. He compared various units of length used in the United States at that time and measured coefficients of expansion to assess temperature effects on the measurements. In 1834, Hassler, measured at Fire Island the first baseline of the Survey of the Coast, shortly before Louis Puissant declared to the French Academy of Sciences in 1836 that Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre and Pierre M\u00e9chain had made errors in the meridian arc measurement, which had been used to determine the length of the metre.\nIn 1855, the Dufour map (French: \"Carte Dufour\"), the first topographic map of Switzerland for which the metre was adopted as the unit of length, won the gold medal at the Exposition Universelle. However, the baselines for this map were measured in 1834 with three toises long measuring rods calibrated on a toise made in 1821 by Jean Nicolas Fortin for Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve. The Spanish standard, a geodetic measuring device calibrated on the metre devised by Carlos Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez e Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez de Ibero and Frutos Saavedra Meneses, was also displayed by Jean Brunner at the Exhibition. Carlos Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez e Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez de Ibero recognized that the end standards with which the most perfect devices of the eighteenth century and those of the first half of the nineteenth century were still equipped, that Jean-Charles de Borda or Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel simply joined measuring the intervals by means of vernier callipers or glass wedges, would be replaced advantageously for accuracy by microscopic measurements, a system designed in Switzerland by Ferdinand Rudolph Hassler and Johann Georg Tralles, and which Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez ameliorated using a single standard with lines marked on the bar. Regarding the two methods by which the effect of temperature was taken into account, Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez used both the bimetallic rulers, in platinum and brass, which he first employed for the central base of Spain, and the simple iron ruler with inlaid mercury thermometers which was used in Switzerland. On the sidelines of the Exposition Universelle (1855) and the second Congress of Statistics held in Paris, an association with a view to obtaining a uniform decimal system of measures, weights and currencies was created in 1855. Under the impetus of this association, a Committee for Weights and Measures and Monies (French: \"Comit\u00e9 des poids, mesures et monnaies\") would be created during the Exposition Universelle (1867) in Paris and would call for the international adoption of the metric system.\nEgyptian astronomy has ancient roots which were revived in the 19th century by the modernist impetus of Muhammad Ali who founded in Sabtieh, Boulaq district, in Cairo an Observatory which he was keen to keep in harmony with the progress of this science still in progress. In 1858, a Technical Commission was set up to continue cadastral surveying inaugurated under Muhammad Ali. This Commission suggested to Viceroy Mohammed Sa'id Pasha to buy geodetic devices which were ordered in France. While Mahmud Ahmad Hamdi al-Falaki was in charge, in Egypt, of the direction of the work of the general map, the viceroy entrusted to Ismail Mustafa al-Falaki the study, in Europe, of the precision apparatus calibrated against the metre intended to measure the geodesic bases and already built by Jean Brunner in Paris. Ismail Mustafa had the task to carry out the experiments necessary for determining the expansion coefficients of the two platinum and brass bars, and to compare the Egyptian standard with a known standard. The Spanish standard designed by Carlos Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez e Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez de Ibero and Frutos Saavedra Meneses was chosen for this purpose, as it had served as a model for the construction of the Egyptian standard. In addition, the Spanish standard had been compared with Borda's double-toise N\u00b0\u00a01, which served as a comparison module for the measurement of all geodesic bases in France, and was also to be compared to the Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez apparatus. In 1954, the connection of the southerly extension of the Struve Geodetic Arc with an arc running northwards from South Africa through Egypt would bring the course of a major meridian arc back to land where Eratosthenes had founded geodesy.\nEuropean geodesy.\nIn Europe, except Spain, surveyors continued to use measuring instruments calibrated on the Toise of Peru. Among these, the toise of Bessel and the apparatus of Borda were respectively the main references for geodesy in Prussia and in France. These measuring devices consisted of bimetallic rulers in platinum and brass or iron and zinc fixed together at one extremity to assess the variations in length produced by any change in temperature. The combination of two bars made of two different metals allowed to take thermal expansion into account without measuring the temperature. A French scientific instrument maker, Jean Nicolas Fortin, made three direct copies of the Toise of Peru, one for Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve, a second for Heinrich Christian Schumacher in 1821 and a third for Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel in 1823. In 1831, Henri-Prudence Gambey also realised a copy of the Toise of Peru which was kept at Altona Observatory in Hamburg.\nIn the second half of the 19th century, the creation of the Central European Arc Measurement () would mark, following Carl Friedrich Gauss, Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel and Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve examples, the systematic adoption of more rigorous methods among them the application of the least squares in geodesy. It became possible to accurately measure parallel arcs, since the difference in longitude between their ends could be determined thanks to the invention of the electrical telegraph. Furthermore, advances in metrology combined with those of gravimetry have led to a new era of geodesy. If precision metrology had needed the help of geodesy, the latter could not continue to prosper without the help of metrology. It was then necessary to define a single unit to express all the measurements of terrestrial arcs and all determinations of the gravitational acceleration by means of pendulum.\nIn 1866, an important concern was that the Toise of Peru, the standard of the toise constructed in 1735 for the French Geodesic Mission to the Equator, might be so much damaged that comparison with it would be worthless, while Bessel had questioned the accuracy of copies of this standard belonging to Altona and Koenigsberg Observatories, which he had compared to each other about 1840. In fact, the length of Bessel's Toise, which according to the then legal ratio between the metre and the Toise of Peru, should be equal to 1.9490348 m, would be found to be 26.2\u00b710\u22126 m greater during measurements carried out by Jean-Ren\u00e9 Beno\u00eet at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures. It was the consideration of the divergences between the different toises used by geodesists that led the European Arc Measurement ( ) to consider, at the meeting of its Permanent Commission in Neuch\u00e2tel in 1866, the founding of a World Institute for the Comparison of Geodetic Standards, the first step towards the creation of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures. Spain joined the European Arc Measurement at this meeting. In 1867 at the second General Conference of the European Arc Measurement held in Berlin, the question of international standard of length was discussed in order to combine the measurements made in different countries to determine the size and shape of the Earth. The conference recommended the adoption of the metric system (replacing Bessel's toise) and the creation of an International Metre Commission.\nSaint Petersburg Academy.\nFerdinand Rudolph Hassler's metrological and geodetic work also had a favourable response in Russia. In 1869, the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences sent to the French Academy of Sciences a report drafted by Otto Wilhelm von Struve, who secured, in 1860, the co-operation of Prussia, Belgium, France and England to the measurement of the European arc of parallel in 52\u00b0 latitude, Heinrich von Wild, the Swiss born director of the Central Geophysical Observatory in Saint Petersburg, and Moritz von Jacobi, whose theorem has long supported the assumption of an ellipsoid with three unequal axes for the figure of the Earth, inviting his French counterpart to undertake joint action to ensure the universal use of the metric system in all scientific work. The French Academy of Sciences and the Bureau des Longitudes in Paris drew the attention of the French government to this issue. In November 1869, Napoleon III issued invitations to join the International Metre Commission in Paris.\nThe International Metre Commission (1870/1872).\nPrior to the 1870 conference, French politicians had feared that the British might reject the existing metre and would prefer to have new value of its theoretical length. However, James Clerk Maxwell wrote in 1865 that no scientist could become famous proposing a metre deduced from new measurements of the size of the Earth, while Adolphe Hirsch would recall, in his 1891 obituary of Carlos Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez e Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez de Ibero, that the International Metre Commission had decided not to propose a new length for the metre.\nIn July 1870, two weeks before the conference was due to start, the Franco-Prussian War broke out. Although the delegates did meet (without a German delegation), it was agreed that the conference should be recalled once all the delegates (including the German delegation) were present. Following the war, which resulted in Napoleon III's exile, Germany and Italy, now unified nations, adopted the metric system as their national system of units, but with the prototype copy of the kilogram and metre under the control of the French Third Republic. In 1872 the new republican government reissued the invitations and the same year scientists from thirty European and American countries met in Paris.\nWhen the International Metre Commission was reconvened in 1872, it was proposed that new prototype metre and kilogram standards be manufactured to reproduce the values of the existing artifacts as closely as possible. Indeed, since its origin, the metre had kept a double definition; it was both the ten-millionth part of the quarter meridian and the length represented by the \"M\u00e8tre des Archives\". The first was historical, the second was metrological. There was much discussion, considering the opportunity either to keep as definitive the units represented by the metre and kilogram standards of the Archives, or to return to the primitive definitions, and to correct the units to bring them closer to them. The first solution prevailed, in accordance with common sense and in accordance with the advice of the French Academy of Sciences. Abandoning the values represented by the standards, would have consecrated an extremely dangerous principle, that of the change of units to any progress of measurements; the Metric System would be perpetually threatened with change, that is to say with ruin. The Commission decided the maintenance of new international standards rather than using French existing standards which, at that time, were 70 years old and which, through wear and tear, might not be exactly the same as when they had been adopted in 1799. Thus the Commission called for the creation of a new international prototype metre which length would be as close as possible to that of the \"M\u00e8tre des Archives\" and the arrangement of a system where national standards could be compared with it.\nThe 1874 metre-alloy.\nOn 6 May 1873 during the 6th session of the French section of the Metre Commission, Henri \u00c9tienne Sainte-Claire Deville cast a 20-kilogram platinum-iridium ingot from Matthey in his laboratory at the \u00c9cole normale sup\u00e9rieure (Paris). On 13 May 1874, 250 kilograms of platinum-iridium to be used for several national prototypes of the metre was cast at the Conservatoire national des arts et m\u00e9tiers. When a conflict broke out regarding the presence of impurities in the metre-alloy of 1874, a member of the Preparatory Committee since 1870 and president of the Permanent Committee of the International Metre Commission, Carlos Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez e Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez de Ibero intervened with the French Academy of Sciences to rally France to the project to create an International Bureau of Weights and Measures equipped with the scientific means necessary to redefine the units of the metric system according to the progress of sciences. In fact, the chemical analysis of the alloy produced in 1874 by the French section revealed contamination by ruthenium and iron which led the International Committee for Weights and Measures to reject, in 1877, the prototypes produced by the French section from the 1874 alloy. It also seemed at the time that the production of prototypes with an X profile was only possible through the extrusion process, which resulted in iron contamination. However, it soon turned out that the prototypes designed by Henri Tresca could be produced by milling.\nThe 1875 conferences in Paris.\nThe principal tasks facing the delegates at the 1875 Diplomatic Conference on the Metre was the replacement of the existing metre and kilogram artefacts that were held by the French Government and the setting up of an organization to administer the maintenance of standards around the globe. The conference did not concern itself with other units of measure. The conference had undertones of Franco-German political manoeuvring, particularly since the French had been humiliated by the Prussians during the war a few years previously. Although France lost control of the metric system, they ensured that it passed to international rather than German control and that the international headquarters were in Paris.\nWhile the German astronomer Wilhelm Julius Foerster along with the Russian and Austrian representatives had boycotted the Permanent Committee of the International Metre Commission in order to prompt the reunion of the Diplomatic Conference of the Metre and to promote the foundation of a permanent International Bureau of Weights and Measures, Adolphe Hirsch, delegate of Switzerland at this Diplomatic Conference in 1875, conformed to the opinion of Italy and Spain to create, in spite of French reluctance, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures in France as a permanent institution at the disadvantage of the \"Conservatoire national des arts et m\u00e9tiers\".\nIn 1875, the Permanent Commission of the European Arc Measurement would also hold its reunion in Paris and decide the creation of an international geodetic standard for baselines' measurement calibrated against the metre. French Empire had hesitated for a long time before giving in to the demands of the European Arc Measurement, which asked the French geodesists to take part in its work. It was only after the Franco-Prussian War, that Charles-Eug\u00e8ne Delaunay represented France at the Congress of Vienna in 1871. In 1874, Herv\u00e9 Faye was appointed member of the Permanent Commission of the European Arc Measurement presided by Carlos Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez e Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez de Ibero who was collaborating with the French on the extension and remeasurement of the meridian arc of Delambre and M\u00e9chain since 1853.\nSpain notably supported France for these outcomes and the first president of the International Committee for Weights and Measures, the Spanish geodesist, Carlos Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez e Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez de Ibero received the Grand Officer medal of the L\u00e9gion d'Honneur for his diplomatic role on this issue and was awarded the Poncelet Prize for his scientific contributions to metrology and geodesy. Indeed, Carlos Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez e Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez de Ibero, first president of the International Geodetic Association, played a pivotal role in reconciling French and German interests.\nReference standards.\nAlthough the new standard metre had the same value as the old metre, it had an \"X\" cross-section designed by Henri Tresca rather than a rectangular cross-section as this reduced the flexing when taking measurements. Moreover, the new bar, rather than being exactly one metre in length was a little longer than one metre and had lines engraved on them that were exactly one metre apart. The London firm Johnson Matthey delivered 30 prototype metres and 40 prototype kilograms. At the first meeting of the CGPM in 1889 bar No.\u00a06 and cylinder No.\u00a0X were chosen by lot as the international prototypes. The remainder were either kept as BIPM working copies or distributed by lot to member states as national prototypes.\nThe comparison of the new prototypes of the metre with each other involved the development of special measuring equipment and the definition of a reproducible temperature scale. The BIPM's thermometry work led to the discovery of special alloys of iron\u2013nickel, in particular invar, whose practically negligible coefficient of expansion made it possible to develop simpler baseline measurement methods, and for which its director, the Swiss physicist Charles \u00c9douard Guillaume, was granted the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1920. Guillaume's Nobel Prize marked the end of an era in which metrology was leaving the field of geodesy to become an autonomous scientific discipline capable of redefining the metre through technological applications of physics. On the other hand, the foundation of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey by Ferdinand Rudolph Hassler paved the way to a new definition of the metre, with Charles Sanders Peirce being the first to experimentally link the metre to the wavelength of a spectral line. Albert A. Michelson soon took up the idea and improved it.\nThe prototype metre was retained as the international standard until 1960 when the metre was redefined in terms of the wavelength of the orange-red line of krypton-86. The current definition of the metre is \"the length of the path travelled by light in vacuum during a time interval of 1/ of a second\".\nOn 16 November 2018, the 26th General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) voted unanimously in favour of revised definitions of some SI base units, in particular the kilogram. The new definitions came into force on 20 May 2019, but did not change the metre.\nInternational organization.\nThe Convention created an international organization with two governing organs to facilitate the standardization of weights and measures around the world. The first, the CGPM provides a forum for representative of member states, the second, the CIPM is an advisory committee of metrologists of high standing. The Secretariat or Headquarters provides appropriate meeting and laboratory facilities in support of the CGPM and CIPM.\nThe structure may be compared to a corporation, the CIPM is analogous to a board of directors, and the CGPM to a shareholders' meeting.\nGeneral Conference on Weights and Measures.\nThe General Conference on Weights and Measures ( or CGPM) is the principal decision-making body put on place by the convention. It is made up of delegates from member states and [non-voting] observers from associate states and economies. The conference usually meets every four years to receive and discuss a report from the CIPM and to endorse new developments in the SI on the advice of the CIPM though at the 2011 meeting, it agreed to meet again in 2014 rather than 2015 to discuss the maturity of the new SI proposals. It is also responsible for new appointments to the CIPM and decides on major issues concerning the development and financing of the BIPM. According to the Metre Convention (Art. 4) the President of the French Academy of Sciences is also the President of the General Conference on Weights and Measures.\nInternational Committee for Weights and Measures.\nThe International Committee for Weights and Measures ( or CIPM) is made up of eighteen (originally fourteen) individuals from a member state of high scientific standing, nominated by the CGPM to advise the CGPM on administrative and technical matters. It is responsible for the running of ten consultative committees (CCs), each of which investigates different aspects of metrology \u2013 one CC discusses the measurement of temperature, another the measurement of mass and so on. The CIPM meets annually at Saint-Cloud to discuss annual reports from the various CCs, to submit an annual report to the governments of member states in respect of the administration and finances of the BIPM and to advise the CGPM on technical matters as and when necessary. Each member of the CIPM is from a different member state \u2013 with France, in recognition of its work in setting up the convention, always having one seat on the CIPM.\nSecretariat of the BIPM.\nThe Secretariat (or Headquarters) of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures ( or BIPM) is based at Saint-Cloud, France. It has custody of the now historical international prototype of the kilogram and provides metrology services for Member States and hosts formal meetings. It also has custody of the former international prototype of the metre which was retired in 1960. Over the years the various prototypes of the metre and of the kilogram were returned to the BIPM laboratories for recalibration services.\nInitially it had a staff of 9, falling to 4 once the initial batch of prototypes had been distributed; in 2012 it had a staff of over 70 people and an annual budget of over \u20ac10\u00a0million. The director of the BIPM is \"ex-officio\" a member of the CIPM and a member of all consultative committees.\nHeadquarters, language and protocol.\nThe original treaty was written in French and the authoritative language of all official documents is French. Communication between the BIPM and member states is, in the case of France, via the French Foreign Minister and in the case of all other members, via the members' ambassador to France.\nThe French government offered the treaty members the Pavillon de Breteuil in Saint-Cloud to house the BIPM. The Pavillon was originally built in 1675 on the estate of the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Cloud which was home to, amongst others, Emperor Napoleon III. The ch\u00e2teau was all but destroyed during the Franco-Prussian War (1870\u20131) and the Pavillon badly damaged. The Pavillon has been fully restored and, as headquarters of an intergovernmental organization enjoys privileges and immunities.\nPost-1875 developments.\nThe science of metrology has progressed vastly since 1875. In particular the treaty was amended in 1921 with the result that many other international organizations have a forum within the CIPM to ensure harmonization of measurement standards across many disciplines. In addition, what were originally conceived as standards for the purposes of trade have now been extended to cover a large number of aspects of human activity including medicine, science, engineering and technology.\nExtensions to the treaty (1921) and development of the SI.\nThe metre convention was originally drawn up with the main purpose of providing standards of length and mass only. Standards relating to other quantities were under the control of other bodies \u2013 time was measured by astronomers, electrical units by a series of ad-hoc international conferences, and other physical standards and concepts were maintained or defined by international bodies such as International Congress of Applied Chemistry or the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics.\nIn 1901 Giorgi published a proposal for building a coherent set of units based on four base units \u2013 the metre, kilogram, second and one electrical unit (ampere, volt or ohm). In 1921 the convention was extended to permit the promotion of standards relating to any physical quantity which greatly increased the scope of the CIPM's remit and implicitly giving it freedom to exploit Giorgi's proposals. The 8th CGPM (1933) resolved to work with other international bodies to agree to standards for electrical units that could be related back to the international prototypes. This was agreed in principle by the International Electrotechnical Commission at its congress in Brussels in 1935 subject to the choice of the fourth unit being agreed with, amongst others, the appropriate consultative committee of the CIPM.\nIn 1948, three years after the end of World War II and fifteen years after the 8th CGPM, the 9th CGPM was convened. In response to formal requests made by the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics and by the French Government to establish a practical system of units of measure, the CGPM requested the CIPM to prepare recommendations for a single practical system of units of measurement, suitable for adoption by all countries adhering to the Metre Convention. At the same time the CGPM formally adopted a recommendation for the writing and printing of unit symbols and of numbers. The recommendation also catalogued the recommended symbols for the most important MKS and CGS units of measure and for the first time the CGPM made recommendations concerning derived units.\nThe CIPM's draft proposal, which was an extensive revision and simplification of the metric unit definitions, symbols and terminology based on the MKS system of units, was put to the 10th CGPM in 1954. In the proposal the CIPM recommended that the ampere be the base unit from which electromechanical standards would be derived. After negotiations with the CIS and IUPAP, two further base units, the degree kelvin and the candela were also proposed as base units. The full system and name \"Syst\u00e8me international d'unit\u00e9s\" were adopted at the 11th CGPM. During the years that followed the definitions of the base units and particularly the to realize these definitions have been refined.\nThe formal definition of International System of Units (SI) along with the associated resolutions passed by the CGPM and the CIPM are published by the BIPM on the Internet and in brochure form at regular intervals. The eighth edition of the brochure \"Le Syst\u00e8me international d'unit\u00e9s \u2013 The International System of Units\" was published in 2006.\nMutual Recognition Arrangements (CIPM-MRA).\nDuring the 1940s, the United States government recognized the benefits of its suppliers keeping quality control records in respect of manufactured goods that would provide traceability of the process. This process was formalized by the British Government and in 1979 as the quality control standard BS\u00a05750. In 1987 BS\u00a05750 was adopted by ISO as the basis for ISO 9000. ISO 9000 is a general purpose quality control standard which works in conjunction industry-specific standards: for example ISO 15195:2003 which gives the specific requirements for reference measurement laboratories in laboratory medicine.\nInternational trade is hampered by one country not recognising the quality controls in place in other countries \u2013 often due to standards being different or being incompatible with each other. At the 20th CGPM (1995), it was recognized that although ad-hoc recognition of instrument calibration between cooperating countries had been taking place for a hundred years, a need had arisen for a more comprehensive agreement. Consequently, the CIPM was mandated to investigate the setting up of a Mutual Recognition Agreement in respect of instrument calibration. Any such agreement would require the keeping of records that could demonstrate the traceability of calibrations back to the base standards. Such records would be recorded within an ISO\u00a09000 framework. Four years later, in 1999 the text of the CIPM-MRA was agreed at the 21st CGPM.\nThe CIPM-MRA scheme is to catalogue the capabilities of National Measurement Institutes (NMIs) such as NIST in the United States or the National Physical Laboratory in Britain whose calibration procedures have been peer-assessed. The essential points of CIPM-MRA are:\nSubsequent to launch of the CIPM MRA and in response to a European Community directive on medical devices, the Joint Committee for Traceability in Laboratory Medicine (JCTLM) was created in 2002 through a Declaration of Cooperation between the International Committee of Weights and Measures (CIPM), the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (IFCC), and the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation (ILAC). The joint committee provides a forum for the harmonization of standards of the various participants.\nCoordination of International Atomic Time.\nWith the advent of the atomic clock it has been possible to define and measure International Atomic Time with sufficient precision that variations in the Earth's rotation can be detected. The International Earth Rotation Service monitors these changes relative to the stars at regular intervals and proposes leap seconds as and when these are needed. Currently there are over 200 atomic clocks in over 50 national laboratories around the world and the BIPM, in terms of the mandate given to it under the Metre Convention, coordinates the various atomic clocks.\nNew SI.\nAfter 1960, when the definition of the metre was linked to a particular wavelength of light rather than the international prototype of the metre, the only unit of measure that remained dependent on a particular artefact was the kilogram. Over the years, small drifts which could be as high as kilograms per annum in the mass of the international prototype of the kilogram were detected. At the 21st meeting of the CGPM (1999), national laboratories were urged to investigate ways of breaking the link between the kilogram and a specific artefact.\nIndependently of this drift having been identified, the Avogadro project and development of the Kibble (or watt) balance promised methods of indirectly measuring mass with a very high precision. These projects provided tools that enabled alternative means of redefining the kilogram.\nA report published in 2007 by the Consultative Committee for Thermometry to the CIPM noted that their definition of temperature had proved to be unsatisfactory for temperatures below 20\u00a0K and for temperatures above 1300\u00a0K. The committee was of the view that the Boltzmann constant provided a better basis for temperature measurement than did the triple point of water, as it overcame these difficulties.\nOver the next few years the support for natural constants grew and details were clarified, until in November 2018, the 26th General Conference on Weights and Measures voted unanimously in favour of revised definitions of the SI base units. The 2019 revision of the SI came into force on the 144th anniversary of the convention, 20 May 2019.\nMembership.\nThe BIPM has two classes of adherents \u2013 full membership for those states that wish to participate in the activities of the BIPM and associate membership for those countries or economies that only wish to participate in the MRA programme. Associate members have observer status at the CGPM. Since all formal liaison between the convention organizations and national governments is handled by the member state's ambassador to France, it is implicit that member states must have diplomatic relations with France, though during both world wars, nations that were at war with France retained their membership of the CGPM. The opening session of each CGPM is chaired by the French foreign minister and subsequent sessions by the president of the French Academy of Sciences.\nOn 20 May 1875 representatives from seventeen of countries that attended the Conference of the Metre in 1875, signed the Convention of the Metre. In April 1884 HJ Chaney, Warden of Standards in London unofficially contacted the BIPM inquiring whether the BIPM would calibrate some metre standards that had been manufactured in Britain. Broch, director of the BIPM replied that he was not authorized to perform any such calibrations for non-member states. On 17 September 1884, the British Government signed the convention. This number grew to 21 in 1900, 32 in 1950, and 49 in 2001. As of 2024[ [update]], the General Conference membership was made up of 64 member states, 37 associate states and economies and four international organizations as follows (with year of partnership between brackets):\nAssociates.\nAt its 21st meeting (October 1999), the CGPM created the category of \"associate\" for those states not yet members of the BIPM and for economic unions.\nInternational organizations.\nThe following international organizations have signed the CIPM MRA:\nFormer member states.\nThe following former members were excluded from the organization following failure to pay their arrears over a span of years and upon failing to provide any form of payment plan:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20667", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20667", "title": "Mnemonic technique", "text": ""}
{"id": "20668", "revid": "6036800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20668", "title": "MAC address", "text": "Unique identifier assigned to network interfaces\nA MAC address (medium access control address or media access control address) is a unique identifier assigned to a network interface controller (NIC) for use as a network address in communications within a network segment. This use is common in most IEEE 802 networking technologies, including Ethernet, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth. Within the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) network model, MAC addresses are used in the medium access control protocol sublayer of the data link layer. As typically represented, MAC addresses are recognizable as six groups of two hexadecimal digits, separated by hyphens, colons, or without a separator.\nMAC addresses are primarily assigned by device manufacturers, and are therefore often referred to as the burned-in address, or as an Ethernet hardware address, hardware address, or physical address. Each address can be stored in the interface hardware, such as its read-only memory, or by a firmware mechanism. Many network interfaces, however, support changing their MAC addresses. The address typically includes a manufacturer's organizationally unique identifier (OUI). MAC addresses are formed according to the principles of two numbering spaces based on extended unique identifiers (EUIs) managed by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE): EUI-48\u2014which replaces the obsolete term MAC-48\u2014and EUI-64.\nNetwork nodes with multiple network interfaces, such as routers and multilayer switches, must have a unique MAC address for each network interface in the same network. However, two network interfaces connected to two different networks can share the same MAC address.\nAddress details.\nThe IEEE 802 MAC address originally comes from the Xerox Network Systems Ethernet addressing scheme. This 48-bit address space contains potentially 248 (over 281 trillion) possible MAC addresses. The IEEE manages the allocation of MAC addresses, originally known as MAC-48 and now called EUI-48 identifiers. The IEEE has a target lifetime of 100 years (until 2080) for applications using EUI-48 space and restricts applications accordingly. The IEEE encourages adoption of the more plentiful EUI-64 for non-Ethernet applications.\nThe distinctions between EUI-48 and MAC-48 identifiers are in name and application only. MAC-48 was used to address hardware interfaces within existing 802-based networking applications; EUI-48 is now used for 802-based networking and is also used to identify other devices and software, for example Bluetooth. The IEEE now considers \"MAC-48\" to be an obsolete term. \"EUI-48\" is now used in all cases. In addition, the EUI-64 numbering system originally encompassed both MAC-48 and EUI-48 identifiers by a simple translation mechanism. These translations have since been deprecated.\nThe Individual Address Block (IAB) is an inactive registry which has been replaced by the \"MA-S\" (\"MAC address block, small\"), previously named \"OUI-36\", and has no overlaps in addresses with the IAB registry product as of January 1, 2014. The IAB uses an OUI from the \"MA-L\" (\"MAC address block, large\") registry, previously called the \"OUI\" registry. The term \"OUI\" is still in use, but the IEEE Registration Authority does not administer them. An OUI is concatenated with 12 additional IEEE-provided bits (for a total of 36 bits), leaving only 12 bits for the organisation owning the IAB to assign to its (up to 4096) individual devices. An IAB is ideal for organizations requiring not more than 4096 unique 48-bit numbers (EUI-48). Unlike an OUI, which allows the assignee to assign values in various number spaces (for example, EUI-48, EUI-64, and the various context-dependent identifier number spaces, as in SNAP or EDID), the Individual Address Block could only be used to assign EUI-48 identifiers. All other potential uses based on the OUI from which the IABs are allocated are reserved and remain the property of the IEEE Registration Authority. Between 2007 and September 2012, the OUI value 00:50:C2 was used for IAB assignments. After September 2012, the value 40:D8:55 was used. Owners of an already assigned IAB may continue to use it.\nThe MA-S registry includes, for each registrant, both a 36-bit unique number used in some standards and a block of EUI-48 and EUI-64 identifiers (while the registrant of an IAB cannot assign an EUI-64). MA-S does not include assignment of an OUI.\nAdditionally, the \"MA-M\" (\"MAC address block, medium\") provides both 220 EUI-48 identifiers and 236 EUI-64 identifiers, the first 28 bits being assigned by IEEE. The first 24 bits of the assigned MA-M block are an OUI assigned to IEEE that will not be reassigned, so the MA-M does not include assignment of an OUI.\nUniversal vs. local (U/L bit).\nAddresses can either be universally administered addresses (UAA) or locally administered addresses (LAA). A universally administered address is uniquely assigned to a device by its manufacturer. The first three octets (in transmission order) identify the organization that issued the identifier and are known as the organizationally unique identifier (OUI). The remainder of the address (three octets in EUI-48 or five in EUI-64) are assigned by that organization in nearly any manner they please, subject to the constraint of uniqueness. A locally administered address is assigned to a device by software or a network administrator, overriding the burned-in address of a physical device.\nLocally administered addresses are distinguished from universally administered addresses by setting (assigning the value of 1 to) the second-least-significant bit of the first octet of the address. This bit is also referred to as the \"U/L\" bit, short for \"Universal/Local\", which identifies how the address is administered.20 If the bit is 0, the address is universally administered, which is why this bit is 0 in all UAAs. If it is 1, the address is locally administered. In the example address , the first octet is 06 (hexadecimal), the binary form of which is 00000110, where the second-least-significant bit is 1. Therefore, it is a locally administered address. Even though many hypervisors manage dynamic MAC addresses within their own OUI, often it is useful to create an entire unique MAC within the LAA range.\nUniversal addresses that are administered locally.\nIn virtualisation, hypervisors such as QEMU and Xen have their own OUIs. Each new virtual machine is started with a MAC address set by assigning the last three bytes to be unique on the local network. While this is local administration of MAC addresses, it is not an LAA in the IEEE sense.\nA historical example of this hybrid situation is the DECnet protocol, where the universal MAC address (with Digital Equipment Corporation's OUI AA-00-04) is administered locally. The DECnet software sets the last three bytes of the complete MAC address to (so that the full MAC address is ), where reflects the host's DECnet network address \"xx.yy\". This eliminates the need for DECnet to have an address resolution protocol since the MAC address of any DECnet host can be determined from its DECnet address.\nUnicast vs. multicast (I/G bit).\nThe least significant bit of an address's first octet is referred to as the \"I/G\", or \"Individual/Group\", bit.20 When this bit is 0 (zero), the frame is meant to reach only one receiving network interface. This type of transmission is called unicast. A unicast frame is transmitted to all nodes within the collision domain. In a modern wired setting (i.e. with \"switches\", not simple \"hubs\") the collision domain usually is the length of the Ethernet cabling between two network interfaces. In a wireless setting, the collision domain is all receivers that can detect a given wireless signal. If a switch does not know which port leads to a given MAC address, the switch will forward a unicast frame to all of its ports (except the originating port), an action known as unicast flood. Only the node with the matching hardware MAC address will (normally) accept the frame; network interfaces with non-matching MAC-addresses ignore the frame unless they are in promiscuous mode.\nIf the least significant bit of the first octet is set to 1 (i.e. the second hexadecimal digit is odd) the frame will still be sent only once; however, network interface controllers will choose to accept or ignore it based on criteria other than the matching of their individual MAC addresses: for example, based on a configurable list of accepted multicast MAC addresses. This is called multicast addressing.\nThe IEEE has built in several special address types to allow more than one network interface card to be addressed at one time:\nThese are all examples of \"group addresses\", as opposed to \"individual addresses\"; the least significant bit of the first octet of a MAC address distinguishes individual addresses from group addresses. That bit is set to 0 in individual addresses and set to 1 in group addresses. Group addresses, like individual addresses, can be universally administered or locally administered.\nRanges of group and locally administered addresses.\nThe U/L and I/G bits are handled independently, and there are instances of all four possibilities. IPv6 multicast uses locally administered, multicast MAC addresses in the range (with both bits set).\nGiven the locations of the U/L and I/G bits, they can be discerned in a single digit in common MAC address notation as shown in the following table:\nIEEE 802c local MAC address usage.\nIEEE standard 802c further divides the locally administered MAC address block into four quadrants. This additional partitioning is called Structured Local Address Plan (SLAP) and its usage is optional.\nApplications.\nThe following network technologies use the EUI-48 identifier format:\nEvery device that connects to an IEEE 802 network (such as Ethernet and Wi-Fi) has an EUI-48 address. Common networked consumer devices such as PCs, smartphones and tablet computers use EUI-48 addresses.\nEUI-64 identifiers are used in:\nUse in hosts.\nOn broadcast networks, such as Ethernet, the MAC address is expected to uniquely identify each node on that segment and allows frames to be marked for specific hosts. It thus forms the basis of most of the link layer (OSI layer 2) networking upon which upper-layer protocols rely to produce complex, functioning networks.\nMany network interfaces support changing their MAC address. On most Unix-like systems, the command utility ifconfig may be used to remove and add link address aliases. For instance, the \"active\" ifconfig directive may be used on NetBSD to specify which of the attached addresses to activate. Hence, various configuration scripts and utilities permit the randomization of the MAC address at the time of booting or before establishing a network connection.\nChanging MAC addresses is necessary in network virtualization. In MAC spoofing, this is practiced in exploiting security vulnerabilities of a computer system. Some modern operating systems, such as Apple iOS and Android, especially in mobile devices, are designed to assign a random MAC address to their network interface when scanning for wireless access points to avert tracking systems.\nIn Internet Protocol (IP) networks, the MAC address of an interface corresponding to an IP address may be queried with the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) for IPv4 and the Neighbor Discovery Protocol (NDP) for IPv6. Thus ARP and NDP relate OSI layer 3 addresses to layer 2 addresses.\nTracking.\nRandomization.\nAccording to Edward Snowden, the US National Security Agency has a system that tracks the movements of mobile devices in a city by monitoring MAC addresses. To avert this practice, Apple started using random MAC addresses in iOS devices while scanning for networks. Other vendors quickly followed suit. MAC address randomization during scanning was added in Android starting from version 6.0, in Windows 10, and in Linux 3.18. The actual implementations of the MAC address randomization technique vary largely in different devices. Moreover, various flaws and shortcomings in these implementations may allow an attacker to track a device even if its MAC address is changed, for instance its probe requests' other elements, or their timing. If random MAC addresses are not used, researchers have confirmed that it is possible to link a real identity to a particular wireless MAC address.\nRandomized MAC addresses can be identified by the \"locally administered\" bit described above.\nOther information leakage.\nUsing wireless access points in SSID-hidden mode (network cloaking), a mobile wireless device may not only disclose its own MAC address when traveling, but even the MAC addresses associated to SSIDs the device has already connected to, if they are configured to send these as part of probe request packets. Alternatives to prevent this include configuring access points to be in either beacon-broadcasting mode or probe-response-with-SSID mode. In these modes, probe requests may be unnecessary or sent in broadcast mode without disclosing the identity of previously known networks.\nNotational conventions.\nThe standard (IEEE 802) format for printing EUI-48 addresses in human-friendly form is six groups of two hexadecimal digits, separated by hyphens () in transmission order (e.g. ). This form is also commonly used for EUI-64 (e.g. ). Other conventions include six groups of two hexadecimal digits separated by colons (:) (e.g. ), and three groups of four hexadecimal digits separated by dots (.) (e.g. ); again in transmission order.\nBit-reversed notation.\nThe standard notation, also called canonical format, for MAC addresses is written in transmission order with the least significant bit of each byte transmitted first, and is used in the output of the codice_1, codice_2, and codice_3 commands, for example.\nHowever, since IEEE 802.3 (Ethernet) and IEEE 802.4 (Token Bus) send the bytes (octets) over the wire, left-to-right, with the least significant bit in each byte first, while IEEE 802.5 (Token Ring) and IEEE 802.6 (FDDI) send the bytes over the wire with the most significant bit first, confusion may arise when an address in the latter scenario is represented with bits reversed from the canonical representation. For example, an address in canonical form would be transmitted over the wire as bits codice_4 in the standard transmission order (least significant bit first). But for Token Ring networks, it would be transmitted as bits codice_5 in most-significant-bit\u2013first order. The latter might be incorrectly displayed as . This is referred to as \"bit-reversed order\", \"non-canonical form\", \"MSB format\", \"IBM format\", or \"Token Ring format\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20669", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20669", "title": "My Neighbor Totoro", "text": "1988 film by Hayao Miyazaki\n is a 1988 Japanese animated fantasy film written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki and animated by Studio Ghibli for Tokuma Shoten. It stars the voices of Noriko Hidaka, Chika Sakamoto and Hitoshi Takagi, and focuses on two young sisters and their interactions with friendly wood spirits in postwar rural Japan.\nThe film explores themes such as animism, Shinto symbology, environmentalism and the joys of rural living. \"My Neighbor Totoro\" received worldwide critical acclaim, and grossed over $ worldwide at the box office; the film also grossed significantly more from home video sales and merchandise.\n\"My Neighbor Totoro\" received numerous awards, including the Animage Anime Grand Prix prize, the Mainichi Film Award, and Kinema Junpo Award for Best Film in 1988. It also received the Special Award at the Blue Ribbon Awards in the same year. The film is widely regarded as one of the greatest animated films of all time, ranking 41st in \"Empire\" magazine's \"The 100 Best Films of World Cinema\" in 2010 and the number-one animated film on the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" critics' poll of all-time greatest films. The film and its titular character have become cultural icons, and made multiple cameo appearances in other films. Totoro also serves as the mascot for Studio Ghibli and is recognized as one of the most popular characters in Japanese animation.\nPlot.\nIn 1950s Japan, university professor Tatsuo Kusakabe and his daughters Satsuki and Mei (approximately ten and four years old, respectively) move into an old house close to the hospital where the girls' mother, Yasuko, is recovering from a long-term illness. The house is inhabited by small, dark, dust-like house spirits called \"susuwatari\" that can be seen when moving from bright places to dark ones. The \"susuwatari\" leave to find another empty house. Mei discovers two small spirits that lead her into the hollow of a large camphor tree. She befriends a larger spirit, which identifies itself using a series of roars that she interprets as \"Totoro\". Mei thinks Totoro is the troll from her illustrated book \"Three Billy Goats Gruff\". She falls asleep atop Totoro but when Satsuki finds her, she is on the ground. Despite many attempts, Mei cannot show her family Totoro's tree. Tatsuo comforts her, saying Totoro will reveal himself when he wants to.\nThe girls wait for Tatsuo's bus, which is late. Mei falls asleep on Satsuki's back and Totoro appears beside them, allowing Satsuki to see him for the first time. Totoro has only a leaf on his head for protection against the rain, prompting Satsuki to offer her umbrella to him. Delighted, he gives her a bundle of nuts and seeds in return. A giant, bus-shaped cat arrives; Totoro boards it and leaves. A few days after planting the seeds, the girls awaken at midnight to find Totoro and his fellow spirits engaged in a ceremonial dance around the planted seeds. They join in, causing the seeds to grow into an enormous tree. Totoro takes the girls for a ride on a magical flying top. In the morning, the tree is gone but the seeds have sprouted.\nThe girls discover that a planned visit by their mother has been postponed because of a setback in her treatment. Mei is upset and argues with Satsuki. She leaves for the hospital to take fresh corn to their mother, but gets lost on the way. Mei's disappearance prompts Satsuki and the neighbors to search for her, thinking that Mei has died. In desperation, Satsuki pleads for Totoro's help. Totoro summons the Catbus, which carries Satsuki to Mei's location, and the sisters reunite. The bus then takes them to the hospital, where the girls learn that their mother has been kept in the hospital by a minor cold but is otherwise recovering well. The girls secretly leave the ear of corn on the windowsill, where their parents discover it.\nEventually, their mother returns home and the girls play with other children while Totoro and his friends watch from afar.\nDevelopment.\nAfter working on \"3000 Miles in Search of a Mother\", Hayao Miyazaki wanted to make a \"delightful, wonderful film\" that would be set in Japan with the idea to \"entertain and touch its viewers, but stay with them long after they have left the theaters\". Initially, Miyazaki had the main characters Totoro, Mei, Tatsuo, and Kanta. The director based Mei on his niece, and Totoros as \"serene, carefree creatures\" that were \"supposedly the forest keeper, but that's only a half-baked idea, a rough approximation\".\nArt director Kazuo Oga was drawn to the film when Hayao Miyazaki showed him an original image of Totoro standing in a \"satoyama\". Miyazaki challenged Oga to raise his standards, and Oga's experience with \"My Neighbor Totoro\" began Oga's career. Oga and Miyazaki debated the film's color palette; Oga wanted to paint black soil from Akita Prefecture and Miyazaki preferred the color of red soil from Kant\u014d region. The finished film was described by Studio Ghibli producer Toshio Suzuki; \"It was nature painted with translucent colors\".\nOga's conscientious approach to \"My Neighbor Totoro\" was a style the \"International Herald Tribune\" recognized as \"[updating] the traditional Japanese animist sense of a natural world that is fully, spiritually alive\". The newspaper said of the film:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Set in a period that is both modern and nostalgic, the film creates a fantastic, yet strangely believable universe of supernatural creatures coexisting with modernity. A great part of this sense comes from Oga's evocative backgrounds, which give each tree, hedge and twist in the road an indefinable feeling of warmth that seems ready to spring into sentient life.\nOga's work on \"My Neighbor Totoro\" led to his continued involvement with Studio Ghibli, which assigned him jobs that would play to his strengths, and Oga's style became a trademark style of Studio Ghibli.\nOnly one young girl, rather than two sisters, is depicted in several of Miyazaki's initial conceptual watercolor paintings, as well as on the theatrical release poster and on later home-video releases. According to Miyazaki; \"If she was a little girl who plays around in the yard, she wouldn't be meeting her father at a bus stop, so we had to come up with two girls instead. And that was difficult.\" Miyazaki said the film's opening sequence was not storyboarded; \"The sequence was determined through permutations and combinations determined by the time sheets. Each element was made individually and combined in the time sheets\u00a0...\" The ending sequence depicts the mother's return home and the signs of her return to good health by playing with Satsuki and Mei outside.\nMiyazaki stated that the story was initially intended to be set in 1955, however, the team was not thorough in the research and instead worked on a setting \"in the recent past\". The film was originally set to be an hour long but during production it grew to respond to the social context, including the reason for the move and the father's occupation. Eight animators worked on the film, which was completed in eight months.\nTetsuya Endo noted numerous animation techniques were used in the film. For example, ripples were designed with \"two colors of high-lighting and shading\" and the rain for \"My Neighbor Totoro\" was \"scratched in the cels\" and superimposed for it to convey a soft feel. The animators stated one month was taken to create the tadpoles, which included four colors; the water for it was also blurred.\nThemes.\nAnimism is a major theme in \"My Neighbor Totoro\", according to Eriko Ogihara-Schuck. Totoro has animistic traits and has status because he lives in a camphor tree in a Shinto shrine surrounded by a Shinto rope, and he is referred to as (master of the forest). Ogihara-Schuck writes that when Mei returns from her encounter with Totoro, her father takes Mei and her sister to the shrine to greet and thank Totoro. This is a common practice in the Shinto tradition following an encounter with a . According to Phillip E. Wegner, the film is an example of alternative history, citing the film's utopian-like setting.\nRelease.\nAfter writing and filming \"Nausica\u00e4 of the Valley of the Wind\" (1984) and \"Castle in the Sky\" (1986), Hayao Miyazaki began directing \"My Neighbor Totoro\" for Studio Ghibli. Miyazaki's production paralleled his colleague Isao Takahata's production of \"Grave of the Fireflies\". Miyazaki's film was financed by executive producer Yasuyoshi Tokuma, and both \"My Neighbor Totoro\" and \"Grave of the Fireflies\" were released on the same bill in 1988. The dual billing was considered \"one of the most moving and remarkable double bills ever offered to a cinema audience\".\nBox office.\nIn Japan, \"My Neighbor Totoro\" initially sold 801,680 tickets and earned a distribution rental income of \u00a5 in 1988. According to the animation scholar Seiji Kano, by 2005, the film's box-office gross receipts in Japan totalled \u00a5 ($). In France, the film has sold 429,822 tickets since 1999. The film has been internationally released several times since 2002. The film has grossed US$ worldwide since 2002. A \"South China Morning Post\" article in 2021 reported that the film has grossed more than $41 million in total.\nThirty years after its original release in Japan, \"My Neighbor Totoro\" received a Chinese theatrical release in December 2018. The delay was due to long-standing political tensions between China and Japan but many Chinese people had become familiar with Miyazaki's films due to rampant video piracy. In its opening weekend, ending December 16, 2018, \"My Neighbor Totoro\" grossed $, entering the box-office charts at number two behind Hollywood film \"Aquaman\" and ahead of Bollywood film \"Padman\" at number three. By its second weekend, \"My Neighbor Totoro\" had grossed $ in China. As of February 2019, it had grossed US$ in China.\nEnglish dubs.\nIn 1989, US-based company Streamline Pictures produced an exclusive English language dub of \"My Neighbor Totoro\" for use as an in-flight movie on Japan Airlines flights. In April 1993, Troma Films, under its label 50th St. Films, distributed the dub of the film as a theatrical release. The songs for the Streamline version of \"My Neighbor Totoro\" were sung by Cassie Byram.\nIn 2004, Walt Disney Pictures produced a new English dub of \"My Neighbor Totoro\" to be released after the rights to the Streamline dub had expired. As is the case with Disney's other English dubs of Miyazaki films, the Disney version of \"My Neighbor Totoro\" has a star-heavy cast, including Dakota and Elle Fanning as Satsuki and Mei, Timothy Daly as Mr. Kusakabe, Pat Carroll as Granny, Lea Salonga as Mrs. Kusakabe, and Frank Welker as Totoro and Catbus. The songs for the new dub retain the translation as the earlier dub but are sung by Sonya Isaacs. The Disney dub was directed by Rick Dempsey, a Disney executive in charge of the company's dubbing services, and was written by Don and Cindy Hewitt, who had written other dubs for Studio Ghibli.\nDisney's English-language dub premiered on October 23, 2005; it was screened at the 2005 Hollywood Film Festival. The cable television network Turner Classic Movies (TCM) held the television premiere of Disney's new English dub in January 2006, as part of the network's tribute to Hayao Miyazaki. TCM aired the dub and the original Japanese film with English subtitles. The Disney version was released on DVD in the United States on March 7, 2006. In Australia, the original English dub was also released by Madman Entertainment on March 15, 2006.\nIn 2023, the film was re-released in 970 United States locations as part of celebrations to mark the 35th anniversary of its first theatrical release, with showings in both Japanese with English subtitles and with the English dub.\nHome media.\nTokuma Shoten released \"My Neighbor Totoro\" on VHS and LaserDisc in August 1988. Buena Vista Home Entertainment Japan (now Walt Disney Japan) reissued the VHS on June 27, 1997, as part of their series \"Ghibli ga Ippai\". Disney released the film on Blu-ray in Japan on 2012.\nAfter the rights to the Streamline dub expired in 2004, Walt Disney Home Entertainment re-released the movie on DVD on March 7, 2006, with Disney's newly produced English dub and the original Japanese version. The company reissued \"My Neighbor Totoro\", as well as \"Castle in the Sky\", and \"Kiki's Delivery Service\", with updated cover art highlighting its Studio Ghibli origins, on March 2, 2010, coinciding with the US DVD and Blu-ray debut of \"Ponyo\". \"My Neighbor Totoro\" was re-released by Disney on Blu-Ray on May 21, 2013. GKIDS re-issued the film on Blu-ray and DVD on October 17, 2017.\nIn Japan, \"My Neighbor Totoro\" had sold 3.5million VHS and DVD units as of April 2012, equivalent to approximately \u00a5 ($) at an average retail price of \u00a5 (\u00a5 on DVD and \u00a5 on VHS). In the United States, the film sold over 500,000 VHS units by 1996, with the later 2010 DVD release selling a further 3.8million units and grossing $ in the United States as of October 2018.\nIn the UK, the film's Studio Ghibli anniversary release appeared on the annual lists of ten-best-selling foreign language films on home video for five consecutive years, ranking number seven in 2015, number six in 2016 and 2017, number one in 2018, and number two in 2019 below \"Spirited Away\".\nStreaming.\nThe majority of the Studio Ghibli film library are available on HBO Max. WarnerMedia (before merging with Discovery, Inc. to form Warner Bros Discovery) acquired the exclusive streaming rights to the entire Studio Ghibli library in 2019 from GKIDS, the North American distributor. In select countries, these films can be streamed on Netflix.\nMusic.\nThe music for \"My Neighbor Totoro\" was composed by Joe Hisaishi, who previously collaborated with Miyazaki on the movies \"Nausica\u00e4 of the Valley of the Wind\" and \"Castle in the Sky\". Hisaishi was inspired by the contemporary composers Terry Riley, Philip Glass, Steve Reich, Karlheinz Stockhausen, and John Cage, and described Miyazaki's films as \"rich and personally compeling\". He hired an orchestra for the soundtrack and primarily used a Fairlight instrument.\nThe soundtrack for \"My Neighbor Totoro\" was first released in Japan on May 1, 1988, by Tokuma Shoten, and includes the musical score used in the film, except for five vocal pieces that were performed by Azumi Inoue, including \"Stroll\", \"A Lost Child\", and \"My Neighbor Totoro\". It had previously been released as an Image Song CD in 1987 that contains some songs that were not included in the film.\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"My Neighbor Totoro\" received widespread acclaim from film critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 59 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.4/10. The website's consensus reads: \"\"My Neighbor Totoro\" is a heartwarming, sentimental masterpiece that captures the simple grace of childhood.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 86 out of 100, based on 15 critics, indicating .\nIn 2001, Japanese magazine \"Animage\" ranked \"My Neighbor Totoro\" 45th in its list of \"100 Best Anime Productions of All Time\". In 2012, \"My Neighbor Totoro\" was voted the highest-ranking animated film on \"Sight &amp; Sound\"'s critics' poll of all-time greatest films, and joint 154th overall. In 2022, the magazine ranked the film as the joint-72nd-greatest film overall in the Critics' poll, being one of three animated films included in the list. \"My Neighbor Totoro\" was ranked third on the list of \"Greatest Japanese Animated Films of All Time\" by film magazine \"Kinema Junpo\" in 2009, 41st in \"Empire magazine's\" \"The 100 Best Films of World Cinema\" in 2010, second on a similar \"Empire\" list of best children's films, and number one in the greatest animated films in \"Time Out\"; a similar list by the editors ranked the film in third place.\nFilm critic Roger Ebert of \"Chicago Sun-Times\" identified \"My Neighbor Totoro\" as one of his \"Great Movies\", calling it \"one of the lovingly hand-crafted works of Hayao Miyazaki\". In his review, Ebert said the film \"is based on experience, situation and exploration\u2014not on conflict and threat\", and added:\nit would never have won its worldwide audience just because of its warm heart. It is also rich with human comedy in the way it observes the two remarkably convincing, lifelike little girls\u00a0... It is a little sad, a little scary, a little surprising and a little informative, just like life itself. It depends on a situation instead of a plot, and suggests that the wonder of life and the resources of imagination supply all the adventure you need.\nSteve Rose from \"The Guardian\" gave the film five stars, praising Miyazaki's \"rich, bright, hand-drawn\" animation and describing it as \"full of benign spirituality, prelapsarian innocence and joyous discovery, all rooted in a carefully detailed reality\". Trevor Johnston from \"Time Out\" also awarded the film five stars, commenting on its \"delicate rendering of the atmosphere\" and its first half that \"delicately captures both mystery and quietness\". Japanese filmmaker Akira Kurosawa cited \"My Neighbor Totoro\" as one of his favorite films. Writing for the \"London Evening Standard\", Charlotte O'Sullivan praised the charm of the film but said it lacks complexity in comparison with \"Spirited Away\". Jordan Cronk from \"Slant\" awarded the film three-and-a-half stars but said it is \"devoid of much of the fantasia of Miyazaki's more outwardly visionary work\". In the 1996 movie guide \"Seen That, Now What?\", \"My Neighbor Totoro\" was given the rating of \"A\". The guide stated that the film is an \"enchanting, lushly animated view of the natural world with child's sense of wonder\", and noting its suitability for young children while being \"a perennial favorite among [film buffs]\".\nThe 1993 translation was not as well-received as the 2006 translation; Leonard Klady of \"Variety\" wrote the 1993 translation demonstrates \"adequate television technical craft\" that is characterized by \"muted pastels, homogenized pictorial style and [a] vapid storyline\". Klady described the film's environment as \"obviously aimed at an international audience\" but \"evinces a disorienting combination of cultures that produces a nowhere land more confused than fascinating\". Stephen Holden of \"The New York Times\" described the 1993 translation as \"very visually handsome\", and said the film is \"very charming\" when \"dispensing enchantment\". Despite the highlights, Holden wrote \"too much of the film, however, is taken up with stiff, mechanical chitchat\".\nMatthew Leyland of \"Sight &amp; Sound\" reviewed the DVD released in 2006, commenting; \"Miyazaki's family fable is remarkably light on tension, conflict and plot twists, yet it beguiles from beginning to end\u00a0... what sticks with the viewer is the every-kid credibility of the girls' actions as they work, play and settle into their new surroundings\". Leyland praised the DVD transfer of the film but noted the disc lacks a look at the film's production, instead being overabundant with storyboards. Writing in \"Joe Hisaishi's Soundtrack for My Neighbor Totoro\", Kunio Hara praised the soundtrack, describing the song \"My Neighbor Totoro\" as a \"sonic icon\" of the film. Hara also commented the music \"arouse[s] a similar sentiment of yearning for the past\".\nLegacy.\n\"My Neighbor Totoro\" was considered a milestone for writer-director Hayao Miyazaki. The popularity of the film's central character Totoro among Japanese children has been likened to that of Winnie-the-Pooh in Britain. \"The Independent\" said Totoro is one of the greatest cartoon characters, describing the creature; \"At once innocent and awe-inspiring, King Totoro captures the innocence and magic of childhood more than any of Miyazaki's other magical creations\". The \"Financial Times\" recognized the character's appeal, commenting Totoro \"is more genuinely loved than Mickey Mouse could hope to be in his wildest\u2014not nearly so beautifully illustrated\u2014fantasies\". \"Empire\" also commented on Totoro's appeal, ranking him at number 18 on a list of the greatest animated characters of all time. The character of Totoro later became a mascot and official logo for Studio Ghibli.\nAccording to the environmental journal \"Ambio\", \"My Neighbor Totoro\" \"has served as a powerful force to focus the positive feelings that the Japanese people have for and traditional village life\". The film's central character Totoro was used as a mascot by the Japanese campaign \"Totoro Hometown Fund Campaign\", which aimed to preserve areas of in Saitama Prefecture. The fund, started in 1990 after the film's release, held an auction in August 2008 at Pixar Animation Studios to sell over 210 original paintings, illustrations, and sculptures inspired by \"My Neighbor Totoro\".\nA main-belt asteroid that was discovered on December 31, 1994, was named 10160 Totoro. In 2013, \"Eoperipatus totoro\", a species of velvet worm that was discovered in Vietnam, was named after Totoro. Following the request of the paper's authors, the species was named for the character because he \"uses a many-legged animal as a vehicle, which according to the collectors resembles a velvet worm\".\nMedia.\nBooks.\nIn Japan in May 1988, Tokuma published a four-volume series of \"ani-manga\" books, which use color images and lines directly from \"My Neighbor Totoro\". The series was licensed for English-language release in North America by Viz Media, which released the books from November 10, 2004, through February 15, 2005. A 111-page picture book based on the film and aimed at young children was released by Tokuma on June 28, 1988, and, in a 112-page English translation, by Viz on November 8, 2005. Tokuma later released another 176-page art book containing conceptual art from the film and interviews with production staff on July 15, 1988, and, in English translation, by Viz on November 8, 2005. In 2013, Viz released a hardcover light novel that was written by Tsugiko Kubo and illustrated by Hayao Miyazaki.\nSequel.\n is a thirteen-minute sequel to \"My Neighbor Totoro\" that was written and directed by Miyazaki. Chika Sakamoto, who voiced Mei in \"Totoro\", returned to voice Mei in this short. Hayao Miyazaki voiced Granny Cat (\"Neko Baa-chan\") and Totoro. The sequel focuses on the character Mei Kusakabe from the original film and her one-night adventures with Kittenbus, the offspring of Catbus, and other cat-oriented vehicles. The sequel was first released in Japan in 2003 and is regularly shown at Ghibli Museum but has not been released on home video.\nMerchandise.\nLicensed \"My Neighbor Totoro\" merchandise of Totoro has been sold in Japan for decades after the film's release. Sales of the film's licensed merchandise in Japan grossed \u00a5 in 1999, \u00a5 during 2003\u20132007, at least \u00a5 in 2008, and \u00a5 during 2010\u20132012.\nStage adaptation.\nIn May 2022, the Royal Shakespeare Company and composer Joe Hisaishi announced that a stage adaptation of the film titled \"My Neighbour Totoro\" would run from 8 October 2022 to 21 January 2023 at the Barbican Centre in London. It was adapted by British playwright Tom Morton-Smith and directed by Improbable's Phelim McDermott. Tickets went on sale on 19 May 2022, breaking the theater's box-office record for sales in one day which was previously held by the 2015 production of \"Hamlet\" starring Benedict Cumberbatch. The show won six Olivier Awards.\nOn 30 March 2023, it was announced that the production will return to the Barbican for another season, which began on 21 November 2023 and ran until 23 March 2024.\nThe show's return to London was announced on 24 April 2024, this time at the Gillian Lynne Theatre, with a run from 8 March to 2 November 2025. The run was later extended to 30 August 2026.\nTheme park exhibit.\nA reproduction of the house from the film was built for Expo 2005, and remains at the site as part of Ghibli Park.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20670", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20670", "title": "Maribor", "text": "City in Styria, Slovenia\nMaribor ( , , ; also known by other historical names) is the second-largest city in Slovenia and the largest city of the traditional region of Lower Styria. It is the seat of the Urban Municipality of Maribor and the Drava statistical region. Maribor is also the economic, administrative, educational, and cultural centre of eastern Slovenia.\nMaribor was first mentioned as a castle in 1164, as a settlement in 1209, and as a city in 1254. Like most Slovene ethnic territory, Maribor was under Habsburg rule until 1918, when Rudolf Maister and his men secured the city for the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs, which then joined the Kingdom of Serbia to form the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. In 1991 Maribor became part of independent Slovenia.\nMaribor, along with the Portuguese city of Guimar\u00e3es, was selected as the European Capital of Culture for 2012.\nName.\nMaribor was attested in historical sources as \"Marpurch\" c.\u20091145 (and later as \"Marchburch\", \"Marburc\", and \"Marchpurch\"), and is a compound of Middle High German \"march\" 'march (borderland)' + \"burc\" 'fortress'. In modern times, the town's German name is \"Marburg an der Drau\" (; literally, 'Marburg on the Drava').\nThe Slovene name \"Maribor\" is an artificial Slovenized creation, coined by Stanko Vraz in 1836. Vraz created the name in the spirit of Illyrianism by analogy with the name \"Brandenburg\" (cf. Lower Sorbian \"Bramborska\"). Locally, the town was known in Slovene as \"Marprk\" or \"Marprog\". The name \"Maribor\" was accepted among Slovenes in 1861, when Lovro Toman published a song named \"Mar i bor\", giving the name a Slovene compound \"Mar\" ('to care') + \"i\" ('and') + \"bor\" ('to fight for'). In addition to its Slovene and German names, the city is also known as \"Marburgum\" in Latin and \"Marburgo\" in Italian.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n Archbishop of Salzburg (1164\u20131555)\n Habsburg Monarchy (1555\u20131804)\n Austrian Empire (1804\u20131867)\n Austria-Hungary (1867\u20131918)\n State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs (1918)\n Kingdom of Yugoslavia (1918\u20131941)\n Nazi Germany (1941\u20131945; )\n SFR Yugoslavia (1945\u20131991)\n Slovenia 1991\u2013Present\nPrehistory.\nThe oldest known remnants of settlement in the Maribor area date back to the 5th millennium BC, at the time of the Chalcolithic. With the construction of Maribor's western bypass, larger settlements were discovered dating from the 44th to 42nd century BC. Another settlement from around the same period was also discovered in Spodnje Ho\u010de, a town right next to Maribor and another below Melje Hill near Male\u010dnik. Another settlement below Melje Hill was also found dating to the 4th millennium BC.\nA more intense period of settlement of the Maribor area occurred in the 3rd millennium BC with the advent of the Bronze Age. In the 13th to 12th century BC, in the age of the Urnfield culture, new settlements were found in Pekel. Around 1000 BC, new settlers moved to the Maribor area. An urnfield cemetery was found from that period in today's \"Mladinska ulica\" and another necropolis was also found in Pobre\u017eje.\nAntiquity.\nWith the Iron Age and the Hallstatt Culture, new settlements began to appear on hills. One of them was Po\u0161tela in the Pohorje Mountains. Po\u0161tela was an old town that was abandoned in the 6th century BC and inhabited again in the 2nd century BC.\nDuring Roman times, the area where Maribor later developed was part of the province of Noricum, right on the border with Pannonia. During that period, Roman agricultural estates known as \"villae rusticae\" filled the area around Radvanje, Betnava, Bohova, and Ho\u010de. The best-known of them was in today's Borova Vas neighborhood of Maribor. An important trade route was also established in the area, connecting Celeia and Flavia Solva in one direction with Poetovio and central Noricum on the other.\nMedieval history.\nAfter the fall of the Roman Empire, the Maribor area was settled by the Slavs.\nA Slavic cemetery was found in Radvanje dating to the 10th century AD. The area of what later became Maribor was first part of Samo's Empire and later the area stood on the border between Carantania and Lower Pannonia. In 843 the area was absorbed into the Frankish Empire.\nIn the Frankish Empire, the area again stood on the border, this time between the Frankish Empire and the Principality of Hungary. To protect the Frankish Empire from Hungarian raids, a castle was built on Pyramid Hill. The castle was mentioned for the first time on 20 October 1164 as \"Castrum Marchburch\". A settlement soon began to grow below the castle. Maribor was first mentioned as a market near the castle in 1204, and it received town privileges in 1254. It is likely that the castle stood before 1164 because Bernard of Trixien, the count of the region, already used the title \"Bernhard von Marchpurg\" 'Bernard of Maribor' in 1124.\nThe town began to grow rapidly after the victory of Rudolf I of the Habsburg dynasty over King Otakar II of Bohemia in 1278. The town built fortifications, and trade, viticulture, and crafts started to grow. The town had a monopoly over the entire region and also controlled the viticulture trade with Carinthia. The first churches were built, and also around this time the first Jews arrived. The Jews built their own ghetto in the southeastern part of town, where they also built the Maribor Synagogue. Most Slovenians lived in the northwestern part of town on what is now Slovenian Street (\"Slovenska ulica\").\nIn 1478, a second castle was built on the northeastern side of the town, today known as Maribor Castle. In 1480 and in 1481, Matthias Corvinus besieged the town but failed to conquer it on both occasions. In 1496, Maximilian I issued a decree to expel all Jews from Maribor and Styria. In 1515, the Maribor Town Hall was built and a few years later, in 1532, Maribor again came under siege, this time by the Ottoman Empire. In the battle that became known as the Siege of Maribor, a 100,000-strong Ottoman army under the leadership of Suleiman the Magnificent attacked the town, which was defended only by the local garrison and its citizens. Despite all the odds, Maribor was defended and the legend of the Maribor shoemaker who raised the sluice gates and flooded the Ottoman army is still popular today.\nModern period.\nIn the 17th century, numerous fires razed the town. The biggest ones occurred in 1601, 1645, 1648, and 1700. As a consequence, the town was rebuilt numerous times. In addition to fires, the plague decimated the town's population. The largest plague epidemics occurred in 1646, 1664, and 1680. Due to the plague, the town lost 35 percent of its population. In gratitude for the end of the plague, a plague column was built in 1681, with the original being replaced in 1743. In 1846, the Southern Railway was built through the town, which resulted in great economic growth and territorial expansion. In 1859, Anton Martin Slom\u0161ek, a bishop of the Diocese of Lavant, transferred the seat of the diocese to Maribor, and he further encouraged the use of Slovene. With the transfer, Maribor also received its first higher school. Four years later, Maribor was connected with Carinthia with the construction of the railway from Maribor to Prevalje. The first daily Slovenian newspaper, called \"Slovenski narod\", was established in 1868 on today's Slom\u0161ek Square (\"Slom\u0161kov trg\"). On 4 April 1883, the first electric light in Slovene ethnic territory was installed on Castle Square (\"Grajski trg\"). The renowned electrical engineer Nikola Tesla lived in Maribor from 1878 to 1879, where he received his first job. Maribor National Hall was built in 1899, and it became a political, cultural, and economic centre for all Styrian Slovenes.\nIn 1900, the city itself had a population that was 82.3% Austrian German (19,298 people) and 17.3% Slovene (4,062 people; based on the language spoken at home); most of the city's capital and public life was in Austrian German hands. However, the county excluding the city had only 10,199 Austrian Germans and 78,888 Slovene inhabitants, meaning the city was completely surrounded by majority-Slovene ethnic territory. Some former independent settlements that later became part of the city had more ethnic Slovenes than Austrian Germans (e.g., Kr\u010devina, Radvanje, Tezno), whereas others had more Austrian Germans than ethnic Slovenes (e.g., Pobre\u017eje and Studenci). In 1913, a new bridge was opened over the Drava River, today known as the Old Bridge. In World War I, the 47th Infantry Regiment of the Austro-Hungarian Army was based in the city and also fought on the Isonzo front. During the First World War many Slovenes in Carinthia and Styria were detained on suspicion of being enemies of the Austrian Empire. This led to distrust between Austrian Germans and Slovenes.\nAfter the collapse of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire in 1918, Maribor was claimed by both the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs and German Austria. On 1 November 1918, a meeting was held by Colonel Anton Holik in the Melje barracks, where it was decided that the city would be part of German Austria. Ethnic Slovene Major Rudolf Maister, who was present at the meeting, denounced the decision and organised Slovenian military units that were able to seize control of the city. All Austrian officers and soldiers were disarmed and demobilised to the new state of German Austria. The German city council then held a secret meeting, where it was decided to do whatever possible to regain Maribor for German Austria. They organised a military unit called the Green Guard (\"Schutzwehr\"), and approximately 400 well-armed soldiers of this unit opposed the pro-Slovenian and pro-Yugoslav Major Maister. Slovenian troops surprised and disarmed the Green Guard early on the morning of 23 November. Thereafter, the city remained in Slovenian hands.\nOn 27 January 1919, Austrian Germans gathered to await the United States peace delegation at the city's marketplace were fired upon by Slovenian troops. Nine citizens were killed and eighteen were seriously wounded; who had actually ordered the shooting has never been unequivocally established. German sources accused Maister's troops of shooting without cause. In turn Slovene witnesses such as Maks Pohar claimed that the Austrian Germans attacked the Slovenian soldiers guarding the town hall, one even discharging a revolver and hitting one Slovenian soldier in the bayonet. The German-language media called the incident \"Marburg's Bloody Sunday\". As Maribor was now firmly in the hands of the Slovenian forces and surrounded completely by Slovenian territory; the city had been recognised as part of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes without a plebiscite in the Treaty of Saint-Germain of 10 September 1919 between the victors and German Austria. For his actions in Maribor and later in the Austro-Slovene conflict in Carinthia, Rudolf Maister is today considered a Slovenian national hero.\nAfter 1918, most of Maribor's Austrian Germans left the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes for Austria. A policy of cultural assimilation was pursued in Yugoslavia against the Austrian German minority similar to the Germanization policy followed by Austria against its Slovene minority in Carinthia. From 1922 to 1929, Maribor was the seat of the Maribor Oblast, a subdivision within Yugoslavia and was later part of the Drava Banovina. Up until World War II, Maribor was considered the fastest-developing city in the country.\nWorld War II and aftermath.\nIn 1941 Lower Styria, the predominantly Slovene part of Styria, was annexed by Nazi Germany. German troops marched into the town at 9 pm on 8 April 1941. On 26 April Adolf Hitler, who encouraged his followers to \"make this land German again\", visited Maribor and a grand reception was organised in the city castle by the local Germans. Immediately after the occupation, Nazi Germany began mass expulsions of Slovenes to the Independent State of Croatia, Serbia, and later to the concentration and work camps in Germany. The Nazi goal was to Germanize the population of Lower Styria after the war. Slovene patriots were taken hostage and many were later shot in the prisons of Maribor and Graz. This led to organised resistance by Slovene partisans. The first act of resistance in Maribor and occupied Slovenia occurred only three days after Hitler's visit, when Slovene communists and SKOJ members burned two German cars.\nMaribor was the site of a German prisoner-of-war camp from 1941 to 1945 for many British, Australian, and New Zealand troops who had been captured in Crete in 1941. In 1944, the largest mass rescue of POWs of the war in Europe took place when 105 Allied prisoners from the camp were freed by Slovene partisans in the Raid at O\u017ebalt. The city, a major industrial centre with an extensive armament industry, was systematically bombed by the Allies in the closing years of World War II. A total of 29 bombing raids devastated some 47% of the city area, killing 483 civilians and leaving over 4,200 people homeless. Over 2,600 people died in Maribor during the war. By the end of the war, Maribor was the most war-damaged major town of Yugoslavia. The remaining German-speaking population, except those who had actively supported the resistance during the war, was summarily expelled at the end of the war in May 1945. At the same time Croatian Home Guard members and their relatives who tried to escape from Yugoslavia were executed by the Yugoslav Army. The existence of nine mass graves in and near Maribor was revealed after Slovenia's independence.\nContemporary history.\nAfter the Second World War, Maribor became part of SR Slovenia, within SFR Yugoslavia. A major process of renewal and reconstruction began in the city. Maribor soon after became the industrial centre of Slovenia and the whole of Yugoslavia, hosting many known companies such as the Maribor Automobile Factory among others. The first clash between the Yugoslav People's Army and the Slovenian Territorial Defence in Slovenia's war of independence happened in nearby Pekre and on the streets of Maribor, resulting in the conflict's first casualty. After Slovenia seceded from Yugoslavia in 1991, the loss of the Yugoslav market severely strained the city's economy, which was based on heavy industry. The city saw a record unemployment rate of nearly 25%.\nThe economic situation of Maribor after the mid-1990s crisis worsened again with the onset of global economic crisis combined with the European sovereign-debt crisis, which was one of the causes for the beginning of 2012\u201313 Maribor protests which spread into 2012\u20132013 Slovenian protests. In 2012, Maribor was one of the two European Capitals of Culture, and the following year, Maribor was the European Youth Capital.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nOn the Drava River lies Maribor Island (). The oldest public bath, still an important and often visited place in Maribor, is located on the island.\nThere are two hills in Maribor: Calvary Hill and Pyramid Hill, both surrounded by vineyards. The latter dominates the northern border of the city. Ruins of the first Maribor castle from the 11th century and a chapel from the 19th century also stand there. The hill offers an easily accessible scenic overlook of Maribor and the countryside to the south over the Drava River.\nCity districts.\nThe city of Maribor is divided into 11 districts () of the City Municipality of Maribor. The Drava River separates the districts of Center, Koro\u0161ka Vrata, and Ivan Cankar to the north from other districts south of it. The various city districts are connected by four road bridges, a rail bridge, and a pedestrian bridge.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nMaribor has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: Dfb), bordering on oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: Cfb). Average temperatures hover around zero degrees Celsius during the winter. Summers are generally warm. Average temperatures during the city's warmest month (July) exceed 20 degrees Celsius, which is one of the main reasons for the Maribor wine tradition. The city sees on average roughly of precipitation annually and it's one of the sunniest Slovene cities, with an average of 266 sunny days throughout the course of the year. The most recent temperature heatwave record for August is 40.6\u00a0\u00b0C, measured at the Maribor\u2013Tabor weather station by the Slovenian Environment Agency (ARSO) on 8 August 2013.\nArchitecture.\nMany historical structures stand in Maribor. Of the remains of city walls surrounding the old downtown, the most prominent are the Judgement Tower, the Water Tower, and the Jewish Tower. Maribor Cathedral was built in the Gothic style in the 13th century. Maribor Synagogue was built in the 14th century, and is the second oldest synagogue of Europe. Today it serves as a centre for cultural activities. Other prominent Medieval buildings are Maribor Castle, Betnava Castle, and the ruins of Upper Maribor Castle on Pyramid Hill. Town Hall was constructed in the Renaissance style, and the Plague Column in the Baroque style.\nAt the start of the 21st century, plans were made for a new modern business, residential and entertainment district, called the Drava Gate () and nicknamed the \"Maribor Manhattan\". The project includes many new exclusive residential apartments, offices and conference halls, a green and recreational space, and other structures. It also includes a tall skyscraper that would be the tallest building in Slovenia. Due to lack of finances, the project has been postponed.\nIn 2008, the Studenci Footbridge () was renovated according to the design of the Ponting company. The design was awarded that year at the 3rd International Footbridge Conference in Porto.\nIn 2010, Maribor organised an international architectural competition \"ECC Maribor 2012 \u2013 Drava 2012\" to gather proposals for the design and reconstruction of the Drava banks, the construction of a new art gallery, and for a new footbridge. Its jury received about 400 proposals for the three different projects. The footbridge and the river embankments will be built in the near future, but the art gallery was replaced with a cultural center MAKS, which is currently under construction.\nThe construction of a new modern Faculty of Medicine started in 2011 near the Drava River. It was designed by architect Boris Podrecca and was completed in 2013.\nThere are plans to renovate the Maribor Public Library and Town Hall Square (). In addition, the renovation of Maribor Island () in the Drava River has been planned.\nParks and other green spaces.\nThe main park in the city is Maribor City Park, with the City Aquarium and Terrarium, and a wide promenade leading to the Three Ponds, containing over 100 local and foreign species of deciduous and coniferous trees.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCatholic Church.\nMaribor, previously in the Catholic Diocese of Graz-Seckau, became part of the Diocese of Lavant on 1 June 1859, and the seat of its Prince-Bishop. The name of the diocese (after a river in Carinthia) was later changed to the Diocese of Maribor on 5 March 1962. It was elevated to an archdiocese by Pope Benedict XVI on 7 April 2006.\nJewish community.\nJewish people living in Maribor were first mentioned in 1277. It is suggested that at that time there was already a Jewish quarter in the city. The Jewish ghetto was located in the southeastern part of the city and it comprised, at its peak, several main streets in the city centre including part of the main city square. The ghetto had a synagogue, a Jewish cemetery and also a Talmud school. The Jewish community of Maribor was numerically at its apex around 1410. After 1450 the circumstances changed dramatically: increasing competition that coincided with an economic crisis dealt a severe blow to the economic activities that were crucial to their economic success. According to a decree issued by Emperor Maximilian\u00a0I in 1496, Jews were forced to leave the city of Maribor. Restrictions on settlement and business for Jews remained in place until 1861. From late spring 1941, after Lower Styria was annexed by the Third Reich, the Jews of Maribor were deported to concentration camps.\nCulture.\nThe city is the location of the University of Maribor, established in 1975, Alma Mater Europaea, and several other higher education institutions. High schools include Maribor High School No. 1 (\"Prva gimnazija Maribor\") and Maribor High School No. 2 (\"II. gimnazija Maribor\").\nEvery June, the two-week Lent Festival (named after the waterfront district called Lent) is held, with hundreds of musical, theatrical and other events. Every year the festival attracts theatre, opera, ballet performers, classical, modern, and jazz musicians and dancers from all over the world.\nMaribor is known for wine and culinary specialities of international and Slovene cuisine (mushroom soup with buckwheat mush, tripe, sour soup, sausages with Sauerkraut, cheese dumplings, apple strudel, special cheese cake called gibanica). There are also many popular restaurants with Serbian cuisine. The Vinag Wine Cellar (), with an area of and a length of , has a capacity of of wine. The house of the oldest grapevine in the world () at Lent grows the world's oldest grapevine, which was in 2004 recorded in \"Guinness World Records\". The grapevine of \u017dametovka is over 400 years old.\nThe most listened radio station transmitting from Maribor is the commercial radio station Radio City. Other radio stations broadcasting from Maribor include Radio NET FM, Radio Maribor, Rock Maribor, Radio Brezje, and Maribor \u0160tudent Radio (MAR\u0160).\nThe alternative scene of Maribor is situated in the Pekarna Cultural Centre, located in a former military bakery area in the Magdalena District.\nSports.\nTeam sports.\nMaribor is the hometown of the football club NK Maribor, playing in the Slovenian top division. NK Maribor has won the domestic title a record 16 times and has participated in the UEFA Champions League group stage on three occasions, in 1999, 2014, and 2017. The club's home ground is Ljudski vrt, located in the Koro\u0161ka Vrata district.\nWinter sports.\nThe Maribor Pohorje Ski Resort, situated on the outskirts of the city on the slopes of the Pohorje mountain range, hosted the women's slalom and giant slalom races for the Alpine Skiing World Cup. The competition, known as the Golden Fox (), was held for the first time in 1964, and was last held in Maribor in 2019. Since then, due to the lack of snow in the city, the event has been relocated to Kranjska Gora.\nEvent hosting.\nIn November 2012, Maribor hosted the World Youth Chess Championship with Garry Kasparov as the guest of honour. It was presumed that Maribor would also host the 2013 Winter Universiade, but the Government of Slovenia refused any financial support for the project. As a result, in March 2012, the International University Sports Federation decided that it would organise the Universiade elsewhere. In the same year, Maribor also withdrew as one of the host cities of the EuroBasket 2013 due to lack of finances.\nMaribor's Ljudski vrt stadium was one of the venues for the 2012 UEFA European Under-17 Championship and the 2021 UEFA European Under-21 Championship. In July 2023, Maribor hosted the 17th edition of the European Youth Olympic Festival.\nSports parks.\nMaribor's sports parks include the Pohorje Adrenaline Park (), the Pohorje Bike Park, and the Betnava Adventure Park (\"Pustolovski park Betnava\") with ropes courses, zip-lines, and poles.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nMaribor is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPartner cities.\nMaribor has signed partnerships with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20672", "revid": "6525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20672", "title": "Matthew the Apostle", "text": "Christian evangelist and apostle\nMatthew the Apostle was one of the twelve apostles of Jesus. According to Christian traditions, he was also one of the four Evangelists as author of the Gospel of Matthew, and thus is also known as Matthew the Evangelist.\nThe New Testament records that as an Apostle, he followed Jesus. Church Fathers, such as Irenaeus and Clement of Alexandria, relate that Matthew preached the gospel in Judea before going to other countries. The claim of his gospel authorship is rejected by most critical biblical scholars, though the \"traditional authorship still has its defenders.\"\nIn the New Testament.\nMatthew is mentioned in Matthew 9:9 and Matthew 10:3 as a tax collector (in the New International Version and other translations of the Bible) who, while sitting at the \"receipt of custom\" in Capernaum, was called to follow Jesus. He is also listed among the Twelve Disciples, but without identification of his background, in Mark 3:18, Luke 6:15 and Acts 1:13. In passages parallel to , both Mark 2:14 and Luke 5:27 describe Jesus's calling of the tax collector Levi, the son of Alphaeus. They do not associate it with the name Matthew, but all three passages are remarkably similar.\nSince the father of both Levi/Matthew and James, son of Alphaeus is named Alphaeus, according to the tradition of the Eastern Orthodox Church the two apostles were brothers.\nMinistry.\nThe New Testament records that as a disciple, Matthew followed Jesus. After Jesus' ascension, the disciples withdrew to an upper room (Acts 1:10\u201314) (traditionally the Cenacle) in Jerusalem. The disciples remained in and about Jerusalem and proclaimed that Jesus was the promised Messiah.\nIn the Babylonian Talmud (Sanhedrin 43a), \"Mattai\" is one of five disciples of \"Jeshu\".\nEarly Church Fathers such as Irenaeus (\"Against Heresies\" 3.1.1) and Clement of Alexandria say that Matthew preached the gospel to the Jewish community in Judea, before going to other countries. Ancient writers are not in agreement as to which other countries these are, but almost all sources mention Ethiopia. This Ethiopia is more likely to be the region south of the Caspian Sea now known as ancient Persia than the modern nation of Ethiopia in Africa. (See also the Wikipedia article about the Aethiopian Sea.) \nThe Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church each hold the tradition that Matthew died as a martyr, and the Babylonian Talmud appears to report his execution in Sanhedrin 43a.\nAccording to some traditions, while preaching in Ethiopia, Matthew converted, and then consecrated to God, Ephigenia of Ethiopia, the virgin daughter of King Egippus. When King Hirtacus succeeded Egippus, he asked the apostle if he could persuade Ephigenia to marry him. Matthew invited King Hirtacus to liturgy the following Sunday, where he rebuked the king for lusting after the girl, as she was a nun and therefore was the bride of Christ. The enraged King thus ordered his bodyguard to kill Matthew who stood at the altar, making him a martyr.\nThe Gospel of Matthew.\nEarly Church tradition holds that the Gospel of Matthew was written by the apostle Matthew. This tradition is first attested, among the extant writings of the first and second centuries, with the early Christian bishop Papias of Hierapolis (c.\u2009AD 60\u2013163), who is cited by the Church historian Eusebius (AD 260\u2013340), as follows: \"Matthew collected the oracles [in Greek, : sayings of or about Jesus] in the Hebrew language [], and each one interpreted [ \u2013 perhaps 'translated'] them as best he could.\" Likewise, early Christian theologian Origen (c.\u2009184\u2013c.\u2009253) indicates that the first gospel was written by Matthew, and that his gospel was composed in Hebrew near Jerusalem for Hebrew Christians and translated into Greek. The Hebrew original was kept at the Library of Caesarea. Sometime in the late fourth or early fifth century the Nazarene Community transcribed a copy for Jerome, which he used in his work. This Gospel was called the Gospel according to the Hebrews or sometimes the Gospel of the Apostles and it was once believed that it was the original to the 'Greek Matthew' found in the Bible. However, this has been challenged by modern biblical scholars such as Bart D. Ehrman and James R. Edwards.\nMost modern scholars hold that the Gospel of Matthew was written anonymously, and not by Matthew, though it is possible the gospel incorporates a source written by the disciple. The author is not named within the text, and scholars have proposed that the superscription \"according to Matthew\" was added sometime in the second century.\nNon-canonical or apocryphal gospels.\nIn the 3rd century, Jewish\u2013Christian gospels attributed to Matthew were used by Jewish\u2013Christian groups such as the Nazarenes and Ebionites. Fragments of these gospels survive in quotations by Jerome, Epiphanius and others. Most academic study follows the distinction of Gospel of the Nazarenes (36 fragments), Gospel of the Ebionites (7 fragments), and Gospel of the Hebrews (7 fragments) found in Schneemelcher's New Testament Apocrypha. Critical commentators generally regard these texts as having been composed in Greek and related to Greek Matthew. A minority of commentators consider them to be fragments of a lost Aramaic- or Hebrew-language original.\nThe Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew is a 7th-century compilation of three other texts: the Gospel of James, the Flight into Egypt, and the Infancy Gospel of Thomas.\nJerome relates that Matthew was supposed by the Nazarenes to have composed their Gospel of the Hebrews, though Irenaeus and Epiphanius of Salamis consider this simply a revised version of the canonical Gospel. This Gospel has been partially preserved in the writings of the Church Fathers, said to have been written by Matthew. Epiphanius does not make his own the claim about a Gospel of the Hebrews written by Matthew, a claim that he attributes to the Ebionites.\nVeneration.\nMatthew is recognized as a saint in the Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Lutheran and Anglican churches (see St. Matthew's Church). His tomb is located in the crypt of Salerno Cathedral in southern Italy.\nRoman Catholicism.\nThe Roman Catholic Church celebrates Matthew with a feast on September 21.\nLutheranism.\nThe Evangelical Lutheran Church in America remembers Matthew with a feast on September 21. The Lutheran Church \u2500 Missouri Synod also remembers Matthew with a feast on September 21.\nAnglicanism.\nThe Anglican communion commemorates Matthew with a festival on September 21.\nEastern Orthodox.\nMatthew is venerated as a saint in the Eastern Orthodox Church with the following feast days.\nIn Christian art.\nLike the other evangelists, Matthew is often depicted in Christian art with one of the four living creatures of Revelation 4:7. The one that accompanies him is in the form of a winged man. The three paintings of Matthew by Caravaggio in the church of San Luigi dei Francesi in Rome, where he is depicted as called by Christ from his profession as a tax gatherer, are among the landmarks of Western art.\nIn Islam.\nThe Quran speaks of Jesus' disciples but does not mention their names, instead referring to them as \"helpers to the work of Allah\". Muslim exegesis and Quran commentary, however, name them and include Matthew amongst the disciples. Muslim exegesis preserves the tradition that Matthew (\"Matt\u0101\") and Andrew (\"Andir\u0101was\") were the two disciples who went to Ethiopia to preach the message of God.\nIn the Druze faith.\nDruze tradition honors several \"mentors\" and \"prophets\", and Matthew the Apostle is honored as a prophet. In the Druze tradition and doctrine, Matthew the Apostle is respected for his contributions to spiritual knowledge and guidance. Druze doctrine teaches that Christianity is to be \"esteemed and praised\", as the Gospel writers are regarded as \"carriers of wisdom\". \nThe number 5 contains an unstated significance within the Druze faith; it is believed in this area that great prophets come in groups of five. In the time of the ancient Greeks, these five were represented by Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Parmenides, and Empedocles. In the first century, the five were represented by Jesus Christ, John the Baptist, Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, and Saint Luke. In the time of the faith's foundation, the five were Hamza ibn Ali ibn Ahmad, Mu\u1e25ammad ibn Wahb al-Qurash\u012b, Ab\u016b'l-Khayr Salama ibn Abd al-Wahhab al-Samurri, Ism\u0101\u02bf\u012bl ibn Mu\u1e25ammad at-Tam\u012bm\u012b, and Al-Muqtana Baha'uddin.\nIn architecture.\nThe Basilica of Annunciation in Nazareth houses a capital that depicts Matthew the Apostle and his story regarding King Eglypus of Aethiopia and his sons. It shows how Matthew is leading them away from the demon in the far corner of the capital. The biblical story tells of Matthew converting the king and his sons to Christianity. Not only does this capital depict an act carried out by Matthew in the Bible, it foreshadows Matthew being a martyr. When Matthew the Apostle was murdered, he then became a martyr for the Christian religion as being killed for his faith and teachings given the demon in the corner of the capitol. The iconography of this capital helps understand the religion of the time period since it was just coming into Christendom. This shows the cross between Ethiopia and Nazareth as these are where the capitals are today.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCommentaries\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20673", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20673", "title": "Mononoke Hime", "text": ""}
{"id": "20675", "revid": "26074453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20675", "title": "Mehrgarh", "text": "Neolithic archaeological site in Balochistan, Pakistan\nMehrgarh is a Neolithic archaeological site situated on the Kacchi Plain of Balochistan in Pakistan. It is located near the Bolan Pass, to the west of the Indus River and between the modern-day Pakistani cities of Quetta, Kalat and Sibi. The site was discovered in 1974 by the French Archaeological Mission in the Indus Basin led by the French archaeologists Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Jarrige and Catherine Jarrige. Mehrgarh was excavated continuously between 1974 and 1986, and again from 1997 to 2000. Archaeological material has been found in six mounds, and about 32,000 artifacts have been collected from the site. The earliest settlement at Mehrgarh, located in the northeast corner of the site, was a small farming village dated from 7000 BCE or 5250 BCE (see below).\nHistory.\nMehrgarh is one of the earliest known sites in the Indian subcontinent showing evidence of farming and herding. It was influenced by the Neolithic culture of the Near East, with similarities between \"domesticated wheat varieties, early phases of farming, pottery, other archaeological artefacts, some domesticated plants and herd animals.\" According to Asko Parpola, the culture migrated into the Indus Valley and became the Indus Valley Civilisation of the Bronze Age.\nJean-Francois Jarrige argues for an independent origin of Mehrgarh. Jarrige notes \"the assumption that farming economy was introduced full-fledged from Near-East to South Asia,\" and the similarities between Neolithic sites from eastern Mesopotamia and the western Indus Valley, which are evidence of a \"cultural continuum\" between those sites. However, given the originality of Mehrgarh, Jarrige concludes that Mehrgarh has an earlier local background,\" and is not a \"'backwater' of the Neolithic culture of the Near East.\"\nLukacs and Hemphill suggest an initial local development of Mehrgarh, with continuity in cultural development but a population change. According to Lukacs and Hemphill, while there is a strong continuity between the Neolithic and Chalcolithic cultures of Mehrgarh, dental evidence shows that the Chalcolithic population did not descend from the Neolithic population of Mehrgarh, which \"suggests moderate levels of gene flow.\" They wrote that \"the direct lineal descendants of the Neolithic inhabitants of Mehrgarh are to be found to the south and the east of Mehrgarh, in northwestern India and the western edge of the Deccan Plateau,\" with Neolithic Mehrgarh showing greater affinity with Chalcolithic Inamgaon, south of Mehrgarh, than with Chalcolithic Mehrgarh.\nGallego Romero et al. (2011) state that their research on lactose tolerance in India suggests that \"the west Eurasian genetic contribution identified by Reich et al. (2009) principally reflects gene flow from Iran and the Middle East.\" Gallego Romero notes that Indians who are lactose-tolerant show a genetic pattern regarding this tolerance which is \"characteristic of the common European mutation.\" According to Romero, this suggests that \"the most common lactose tolerance mutation made a two-way migration out of the Middle East less than 10,000 years ago. While the mutation spread across Europe, another explorer must have brought the mutation eastward to India \u2013 likely traveling along the coast of the Persian Gulf where other pockets of the same mutation have been found.\" They further note that \"[t]he earliest evidence of cattle herding in south Asia comes from the Indus River Valley site of Mehrgarh and is dated to 7,000 YBP.\"\nPeriods of occupation.\nArchaeologists divide the occupation at the site into eight periods.\nMehrgarh Period I (5250-4650 BCE).\nRecent radiocarbon dating on teeth done by Mutin and Zazzo has placed the dating of Mehrgarh Period I between 5250 and 4650 BCE, differently from Jarrige's earlier dating pre-7000\u20135500 BCE. It was Neolithic and aceramic (without the use of pottery). The earliest farming in the area was developed by semi-nomadic people using plants such as wheat and barley and animals such as sheep, goats and cattle. The settlement was established with unbaked mud-brick buildings and most of them had four internal subdivisions. Numerous burials have been found, many with elaborate goods such as baskets, stone and bone tools, beads, bangles, pendants, and occasionally animal sacrifices, with more goods left with burials of males. Ornaments of sea shell, limestone, turquoise, lapis lazuli and sandstone have been found, along with simple figurines of women and animals. Seashells from far seashores, and lapis lazuli from as far away as present-day Badakshan, show good contact with those areas. One ground stone axe was discovered in a burial, and several more were obtained from the surface. These ground stone axes are the earliest to come from a stratified context in South Asia.\nPeriods I, II, and III are considered contemporaneous with another site called Kili Gul Mohammad. The aceramic Neolithic phase in the region had originally been called the \"Kili Gul Muhammad phase\". \nIn 2001, archaeologists studying the remains of nine men from Mehrgarh discovered that the people of this civilization knew proto-dentistry. In April 2006, it was announced in the scientific journal \"Nature\" that the oldest (and first \"early Neolithic\") evidence for the drilling of human teeth \"in vivo\" (\"i.e.\" in a living person) was found in Mehrgarh. According to the authors, their discoveries point to a tradition of proto-dentistry in the early farming cultures of that region. \"Here we describe eleven drilled molar crowns from nine adults discovered in a Neolithic graveyard in Pakistan that dates from 7,500 to 9,000 years ago. These findings provide evidence for a long tradition of a type of proto-dentistry in early farming culture.\"\nMehrgarh Period II (4650\u20134000 BCE) and Period III (4000\u20133500 BCE).\nThe Mehrgarh Period II was ceramic Neolithic, using pottery and Merhgarh Period III was Chalcolithic. Period II is at site MR4 and Period III is at MR2. Much evidence of manufacturing activity has been found and more advanced techniques were used. Glazed faience beads were produced and terracotta figurines became more detailed. Figurines of females were decorated with paint and had diverse hairstyles and ornaments. Two flexed burials were found in Period II with a red ochre cover on the body. The number of burial goods decreased over time, becoming limited to ornaments and with more goods left with burials of females. The first button seals were produced from terracotta and bone and had geometric designs. Technologies included stone and copper drills, updraft kilns, large pit kilns, and copper melting crucibles. There is further evidence of long-distance trade in Period II: important as an indication of this is the discovery of several beads of lapis lazuli, once again from Badakshan. Mehrgarh Periods II and III are also contemporaneous with an expansion of the settled populations of the borderlands at the western edge of South Asia, including the establishment of settlements like Rana Ghundai, Sheri Khan Tarakai, Sarai Kala, Jalilpur, and Ghaligai.\nPeriod III was not much explored, but it was found that Togau phase (c.\u20094000\u20133500 BCE) was part of this level, covering around 100 hectares in the areas MR.2, MR.4, MR.5 and MR.6, encompassing ruins, burial and dumping grounds, but archaeologist Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Jarrige concluded that \"such wide extension was not due to contemporaneous occupation, but rather due to the shift and partial superimposition in time of several villages or settlement clusters across a span of several centuries.\"\nTogau phase.\nAt the beginning of Mehrgarh III, Togau ceramics appeared at the site. Togau ware was first defined by Beatrice de Cardi in 1948. Togau is a large mound in the Chhappar Valley of Sarawan, 12 kilometers northwest of Kalat in Balochistan. This type of pottery is found widely in Balochistan and eastern Afghanistan, at sites such as Mundigak, Sheri Khan Tarakai, and Periano Ghundai. According to Possehl it is attested at 84 sites up to date. Anjira is a contemporary ancient site near Togau.\nTogau ceramics are decorated with geometric designs and were already being made with a potter's wheel.\nThe time of Mehrgarh Period III and beyond is characterized by important new developments. During the second half of the 4th millennium BCE there is a big increase in the number of settlements in the Quetta Valley, the Surab Region, the Kachhi Plain and elsewhere in the area. Kili Ghul Mohammad (II\u2212III) pottery is similar to Togau Ware.\nMehrgarh Periods IV, V and VI (3500\u20133000 BCE).\nPeriod IV was 3500\u20133250\u00a0BCE, Period V from 3250\u20133000\u00a0BCE, and Period VI was around 3000\u00a0BCE. The site containing Periods IV to VII is designated as MR1.\nMehrgarh Period VII (2600\u20132000 BCE).\nSometime between 2600\u00a0BCE and 2000\u00a0BCE, the city seems to have been largely abandoned in favor of the larger fortified town Nausharo five miles away, when the Indus Valley Civilisation was in its middle stages of development. Historian Michael Wood suggests this took place around 2500\u00a0BCE.\nArchaeologist Massimo Vidale considers a series of semi-columns found in a structure at Mehrgarh, dated around 2500 BCE by the French mission there, to be very similar to semi-columns found in Period IV at Shahr-e Sukhteh.\nMehrgarh Period VIII.\nThe last period is found at the Sibri cemetery, about 8\u00a0kilometers from Mehrgarh.\nLifestyle and technology.\nEarly Mehrgarh residents lived in mud brick houses, stored their grain in granaries, fashioned tools with local copper ore, and lined their large basket containers with bitumen. They cultivated six-row barley, einkorn and emmer wheat, jujubes and dates, and herded sheep, goats and cattle. Residents of the later period (5500\u00a0BCE to 2600\u00a0BCE) put much effort into crafts, including flint knapping, tanning, bead production, and metal working. Mehrgarh is probably the earliest known center of agriculture in South Asia.\nThe oldest known example of the lost-wax technique comes from a 6,000-year-old wheel-shaped copper amulet found at Mehrgarh. The amulet was made from unalloyed copper, an unusual innovation that was later abandoned.\nArtifacts.\nHuman figurines.\nThe oldest ceramic figurines in South Asia were also found at Mehrgarh. They occur in all phases of the settlement and were prevalent even before pottery appears. The earliest figurines are quite simple and do not show intricate features. However, they grow in sophistication with time, and by 4000\u00a0BCE begins to show their characteristic hairstyles and typical prominent breasts. All the figurines up to this period were female. Male figurines appear only from period VII and gradually become more numerous. Many of the female figurines are holding babies, and were interpreted as depictions of a mother goddess. However, due to some difficulties in conclusively identifying these figurines with a mother goddess, some scholars prefer using the term \"female figurines with likely cultic significance\".\nPottery.\nEvidence of pottery begins from Period II. In Period III, the finds become much more abundant as the potter's wheel is introduced, and they show more intricate designs and also animal motifs. The characteristic female figurines appear beginning in Period IV and the finds show more intricate designs and sophistication. Pipal leaf designs are used in decoration from Period VI. Some sophisticated firing techniques were used from Periods VI and VII and an area reserved for the pottery industry has been found at mound MR1. However, by Period VIII, the quality and intricacy of designs seem to have suffered due to mass production, and a growing interest in bronze and copper vessels.\nBurials.\nThere are two types of burials in the Mehrgarh site. There were individual burials where a single individual was enclosed in narrow mud walls and collective burials with thin mud-brick walls within which skeletons of six different individuals were discovered. The bodies in the collective burials were kept in a flexed position and were laid east to west. Child bones were found in large jars or urn burials (4000\u20133300 BCE).\nMetallurgy.\nMetal findings have been dated as early as Period IIB, with a few copper items.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20676", "revid": "35171133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20676", "title": "Microvision", "text": "First handheld game console that used interchangeable ROM cartridges\nThe Microvision (aka Milton Bradley Microvision or MB Microvision) is the first handheld game console that used interchangeable cartridges and in that sense is reprogrammable. It was released by the Milton Bradley Company in November 1979 for a retail price of $49.99, equivalent to $221.00 in 2025.\nThe Microvision was designed by Jay Smith, the engineer who later designed the Vectrex video game console. The Microvision's combination of portability and a cartridge-based system led to moderate success, with Smith Engineering grossing $15 million in the first year of the system's release. However, its small game library, its small screen, and a lack of support from established home video game companies led to its discontinuation in 1981. According to Satoru Okada, the former head of Nintendo's R&amp;D1 Department, the Microvision inspired the Game Boy, the follow-up to Game &amp; Watch, after Nintendo designed around Microvision's limitations.\nProduction.\nUnlike most later consoles, the Microvision did not contain an onboard processor (CPU). Instead, each game included its own processor contained within the removable cartridge. This meant that the console itself effectively consisted of the controls, LCD panel and LCD controller.\nThe processors for the first Microvision cartridges were made with both Intel 8021 (cross-licensed by Signetics) and Texas Instruments TMS1100 processors. Due to purchasing issues, Milton Bradley switched to using TMS1100 processors exclusively, including reprogramming the games that were originally programmed for the 8021 processor. The TMS1100 was a more primitive device, but offered more memory and lower power consumption than the 8021. First-revision Microvisions needed two batteries due to the 8021's higher power consumption, but later units (designed for the TMS1100) only had one active battery holder. Even though the battery compartment was designed to allow the two 9-volt batteries to be inserted with proper polarity of positive and negative terminals, when a battery was forcefully improperly oriented, while the other battery was properly oriented, the two batteries would be shorted and overheat. The solution was to remove terminals for one of the batteries to prevent this hazard. Due to the high cost of changing production molds, Milton Bradley did not eliminate the second battery compartment, but instead removed its terminals and called it a spare battery holder.\nProblems.\nMicrovision units and cartridges are now somewhat rare. Those that are still in existence are susceptible to three main problems: \"screen rot,\" ESD damage, and keypad destruction.\nScreen rot.\nThe manufacturing process used to create the Microvision's LCD was primitive by modern standards. Poor sealing and impurities introduced during manufacture have resulted in the condition known as \"screen rot\". The liquid crystal spontaneously leaks and permanently darkens, resulting in a game unit that still plays but is unable to properly draw the screen. While extreme heat, which can instantly destroy the screen, can be avoided, there is nothing that can be done to prevent screen rot in most Microvision systems.\nESD damage.\nA major design problem on early units involves the fact that the microprocessor (which is inside the top of each cartridge) lacks ESD protection and is directly connected to the copper pins which normally connect the cartridge to the Microvision unit. If the user opens the protective sliding door that covers the pins, the processor can be exposed to any electric charge the user has built up. If the user has built up a substantial charge, the discharge can jump around the door's edge or pass through the door itself (dielectric breakdown). The low-voltage integrated circuit inside the cartridge is extremely ESD sensitive, and can be destroyed by an event of only a few dozen volts which cannot even be felt by the person, delivering a fatal shock to the game unit. This phenomenon was described in detail by John Elder Robison (a former Milton Bradley engineer) in his book \"Look Me in the Eye\"; according to Robison, up to 60% of units were returned as defective during the 1979 holiday season, causing significant panic among Milton Bradley staff and prompting extensive modifications to both later Microvision units (which were his own design) and Microvision factories to better dispel stray static charges.\nKeypad destruction.\nThe Microvision unit had a twelve-button keypad, with the switches buried under a thick layer of flexible plastic. To align the user's fingers with the hidden buttons, the cartridges had cutouts in their bottom (over the keypad). As different games required different button functions, the cutouts were covered with a thin printed piece of plastic, which identified the buttons' functions in that game. The problem with this design is that pressing on the buttons stretched the printed plastic, resulting in the thin material stretching and eventually tearing. Having long fingernails exacerbated the condition. Many of the initial games were programmed to give feedback of the keypress when the key was released instead of when the key was pressed. As a result, users may press on the keypad harder because they are not being provided with any feedback that the key has been pressed. This resulted from a keypad used for prototyping being different from the production keypad; the prototyping keypad had tactile feedback upon key pressing that the production units lacked.\nGames.\nWhile the game cartridge plastic cases were beige colored in the USA, in Europe they came in a variety of different colors, and the games were numbered on the Box. The age range in Europe for the console and its games was from 8 to 80 years old or 8 to Adult.\nThere were titles known to have been released.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0\"Background shading and an asterisk indicates cancelled games.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20677", "revid": "31541467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20677", "title": "Mary, Queen of Hungary", "text": "Queen of Hungary and Croatia (1382\u20131385, 1386\u20131395)\nMary, also known as Maria of Anjou (, , ; 1371\u00a0\u2013\u00a017 May 1395), reigned as Queen of Hungary and Croatia between 1382 and 1385, and from 1386 until her death. She was the daughter of Louis the Great, King of Hungary and Poland, and his wife, Elizabeth of Bosnia. Mary's marriage to Sigismund of Luxembourg, a member of the imperial Luxembourg dynasty, was already decided before her first birthday. A delegation of Polish prelates and lords confirmed her right to succeed her father in Poland in 1379.\nHaving no male siblings, Mary was crowned \"king\" of Hungary on 17September 1382, seven days after Louis the Great's death. Her mother, who had assumed the regency, absolved the Polish noblemen from their oath of loyalty to Mary in favour of Mary's younger sister, Jadwiga, in early 1383. The idea of a female monarch remained unpopular among the Hungarian noblemen, the majority of whom regarded Mary's distant cousin, Charles III of Naples, as the lawful heir. To strengthen Mary's position, the queen mother wanted her to marry Louis, the younger brother of Charles VI of France. Their engagement was announced in May 1385.\nCharles III of Naples landed in Dalmatia in September 1385. Sigismund of Luxembourg invaded Upper Hungary (now Slovakia), forcing the queen mother to give 14-year-old Mary in marriage to him in October. However, they could not prevent Charles from entering Buda. After Mary renounced the throne, Charles was crowned king on 31December 1385, but he was murdered at the instigation of Mary's mother in February 1386. Mary was restored, but the dead king's supporters captured her and her mother on 25July. Queen Elizabeth was murdered in January 1387, but Mary was released on 4June 1387. Mary officially remained co-ruler with Sigismund, who had meanwhile been crowned king, but her influence on the government was minimal. She and her premature son died after falling from a horse when the queen went on a hunting trip while she was pregnant.\nChildhood (1371\u20131382).\nMary was born in the latter half of 1371 to Louis the Great, King of Hungary and Poland, and his second wife, Elizabeth of Bosnia. She was the second daughter of her parents. They had been childless for over a decade before Mary's older sister, Catherine, was born in 1370. Mary and Catherine gained another sibling, Jadwiga, in 1374.\nSince Louis had fathered no sons, the expectation that he would bequeath Hungary, Poland, and his claims to the Kingdom of Naples and Provence to his daughters made them desirable spouses for members of the European royal families. Before Mary's first birthday, her father made a promise to Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor, that Mary would marry the emperor's second son, Sigismund of Luxembourg. Louis confirmed his promise in a deed in June 1373. Mary and Sigismund were closely related, because her paternal grandmother, Elizabeth of Poland, was the sister of his great-grandfather, Casimir III of Poland. Pope Gregory XI issued the dispensation necessary for their marriage on 6December 1374. The leading Hungarian and Polish lords confirmed Louis's promise of Mary's and Sigismund's marriage on 14April 1375.\nMary's older sister, Catherine, who had been betrothed to Louis of France, died in late 1378. Louis the Great confirmed his earlier promise of Mary's and Sigismund's marriage to Sigismund's brother, Wenceslaus, King of the Romans, in Z\u00f3lyom (now Zvolen in Slovakia) in 1379. Louis and Wenceslaus also agreed that they would acknowledge Urban VI as the lawful pope against Clement VII. Mary was formally engaged to Sigismund in Nagyszombat (now Trnava in Slovakia) in the same year. Sigismund, who had meanwhile become Margrave of Brandenburg, came to Hungary.\nLouis summoned the Polish prelates and lords to Kassa (now Ko\u0161ice in Slovakia) in September 1379, persuading them to acknowledge Mary's right to succeed him in Poland. The contemporaneous Jan of Czarnk\u00f3w, who was biased against Louis, recorded that the Poles yielded to the monarch's demand only after he had prevented them from leaving the town by shutting its gates. At a meeting with Leopold III, Duke of Austria in early 1380, Louis strongly hinted that he would bequeath Hungary to his younger daughter, Jadwiga, who had been engaged to LeopoldIII's son, William. Upon Louis's demand, a delegation of the Polish noblemen again paid homage to Sigismund and Mary on 25July 1382. According to the historian Oscar Halecki, Louis wished to divide his kingdoms between his two surviving daughters, but P\u00e1l Engel and Claude Michaud write that the ailing king wanted to bequeath both Hungary and Poland on Mary and Sigismund.\nReign.\nFirst years (1382\u20131384).\nLouis the Great died on 10 September 1382. Cardinal Demetrius, Archbishop of Esztergom, crowned Mary \"king\" with the Holy Crown of Hungary in Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r on 17September, a day after her father's burial. Mary's title and her rapid coronation in the absence of her fianc\u00e9, Sigismund, show that her mother and her mother's supporters wanted to emphasize Mary's role as monarch and to postpone or even hinder Sigismund's coronation.\nThe queen mother, Elizabeth, assumed regency. Palatine Nicholas Garai and Cardinal Demetrius became her main advisors. Most of Louis's barons preserved their offices; the queen mother only dismissed the master of the cupbearers, George Czudar, and his brother Peter, voivode of Ruthenia. According to the 15th-century historian Jan D\u0142ugosz, the Czudar brothers surrendered forts to the Lithuanians, who had \"[h]eavily bribed\" them. Queen Elizabeth had Peter Czudar imprisoned before 1November; her charters only stated that he \"had obviously been disloyal\" without specifying the reasons for his arrest.\nAll royal charters issued during the first six months of Mary's reign emphasized that she had lawfully inherited her father's crown. However, most Hungarian noblemen were strongly opposed to the very idea of a female monarch. They regarded Charles III of Naples as Louis the Great's legitimate heir because Charles was the last male offspring of the Capetian House of Anjou except for his own son Ladislaus. Charles could not openly lay claim to Hungary, because his rival for the Kingdom of Naples, Louis I, Duke of Anjou\u00a0\u2013\u00a0who was Charles VI of France's uncle\u00a0\u2013\u00a0had invaded Southern Italy in the previous year.\nNoblemen from Greater Poland offered to pay homage to either Mary or Jadwiga at a meeting in Radomsko on 25November, but they stipulated that the queen and her husband should live in Poland. The assembly of the nobility of Lesser Poland passed a similar resolution in Wi\u015blica on 12December. On the latter occasion, in response to Queen Elizabeth's demand, the noblemen also promised that they would not pay homage to anyone else than either Mary or Jadwiga. Mary's fianc\u00e9, Sigismund, who had stayed in Poland, returned to Hungary. Bodzanta, Archbishop of Gniezno, the Na\u0142\u0119cz family, and their allies in Greater Poland favoured a native prince, SiemowitIV of Masovia. To avoid a civil war, Queen Elizabeth sent envoys to the Polish noblemen's next assembly which met in Sieradz in late February 1383. Her envoys absolved the Poles from their 1382 oath of loyalty to Mary on 28March, announcing that the queen mother would send her younger daughter, Jadwiga, to Poland.\nJohn of Palisna, Prior of Vrana, rose up in open rebellion against the rule of Mary and her mother in the spring of 1383. The queens made Stephen Lackfi Ban of Croatia. The royal army marched to Croatia and laid siege to Vrana, forcing John of Palisna to flee to Bosnia. The defenders of Vrana surrendered to Mary, who had been present during the siege along with her mother, on 4November. To strengthen Mary's position against Charles of Naples, Queen Elizabeth sent her envoys to France and opened negotiations on the marriage of Mary to the younger brother of CharlesVI of France, Louis, who had once been engaged to Mary's sister, Catherine. Mary and the queen mother only left Croatia and Slavonia early next year. Queen Elizabeth replaced Stephen Lackfi with Thomas Szentgy\u00f6rgyi, who used draconian measures to put an end to a conspiracy against the queens in Zadar in May 1384.\nAlthough the last Diet was held in the early 1350s, the queens convoked a Diet to deal with the grievances of the noblemen. Mary confirmed her father's decrees of 1351 summarizing the noblemen's privileges on 22June 1384. The negotiations of Mary's marriage in France caused a new rift within the Hungarian nobility, because the Lackfis, Nicholas Z\u00e1mb\u00f3 and Nicholas Sz\u00e9csi and other high officers, who had been appointed during Louis the Great's reign, continued to support Mary's fianc\u00e9, Sigismund, in accordance with Louis the Great's will. The queen mother replaced them with Nicholas Garai's supporters in August 1384. The prelates were also opposed to the French marriage because the French supported Clement VII whom the Hungarian clergy considered an antipope. Mary's sister, Jadwiga, went to Poland where she was crowned on 16October 1384. Cardinal Demetrius, who had accompanied Jadwiga to Poland, remained absent from the queens' court after his return to Hungary. The royal government could not properly function during his absence because he was the keeper of the royal seal.\nNeapolitan threat (1384\u20131385).\nLouis I of Anjou died on 10 September 1384, enabling his rival, CharlesIII of Naples, to stabilize his rule in Southern Italy during the next months. The consolidation of CharlesIII's position in Naples also contributed to the formation of a party of noblemen who supported his claim to Hungary. John Horvat, Ban of Macs\u00f3 (now Ma\u010dva in Serbia), and his brother, Paul, Bishop of Zagreb, were the leading figures of their movement. Sigismund of Luxembourg tried to persuade the queen mother to consent to his marriage to Mary, but she refused him. He left Hungary in early 1385.\nThe queens and their supporters initiated negotiations with the representatives of the opposition, but no reconciliation was reached at their meeting in Po\u017eega in the spring of 1385. After a French delegation came to Hungary in May 1385, Mary was engaged to Louis of France. Louis of France thereafter signed his letters \"Louis of France, King of Hungary\", according to Jean Froissart. In the same month, the queen mother dismissed Stephen Lackfi, accusing him of high treason. She also sent letters to Zagreb and other places in the kingdom, forbidding the local inhabitants to support Lackfi, Nicholas Sz\u00e9csi, Bishop Paul Horvat and their relatives. John and Paul Horvat and their allies formally offered the crown to CharlesIII of Naples and invited him to Hungary in August. In the same month, Mary confirmed TvrtkoI of Bosnia's acquisition of Kotor in Dalmatia. Sigismund stormed into Upper Hungary, accompanied by his cousins, Jobst and Prokop of Moravia, and occupied Pozsony County. The queen mother replaced Nicholas Garai with Nicholas Sz\u00e9csi, and made Stephen Lackfi voivode of Transylvania and Nicholas Z\u00e1mb\u00f3 master of the treasury.\nCharles III of Naples landed at Senj in Dalmatia in September 1385 and marched to Zagreb. Sigismund of Luxembourg came to Buda and persuaded the queen mother to give her consent to his marriage to Mary. The marriage took place in Buda in October, but Sigismund was not crowned king and received no governmental function. The queen mother convoked a new Diet and Mary again confirmed the noblemen's liberties, but the queens' rule remained unpopular. Sigismund left Buda and mortgaged the territories west of the River V\u00e1g to his Moravian cousins. Charles of Naples had meanwhile left Zagreb, stating that he wanted to restore peace and public order in Hungary.\nCharles's reign (1385\u20131386).\nMany noblemen joined Charles of Naples who marched towards Buda. Mary and her mother received him ceremoniously before he reached Buda, and he entered the capital in the two queens' company in early December 1385. Mary renounced the crown without resistance in the middle of December out of fear that Charles would kill her. Charles first adopted the title governor, but the Diet elected him king. Charles was crowned king of Hungary in Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r on 31December. According to the contemporaneous Lorenzo de Monacis, Mary and her mother, who attended Charles's coronation, visited Louis the Great's tomb during the ceremony where they burst into tears because of their ill fate.\nCharles did not detain Mary and her mother who continued to live in the royal palace in Buda. Queen Elizabeth and Nicholas Garai decided to get rid of Charles. They persuaded Blaise Forg\u00e1ch, the master of the cupbearers, to join them, promising him the domain of Gimes (now Jelenec in Slovakia) if he murdered the king. Upon Queen Elizabeth's request, Charles visited her and her daughter on 7February 1386. During the meeting, Blaise Forg\u00e1ch attacked the king, seriously injuring him on the head. The wounded King Charles was carried to Visegr\u00e1d where he died on 24February.\nRestoration and capture (1386\u20131387).\nMary was restored to the throne, with her mother ruling in her name. The queen mother informed the citizens of K\u0151szeg already on 14February that \"Queen Mary had regained the Holy Crown\". However, the Horvat brothers rose up in open rebellion on behalf of the murdered king's son, Ladislaus of Naples. Mary's husband, Sigismund, and his brother, Wenceslaus, invaded Upper Hungary in April. After weeks of negotiations, the queens acknowledged Sigismund's position as consort in a treaty which was signed in Gy\u0151r in early May. They also confirmed Sigismund's mortgage of the lands west of the V\u00e1g to Jobst and Prokop of Moravia. After the treaty was signed, the queens returned to Buda and Sigismund went to Bohemia, suggesting that he was dissatisfied with the treaty.\nQueen Elizabeth, who according to the 15th-century historian Johannes de Thurocz was \"driven by folly\", decided to visit the southern counties of the kingdom that were controlled by supporters of Ladislaus of Naples. The queen mother and Mary set out for \u0110akovo, accompanied by Nicholas Garai and a modest following around 15July. However, John Horv\u00e1t, John of Palisna and their retainers ambushed and attacked the queens and their retinue at Gorjani on 25July. The queens' small entourage fought the attackers, but all were killed or captured. Blaise Forg\u00e1ch and Nicholas Garai were beheaded and their heads were thrown into the queens' carriage. Elizabeth took all the blame for the rebellion and begged the attackers to spare her daughter's life, according to Johannes deThurocz's account.\nMary and her mother were imprisoned. They were held in captivity in Gomnec Castle, which was a fortress of the Bishopric of Zagreb. In the queens' absence, the barons of the realm convoked a Diet under the newly carved \"seal of the regnicoles\". On Queen Mary's behalf, they promised a general pardon, but the Horvats refused to submit. The two queens were dragged to Krupa, and from there to Novigrad Castle on the coast of the Adriatic Sea. The barons or the Diet elected Stephen Lackfi palatine and made Sigismund of Luxembourg regent. John Horvat's henchmen strangled Queen Elizabeth in Mary's presence in early January. In the same month, Sigismund invaded Slavonia, but could not defeat the rebels.\nTaking advantage of the anarchy in Hungary, Polish troops invaded Lodomeria and Halych in February. Only Vladislaus II of Opole, who claimed the two realms for himself, protested against their action. Sigismund was crowned king on 31March as it was decided that the kingdom could no longer be without an effective ruler. One of his supporters, Ivan of Krk, laid siege to Novigrad Castle with the assistance of a Venetian fleet, which was under the command of Giovanni Barbarigo. They captured the castle and liberated Mary on 4June 1387. She was especially grateful to Barbarigo; she knighted him and granted an annuity of 600 golden florins to him.\nHusband's co-ruler (1387\u20131395).\nMary met her husband in Zagreb on 4July. She officially remained Sigismund's co-ruler until the end of her life, but her influence on government was minimal. Sigismund's land grants were always confirmed with Mary's great seal during the first year of their common rule, but thereafter the grantees rarely sought her confirmation. Royal charters counted her regnal years not from her ascension, but from her husband's coronation. Nevertheless, according to Johannes de Thurocz, Mary persuaded her husband to dismember John Horvat who was captured in July 1394 although Sigismund would have been willing to spare his life.\nMary was pregnant when she decided to venture out alone on a hunt in a Buda forest on 17May 1395. Her horse tripped, threw her and fell on top of her. The trauma induced labor and she gave birth prematurely to a son. The queen succumbed to the fatal injuries; being far from any kind of assistance, her son died as well. She was buried in the cathedral of V\u00e1rad (now Oradea in Romania). Mary's sister, Jadwiga, claimed the Hungarian crown, but Sigismund retained it without much difficulty.\nAncestors.\nQueen Mary's ancestors of the \u00c1rp\u00e1d dynasty.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20679", "revid": "13644854", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20679", "title": "TiVo Corporation", "text": "American technology company (1983\u20132020)\nTiVo Corporation, formerly known as the Rovi Corporation and Macrovision Solutions Corporation, was an American technology company headquartered in San Jose, California. Now operating as Xperi, the company is primarily involved in licensing its intellectual property within the consumer electronics industry, including digital rights management, electronic program guide software, and metadata. The company holds over 6,000 pending and registered patents. The company also provides analytics and recommendation platforms for the video industry.\nIn 2016, Rovi acquired digital video recorder maker TiVo Inc., and renamed itself TiVo Corporation. On May 30, 2019, TiVo announced the appointment of Dave Shull as the company's new president and CEO.\nOn December 19, 2019, TiVo merged with Xperi; the combined firm operates as Xperi.\nHistory.\nMacrovision Corporation was established in 1983 by Victor Farrow and John O. Ryan. The 1984 film \"The Cotton Club\" was the first video to be encoded with Macrovision technology when it was released in 1985. The technology was subsequently extended to DVD players and other consumer electronic recording and playback devices such as digital cable and satellite set-top boxes, digital video recorders, and portable media players. By the end of the 1980s, most major Hollywood studios were utilizing their services.\nIn the 1990s, Macrovision acquired companies with expertise in managing access control and secure distribution of other forms of digital media, including music, video games, internet content, and computer software.\nRyan (founder and CEO of Macrovision from June 1995 to October 2001) and William A. Krepick (president of Macrovision Corporation from July 1995 to July 2005 and CEO from October 2001 to July 2005) led the company through an IPO in 1997 priced at $9.00 a share. Under their leadership, the company went from a private company with sales of under $20 million to a global, publicly traded corporation with annual sales of $220 million and market cap exceeding $1 billion.\nIn July 2005, the company hired Alfred J. Amoroso as chief executive officer and president to succeed William A. Krepick, who announced his retirement earlier in the year.\nMacrovision acquired Gemstar-TV Guide on May 2, 2008, in a cash-and-stock deal worth about $2.8 billion. The combined company would seek to be \u201cthe homepage for the TV experience,\u201d said Mr. Amoroso.\nAfter the announcement of its intent to buy Gemstar-TV Guide, Macrovision made other changes in order to focus on entertainment technology, including selling its software business unit, valued at approximately $200 million, to private equity firm Thoma Cressey Bravo. The divestiture of the software business unit closed on April 1, 2008, becoming Acresso Software. Macrovision also ultimately sold off parts of Gemstar-TV Guide not focused on digital entertainment, including TryMedia, eMeta, TV Guide Magazine, TV Guide Network and the TV Games Network.\nThe company also bought two companies providing entertainment metadata: All Media Guide on November 6, 2007, and substantially all the assets of Muze, Inc. on April 15, 2009.\nAs Rovi.\nOn July 16, 2009, Macrovision Solutions Corporation announced the official change of its name to Rovi Corporation.\nRovi announced its first product on January 7, 2010 \u2013 TotalGuide, an interactive media guide that incorporated entertainment data, to search, browse and provide recommendations. On March 16, 2010, Rovi acquired MediaUnbound for an undisclosed amount. MediaUnbound had helped build static and dynamic personalization and recommendation engines for clients such as Napster, eMusic and MTV Networks. On June 16, 2010, the company announced the Rovi Advertising Network which bundled guide advertising and third-party interactive TV platforms.\nOn December 23, 2010, the company announced its intention to acquire Sonic Solutions and its DivX video software in a deal valued at $720 million. Sonic provided digital video processing, playback and distribution technologies and owned RoxioNow (formerly CinemaNow) an OTT technology provider.\nOn March 1, 2011, Rovi announced its acquisition of online video guide SideReel.\nThe company announced Amoroso's intention to retire on May 26, 2011. Tom Carson, formerly the executive vice president of sales and marketing, was appointed CEO and President in December 2011. Under Carson the company shifted its focus on \"growth opportunities related to its core enabling technology and services\" and it announced that it intended to sell the Rovi Entertainment Store business. It entered into separate agreements to sell the Rovi Entertainment Store to Reliance Majestic Holdings, a private equity-backed company; and its consumer websites to All Media Networks, a new company, in July 2013. Continuing on this path, the company made a similar announcement in January 2014 indicating its intent to sell the DivX and MainConcept businesses.\nOn April 1, 2013, Rovi acquired Integral Reach, a provider of predictive analysis services. The technology would be integrated into Rovi's audience analysis services.\nIn April 2013, Facebook began licensing Rovi metadata for use within the service.\nAs TiVo Corporation.\nOn April 29, 2016, Rovi Corporation announced that it had acquired TiVo Inc. for $1.1 billion. The combined company operated under the TiVo brand, and held over 6,000 pending and registered patents. Rovi plans to discontinue in-house hardware production, and focus primarily on licensing its technologies and the TiVo brand to third-party companies.\nIn December 2019, TiVo Corporation announced their intent to merge with Xperi. The surviving entity will operate under the Xperi name and have a combined value of $3 billion. TiVo had previously considered splitting out its hardware operations from its licensing operations. The merger was completed on June 1, 2020.\nIn August 2022, TiVo announced the TiVo OS for smart TVs launching in 2023 in Europe with Vestel.\nProducts.\nGuides.\nRovi provides guides for service providers and CE manufacturers.\nData.\nRovi provides entertainment metadata for consumer electronics manufacturers, service providers, retailers, online portals and application developers around the world. The company has over 50 years of metadata for video, music, books, and games covering more than 5 million movies and TV programs, 3.2 million album releases and 30 million song tracks, 9 million in-print and out-of-print book titles, and 70,000 video games. The metadata includes basic facts, local TV listings and channel line-ups for interactive program guides, original editorial, imagery, and other features.\nSearch and recommendations.\nRovi Search Service allows consumer electronics manufacturers, service providers, and developers to provide solutions that enable consumers to search for and access desired content. Rovi Recommendations Service is a cloud-based service that offers consumers entertainment choices similar to their chosen program, movie, album, track, musician or band.\nAdvertising.\nRovi Advertising Service enables the monetization of entertainment platforms. It places ads that appear as content choices in application menus and user interfaces for set-top boxes, connected TVs, smartphones, tablets, Blu-ray players, game consoles and other devices.\nRovi Audience Management.\nRovi Audience Management is a suite of products (Advertising Optimizer and Promotion Optimizer) combining big data with predictive analytics to provide TV audience insights and advertising campaign management. Ad Optimizer allows provides campaign management and media planning capabilities to TV networks and multichannel video programming distributors (MVPDs). Promo Optimizer uses past viewing data to enable cable and broadcast networks to create plans for on-air promos.\nLegacy products.\nThe company historically developed technologies and products that helped protect content from being pirated. Its two core legacy products were called RipGuard and the Analog Protection System (APS).\nRipGuard.\nMacrovision introduced its RipGuard technology in February 2005. It was designed to prevent or reduce digital DVD copying by altering the format of the DVD content to disrupt the ripping software. Although the technology could be circumvented by several current DVD rippers such as AnyDVD or DVDFab, Macrovision claimed that 95% of casual users lack the knowledge and/or determination to be able to copy a DVD with RipGuard technology.\nAnalog Protection System.\nThe Analog Protection System (APS), also known as Analog Copy Protection (ACP), Copyguard or Macrovision, was the Macrovision Corporation's flagship product, a copy protection system for both VHS and DVD. Video tapes copied from DVDs encoded with APS become garbled and unwatchable. The process works by adding pulses to analog video signals to negatively impact the AGC circuit of a recording device. In digital devices, changes to the analog video signal are created by a chip that converts the digital video to analog within the device. In DVD players, trigger bits are created during DVD authoring to inform the APS that it should be applied to DVD players' analog outputs or analog video outputs on a PC while playing back a protected DVD-Video disc. In set top boxes trigger bits are incorporated into Conditional Access Entitlement Control Messages (ECM) in the stream delivered to the STB. In VHS, alterations to the analog video signal are added in a Macrovision-provided \"processor box\" used by duplicators.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20681", "revid": "219723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20681", "title": "MIPS Technologies Inc.", "text": ""}
{"id": "20682", "revid": "20838146", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20682", "title": "MIPS Technologies", "text": "American fabless semiconductor design company\nMIPS Tech LLC, formerly MIPS Computer Systems, Inc. and MIPS Technologies, Inc., is an American fabless semiconductor design company that is most widely known for developing the MIPS architecture and a series of RISC CPU chips based on it. MIPS provides processor architectures and cores for digital home, networking, embedded, Internet of things and mobile applications.\nMIPS was founded in 1984 to commercialize the work being carried out at Stanford University on the MIPS architecture, a pioneering RISC design. The company generated intense interest in the late 1980s, seeing design wins with Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) and Silicon Graphics (SGI), among others. By the early 1990s the market was crowded with new RISC designs and further design wins were limited. The company was purchased by SGI in 1992, by that time its only major customer, and won several new designs in the game console space. In 1998, SGI announced they would be transitioning off MIPS and spun off the company.\nAfter several years operating as an independent design house, in 2013 the company was purchased by Imagination Technologies, best known for their PowerVR graphics processor family. They were sold to Tallwood Venture Capital in 2017 and then purchased soon after by Wave Computing in 2018. Wave declared bankruptcy in 2020, emerging in 2021 as MIPS and announcing that the MIPS architecture was being abandoned in favor of RISC-V designs.\nIn May 2022, MIPS previewed its first RISC-V CPU IP cores, the eVocore P8700 and I8500 multiprocessors. In December 2022, MIPS announced availability of the P8700.\nIn July 2025, MIPS was acquired by GlobalFoundries.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plain image with caption/styles.css\"/&gt; \nLogo of MIPS Computer Systems \nMIPS Computer Systems Inc. was founded in 1984 by a group of researchers from Stanford University including John L. Hennessy and Chris Rowen. These researchers had worked on a project called MIPS (for \"Microprocessor without Interlocked Pipeline Stages\"), one of the projects that pioneered the RISC concept. Other principal founders were Skip Stritter, formerly a Motorola technologist, and John Moussouris, formerly of IBM.\nThe initial CEO was Vaemond Crane, formerly President and CEO of Computer Consoles Inc., who arrived in February 1985 and departed in June 1989. He was replaced by Bob Miller, a former senior IBM and Data General executive. Miller ran the company through its IPO and subsequent sale to Silicon Graphics.\nIn 1986, MIPS Computer Systems designs were noticed by companies such as Cadnetix, Prime Computer and Silicon Graphics (SGI), these adopting the R2000 for new products, with SGI adopting the MIPS architecture for its computers having noted that the Motorola 68000 series of processors was \"at the end of its price-performance curve\". Identifying the \"time-to-market issues\" of companies introducing workstation products, MIPS introduced a range of component kits, processor boards and memory boards, intended as \"building blocks\" for such companies to build into systems. Additionally, development systems such as the M/500 were sold, intended to support software development at systems vendors building MIPS-based hardware products. In December 1989, MIPS held its first IPO. That year, Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) released a Unix workstation based on the MIPS design.\nAfter developing the R2000 and R3000 microprocessors, a management change brought along the larger dreams of being a computer vendor. The company found itself unable to compete in the computer market against much larger companies and was struggling to support the costs of developing both the chips and the systems (MIPS Magnum). To secure the supply of future generations of MIPS microprocessors (the 64-bit R4000), SGI acquired the company in 1992 for $333 million and renamed it as MIPS Technologies Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of SGI.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plain image with caption/styles.css\"/&gt; \nMIPS RISC Certified Power emblem \nDuring SGI's ownership of MIPS, the company introduced the R8000 in 1994 and the R10000 in 1996 and a follow-up the R12000 in 1997. During this time, two future microprocessors code-named \"The Beast\" and \"Capitan\" were in development; these were cancelled after SGI decided to migrate to the Itanium architecture in 1998. As a result, MIPS was spun out as an intellectual property licensing company, offering licences to the MIPS architecture as well as microprocessor core designs.\nOn June 30, 1998, MIPS held an IPO after raising about $ with an offering price of $ a share. In 1999, SGI announced it would overhaul its operations; it planned to continue introducing new MIPS processors until 2002, but its server business would include Intel's processor architectures as well. SGI spun MIPS out completely on June 20, 2000, by distributing all its interest as stock dividend to the stockholders.\nIn early 2008 MIPS laid off 28 employees from its processor business group. On August 13, 2008, MIPS announced a loss of $108.5 million for their fiscal fourth-quarter and that they would lay off another 15% of their workforce. At the time MIPS had 512 employees. In May 2018, according to the company's presence on LinkedIn, there may be less than 50 employees.\nNotable Contributors.\nNotable people who have worked at MIPS include James Billmaier, Steve Blank, Joseph DiNucci, John L. Hennessy,\nTodd Bezenek,\nDavid Hitz, Earl Killian, Dan Levin, John Mashey, John P. McCaskey, Bob Miller, Stratton Sclavos, and Skip Stritter.\nIn 2010, Sandeep Vij was named CEO of MIPS Technologies. Vij studied under John Hennessy as a Stanford University graduate student. Prior to taking over at MIPS, Vij was an executive at Cavium Networks, Xilinx and Altera.\n\"EE Times\" reported that MIPS had 150 employees as of November 1, 2010. If the August 14, 2008 EDN article was accurate about MIPS having over 500 employees at the time, then MIPS reduced their total workforce by 70% between 2008 and 2010.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plain image with caption/styles.css\"/&gt; \nMIPS branding as used by Imagination Technologies \nIn addition to its main R&amp;D center in Sunnyvale, California, MIPS has engineering facilities in Shanghai, China, Beaverton, Oregon, Bristol and Kings Langley, both in England. It also has offices in Hsin-chu, Taiwan; Tokyo, Japan; Remscheid, Germany and Haifa, Israel.\nDuring the first quarter of 2013, 498 out of 580 of MIPS patents were sold to Bridge Crossing which was created by Allied Security Trust, with all processor-specific patents and the other parts of the company sold to Imagination Technologies. Imagination had outbid Ceva Inc to buy MIPS with an offer of $100 million, and was investing to develop the architecture for the embedded processor market.\nIn 2017, under financial pressure itself, Imagination Technologies sold the MIPS processor business to a California-based investment company, Tallwood Venture Capital. Tallwood in turn sold the business to Wave Computing in 2018, both of these companies reportedly having their origins with, or ownership links to, a co-founder of Chips and Technologies and S3 Graphics. Despite the regulatory obstacles that had forced Imagination to divest itself of the MIPS business prior to its own acquisition by Canyon Bridge, bankruptcy proceedings for Wave Computing indicated that the company had in 2018 and 2019 transferred full licensing rights for the MIPS architecture for China, Hong Kong and Macau to CIP United, a Shanghai-based company.\nIn 2021, MIPS announced it would begin making chips based on the RISC-V architecture. In 2022, the company announced availability of its first RISC-V CPU IP core, the eVocore P8700.\nIn September 2023, MIPS named former Texas Instruments (TI) executive Sameer Wasson CEO. Wasson spent 18 years at TI, most recently as vice president, Business Unit (BU) Manager, Processors.\nProducts.\nMIPS Technologies created the processor architecture that is licensed to chip makers. Before the acquisition, the company had 125+ licensees who ship more than 500 million MIPS-based processors each year.\nMIPS processor architectures and cores are used in home entertainment, networking and communications products. The company licensed its 32- and 64-bit architectures as well as 32-bit cores.\nThe MIPS32 architecture is a high-performance 32-bit instruction set architecture (ISA) that is used in applications such as 32-bit microcontrollers, home entertainment, home networking devices and mobile designs. MIPS customers license the architecture to develop their own processors or license off-the-shelf cores from MIPS that are based on the architecture.\nThe MIPS64 architecture is a high performance 64-bit instruction set architecture that is widely used in networking infrastructure equipment through MIPS licensees such as Cavium Networks and Broadcom.\nSmartCE (Connected Entertainment) is a reference platform that integrates Android, Adobe Flash platform for TV, Skype, the Home Jinni ConnecTV application and other applications. SmartCE lets OEM customers create integrated products more quickly.\nMIPS processor core families.\nThe MIPS processor cores are divided by Imagination into three major families:\nMIPS eVocore RISC-V CPU IP cores.\nThe MIPS eVocore CPUs are the first RISC-V CPU IP cores from MIPS. Both cores provide support for privileged hardware virtualization, user defined custom extensions, multi-threading, hybrid debug, and functional safety. They include:\nLicensees.\nMIPS Technologies had a strong customer licensee base in home electronics and portable media players; for example, 75 percent of Blu-ray Disc players were running on MIPS Technologies processors. In the digital home, the company's processors were predominantly found in digital TVs and set-top boxes. The Sony PlayStation Portable used two processors based on the MIPS32 4K processor.\nWithin the networking segment, licensees include Cavium Networks and Broadcom. Cavium has used up to 48 MIPS cores for its OCTEON family network reference designs. Broadcom ships Linux-ready MIPS64-based XLP, XLR, and XLS multicore, multithreaded processors. Licensees using MIPS to build smartphones and tablets include Actions Semiconductor and Ingenic Semiconductor. Tablets based on MIPS include the Cruz tablets from Velocity Micro. TCL Corporation is using MIPS processors for the development of smartphones.\nCompanies can also obtain an MIPS \"architectural licence\" for designing their own CPU cores using the MIPS architecture. Distinct MIPS architecture implementations by licensees include Broadcom's BRCM 5000.\nOther licensees include Broadcom, which has developed MIPS-based CPUs for over a decade, Microchip Technology, which leverages MIPS processors for its 32-bit PIC32 microcontrollers, Qualcomm Atheros, MediaTek and Mobileye, whose EyeQ chips are based on cores licensed from MIPS.\nThe first announced licensee for MIPS' RISC-V CPUs is Mobileye, who adopted the MIPS eVocore P8700 for autonomous driving SoCs.\nOperating systems.\nMIPS is widely supported by Unix-like systems, including Linux, FreeBSD, NetBSD, and OpenBSD.\nGoogle's processor-agnostic Android operating system is built on the Linux kernel. MIPS originally ported Android to its architecture for embedded products beyond the mobile handset, where it was originally targeted by Google but MIPS support was dropped in 2018. In 2010, MIPS and its licensee Sigma Designs announced the world's first Android set-top boxes. By porting to Android, MIPS processors power smartphones and tablets running on the Android operating system.\nOpenWrt is an embedded operating system based on the Linux kernel.\nWhile it currently runs on a variety of processor architectures,\nit was originally developed for the Linksys WRT54G, which used a 32-bit MIPS processor from Broadcom.\nThe OpenWrt Table of Hardware now includes MIPS-based devices from Atheros, Broadcom, Cavium, Lantiq, MediaTek, etc.\nReal-time operating systems that run on MIPS include CMX Systems, eCosCentric's eCos, ENEA OSE, Express Logic's ThreadX, FreeRTOS, Green Hills Software's Integrity, LynuxWorks' LynxOS, Mentor Graphics, Micrium's Micro-Controller Operating Systems (\u03bcC/OS), QNX Software Systems' QNX, Quadros Systems Inc.'s RTXC Quadros RTOS, Segger's embOS and Wind River's VxWorks.\nHPE NonStop Guardian OS has a version running on MIPS.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20683", "revid": "50279579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20683", "title": "Machine code", "text": "Instructions directly executable by a computer\nIn computing, machine code is data encoded and structured to control a computer's central processing unit (CPU) via its programmable interface. A computer program consists primarily of sequences of machine-code instructions. Machine code is classified as native with respect to its host CPU since it is the language that the CPU interprets directly. A software interpreter is a virtual machine that processes virtual machine code.\nA machine-code instruction causes the CPU to perform a specific task such as:\nAn instruction set architecture (ISA) defines the interface to a CPU and varies by groupings or families of CPU design such as x86 and ARM. Generally, machine code compatible with one family is not with others, but there are exceptions. The VAX architecture includes optional support of the PDP-11 instruction set. The IA-64 architecture includes optional support of the IA-32 instruction set. And, the PowerPC 615 can natively process both PowerPC and x86 instructions.\nAssembly language.\nAssembly language provides a relatively direct mapping from a human-readable source code to machine code. The assembly language source code represents numerical codes in machine code, as mnemonics and labels. For example, codice_1 in assembly for an x86 processor represents the x86 architecture opcode 0x90 in machine code. While it is possible to write a program in machine code, doing so is tedious and error-prone. Therefore, programs are usually written in assembly or, more commonly, in a high-level programming language.\nInstruction set.\nA machine instruction encodes an operation as a pattern of bits based on the specified format for the machine's instruction set. \nInstruction sets differ in various ways. Instructions of a set might all be the same length or different instructions might have different lengths; they might be smaller than, the same size as, or larger than the word size of the architecture. The number of instructions may be relatively small or large. Instructions may or may not have to be aligned on particular memory boundaries, such as the architecture's word boundary.\nAn instruction set needs to execute the circuits of a computer's digital logic level. At the digital level, the program needs to control the computer's registers, bus, memory, ALU, and other hardware components. To control a computer's architectural features, machine instructions are created. Examples of features that are controlled using machine instructions:\nThe criteria for instruction formats include:\nDetermining the size of the address field is a choice between space and speed. On some computers, the number of bits in the address field may be too small to access all of the physical memory. Also, virtual address space needs to be considered. Another constraint may be a limitation on the size of registers used to construct the address. Whereas a shorter address field allows the instructions to execute more quickly, other physical properties need to be considered when designing the instruction format. \nInstructions can be separated into two types: general-purpose and special-purpose. Special-purpose instructions exploit architectural features that are unique to a computer. General-purpose instructions control architectural features common to all computers.\nGeneral-purpose instructions control:\nOverlapping instruction.\nOn processor architectures with variable-length instruction sets (such as Intel's x86 processor family) it is, within the limits of the control-flow resynchronizing phenomenon known as the Kruskal count, sometimes possible through opcode-level programming to deliberately arrange the resulting code so that two code paths share a common fragment of opcode sequences. These are called \"overlapping instructions\", \"overlapping opcodes\", \"overlapping code\", \"overlapped code\", \"instruction scission\", or \"jump into the middle of an instruction\".\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, overlapping instructions were sometimes used to preserve memory space. One example was in the implementation of error tables in Microsoft's Altair BASIC, where \"interleaved instructions\" mutually shared their instruction bytes. The technique is rarely used today, but might still be necessary to resort to in areas where extreme optimization for size is necessary on the byte-level such as in the implementation of boot loaders which have to fit into boot sectors.\nIt is also sometimes used as a code obfuscation technique as a measure against disassembly and tampering.\nThe principle is also used in shared code sequences of fat binaries which must run on multiple instruction-set-incompatible processor platforms.\nThis property is also used to find unintended instructions called gadgets in existing code repositories and is used in return-oriented programming as alternative to code injection for exploits such as return-to-libc attacks.\nMicrocode.\nIn some computers, the machine code of the architecture is implemented by an even more fundamental underlying layer called microcode, providing a common machine language interface across a line or family of different models of computer with widely different underlying dataflows. This is done to facilitate porting of machine language programs between different models. An example of this use is the IBM System/360 family of computers and their successors.\nExamples.\nIBM 709x.\nThe IBM 704, 709, 704x and 709x store one instruction in each instruction word; IBM numbers the bit from the left as S, 1, ..., 35. Most instructions have one of two formats:\nS,1-11\n12-13 Flag, ignored in some instructions\n14-17 unused\n18-20 Tag\n21-35 Y\nS,1-2 Opcode\n3-17 Decrement\n18-20 Tag\n21-35 Y\nFor all but the IBM 7094 and 7094 II, there are three index registers designated A, B and C; indexing with multiple 1 bits in the tag subtracts the logical or of the selected index registers and loading with multiple 1 bits in the tag loads all of the selected index registers. The 7094 and 7094 II have seven index registers, but when they are powered on they are in \"multiple tag mode\", in which they use only the three of the index registers in a fashion compatible with earlier machines, and require a Leave Multiple Tag Mode (LMTM) instruction in order to access the other four index registers.\nThe effective address is normally Y-C(T), where C(T) is either 0 for a tag of 0, the logical or of the selected index registers in multiple tag mode or the selected index register if not in multiple tag mode. However, the effective address for index register control instructions is just Y.\nA flag with both bits 1 selects indirect addressing; the indirect address word has both a tag and a Y field.\nIn addition to \"transfer\" (branch) instructions, these machines have skip instruction that conditionally skip one or two words, e.g., Compare Accumulator with Storage (CAS) does a three way compare and conditionally skips to NSI, NSI+1 or NSI+2, depending on the result.\nMIPS.\nThe MIPS architecture provides a specific example for a machine code whose instructions are always 32 bits long. The general type of instruction is given by the \"op\" (operation) field, the highest 6 bits. J-type (jump) and I-type (immediate) instructions are fully specified by \"op\". R-type (register) instructions include an additional function (funct) field to determine the exact operation. The fields used in these types are:\n 6 5 5 5 5 6 bits\n [ op | rs | rt | rd |shamt| funct] R-type\n [ op | rs | rt | address/immediate] I-type\n [ op | target address ] J-type\n\"rs\", \"rt\", and \"rd\" indicate register operands; \"shamt\" gives a shift amount; and the \"address\" or \"immediate\" fields contain an operand directly.\nFor example, adding the registers 1 and 2 and placing the result in register 6 is encoded:\n [ op | rs | rt | rd |shamt| funct]\n 0 1 2 6 0 32 decimal\n 000000 00001 00010 00110 00000 100000 binary\nLoad a value into register 8, taken from the memory cell 68 cells after the location listed in register 3:\n [ op | rs | rt | address/immediate]\n 35 3 8 68 decimal\n 100011 00011 01000 00000 00001 000100 binary\nJumping to the address 1024:\n [ op | target address ]\n 2 1024 decimal\n 000010 00000 00000 00000 10000 000000 binary\nBytecode.\nMachine code is similar to yet fundamentally different from bytecode. Like machine code, bytecode is typically generated (i.e. by a compiler) from source code. But, unlike machine code, bytecode is not directly executable by a CPU. An exception is if a processor is designed to use bytecode as its machine code, such as the Java processor. If bytecode is processed by an software interpreter, then that interpreter is a virtual machine for which the bytecode is its machine code.\nStorage.\nDuring execution, machine code is generally stored in RAM although running from ROM is supported by some devices. Regardless, the code may also be cached in more specialized memory to enhance performance. There may be different caches for instructions and data, depending on the architecture. \nFrom the point of view of a process, the machine code lives in \"code space\", a designated part of its address space. In a multi-threading environment, different threads of one process share code space along with data space, which reduces the overhead of context switching considerably as compared to process switching.\nReadability.\nMachine code is generally considered to be not human readable, with Douglas Hofstadter comparing it to examining the atoms of a DNA molecule. However, various tools and methods support understanding machine code.\nDisassembly decodes machine code to assembly language which is possible since assembly instructions can often be mapped one-to-one to machine instructions.\nA decompiler converts machine code to a high-level language, but the result can be relatively obfuscated; hard to understand. \nA program can be associated with debug symbols (either embedded in the native executable or in a separate file) that allow it to be mapped to external source code. A debugger reads the symbols to help a programmer interactively debug the program. Examples include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20684", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20684", "title": "Instructions per second", "text": "Measure of a computer's processing speed\nInstructions per second (IPS) is a measure of a computer's processor speed. For complex instruction set computers (CISCs), different instructions take different amounts of time, so the value measured depends on the instruction mix; even for comparing processors in the same family the IPS measurement can be problematic. Many reported IPS values have represented \"peak\" execution rates on artificial instruction sequences with few branches and no cache contention, whereas realistic workloads typically lead to significantly lower IPS values. Memory hierarchy also greatly affects processor performance, an issue barely considered in IPS calculations. Because of these problems, synthetic benchmarks such as Dhrystone are now generally used to estimate computer performance in commonly used applications, and raw IPS has fallen into disuse.\nThe term is commonly used in association with a metric prefix (k, M, G, T, P, or E) to form kilo instructions per second (kIPS), mega instructions per second (MIPS), giga instructions per second (GIPS) and so on. Formerly TIPS was used occasionally for \"thousand IPS\".\nComputing.\nIPS can be calculated using this equation:\nformula_1\nHowever, the instructions/cycle measurement depends on the instruction sequence, the data and external factors.\nScaling units.\nFor the most early 8-bit and 16-bit microprocessors, performance was measured in thousand instructions per second, or kilo instructions per second (kIPS).\nThe term \"mega instructions per second\" became useful in the late 1970s. The IBM System/370 model 158\u20133 and the VAX-11/780 were considered roughly equivalent at 1\u00a0MIPS.\nTypes of instruction.\nThe speed of a given CPU depends on many factors, such as the type of instructions being executed, the execution order and the presence of branch instructions (problematic in CPU pipelines). CPU instruction rates are different from clock frequencies, usually reported in Hz, as each instruction may require several clock cycles to complete or the processor may be capable of executing multiple independent instructions simultaneously. MIPS can be useful when comparing performance between processors made with similar architecture (e.g. PIC microcontrollers), but they are difficult to compare between differing CPU architectures, especially between RISC and CISC architectures. This led to the term \"Meaningless Indicator of Processor Speed,\" or less commonly, \"Meaningless Indices of Performance,\" being popular amongst technical people by the mid-1980s.\nThe Gibson Mix (1959).\nBefore standard benchmarks were available, average speed rating of computers was based on calculations for a mix of instructions with the results given in kilo instructions per second (kIPS). Among the first attempts at defining a specific collections of instructions to time was the Gibson Mix, produced by Jack Clark Gibson of IBM for scientific applications in 1959.\nGibson divided computer instructions into 12 classes, based on the IBM 704 architecture, adding a 13th class to account for indexing time. Weights were primarily based on analysis of seven scientific programs run on the 704, with a small contribution from some IBM 650 programs. The overall score was then the weighted sum of the average execution speed for instructions in each class.\nThe Gibson Mix is a product of its era, when computer speeds were still measured in kIPS. \nOther ratings, such as the ADP mix which does not include floating point operations, were produced for commercial applications.\nThese early ratings were nowhere as systemic as the later approaches, although the idea of creating a benchmark to resemble real-world applications (later called a \"synthetic benchmark\") would persist.\nTwo flavors of VAX MIPS.\nThe VAX-11/780 was released in 1977. It was marketed as being able to execute the equivalent of 1 million System/370 instructions per second, the first minicomputer to achieve such a speed. VAX-11/780 would quickly become a unit of reference for MIPS measurements, in two separate benchmarks:\nOther instruction mixes.\n\"zMIPS\" refers to the MIPS measure used internally by IBM to rate its mainframe servers (zSeries, IBM System z9, and IBM System z10).\n\"Weighted million operations per second (WMOPS)\" is a similar measurement, used for audio codecs.\nOther factors that affect instructions per second.\nEffective MIPS speeds are highly dependent on the programming language used: some compilers generate highly-efficient code, others do not. The Whetstone Report has a table showing MWIPS speeds of PCs via early interpreters and compilers up to modern languages. The first PC compiler was for BASIC (1982) when a 4.8\u00a0MHz 8088/87 CPU obtained 0.01\u00a0MWIPS. Results on a 2.4\u00a0GHz Intel Core 2 Duo (1 CPU 2007) vary from 9.7\u00a0MWIPS using BASIC Interpreter, 59\u00a0MWIPS via BASIC Compiler, 347\u00a0MWIPS using 1987 Fortran, 1,534\u00a0MWIPS through HTML/Java to 2,403\u00a0MWIPS using a modern C/C++ compiler.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20685", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20685", "title": "Michael (given name)", "text": "Masculine given name\nMichael (; ) is a common masculine given name usually thought to be from the Hebrew rhetorical question (\"m\u012b k\u0101\u02bc\u0113l\"), \"Who [is] like [the Hebrew god] El?\", thus being a theophoric name whose answer is \"there is none like El,\" or \"there is none as famous and powerful as God.\" This question is known in Latin as \"Quis ut Deus?\" Paradoxically, the name is also sometimes interpreted as \"One who is like God.\"\nAn alternative spelling of the name is \"Micheal\". While \"Michael\" is most often a masculine name, it is also given to women, such as the actresses Michael Michele and Michael Learned, and Michael Steele, the former bassist for the Bangles.\nPatronymic surnames that come from Michael include \"Carmichael, DiMichele, MacMichael, McMichael, Michaels, Micallef, Michaelson, Michiels, Michalka, Michels, Migu\u00e9lez, Mih\u00e1ly, Mikeladze, Mikhaylov, Mikkelsen, Mitchell, Michalski, Mykhaylenko\" and \"Mikaelyan\".\nReligion.\nJudaism.\nThe name first appears in the Hebrew Bible in the Book of Numbers , where Sethur the son of Michael is one of 12 spies sent into the Land of Canaan.\n\"Michael\" is the name of an archangel in the Book of Daniel .\nChristianity.\nThe archangel Michael is venerated in the Roman Catholic Church, the Oriental Orthodox Church, and the Eastern Orthodox Church. For the Roman Catholic Church, 29 September is the feast day of the three archangels: Michael, Gabriel and Raphael. For the Orthodox Church, 8 November is the feast day commemorating the archangels Michael and Gabriel, as well as the whole host of angels, while the Monday of each liturgical week likewise corresponds to the \"Bodiless Powers.\" In the Coptic Orthodox Church, his main feast days are 12 Hathor and 12 Paoni, with lesser feast days on the 12th day of each month of the Coptic calendar.\nIslam.\nAccording to Islam, Michael (Mika'el) is an archangel who brings down rain to the earth by the decree of Allah. He was created from light and the one entrusted with the sustenance of creatures, and is also one of the most prominent angels. As the Angel of Mercy, he asks Allah to forgive people\u2019s sins.\nPopularity.\nMichael (and its variants) is one of the most common given names for men in the world. In the United States, Michael was the most popular name of the 20th century, ranking No. 1 from 1954 to 1998 (with the exception of 1960, when it was second to David). It was among the top three most popular names for each year since 1953, only falling out of the top five in 2011 for the first time since 1949. Michael is the only name to rank among the ten most popular across all four generations since Generation X.\nIn 2014, Michael was the 20th most popular name in Northern Ireland, 27th in Canada and 42nd in Australia. In England and Wales, Michael ranked 53rd in 2011 and 2012. Michael ranked as the eighth most popular name for boys in Ireland in 2013.\nAccording to the SSA, Michael is the most popular name among people in the United States who are currently alive, belonging to an estimated 3.83 million living people as of 2021. \nVariants of Michael rank among the most popular masculine names in multiple countries. It was the third most popular in Finland from 2010 \u2013 March 2015 (as Mikael), seventh in Russia in 2009 (as Mikhail), 14th in Spain in 2012 (as Miguel), and 15th in Denmark (as Mikkel).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20687", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20687", "title": "Minerals", "text": ""}
{"id": "20690", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20690", "title": "Modafinil", "text": "Eugeroic medication\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nModafinil, sold under the brand name Provigil among others, is a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant and eugeroic (wakefulness promoter) medication used primarily to treat narcolepsy, a sleep disorder characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness and sudden sleep attacks. Modafinil is also approved for stimulating wakefulness in people with sleep apnea and shift work sleep disorder. It is taken by mouth. Modafinil is not approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in people under 18 years old.\nCommon side effects of modafinil include anxiety, insomnia, dizziness, and headache. Modafinil has potential for causing severe allergic reactions, psychiatric effects, hypersensitivity, adverse interactions with prescription drugs, and misuse or abuse. Modafinil may harm the fetus if taken during or two months prior to pregnancy.\nWhile modafinil is used as a cognitive enhancer, or \"smart drug\", among healthy individuals seeking improved focus and productivity, its use outside medical supervision raises concerns regarding potential misuse or abuse. Research on the cognitive enhancement effects of modafinil in non-sleep deprived individuals has yielded mixed results, with some studies suggesting modest improvements in attention and executive functions, while others show no significant benefits or a decline in cognitive functions at high doses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUses.\nMedical.\nSleep disorders.\nModafinil, a eugeroic or wakefulness-promoting drug, is primarily used for treating narcolepsy, a sleep disorder characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness and sudden sleep attacks. Being a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant itself, modafinil has lower addictive potential than classical stimulants such as amphetamine, cocaine, or methylphenidate, but still produces psychoactive and subjective effects typical of classical stimulants.\nNarcolepsy causes a strong urge to sleep during the day and can include symptoms like cataplexy (sudden muscle weakness), sleep paralysis (inability to move or speak while falling asleep or waking up), and hallucinations. Narcolepsy is linked to a lack of the brain chemical hypocretin (orexin), primarily produced in the hypothalamus. Modafinil is not a cure for narcolepsy, but it can help manage the symptoms. While modafinil is primarily used to treat excessive sleepiness, it may also help reduce the frequency and severity of cataplexy attacks in some people. Modafinil is approved for management of narcolepsy with or without cataplexy. However, it is not specifically approved for the treatment of cataplexy.\nModafinil is also prescribed for shift work sleep disorder.\nModafinil performs moderately (but better than armodafinil or solriamfetol) as a drug to overcome excessive daytime sleepiness caused by obstructive sleep apnea, though it is recommended that people with apnea use continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy, that is a sleep breathing apparatus to prevent apnea, before starting modafinil. When obstructive sleep apnea is comorbid with narcolepsy, modafinil is an effective drug to reduce the associated excessive daytime sleepiness.\nModafinil's use varies by region. In the US, it is approved for adult narcolepsy, shift work sleep disorder, and obstructive sleep apnea, but not for children. In the UK and the EU, since 2014, it is approved solely for narcolepsy, including in children (pediatric narcolepsy), with its use for other conditions restricted by the European Medicines Agency.\nAs of 2024,[ [update]] both the French and the American Academy of Sleep Medicine strongly recommend modafinil as the first-choice treatment for narcolepsy. In Europe, modafinil is considered one of the primary drugs recommended for treating narcolepsy according to the guidelines.\nMultiple sclerosis-related fatigue.\nFatigue is a common and often debilitating symptom experienced by people with MS.\nWhen modafinil is prescribed for fatigue, some people with MS may experience increased energy levels, reduced feelings of tiredness, improved cognitive function, and better quality of life. Two reviews concluded that modafinil has minor effectiveness in managing fatigue in people with MS, and optimal dosing and treatment schedules are not well established. Clinical assessments have found that adverse events were common. The American National Multiple Sclerosis Society states that modafinil can be used off-label to alleviate fatigue associated with MS.\nAttention deficit hyperactivity disorder.\nModafinil is occasionally prescribed off-label for individuals with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). It has not consistently shown efficacy in treating adult ADHD, especially when compared to other treatments such as lisdexamfetamine. In children, modafinil is more effective than placebo for treating ADHD symptoms.\nGiven its approved status in the US to treat narcolepsy, physicians can also prescribe modafinil for off-label uses, such as treating ADHD in both children and adults.\nThe Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) suggests modafinil as a second-line treament for comorbid ADHD and bipolar disorder, after first-line psychostimulants and the antidepressant bupropion.\nBipolar disorder.\nModafinil is used off-label as an adjunctive treatment (i.e., in combination therapy) for the acute depressive phase in bipolar disorder. The depressive phase of bipolar disorder may feature excessive sleepiness and fatigue. Adjunctive treatment with modafinil can be used as an augmentation for the main treatment to increase its effect and is safe and effective, especially for people who do not respond well to standard antidepressants. Modafinil does not significantly increase the risk of mood switch to mania or suicide attempts in people with bipolar disorder. Modafinil may also have cognitive benefits in people with bipolar disorder who are in a remission state.\nWhereas modafinil and armodafinil are approved for narcolepsy, they have been repurposed as adjunctive treatments to alleviate symptoms of acute depressive phase in people with bipolar disorder. Drug repurposing in psychiatry is a strategy for discovering new uses for drugs that have already been approved or tested in clinical trials for other illnesses. As such, drug repurposing is a rapid, cost-effective, and reduced-risk strategy for the development of new treatment options for psychiatric disorders. 2021 meta-analysis concluded that add-on modafinil and armodafinil were more effective than placebo on response to treatment, clinical remission, and reduction in depressive symptoms, with only minor side effects, but the effect sizes are small and the quality of evidence is therefore low, limiting the clinical relevance of the evidence. Very low rates of mood swing (a change in mood from one extreme to another) have been observed with modafinil and armodafinil in depressive phase of bipolar disorder.\nOccupational.\nModafinil was used during the Gulf War by the French Foreign Legion, the US Air Force, and US Marines to enhance \"operational tempo\" (a term that denotes the speed and intensity at which military operations or activities are executed), aiming to optimize the overall performance and efficiency of the units.\nArmed forces in various countries, including the United States, the United Kingdom, India, and France, have considered modafinil as an alternative to traditional amphetamines for managing sleep deprivation in combat or extended missions. The US military approved modafinil for specific Air Force missions, replacing amphetamines for fatigue management. The use of modafinil in military contexts without sleep deprivation is not recommended due to inconclusive evidence on its cognitive enhancement benefits and potential risks of adverse effects.\nModafinil is also available to astronauts aboard the International Space Station for the management of fatigue caused by circadian dyssynchrony in orbit.\nNon-medical.\nModafinil has been used non-medically as a \"smart drug\" by various groups, including students, office workers, transhumanists, and professionals in various sectors. Its use is attributed by these individuals to its potential for enhancing attention, cognitive capabilities, and alertness.\nThe effectiveness of modafinil as a cognitive enhancer is still debated. Some studies suggest significant increases in cognitive abilities, while others indicate mild to nonexistent cognitive improvements. In some cases, it has even been associated with impairments in certain cognitive functions. It has been shown that modafinil's positive impact on cognitive abilities is more noticeable on sleep-deprived individuals. Therefore, in people who are not sleep-deprived, the potential of modafinil as a cognitive enhancer may be limited.\nAdverse effects.\nModafinil is generally well-tolerated but can have potential risks and side effects. Common adverse effects of modafinil, experienced by less than 10% of users, include headaches, nausea, and reduced appetite. Anxiety, insomnia, dizziness, diarrhea, and rhinitis are also reported in 5% to 10% of users. Psychiatric reactions have occurred in individuals with and without a preexisting psychiatric history. Urinary retention and paresthesia have also been reported.\nNo significant changes in body weight have been observed in clinical trials, although decreased appetite and weight loss have been noted in children and adolescents. Modafinil can cause a slight increase in aminotransferase enzymes, indicative of liver function, but there is no evidence of serious liver damage when levels are within reference ranges.\nRare but serious adverse effects include severe skin rashes and allergy-related symptoms. Between December 1998 and January 2007, the FDA received reports of six cases of severe cutaneous adverse reactions, including erythema multiforme, Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and DRESS syndrome. The FDA has issued alerts regarding these risks and also noted reports of angioedema and multi-organ hypersensitivity reactions in postmarketing surveillance. In 2007, the FDA required Cephalon to modify the Provigil leaflet to include warnings about these serious conditions. The long-term safety and effectiveness of modafinil have not been conclusively established.\nThe FDA does not endorse modafinil for children's medical conditions due to an increased risk of rare but serious dermatological toxicity, manifested as Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome which is a type of severe skin reaction. However, in Europe, modafinil may be prescribed for treating narcolepsy in children.\nAvailable forms.\nModafinil is commercially available in and oral tablet forms. Additionally, it is offered as the (\"R\")-enantiomer, known as armodafinil, and as a prodrug named adrafinil.\nContraindications.\nModafinil is contraindicated during pregnancy and 2 months before getting pregnant. Women who take modafinil should not become pregnant, and, additionally, should be aware that modafinil reduces effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives, increasing chances of getting pregnant. Modafinil therapy during pregnancy increases the risk of birth defects, such as with congenital torticollis, hypospadias, and congenital heart defects.\nModafinil is contraindicated for individuals with known hypersensitivity to either modafinil or armodafinil.\nModafinil is also contraindicated in certain cardiac conditions, including uncontrolled moderate to severe hypertension, arrhythmia, cor pulmonale, and in cases with signs of CNS stimulant-induced mitral valve prolapse or left ventricular hypertrophy. The package insert in the United States cautions about using modafinil in people with a documented medical history of left ventricular hypertrophy or those diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse who have previously exhibited symptoms associated with the mitral valve prolapse syndrome while undergoing treatment involving central nervous system stimulants. The reasons why modafinil is contraindicated in certain cardiac conditions are because modafinil affects the autonomic nervous system and, in particular, exerts significant effects on autonomic cardiovascular regulation, leading in some people to notable increases in heart rate and blood pressure. These substantial changes in the autonomic system warrant careful consideration when prescribing modafinil to people with pre-existing cardiovascular conditions. The increase in heart rate and blood pressure can worsen the symptoms of such pre-existing conditions as hypertension, arrhythmia, and cor pulmonale. These changes in the autonomic system induced by modafinil can increase the risk of heart attack, stroke, and heart failure. Modafinil can stimulate the release of norepinephrine and epinephrine, hormones that activate the sympathetic nervous system. This can cause vasoconstriction, which is the narrowing of blood vessels, and increase the heart's workload, which is not desired in people with pre-existing heart conditions. In particular, modafinil can worsen the consequences of mitral valve prolapse or left ventricular hypertrophy, which are structural abnormalities of the heart. These can affect the blood flow and oxygen delivery to the heart and other organs.\nModafinil is also contraindicated in people with congenital problems like galactose intolerance, lactase deficiency, or glucose-galactose malabsorption.\nDrug tolerance.\nExtensive clinical research has not demonstrated drug tolerance as a common adverse effect, even with therapeutic use extending up to 40 weeks. Drug tolerance in this context is defined as a reduction in response, to wakefulness-promoting and anti-fatigue properties of modafinil.\nWhile modafinil is generally found to be safe and significant adverse effects are rare, including in pediatric narcolepsy cases (sleep disorders in children), there is evidence that long-term usage can lead to tolerance in some individuals. This necessitates higher doses to maintain the same level of cognitive enhancement or relief from sleepiness.\nPeople with current or past substance addictions and those with a family history of addiction are particularly at risk for developing tolerance.\nThe mechanisms driving tolerance to modafinil, which may involve its impact on dopamine and norepinephrine levels in the brain, are not fully understood.\nRepeated administration of modafinil for off-label use, such as increased alertness and cognitive-enhancing effects in sleep deprivation, can lead to drug tolerance, which means that the effectiveness of the drug may decrease over time. Still, modafinil therapy as a eugeroic agent to treat narcolepsy does not typically lead to drug tolerance, i.e., the effectiveness does not usually decrease on prolonged use, although individual responses may vary.\nAddiction and dependence.\nDespite being a CNS stimulant, the addiction and dependence liabilities of modafinil are considered low. The exact mechanisms of action of modafinil are not known, and it is believed that pharmacological profile of modafinil is different from that of the classical stimulants such as cocaine or amphetamine. Although modafinil shares biochemical mechanisms with stimulant drugs, it is less likely to have mood-elevating properties. The similarities in effects with caffeine are not clearly established. Unlike other stimulants, modafinil does not induce a strong subjective feeling of pleasure or reward, which is commonly associated with euphoria, an intense feeling of well-being. Euphoria may be an indicator of a drug's potential to be abused. Substance abuse is a compulsive and excessive use of the substance despite adverse consequences. In comparison to classical stimulants, modafinil exhibits a low propensity for abuse, as it lacks significantly expressed pleasurable or euphoric effects. Albeit to a lower degree than classical stimulants, modafinil still can produce psychoactive, euphoric, and subjective effects typical for abused stimulants.\nModafinil was not observed to promote overuse or misuse, even in people who have a history of cocaine addiction. Despite the initial belief that modafinil carried no abuse potential, emerging evidence suggests that it works at the same neurobiological mechanisms as other addictive stimulants. Consequently, there exists a potential risk of modafinil abuse, necessitating prudent consideration and caution when prescribing or using this medication. Modafinil exhibits a lower response on the amphetamine scale of the addiction research center inventory, suggesting reduced propensity for abuse compared to amphetamine.\nThe US Drug Enforcement Administration has classified modafinil as a Schedule IV controlled substance; the medicine is recognized for having valid medical uses with low addiction potential. The International Narcotics Control Board does not classify it as a narcotic or a psychotropic substance.\nOverdose.\nAn overdose of modafinil can lead to a range of symptoms and complications. Psychiatric symptoms may include psychosis, mania, hallucinations, and suicidal ideation, which can occur even in individuals without a history of mental illness and may persist after discontinuation of the drug. Neurological complications, such as seizures, tremors, dystonia, and dyskinesia, may arise from modafinil's interaction with various neurotransmitter systems.\nAllergic reactions such as rash, angioedema, anaphylaxis, and Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome may rarely be triggered by an immunological response to modafinil or its metabolites. Cardiovascular complications like hypertension, tachycardia, chest pain, and arrhythmias may also be observed due to modafinil's sympathomimetic action.\nIn animal studies, the median lethal dose (LD50) of modafinil varies among species and depends on the route of administration. In mice and rats, the LD50 is approximately if administered via an injection, but the oral LD50 for rats is . The LD50 value for humans have not been established. Human clinical trials have involved total daily doses up to for 7\u201321\u00a0days. Acute one-time total overdoses up to have not been life-threatening but resulted in symptoms like agitation, insomnia, tremor, palpitations, and gastrointestinal disturbances.\nThe management of modafinil overdose involves supportive care, monitoring of vital signs, and treatment of specific complications. In cases of recent consumption, activated charcoal, gastric lavage, or hemodialysis may be used. There is no specific antidote for modafinil overdose. The main way to deal with modafinil overdose is supportive care, which includes sedating the patient and stabilizing their blood pressure, and muscle activity in case of manifestations such as agitation or tremor.\nInteractions.\nSome of the drugs that frequently interact with modafinil include aripiprazole (an antipsychotic), amphetamine (including its enantiomers and salts; stimulants), aspirin, and others.\nModafinil is a weak to moderate inducer of CYP3A4 and a weak inhibitor of CYP2C19, enzymes of the cytochrome P450 group of enzymes. Modafinil also induces or inhibits other cytochrome P450 enzymes. One \"in vitro\" study predicts that modafinil may induce the cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP1A2, CYP3A4, and CYP2B6, as well as may inhibit CYP2C9 and CYP2C19. However, other in-vitro studies find no significant inhibition of CYP2C9. Modafinil may induce P-glycoprotein, which may affect drugs transported by P-glycoprotein, such as digoxin.\nIt was clinically found that modafinil affects pharmacodynamics of drugs which are metabolized by CYP3A4 and other enzymes of the cytochrome P450 family so that interactions of modafinil with these drugs were observed in real people, rather than being predicted in a lab setting. For instance, it was observed that induction of CYP3A4 by modafinil affects metabolism of the following medications and endogenous substances:\nHypertensive crises have been reported when armodafinil (one of modafinil's enantiomers) has been taken with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) like tranylcypromine.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nThe precise mechanism of action of modafinil for narcolepsy and other sleep disorders remains unclear. Although modafinil may have interactions with neurotransmitter systems, its exact mode of action is not fully understood.\nFrom laboratory research, modafinil has little to no affinity for serotonin or norepinephrine transporters and does not directly interact with these systems. However, studies have shown that elevated concentrations of norepinephrine and serotonin can occur as an indirect effect following modafinil administration due to increased extracellular dopamine activity. Unlike traditional psychostimulant drugs, such as cocaine or amphetamine, modafinil shows low potential for causing euphoria due to differences in how it interacts with dopamine transporters at a cellular level.\nIn addition to its influence on dopaminergic pathways, modafinil may impact other neurotransmitter systems, such as orexin (hypocretin). Orexin neurons are involved in promoting wakefulness and regulating arousal states. Modafinil may increase signaling within hypothalamic orexin pathways, potentially contributing to its wake-promoting effects.\nPharmacokinetics.\nCmax (peak levels) occurs approximately 2\u00a0to\u00a03\u00a0hours after modafinil administration. Food slows the absorption of modafinil but does not affect the total area under the curve (AUC). \"In vitro\" measurements indicate that 60% of modafinil is bound to plasma proteins at clinical concentrations of the drug. This percentage changes very little when the concentration of modafinil is varied.\nRenal excretion of unchanged modafinil usually accounts for less than 10% of an oral dose. This means that when modafinil is taken by mouth, the only approved route of administration, less than 10% of the drug is eliminated from the body through the urine without being metabolized by the liver or other organs. The rest of the drug is either metabolized or excreted through other routes, such as feces or bile.\nThe two major circulating metabolites of modafinil are modafinil acid (CRL-40467) and modafinil sulfone (CRL-41056). Both of these metabolites have been described as inactive, and neither appears to contribute to the wakefulness-promoting effects of modafinil. However, modafinil sulfone does appear to possess anticonvulsant effects, a property that it shares with modafinil.\nElimination half-life is in the range of 10 to 12 hours, subject to differences in sex, in cytochrome P450 genotypes, liver function and renal function. Modafinil is metabolized mainly in the liver, and its inactive metabolites are excreted in the urine. Urinary excretion of the unchanged drug is usually less than 10% but can range from 0% to as high as 18.7%, depending on the factors mentioned.\nModafinil exhibits sex-specific pharmacokinetic differences. It demonstrates higher bioavailability in women compared to men. The mean Cmax is higher in women than in men, vs. (p\u2009&lt;\u20090.05), following a single oral dose of modafinil. This difference persists even after adjusting for body weight ( vs. ). The clearance of modafinil is 30% higher in men than in women, and plasma concentrations after a single dose are significantly higher in women than in men. These sex-specific pharmacokinetic differences may have implications for the efficacy and safety of modafinil.\nChemistry.\nEnantiomers.\nModafinil is a racemic mixture of two enantiomers, armodafinil ((\"R\")-modafinil) and esmodafinil ((\"S\")-modafinil).\nDetection in body fluids.\nModafinil and/or its major metabolite, modafinil acid, may be quantified in plasma, serum, or urine to monitor dosage in those receiving the drug therapeutically, to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in hospitalized patients, or to assist in the forensic investigation of a vehicular traffic violation. Instrumental techniques involving gas or liquid chromatography are usually employed for these purposes. In 2011, modafinil was not tested for by common drug screens (except for anti-doping screens) and is unlikely to cause false positives for other chemically unrelated drugs such as substituted amphetamines.\nReagent testing can screen for the presence of modafinil in samples.\nStructural analogs.\nMany derivatives and structural analogs of modafinil have been synthesized. Examples include adrafinil, CE-123, fladrafinil (CRL-40941; fluorafinil), flmodafinil (CRL-40940; bisfluoromodafinil, lauflumide), RDS03-94, JJC8-088, modafiendz and modafinil sulfone (CRL-41056).\nHistory.\nModafinil was developed in France by neurophysiology professor Michel Jouvet and Lafon Laboratories. It is part of a series of benzhydryl sulfinyl compounds, including adrafinil, initially used as a treatment for narcolepsy in France in 1986. Modafinil, the primary metabolite of adrafinil, has been prescribed in France since 1994 under the name Modiodal, and in the United States since 1998 as Provigil. Unlike modafinil, adrafinil does not have FDA approval and was withdrawn from the French market in 2011.\nThe FDA approved modafinil in 1998 for narcolepsy treatment, and later for shift work sleep disorder and obstructive sleep apnea in 2003. It was approved in the UK in December 2002. In the United States, modafinil is marketed by Cephalon, who acquired the rights from Lafon and purchased the company in 2001.\nCephalon introduced armodafinil, the (\"R\")-enantiomer of modafinil, in the United States in 2007. Generic versions of modafinil became available in the US in 2012 after extensive patent litigation.\nSociety and culture.\nModafinil is not approved for use by children in multiple jurisdictions.\nLegal status.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, modafinil is considered to be a prescription-only medicine. This means that it is a drug with a perceived low potential for abuse and low risk of dependence; still, the use of Schedule 4 drugs in Australia is restricted to those who have a valid prescription from a medical practitioner; import from abroad is illegal.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, modafinil is not specifically included in the lists of controlled drugs and substances specified within the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. However, it is classified as a Schedule\u00a0F prescription drug. This means that modafinil can only be obtained legally with a valid prescription from a licensed health care practitioner in Canada, and the import of modafinil to Canada from other countries is subject to restrictions: importing prescription drugs without an import permit may result in the seizure of the drugs at the border, the refusal of entry of the drugs into Canada, or prosecution.\nChina.\nIn mainland China, modafinil is strictly controlled like other stimulants such as amphetamines and methylphenidate. It is classified as Class\u00a0I psychotropic drug. This classification means that modafinil is considered to have a high potential for abuse and dependence, and is therefore subject to strict regulation and control. As a result, modafinil is only available by prescription and cannot be purchased over the counter. In order to obtain a prescription for modafinil, a patient must have a valid medical reason for using the drug, such as narcolepsy or obstructive sleep apnea. Additionally, the prescription must be written by a licensed physician and filled at a licensed pharmacy. The use of modafinil for non-medical purposes, such as with the aim to improve cognitive performance or to stay awake for long periods of time, is strictly prohibited and can result in legal consequences.\nEurope.\nIn Denmark, modafinil is a prescription drug but not listed as a controlled substance. According to the Danish Medicines Agency, modafinil is approved for use in the treatment of narcolepsy; still, importing modafinil to Denmark is considered illegal without a valid prescription.\nFinland\nIn Finland, modafinil is a prescription drug but not listed as a controlled substance. Finland is a member of the European Union, and it is illegal to import prescription medicine from outside the European Union unless the person has a valid prescription.\nRepublic of Moldova.\nIn the Republic of Moldova, modafinil is classified as a psychotropic drug (included in table III list 3 which is the list of psychotropic substances as defined by the Government of Moldova) and is available by prescription. Importation of modafinil may be considered illegal and subject to severe penalties, even if you have a prescription. For example, on June 29, 2017, Moldovan postal officers discovered 60 tablets of Modalert (200\u00a0mg modafinil tablets) in a parcel sent from India to a resident in Chi\u0219in\u0103u, Moldova. The prohibited substance was detected during a routine scan and was seized as illegal. The authorities were notified of the incident and the recipient was charged with criminal penalties. In the Transnistria region of Moldova, modafinil is completely prohibited, due to application of the legislation similar to that of Russia where modafinil is completely prohibited and is in the same list as narcotics. Possession or an attempt to bring modafinil to Transnistria potentially leads to imprisonment.\nRomania.\nIn Romania, modafinil is classified as a stimulant doping agent and is prohibited in sports competitions. In 2022, laws were passed making its importation or sale a felony, punishable by three to seven years in jail.&lt;ref name=\"LEGE 219 26/07/2021 \u2013 Portal Legislativ\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Simple possession for personal use may result in a fine and confiscation.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, modafinil is classified as a schedule\u00a0IV substance, which means that it is considered to have a low potential for abuse and a low risk of dependence. Still, possession is illegal without a prescription.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, it is not listed in Misuse of Drugs Act, so possession is not illegal, but a prescription is required.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, modafinil is not listed as a controlled substance, in the National Health Law, and can be purchased in pharmacies without prescription.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, modafinil is Schedule\u00a0I psychotropic drug. This means that it is considered to have a high potential for abuse and dependence, and is therefore subject to strict regulations. The use of Schedule I drugs in Japan is generally prohibited, except under certain circumstances, such as for medical purposes. It can only be prescribed by a doctor. It cannot be imported or exported without a permit. It cannot be used while driving or operating machinery. Cephalon licensed Alfresa Corporation to produce, and Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma to sell modafinil products under the trade name Modiodal in Japan. There have been arrests of people who imported modafinil for personal use.\nRussia.\nIn Russia, starting from May 18, 2012, modafinil is Schedule\u00a0II controlled substance. Being classified as a Schedule II controlled substance in Russia means that it is seen as a drug with a high potential for abuse and dependence. This classification imposes strict regulations on the production, distribution, and use of modafinil. Possession of a few modafinil pills can lead to three to ten years imprisonment. Modafinil is not approved for medical use in Russia and cannot be bought even in pharmacies. It also cannot be imported from abroad, even if you have a prescription issued outside Russia. There are multiple cases of criminal proceedings initiated against Russian residents who tried to import modafinil by mail from abroad.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, modafinil is Schedule\u00a0V substance, which means that it is legal to use modafinil in South Africa, but only with a valid prescription from a licensed medical practitioner.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, modafinil is classified as a schedule IV controlled substance under US federal law. This means that the drug has a low potential for abuse and dependence compared to other controlled substances. However, it still requires a prescription from a licensed healthcare provider to obtain.\nIt is illegal to import modafinil to the United States without a Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)\u2013registered importer and a prescription. Individuals may legally bring modafinil into the US from a foreign country for personal use, limited to 50 dosage units, with a prescription and proper declaration at the border. Under the Pure Food and Drug Act, marketing drugs for off-label uses is prohibited. Cephalon, the manufacturer of Provigil, faced legal issues for promoting off-label uses and paid significant fines in 2008.\nBrand names.\nModafinil is sold under a variety of brand names worldwide, including Alertec, Alertex, Altasomil, Aspendos, Bravamax, Forcilin, Intensit, Karim, Mentix, Modafinilo, Modalert, Modanil, Modasomil, Modvigil, Modiodal, Modiwake, Movigil, Provigil, Resotyl, Stavigile, Vigia, Vigicer, Vigil, Vigimax, Waklert, and Zalux.\nEconomics.\nOriginally developed in the 1970s by French neuroscientist Michel Jouvet and Lafon Laboratories, modafinil has been prescribed in France since 1994, and was approved for medical use in the United States in 1998.\nConcerns have been raised about the growing use of modafinil as a \"smart drug\" or cognitive enhancer among healthy individuals who use it with the aim to improve concentration and memory. In 2003, modafinil sales were skyrocketing, with some experts concerned that it had become a tempting pick-me-up for people looking for an extra edge in a productivity-obsessed society. The cost of modafinil varied depending on factors such as location and insurance coverage; still, in 2004, the price of modafinil in the US was around $120 or more per monthly supply. However, the availability of generic versions has increased since then and may have driven down prices.\nIn 2020, modafinil was the 302nd most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with just over 1,000,000 prescriptions.\nAs of 2024,[ [update]] the global sales figures for modafinil are not known. Still, modafinil sold under the brand name Provigil accounted for over 40% of Cephalon's global turnover for several years, according to the information published in 2020.\nPatent protection and litigation.\nModafinil's patent history involves several key developments. The original patent, https://, was granted to Laboratoire L. Lafon in 1990, covering the chemical compound of modafinil. This patent expired in 2010. In 1994, Cephalon filed a patent for modafinil in the form of particles of a defined size, represented by https://, which expired in 2015.\nFollowing the nearing expiration of marketing rights in 2002, generic manufacturers, including Mylan and Teva, applied for FDA approval to market a generic form of modafinil, leading to legal challenges by Cephalon regarding the particle size patent. The patent RE\u00a037,516 was declared invalid and unenforceable in 2011.\nIn addition, Cephalon entered agreements with several generic drug manufacturers to delay the sale of generic modafinil in the US. These agreements were subject to legal scrutiny and antitrust investigations, culminating in a ruling by the Court of Appeals in 2016, which found that the settlements did not violate antitrust laws.\nSports.\nThe regulation of modafinil as a doping agent has been controversial in the sporting world, with high-profile cases attracting press coverage since several prominent American athletes tested positive for the substance. Some athletes who used modafinil protested that the drug was not on the prohibited list at the time of their offenses. However, the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) maintains that modafinil was related to already-banned substances. The Agency added modafinil to its list of prohibited substances on August 3, 2004, ten days before the start of the 2004 Summer Olympics.\nSeveral athletes, such as sprinter Kelli White in 2003, cyclist David Clinger and basketball player Diana Taurasi in 2010, and rower Timothy Grant in 2015, were accused of using modafinil as a performance-enhancing doping agent. Taurasi and another player\u2014Monique Coker, tested at the same lab\u2014were later cleared. Kelli White, who tested positive after her 100m victory at the 2003 World Championships in Paris, was stripped of her gold medals. She claimed that she used modafinil to treat narcolepsy, but the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) ruled that modafinil was a performance-enhancing drug.\nThe BALCO scandal brought to light an unsubstantiated (but widely published) account of Major League Baseball's all-time leading home-run hitter Barry Bonds' supplemental chemical regimen that included modafinil in addition to anabolic steroids and human growth hormone.\nSocial views.\nThe use of modafinil as a supposed cognitive enhancer may be considered as cheating, unnatural, or risky. The University of Sussex explained that it is a prescription drug and the decision should be made by the doctor on whether to prescribe modafinil to a student. As a matter of bioethics, the US President's Council on Bioethics argued that excellence achieved through the use of drugs like modafinil is \"cheap\" as it obviates the need for hard work and study, and is not fully authentic because the excellence is partly attributable to the drug, not the individual. Alternately, people in environments like Wall Street trading may not view the use of modafinil as cheating, believing that if modafinil can give them an edge and they are aware of the risks involved, it should not be considered as cheating. Due to such varying views, modafinil users for narcolepsy may cope with stigma by hiding, denying, or justifying their use, or by seeking support from others who share their views or experiences.\nResearch.\nPsychiatric conditions.\nMajor depressive disorder.\nModafinil has been studied in the treatment of major depressive disorder. In a 2021 systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of psychostimulants for depression, modafinil and other stimulants such as methylphenidate and amphetamines improved depression in traditional meta-analysis. However, when subjected to network meta-analysis, modafinil and most other stimulants did not significantly improve depression, with only methylphenidate remaining effective. Modafinil and other stimulants likewise did not improve quality of life in the meta-analysis, although there was evidence for reduced fatigue and sleepiness with modafinil and other stimulants. While significant effectiveness of modafinil for depression has been reported by particular trials, reviews and meta-analyses note that the effectiveness of modafinil for depression is limited, the quality of available evidence is low, and the results are inconclusive.\nAttention deficit hyperactivity disorder (research).\nModafinil was considered for the treatment of ADHD because of its lower abuse potential than conventional psychostimulants like methylphenidate and amphetamines. In 2008, an application to market modafinil for pediatric ADHD was submitted to the Food and Drug Administration in the US.\nHowever, evidence of modafinil for treatment of adult ADHD is mixed, and a 2016 systematic review of alternative drug therapies for adult ADHD did not recommend its use in this context. In a later large phase\u00a03 clinical trial of modafinil for adult ADHD, modafinil was not effective in improving symptoms, there was also a high rate of side effects (86%) and discontinuation (47%). The poor tolerability of modafinil in this study was possibly due to the use of high doses (). Another reason for the denial of the approval was due to concerns about rare but serious dermatological toxicity in Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome.\nThe research on the use of modafinil for treating individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) who also exhibit ADHD symptoms is currently in its early stages with no results delivered.\nSubstance dependence.\nModafinil was studied for the treatment of stimulant dependence, but the results are mixed and inconclusive. Modafinil is not a controlled substance in some countries, unlike other medications, such as bupropion, which is also used to treat depression and nicotine dependence. The clinical trials that have tested modafinil as a treatment for stimulant abuse have failed to demonstrate its efficacy and the optimal dose and duration of modafinil treatment remain unclear, and modafinil is not a recommended treatment for stimulant abuse. 2024 reviews found that modafinil was ineffective for treating individuals with amphetamine-type stimulant use disorder or methamphetamine use disorder from these dependencies.\nSchizophrenia.\nModafinil and armodafinil were studied as a complement to antipsychotic medications in the treatment of schizophrenia. They showed no effect on positive symptoms or cognitive performance. A 2015 meta-analysis found that modafinil and armodafinil may slightly reduce negative symptoms in people with acute schizophrenia, though they do not appear useful for people with the condition who are stable, with high negative symptom scores. Among medications demonstrated to be effective for reducing negative symptoms in combination with antipsychotics, modafinil, and armodafinil are among the smallest effect sizes.\nAbstinence in cocaine addiction.\nModafinil is researched to determine whether it might improve abstinence in people with cocaine addiction.\nMotivational disorders.\nModafinil has been found to reverse tetrabenazine-induced motivational deficits in animals and hence can produce pro-motivational effects. Novel modafinil analogs with greater potency, including CE-123, CE-158, JJC8-088, MK-26, and RDS03-94, have also been developed and have shown pro-motivational effects in animals. These agents are of potential interest in the treatment of motivational disorders in humans.\nCognitive enhancement.\nA 2019 review conducted on the potential nootropic effects of modafinil in healthy, non-sleep-deprived individuals revealed the following: a) while studies using basic testing paradigms demonstrated that modafinil enhances executive function, only half of these studies showed improvements in attention, learning, and memory, with a few studies even reporting impairments in divergent creative thinking; b) modafinil displayed small levels of enhancement in attention, executive functions, and learning abilities; c) no substantial side effects or mood changes were observed; d) the available evidence showed limited evidence for modafinil as a cognitive enhancer outside of its use for sleep-deprived populations.\nA 2020 review reported that modafinil has a modest effect on memory updating, but the effect is small and may not accurately reflect the perception that it is useful as a cognitive enhancer, as there is insufficient evidence to support such a claim.\nPost-anesthesia sedation.\nGeneral anesthesia is required for many surgeries, but may cause lingering fatigue, sedation, and/or drowsiness after surgery that lasts for hours to days. In outpatient surgery the sedation, fatigue, and occasional dizziness is problematic. Modafinil was tested as a potential remedy to alleviate these symptoms. For example, it was expected that modafinil would help people recover quicker from general anesthesia after a short surgery, but the results were uncertain and the inconclusive studies could not reliably verify the expectation. The use of modafinil to relieve post-anesthesia sedation is investigational.\nPostural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome.\nCaution should be exercised in people who have narcolepsy in comorbidity with postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS).\nMyotonic dystrophy.\nModafinil is being researched as a potential remedy for excessive daytime sleepiness in myotonic dystrophy (DM), an inherited condition characterized by progressive muscle loss, weakness, and myotonia. Myotonia is a condition where muscles cannot relax after they contract. Myotonic dystrophy has two main types: DM1 (Steinert disease) and DM2 (proximal myotonic myopathy). Both types can cause excessive daytime sleepiness. Studies suggest that modafinil may be a promising drug that can reduce both daytime sleepiness and myotonia itself, without significant cardiac conduction effects. These presumed property of modafinil is of particular interest for eventual treatment of people with myotonic dystrophy who often have underlying cardiac issues. Still, modafinil is not approved by the FDA for use in myotonic dystrophy, and the value and role of modafinil in DM remain the subject of debate.\nDisorders of consciousness.\nModafinil has been studied for its potential therapeutic effects in patients with disorders of consciousness. Researchers are investigating whether modafinil can stimulate neurotransmitters such as histamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, dopamine, and orexin, and whether modafinil has potential anti-oxidative effects.\nDisorders of consciousness are states characterized by impaired arousal and awareness. These states include coma, vegetative state/unresponsive wakefulness syndrome (VS/UWS), minimally conscious state (MCS), cognitive motor dissociation, and covert cortical processing. Brain injuries can impair consciousness through neuroanatomic lesions involving the bilateral cerebral hemispheres, rostral brainstem, diencephalon, or basal forebrain.\nNeuroimaging studies have shown that modafinil increases cerebral blood flow in several brain regions, such as the thalamus, locus coeruleus, limbic system, and insular cortex; still, observational reports on the use of modafinil in patients with disorders of consciousness have produced mixed results, indicating that its effectiveness may vary among individuals.\nInflammation.\nA possible link between inflammatory processes and depressive disorders has stimulated preliminary research on modafinil for its potential anti-inflammatory effects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20696", "revid": "50772615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20696", "title": "Class (set theory)", "text": "Collection of sets in mathematics that can be defined based on a property of its members\nIn set theory and its applications throughout mathematics, a class is a collection of mathematical objects (often sets) that can be unambiguously defined by a property that all its members share. Classes act as a way to have set-like collections while differing from sets so as to avoid paradoxes, especially Russell's paradox (see \"\"). The precise definition of \"class\" depends on foundational context. In work on Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory, the notion of class is informal, whereas other set theories, such as von Neumann\u2013Bernays\u2013G\u00f6del set theory, axiomatize the notion of \"proper class\", e.g., as entities that are not members of another entity.\nA class that is not a set (informally in Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel) is called a proper class, and a class that is a set is sometimes called a small class. For instance, the class of all ordinal numbers, and the class of all sets, are proper classes in many formal systems.\nIn Quine's set-theoretical writing, the phrase \"ultimate class\" is often used instead of the phrase \"proper class\" emphasising that in the systems he considers, certain classes cannot be members, and are thus the final term in any membership chain to which they belong.\nOutside set theory, the word \"class\" is sometimes used synonymously with \"set\". This usage dates from a historical period where classes and sets were not distinguished as they are in modern set-theoretic terminology. Many discussions of \"classes\" in the 19th century and earlier are really referring to sets, or rather perhaps take place without considering that certain classes can fail to be sets.\nExamples.\nThe collection of all algebraic structures of a given type will usually be a proper class. Examples include the class of all groups, the class of all vector spaces, and many others. In category theory, a category whose collection of objects forms a proper class (or whose collection of morphisms forms a proper class) is called a large category.\nThe surreal numbers are a proper class of objects that have the properties of a field.\nWithin set theory, many collections of sets turn out to be proper classes. Examples include the class of all sets (the universal class), the class of all ordinal numbers, and the class of all cardinal numbers.\nOne way to prove that a class is proper is to place it in bijection with the class of all ordinal numbers. This method is used, for example, in the proof that there is no free complete lattice on three or more generators.\nParadoxes.\nThe paradoxes of naive set theory can be explained in terms of the inconsistent tacit assumption that \"all classes are sets\". With a rigorous foundation, these paradoxes instead suggest proofs that certain classes are proper (i.e., that they are not sets). For example, Russell's paradox suggests a proof that the class of all sets which do not contain themselves is proper, and the Burali-Forti paradox suggests that the class of all ordinal numbers is proper. The paradoxes do not arise with classes because there is no notion of classes containing classes. Otherwise, one could, for example, define a class of all classes that do not contain themselves, which would lead to a Russell paradox for classes. A conglomerate, on the other hand, can have proper classes as members.\nClasses in formal set theories.\nZF set theory does not formalize the notion of classes, so each formula with classes must be reduced syntactically to a formula without classes. For example, one can reduce the formula formula_1 to formula_2. For a class formula_3 and a set variable symbol formula_4, it is necessary to be able to expand each of the formulas formula_5, formula_6, formula_7, and formula_8 into a formula without an occurrence of a class.p. 339\nSemantically, in a metalanguage, the classes can be described as equivalence classes of logical formulas: If formula_9 is a structure interpreting ZF, then the object language \"class-builder expression\" formula_10 is interpreted in formula_9 by the collection of all the elements from the domain of formula_9 on which formula_13 holds; thus, the class can be described as the set of all predicates equivalent to formula_14 (which includes formula_14 itself). In particular, one can identify the \"class of all sets\" with the set of all predicates equivalent to formula_16.\nBecause classes do not have any formal status in the theory of ZF, the axioms of ZF do not immediately apply to classes. However, if an inaccessible cardinal formula_17 is assumed, then the sets of smaller rank form a model of ZF (a Grothendieck universe), and its subsets can be thought of as \"classes\".\nIn ZF, the concept of a function can also be generalised to classes. A class function is not a function in the usual sense, since it is not a set; it is rather a formula formula_18 with the property that for any set formula_4 there is no more than one set formula_20 such that the pair formula_21 satisfies formula_22. For example, the class function mapping each set to its powerset may be expressed as the formula formula_23. The fact that the ordered pair formula_21 satisfies formula_22 may be expressed with the shorthand notation formula_26.\nAnother approach is taken by the von Neumann\u2013Bernays\u2013G\u00f6del axioms (NBG); classes are the basic objects in this theory, and a set is then defined to be a class that is an element of some other class. However, the class existence axioms of NBG are restricted so that they only quantify over sets, rather than over all classes. This causes NBG to be a conservative extension of ZFC.\nMorse\u2013Kelley set theory admits proper classes as basic objects, like NBG, but also allows quantification over all proper classes in its class existence axioms. This causes MK to be strictly stronger than both NBG and ZFC.\nIn other set theories, such as New Foundations or the theory of semisets, the concept of \"proper class\" still makes sense (not all classes are sets) but the criterion of sethood is not closed under subsets. For example, any set theory with a universal set has proper classes which are subclasses of sets.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20697", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20697", "title": "Metric", "text": "Metric or metrical may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMathematics.\nIn mathematics, metric may refer to one of two related, but distinct concepts:\nEngineering and business.\nThe word metric is often used to mean a descriptive statistic, indicator, or figure of merit used to describe or measure something quantitatively, including:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20698", "revid": "2102840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20698", "title": "Michael Atiyah", "text": "British-Lebanese mathematician (1929\u20132019)\nSir Michael Francis Atiyah (; 22 April 1929 \u2013 11 January 2019) was a British-Lebanese mathematician specialising in geometry. His contributions include the Atiyah\u2013Singer index theorem and co-founding topological K-theory. He was awarded the Fields Medal in 1966 and the Abel Prize in 2004.\nEarly life and education.\nAtiyah was born on 22 April 1929 in Hampstead, London, England, the son of Jean (n\u00e9e Levens) and Edward Atiyah. His mother was Scottish and his father was a Lebanese Orthodox Christian. He had two brothers, Patrick (deceased) and Joe, and a sister, Selma (deceased). Atiyah went to primary school at the Diocesan school in Khartoum, Sudan (1934\u20131941), and to secondary school at Victoria College in Cairo and Alexandria (1941\u20131945); the school was also attended by European nobility displaced by the Second World War and some future leaders of Arab nations. He returned to England and Manchester Grammar School for his HSC studies (1945\u20131947) and did his national service with the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (1947\u20131949). His undergraduate and postgraduate studies took place at Trinity College, Cambridge (1949\u20131955). He was a doctoral student of William V. D. Hodge and was awarded a doctorate in 1955 for a thesis entitled \"Some Applications of Topological Methods in Algebraic Geometry\".\nAtiyah was a member of the British Humanist Association.\nDuring his time at Cambridge, he was president of The Archimedeans.\nCareer and research.\nAtiyah spent the academic year 1955\u20131956 at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, then returned to Cambridge University, where he was a research fellow and assistant lecturer (1957\u20131958), then a university lecturer and tutorial fellow at Pembroke College, Cambridge (1958\u20131961). In 1961, he moved to the University of Oxford, where he was a reader and professorial fellow at St Catherine's College (1961\u20131963). He became Savilian Professor of Geometry and a professorial fellow of New College, Oxford, from 1963 to 1969. He took up a three-year professorship at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton after which he returned to Oxford as a Royal Society Research Professor and professorial fellow of St Catherine's College. He was president of the London Mathematical Society from 1974 to 1976.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI started out by changing local currency into foreign currency everywhere I travelled as a child and ended up making money. That's when my father realised that I would be a mathematician some day.\nMichael Atiyah\nAtiyah was president of the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs from 1997 to 2002. He also contributed to the foundation of the InterAcademy Panel on International Issues, the Association of European Academies (ALLEA), and the European Mathematical Society (EMS).\nWithin the United Kingdom, he was involved in the creation of the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences in Cambridge and was its first director (1990\u20131996). He was President of the Royal Society (1990\u20131995), Master of Trinity College, Cambridge (1990\u20131997), Chancellor of the University of Leicester (1995\u20132005), and president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (2005\u20132008). From 1997 until his death in 2019 he was an honorary professor in the University of Edinburgh. He was a Trustee of the James Clerk Maxwell Foundation.\nAtiyah's mathematical collaborators included Raoul Bott, Friedrich Hirzebruch and Isadore Singer, and his students included Graeme Segal, Nigel Hitchin, Simon Donaldson, and Edward Witten. Together with Hirzebruch, he laid the foundations for topological K-theory, an important tool in algebraic topology, which, informally speaking, describes ways in which spaces can be twisted. His best known result, the Atiyah\u2013Singer index theorem, was proved with Singer in 1963 and is used in counting the number of independent solutions to differential equations. Some of his more recent work was inspired by theoretical physics, in particular instantons and monopoles, which are responsible for some corrections in quantum field theory. He was awarded the Fields Medal in 1966 and the Abel Prize in 2004.\nCollaborations.\nAtiyah collaborated with many mathematicians. His three main collaborations were with Raoul Bott on the Atiyah\u2013Bott fixed-point theorem and many other topics, with Isadore M. Singer on the Atiyah\u2013Singer index theorem, and with Friedrich Hirzebruch on topological K-theory, all of whom he met at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton in 1955. His other collaborators included; J. Frank Adams (Hopf invariant problem), J\u00fcrgen Berndt (projective planes), Roger Bielawski (Berry\u2013Robbins problem), Howard Donnelly (L-functions), Vladimir G. Drinfeld (instantons), Johan L. Dupont (singularities of vector fields), Lars G\u00e5rding (hyperbolic differential equations), Nigel J. Hitchin (monopoles), William V. D. Hodge (Integrals of the second kind), Michael Hopkins (K-theory), Lisa Jeffrey (topological Lagrangians), John D. S. Jones (Yang\u2013Mills theory), Juan Maldacena (M-theory), Yuri I. Manin (instantons), Nick S. Manton (Skyrmions), Vijay K. Patodi (spectral asymmetry), A. N. Pressley (convexity), Elmer Rees (vector bundles), Wilfried Schmid (discrete series representations), Graeme Segal (equivariant K-theory), Alexander Shapiro (Clifford algebras), L. Smith (homotopy groups of spheres), Paul Sutcliffe (polyhedra), David O. Tall (lambda rings), John A. Todd (Stiefel manifolds), Cumrun Vafa (M-theory), Richard S. Ward (instantons) and Edward Witten (M-theory, topological quantum field theories).\nHis later research on gauge field theories, particularly Yang\u2013Mills theory, stimulated important interactions between geometry and physics, most notably in the work of Edward Witten.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf you attack a mathematical problem directly, very often you come to a dead end, nothing you do seems to work and you feel that if only you could peer round the corner there might be an easy solution. There is nothing like having somebody else beside you, because he can usually peer round the corner.\nMichael Atiyah\nAtiyah's students included \nPeter Braam 1987,\nSimon Donaldson 1983,\nK. David Elworthy 1967,\nHoward Fegan 1977,\nEric Grunwald 1977,\nNigel Hitchin 1972,\nLisa Jeffrey 1991,\nFrances Kirwan 1984,\nPeter Kronheimer 1986,\nRuth Lawrence 1989,\nGeorge Lusztig 1971,\nJack Morava 1968,\nMichael Murray 1983,\nPeter Newstead 1966,\nIan R. Porteous 1961,\nJohn Roe 1985,\nBrian Sanderson 1963,\nRolph Schwarzenberger 1960,\nGraeme Segal 1967,\nDavid Tall 1966,\nand Graham White 1982.\nOther contemporary mathematicians who influenced Atiyah include Roger Penrose, Lars H\u00f6rmander, Alain Connes and Jean-Michel Bismut. Atiyah said that the mathematician he most admired was Hermann Weyl, and that his favourite mathematicians from before the 20th century were Bernhard Riemann and William Rowan Hamilton.\nThe seven volumes of Atiyah's collected papers include most of his work, except for his commutative algebra textbook; the first five volumes are divided thematically and the sixth and seventh arranged by date.\nAlgebraic geometry (1952\u20131958).\nAtiyah's early papers on algebraic geometry (and some general papers) are reprinted in the first volume of his collected works.\nAs an undergraduate Atiyah was interested in classical projective geometry, and wrote his first paper: a short note on twisted cubics. He started research under W. V. D. Hodge and won the Smith's prize for 1954 for a sheaf-theoretic approach to ruled surfaces, which encouraged Atiyah to continue in mathematics, rather than switch to his other interests\u2014architecture and archaeology.\nHis PhD thesis with Hodge was on a sheaf-theoretic approach to Solomon Lefschetz's theory of integrals of the second kind on algebraic varieties, and resulted in an invitation to visit the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton for a year. While in Princeton he classified vector bundles on an elliptic curve (extending Alexander Grothendieck's classification of vector bundles on a genus 0 curve), by showing that any vector bundle is a sum of (essentially unique) indecomposable vector bundles, and then showing that the space of indecomposable vector bundles of given degree and positive dimension can be identified with the elliptic curve. He also studied double points on surfaces, giving the first example of a flop, a special birational transformation of 3-folds that was later heavily used in Shigefumi Mori's work on minimal models for 3-folds. Atiyah's flop can also be used to show that the universal marked family of K3 surfaces is not Hausdorff.\nK-theory (1959\u20131974).\nAtiyah's works on K-theory, including his book on K-theory are reprinted in volume 2 of his collected works.\nThe simplest nontrivial example of a vector bundle is the M\u00f6bius band (pictured on the right): a strip of paper with a twist in it, which represents a rank 1 vector bundle over a circle (the circle in question being the centerline of the M\u00f6bius band). K-theory is a tool for working with higher-dimensional analogues of this example, or in other words for describing higher-dimensional twistings: elements of the K-group of a space are represented by vector bundles over it, so the M\u00f6bius band represents an element of the K-group of a circle.\nTopological K-theory was discovered by Atiyah and Friedrich Hirzebruch who were inspired by Grothendieck's proof of the Grothendieck\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem and Bott's work on the periodicity theorem. This paper only discussed the zeroth K-group; they shortly after extended it to K-groups of all degrees, giving the first (nontrivial) example of a generalized cohomology theory.\nSeveral results showed that the newly introduced K-theory was in some ways more powerful than ordinary cohomology theory. Atiyah and Todd used K-theory to improve the lower bounds found using ordinary cohomology by Borel and Serre for the James number, describing when a map from a complex Stiefel manifold to a sphere has a cross section. (Adams and Grant-Walker later showed that the bound found by Atiyah and Todd was best possible.) Atiyah and Hirzebruch used K-theory to explain some relations between Steenrod operations and Todd classes that Hirzebruch had noticed a few years before. The original solution of the Hopf invariant one problem operations by J. F. Adams was very long and complicated, using secondary cohomology operations. Atiyah showed how primary operations in K-theory could be used to give a short solution taking only a few lines, and in joint work with Adams also proved analogues of the result at odd primes.\nThe Atiyah\u2013Hirzebruch spectral sequence relates the ordinary cohomology of a space to its generalized cohomology theory. (Atiyah and Hirzebruch used the case of K-theory, but their method works for all cohomology theories).\nAtiyah showed that for a finite group \"G\", the K theory of its classifying space, \"BG\", is isomorphic to the completion of its character ring:\nformula_1\nThe same year they proved the result for \"G\" any compact connected Lie group. Although soon the result could be extended to \"all\" compact Lie groups by incorporating results from Graeme Segal's thesis, that extension was complicated. However a simpler and more general proof was produced by introducing equivariant K-theory, \"i.e.\" equivalence classes of \"G\"-vector bundles over a compact \"G\"-space \"X\". It was shown that under suitable conditions the completion of the equivariant K theory of \"X\" is isomorphic to the ordinary K-theory of a space, formula_2, which fibred over \"BG\" with fibre \"X\":\nformula_3\nThe original result then followed as a corollary by taking \"X\" to be a point: the left hand side reduced to the completion of \"R(G)\" and the right to \"K(BG)\". See Atiyah\u2013Segal completion theorem for more details.\nHe defined new generalized homology and cohomology theories called bordism and cobordism, and pointed out that many of the deep results on cobordism of manifolds found by Ren\u00e9 Thom, C. T. C. Wall, and others could be naturally reinterpreted as statements about these cohomology theories. Some of these cohomology theories, in particular complex cobordism, turned out to be some of the most powerful cohomology theories known.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Algebra is the offer made by the devil to the mathematician. The devil says: `I will give you this powerful machine, it will answer any question you like. All you need to do is give me your soul: give up geometry and you will have this marvellous machine.\"\nMichael Atiyah\nHe introduced the J-group \"J\"(\"X\") of a finite complex \"X\", defined as the group of stable fiber homotopy equivalence classes of sphere bundles; this was later studied in detail by J. F. Adams in a series of papers, leading to the Adams conjecture.\nWith Hirzebruch he extended the Grothendieck\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem to complex analytic embeddings, and in a related paper they showed that the Hodge conjecture for integral cohomology is false. The Hodge conjecture for rational cohomology is, as of 2008, a major unsolved problem.\nThe Bott periodicity theorem was a central theme in Atiyah's work on K-theory, and he repeatedly returned to it, reworking the proof several times to understand it better. With Bott he worked out an elementary proof, and gave another version of it in his book. With Bott and Shapiro he analysed the relation of Bott periodicity to the periodicity of Clifford algebras; although this paper did not have a proof of the periodicity theorem, a proof along similar lines was shortly afterwards found by R. Wood. He found a proof of several generalizations using elliptic operators; this new proof used an idea that he used to give a particularly short and easy proof of Bott's original periodicity theorem.\nIndex theory (1963\u20131984).\nAtiyah's work on index theory is reprinted in volumes 3 and 4 of his collected works.\nThe index of a differential operator is closely related to the number of independent solutions (more precisely, it is the differences of the numbers of independent solutions of the differential operator and its adjoint). There are many hard and fundamental problems in mathematics that can easily be reduced to the problem of finding the number of independent solutions of some differential operator, so if one has some means of finding the index of a differential operator these problems can often be solved. This is what the Atiyah\u2013Singer index theorem does: it gives a formula for the index of certain differential operators, in terms of topological invariants that look quite complicated but are in practice usually straightforward to calculate.\nSeveral deep theorems, such as the Hirzebruch\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem, are special cases of the Atiyah\u2013Singer index theorem. In fact the index theorem gave a more powerful result, because its proof applied to all compact complex manifolds, while Hirzebruch's proof only worked for projective manifolds. There were also many new applications: a typical one is calculating the dimensions of the moduli spaces of instantons. The index theorem can also be run \"in reverse\": the index is obviously an integer, so the formula for it must also give an integer, which sometimes gives subtle integrality conditions on invariants of manifolds. A typical example of this is Rochlin's theorem, which follows from the index theorem.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe most useful piece of advice I would give to a mathematics student is always to suspect an impressive sounding Theorem if it does not have a special case which is \"both\" simple \"and\" non-trivial.\nMichael Atiyah\nThe index problem for elliptic differential operators was posed in 1959 by Gel'fand. He noticed the homotopy invariance of the index, and asked for a formula for it by means of topological invariants. Some of the motivating examples included the Riemann\u2013Roch theorem and its generalization the Hirzebruch\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem, and the Hirzebruch signature theorem. Hirzebruch and Borel had proved the integrality of the \u00c2 genus of a spin manifold, and Atiyah suggested that this integrality could be explained if it were the index of the Dirac operator (which was rediscovered by Atiyah and Singer in 1961).\nThe first announcement of the Atiyah\u2013Singer theorem was their 1963 paper. The proof sketched in this announcement was inspired by Hirzebruch's proof of the Hirzebruch\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem and was never published by them, though it is described in the book by Palais. Their first published proof was more similar to Grothendieck's proof of the Grothendieck\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem, replacing the cobordism theory of the first proof with K-theory, and they used this approach to give proofs of various generalizations in a sequence of papers from 1968 to 1971.\nInstead of just one elliptic operator, one can consider a family of elliptic operators parameterized by some space \"Y\". In this case the index is an element of the K theory of \"Y\", rather than an integer. If the operators in the family are real, then the index lies in the real K theory of \"Y\". This gives a little extra information, as the map from the real K theory of \"Y\" to the complex K-theory is not always injective.\nWith Bott, Atiyah found an analogue of the Lefschetz fixed-point formula for elliptic operators, giving the Lefschetz number of an endomorphism of an elliptic complex in terms of a sum over the fixed points of the endomorphism. As special cases their formula included the Weyl character formula, and several new results about elliptic curves with complex multiplication, some of which were initially disbelieved by experts.\nAtiyah and Segal combined this fixed point theorem with the index theorem as follows.\nIf there is a compact group action of a group \"G\" on the compact manifold \"X\", commuting with the elliptic operator, then one can replace ordinary K-theory in the index theorem with equivariant K-theory.\nFor trivial groups \"G\" this gives the index theorem, and for a finite group \"G\" acting with isolated fixed points it gives the Atiyah\u2013Bott fixed point theorem. In general it gives the index as a sum over fixed point submanifolds of the group \"G\".\nAtiyah solved a problem asked independently by H\u00f6rmander and Gel'fand, about whether complex powers of analytic functions define distributions. Atiyah used Hironaka's resolution of singularities to answer this affirmatively. An ingenious and elementary solution was found at about the same time by J. Bernstein, and discussed by Atiyah.\nAs an application of the equivariant index theorem, Atiyah and Hirzebruch showed that manifolds with effective circle actions have vanishing \u00c2-genus. (Lichnerowicz showed that if a manifold has a metric of positive scalar curvature then the \u00c2-genus vanishes.)\nWith Elmer Rees, Atiyah studied the problem of the relation between topological and holomorphic vector bundles on projective space. They solved the simplest unknown case, by showing that all rank 2 vector bundles over projective 3-space have a holomorphic structure. Horrocks had previously found some non-trivial examples of such vector bundles, which were later used by Atiyah in his study of instantons on the 4-sphere.\nAtiyah, Bott and Vijay K. Patodi gave a new proof of the index theorem using the heat equation.\nIf the manifold is allowed to have boundary, then some restrictions must be put on the domain of the elliptic operator in order to ensure a finite index. These conditions can be local (like demanding that the sections in the domain vanish at the boundary) or more complicated global conditions (like requiring that the sections in the domain solve some differential equation). The local case was worked out by Atiyah and Bott, but they showed that many interesting operators (e.g., the signature operator) do not admit local boundary conditions. To handle these operators, Atiyah, Patodi and Singer introduced global boundary conditions equivalent to attaching a cylinder to the manifold along the boundary and then restricting the domain to those sections that are square integrable along the cylinder, and also introduced the Atiyah\u2013Patodi\u2013Singer eta invariant. This resulted in a series of papers on spectral asymmetry, which were later unexpectedly used in theoretical physics, in particular in Witten's work on anomalies.\nThe fundamental solutions of linear hyperbolic partial differential equations often have Petrovsky lacunas: regions where they vanish identically. These were studied in 1945 by I. G. Petrovsky, who found topological conditions describing which regions were lacunas.\nIn collaboration with Bott and Lars G\u00e5rding, Atiyah wrote three papers updating and generalizing Petrovsky's work.\nAtiyah showed how to extend the index theorem to some non-compact manifolds, acted on by a discrete group with compact quotient. The kernel of the elliptic operator is in general infinite-dimensional in this case, but it is possible to get a finite index using the dimension of a module over a von Neumann algebra; this index is in general real rather than integer valued. This version is called the \"L2 index theorem,\" and was used by Atiyah and Schmid to give a geometric construction, using square integrable harmonic spinors, of Harish-Chandra's discrete series representations of semisimple Lie groups. In the course of this work they found a more elementary proof of Harish-Chandra's fundamental theorem on the local integrability of characters of Lie groups.\nWith H. Donnelly and I. Singer, he extended Hirzebruch's formula (relating the signature defect at cusps of Hilbert modular surfaces to values of L-functions) from real quadratic fields to all totally real fields.\nGauge theory (1977\u20131985).\nMany of his papers on gauge theory and related topics are reprinted in volume 5 of his collected works. A common theme of these papers is the study of moduli spaces of solutions to certain non-linear partial differential equations, in particular the equations for instantons and monopoles. This often involves finding a subtle correspondence between solutions of two seemingly quite different equations. An early example of this which Atiyah used repeatedly is the Penrose transform, which can sometimes convert solutions of a non-linear equation over some real manifold into solutions of some linear holomorphic equations over a different complex manifold.\nIn a series of papers with several authors, Atiyah classified all instantons on 4-dimensional Euclidean space. It is more convenient to classify instantons on a sphere as this is compact, and this is essentially equivalent to classifying instantons on Euclidean space as this is conformally equivalent to a sphere and the equations for instantons are conformally invariant. With Hitchin and Singer he calculated the dimension of the moduli space of irreducible self-dual connections (instantons) for any principal bundle over a compact 4-dimensional Riemannian manifold (the Atiyah\u2013Hitchin\u2013Singer theorem). For example, the dimension of the space of SU2 instantons of rank \"k\"&gt;0 is 8\"k\"\u22123. To do this they used the Atiyah\u2013Singer index theorem to calculate the dimension of the tangent space of the moduli space at a point; the tangent space is essentially the space of solutions of an elliptic differential operator, given by the linearization of the non-linear Yang\u2013Mills equations. These moduli spaces were later used by Donaldson to construct his invariants of 4-manifolds.\nAtiyah and Ward used the Penrose correspondence to reduce the classification of all instantons on the 4-sphere to a problem in algebraic geometry. With Hitchin he used ideas of Horrocks to solve this problem, giving the ADHM construction of all instantons on a sphere; Manin and Drinfeld found the same construction at the same time, leading to a joint paper by all four authors. Atiyah reformulated this construction using quaternions and wrote up a leisurely account of this classification of instantons on Euclidean space as a book.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe mathematical problems that have been solved or techniques that have arisen out of physics in the past have been the lifeblood of mathematics.\nMichael Atiyah\nAtiyah's work on instanton moduli spaces was used in Donaldson's work on Donaldson theory. Donaldson showed that the moduli space of (degree 1) instantons over a compact simply connected 4-manifold with positive definite intersection form can be compactified to give a cobordism between the manifold and a sum of copies of complex projective space. He deduced from this that the intersection form must be a sum of one-dimensional ones, which led to several spectacular applications to smooth 4-manifolds, such as the existence of non-equivalent smooth structures on 4-dimensional Euclidean space. Donaldson went on to use the other moduli spaces studied by Atiyah to define Donaldson invariants, which revolutionized the study of smooth 4-manifolds, and showed that they were more subtle than smooth manifolds in any other dimension, and also quite different from topological 4-manifolds. Atiyah described some of these results in a survey talk.\nGreen's functions for linear partial differential equations can often be found by using the Fourier transform to convert this into an algebraic problem. Atiyah used a non-linear version of this idea. He used the Penrose transform to convert the Green's function for the conformally invariant Laplacian into a complex analytic object, which turned out to be essentially the diagonal embedding of the Penrose twistor space into its square. This allowed him to find an explicit formula for the conformally invariant Green's function on a 4-manifold.\nIn his paper with Jones, he studied the topology of the moduli space of SU(2) instantons over a 4-sphere. They showed that the natural map from this moduli space to the space of all connections induces epimorphisms of homology groups in a certain range of dimensions, and suggested that it might induce isomorphisms of homology groups in the same range of dimensions. This became known as the Atiyah\u2013Jones conjecture, and was later proved by several mathematicians.\nHarder and M. S. Narasimhan described the cohomology of the moduli spaces of stable vector bundles over Riemann surfaces by counting the number of points of the moduli spaces over finite fields, and then using the Weil conjectures to recover the cohomology over the complex numbers.\nAtiyah and R. Bott used Morse theory and the Yang\u2013Mills equations over a Riemann surface to reproduce and extending the results of Harder and Narasimhan.\nAn old result due to Schur and Horn states that the set of possible diagonal vectors of an Hermitian matrix with given eigenvalues is the convex hull of all the permutations of the eigenvalues. Atiyah proved a generalization of this that applies to all compact symplectic manifolds acted on by a torus, showing that the image of the manifold under the moment map is a convex polyhedron, and with Pressley gave a related generalization to infinite-dimensional loop groups.\nDuistermaat and Heckman found a striking formula, saying that the push-forward of the Liouville measure of a moment map for a torus action is given exactly by the stationary phase approximation (which is in general just an asymptotic expansion rather than exact). Atiyah and Bott showed that this could be deduced from a more general formula in equivariant cohomology, which was a consequence of well-known localization theorems. Atiyah showed that the moment map was closely related to geometric invariant theory, and this idea was later developed much further by his student F. Kirwan. Witten shortly after applied the Duistermaat\u2013Heckman formula to loop spaces and showed that this formally gave the Atiyah\u2013Singer index theorem for the Dirac operator; this idea was lectured on by Atiyah.\nWith Hitchin he worked on magnetic monopoles, and studied their scattering using an idea of Nick Manton. His book with Hitchin gives a detailed description of their work on magnetic monopoles. The main theme of the book is a study of a moduli space of magnetic monopoles; this has a natural Riemannian metric, and a key point is that this metric is complete and hyperk\u00e4hler. The metric is then used to study the scattering of two monopoles, using a suggestion of N. Manton that the geodesic flow on the moduli space is the low energy approximation to the scattering. For example, they show that a head-on collision between two monopoles results in 90-degree scattering, with the direction of scattering depending on the relative phases of the two monopoles. He also studied monopoles on hyperbolic space.\nAtiyah showed that instantons in 4 dimensions can be identified with instantons in 2 dimensions, which are much easier to handle. There is of course a catch: in going from 4 to 2 dimensions the structure group of the gauge theory changes from a finite-dimensional group to an infinite-dimensional loop group. This gives another example where the moduli spaces of solutions of two apparently unrelated nonlinear partial differential equations turn out to be essentially the same.\nAtiyah and Singer found that anomalies in quantum field theory could be interpreted in terms of index theory of the Dirac operator; this idea later became widely used by physicists.\nLater work (1986\u20132019).\nMany of the papers in the 6th volume of his collected works are surveys, obituaries, and general talks. Atiyah continued to publish subsequently, including several surveys, a popular book, and another paper with Segal on twisted K-theory.\nOne paper is a detailed study of the Dedekind eta function from the point of view of topology and the index theorem.\nSeveral of his papers from around this time study the connections between quantum field theory, knots, and Donaldson theory. He introduced the concept of a topological quantum field theory, inspired by Witten's work and Segal's definition of a conformal field theory. His book \"The Geometry and Physics of Knots\" describes the new knot invariants found by Vaughan Jones and Edward Witten in terms of topological quantum field theories, and his paper with L. Jeffrey explains Witten's Lagrangian giving the Donaldson invariants.\nHe studied skyrmions with Nick Manton, finding a relation with magnetic monopoles and instantons, and giving a conjecture for the structure of the moduli space of two skyrmions as a certain subquotient of complex projective 3-space.\nSeveral papers were inspired by a question of https:// (called the Berry\u2013Robbins problem), who asked if there is a map from the configuration space of \"n\" points in 3-space to the flag manifold of the unitary group. Atiyah gave an affirmative answer to this question, but felt his solution was too computational and studied a conjecture that would give a more natural solution. He also related the question to Nahm's equation, and introduced the Atiyah conjecture on configurations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBut for most practical purposes, you just use the classical groups. The exceptional Lie groups are just there to show you that the theory is a bit bigger; it is pretty rare that they ever turn up.\nMichael Atiyah\nWith Juan Maldacena and Cumrun Vafa, and E. Witten he described the dynamics of M-theory on manifolds with G2 holonomy. These papers seem to be the first time that Atiyah worked on exceptional Lie groups.\nIn his papers with M. Hopkins and G. Segal he returned to his earlier interest of K-theory, describing some twisted forms of K-theory with applications in theoretical physics.\nIn October 2016, he claimed a short proof of the non-existence of complex structures on the 6-sphere. His proof, like many predecessors, is considered flawed by the mathematical community, even after the proof was rewritten in a revised form.\nAt the 2018 Heidelberg Laureate Forum, he claimed to have solved the Riemann hypothesis, Hilbert's eighth problem, by contradiction using the fine-structure constant. Again, the proof did not hold up and the hypothesis remains one of the six unsolved Millennium Prize Problems in mathematics, as of 2025.\nBibliography.\nBooks.\nThis subsection lists all books written by Atiyah; it omits a few books that he edited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSelected papers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards and honours.\nIn 1966, when he was thirty-seven years old, he was awarded the Fields Medal, for his work in developing K-theory, a generalized Lefschetz fixed-point theorem and the Atiyah\u2013Singer theorem, for which he also won the Abel Prize jointly with Isadore Singer in 2004.\nAmong other prizes he has received are the Royal Medal of the Royal Society in 1968, the De Morgan Medal of the London Mathematical Society in 1980, the Antonio Feltrinelli Prize from the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei in 1981, the King Faisal International Prize for Science in 1987, the Copley Medal of the Royal Society in 1988, the Benjamin Franklin Medal for Distinguished Achievement in the Sciences of the American Philosophical Society in 1993, the Jawaharlal Nehru Birth Centenary Medal\nof the Indian National Science Academy in 1993, the President's Medal from the Institute of Physics in 2008, the Grande M\u00e9daille of the French Academy of Sciences in 2010 and the Grand Officier of the French L\u00e9gion d'honneur in 2011.\nHe was elected a foreign member of the National Academy of Sciences, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1969), the Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences, the Akademie Leopoldina, the Royal Swedish Academy, the Royal Irish Academy, the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the American Philosophical Society, the Indian National Science Academy, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Australian Academy of Science, the Russian Academy of Science, the Ukrainian Academy of Science, the Georgian Academy of Science, the Venezuela Academy of Science, the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, the Royal Spanish Academy of Science, the Accademia dei Lincei and the Moscow Mathematical Society. In 2012, he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society. He was also appointed as an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering in 1993.\nAtiyah was awarded honorary degrees by the universities of Birmingham, Bonn, Chicago, Cambridge, Dublin, Durham, Edinburgh, Essex, Ghent, Helsinki, Lebanon, Leicester, London, Mexico, Montreal, Oxford, Reading, Salamanca, St. Andrews, Sussex, Wales, Warwick, the American University of Beirut, Brown University, Charles University in Prague, Harvard University, Heriot\u2013Watt University, Hong Kong (Chinese University), Keele University, Queen's University (Canada), The Open University, University of Waterloo, Wilfrid Laurier University, Technical University of Catalonia, and UMIST.\nAtiyah was made a Knight Bachelor in 1983 and made a member of the Order of Merit in 1992.\nThe Michael Atiyah building at the University of Leicester\nand the Michael Atiyah Chair in Mathematical Sciences at the American University of Beirut were named after him.\nPersonal life.\nAtiyah married Lily Brown on 30 July 1955, with whom he had three sons, John, David and Robin. Atiyah's eldest son John died on 24 June 2002 while on a walking holiday in the Pyrenees with his wife Maj-Lis.\nLily Atiyah died on 13 March 2018 at the age of 90 while Sir Michael Atiyah died less than a year later on 11 January 2019, aged 89.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20699", "revid": "5984052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20699", "title": "Masorti", "text": "Masorti may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20700", "revid": "42601261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20700", "title": "Mordecai Kaplan", "text": "Lithuanian American rabbi (1881\u20131983)\nMordecai Menahem Kaplan (June 11, 1881 \u2013 November 8, 1983) was an American Conservative rabbi, writer, Jewish educator, professor, theologian-philosopher, activist, and religious leader who founded the Reconstructionist movement of Judaism with his son-in-law, Rabbi Ira Eisenstein. He has been described as a \"towering figure\" in the recent history of Judaism for his influential work in adapting it to modern society, contending that Judaism should be a unifying and creative force by stressing the cultural and historical character of the religion as well as theological doctrine.\nLife and work.\nMordecai Menahem Kaplan was born Mottel Kaplan in Sventiany in the Russian Empire (present-day \u0160ven\u010dionys in Lithuania) on June 11, 1881, the son of Haya (n\u00e9e\u00a0Anna) and Rabbi Israel Kaplan. His father, ordained by leading Lithuanian Jewish scholars, went to serve as a dayan () in the court of Chief Rabbi Jacob Joseph in New York City in 1888. Mordecai was brought over to New York in 1889, at the age of nine.\nAlthough affiliated with the most traditional Orthodox Jewish institutions and personalities on the Lower East Side, his father persisted in non-conformist openness to trends he had already exhibited in Russia: He hosted discussions in his home with maverick Hebrew Bible critic Arnold Ehrlich, withdrew his son from Etz Chaim Yeshiva in Manhattan, enrolled him in public school, and later sent him to the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTSA) to pursue modern Orthodox \"semikhah\" (). Although not the norm amongst first-generation immigrants, who tended to be very conservative and traditional, his father was not alone in this kind of religious broad-mindedness. Kaplan's early education was strictly Orthodox, but, by the time he reached secondary school, he had been attracted to heterodox opinions (particularly regarding the critical approach to the Hebrew Bible). To counter this, Israel hired a tutor to study Maimonides's \"Guide for the Perplexed\" with Mordecai.\nIn 1893, Kaplan began studying for ordination at JTSA, which, at that time, was a Modern Orthodox Jewish institution founded to strengthen Orthodoxy and combat the hegemony of the movement for Reform Judaism. In 1895, he also began studies at the City College of New York (CCNY), which he attended in the morning; Kaplan attended JTSA in the evening. After graduating from CCNY in 1900, he went to Columbia University to study philosophy, sociology, and education, and received a master's degree and doctorate. Majoring in philosophy, he wrote his master's thesis on the ethical philosophy of Henry Sidgwick. His lecturers included the philosopher of ethical culture Felix Adler and the sociologist Franklin Henry Giddings.\nIn 1902, he was ordained at JTSA. Kaplan's understanding of Judaism differed from the seminary's perspective, but he maintained a long-standing connection with the institution, teaching there for more than fifty years. He became principal of its teachers' institute in 1909, served as dean in 1931, and retired afterwards 1963. In 1903, he was appointed as administrator of the religious school at Congregation Kehilath Jeshurun (KJ), a gradually modernizing Orthodox synagogue in New York's Yorkville district consisting of newly affluent and acculturating East European Jews who had migrated north from the Lower East Side. By April 1904, he was appointed as rabbi of the congregation.\nBased on his diary, by around this time (1904, age 23), Kaplan already had serious misgivings about Orthodoxy's ability to satisfy his spiritual needs and its unwillingness to modernize. By 1905, he had begun to doubt the divine inspiration of the Tanakh and its laws, as well as the efficacy of prayers and rituals; by 1907, he had informed his parents of his feelings. Because he was serving as a Congregational rabbi, this created significant dissonance, resulting in considerable internal turmoil and anguish over the hypocrisy of practicing and preaching what he no longer believed. His private diaries and papers reveal that he was tortured within because his beliefs about the nature of religion and of Judaism conflicted with his duties as the leader of an Orthodox congregation.\nIn 1908, he married Lena Rubin, left KJ, and was ordained by Rabbi Yitzchak Yaacov Reines while on his honeymoon in Europe. In 1909, Kaplan became principal of the newly formed teachers' institute at JTSA (which had joined the Conservative movement), a position he held until his retirement in 1963. Kaplan was not primarily interested in academic scholarship, but rather in teaching future rabbis and educators to reinterpret Judaism and make Jewish identity meaningful under modern circumstances. As a result, his work during this time contributed greatly to the future of Jewish education in America.\nEven those who disagreed with his views appreciated his direct approach. They were impressed by his emphasis on intellectual honesty in confronting the challenges posed by modern thought to traditional Jewish beliefs and practices. In his approach to \"midrash\" and philosophies of religion, Kaplan combined scientific scholarship with creative application of the texts to contemporary problems. Kaplan's Reconstructionist philosophy influenced not only his own immediate students but, through them, his extensive writings and public lectures over several decades, the American Jewish community at large. Many of his ideas, such as Judaism as a civilization (and not merely a religion or nationality); bat mitzvah; egalitarian involvement of women in synagogal and communal life; the synagogue as a Jewish center and not merely a place of worship; and living as Jews in a multicultural society, eventually came to be accepted as commonplace and implemented in all but strictly Orthodox segments of the community.\nEarly in his career, Kaplan became a devotee of the scientific and historical study of the Hebrew Bible. He was the leading educator to confront rabbis, teachers, and laity with the changes in Jewish thought that had become necessary once the Bible had been exposed to modern techniques of examination and interpretation. But far from denigrating the genius of the biblical text, Kaplan taught his students to regard it as an indispensable source for an understanding of Jewish peoplehood and Jewish civilization.\nIn 1912, he was an advisor to the creators of the Young Israel movement of Modern Orthodox Judaism, together with Rabbi Israel Friedlander.\nIn speeches and articles in 1912 and 1916, he chided American Orthodox Judaism for not adequately embracing modernity. He was a leader in creating the Jewish community center concept. Around 1916-1918, he organized the Jewish Center in New York, a community organization with a Modern Orthodox synagogue as its nucleus\u2014the first of its kind in the United States\u2014and served as its rabbi until 1922.\nKaplan's ideology and rhetoric had been evolving over the decade, but it was not until 1920 that he finally took a clear and irrevocable stand, criticizing \"the fundamental doctrine of Orthodoxy, which is that tradition is infallible... The doctrine of infallibility rules out of court all research and criticism and demands implicit faith in the truth of whatever has come down from the past. It precludes all conscious development in thought and practice...\" However, he was even more critical of Reform, saying that Reform was worse due to what he called Reform's \"absolute break with the Judaism of the past\".\nYet he remained the rabbi of the center until around 1922, when he resigned due to ideological conflicts with some of the lay leadership. He, along with a sizeable group of congregants, then established the Society for the Advancement of Judaism, which later became the core of the Reconstructionist movement.\nHe held the first public celebration of a bat mitzvah in the United States, for his daughter Judith Kaplan, on March 18, 1922, at the Society for the Advancement of Judaism. Judith read from the Torah at this ceremony, a role that had traditionally been reserved for males.\nIn 1925, the American Zionist Organization sent Kaplan to Jerusalem as its official representative for the opening of Hebrew University. From 1934 until 1970, Kaplan wrote a series of books in which he expressed his Reconstructionist ideology, an attempt to adapt Judaism to modern realities that he believed necessitated a new conception of God. His basic ideology was first defined in his 1934 work \"Judaism as a Civilization: Toward the Reconstruction of American-Jewish Life\". In 1935, a biweekly periodical (\"The Reconstructionist Journal\") was started under Kaplan's editorship, which was \"dedicated to the advancement of Judaism as a religious civilization, to the upbuilding of Eretz Yisrael [the Land of Israel] as the spiritual center of the Jewish People, and to the furtherance of universal freedom, justice, and peace.\" Kaplan further refined the goals of his ideology in subsequent books, including: \"The Meaning of God in Modern Jewish Religion\" (1937), \"Judaism Without Supernaturalism\" (1958), and \"The Religion of Ethical Nationhood\" (1970).\nKaplan saw his ideology as a \"school of thought\" rather than a separate denomination, and in fact resisted pressure to turn it into one, fearing that it might further fragment the American Jewish community and hoping that his ideas could be applied across denominations.\nKaplan was dissatisfied with traditional rituals and prayer and sought ways to make them more meaningful to Jews who agreed with him. In 1941, he wrote the controversial \"Reconstructionist Haggadah\", for which he received criticism from colleagues at JTSA. However, this did not stop him from publishing the \"Reconstructionist Sabbath Prayer Book\" in 1945, in which, among other unorthodoxies, he denied the literal accuracy of the biblical text. As a result, he was excommunicated by the Union of Orthodox Rabbis of the United States and Canada, who held a \"herem\" ceremony at which his prayer book was burned.\nAlthough Kaplan preferred that Reconstructionism remain a non-denominational school of thought rather than a separate denomination, in the late 1940s to early 1950s, a number of laypeople in synagogues throughout the United States decided to organize an independent federation of Reconstructionist synagogues, and by 1954, the Federation of Reconstructionist Congregations and Havurot was organized. As the years passed, the number of affiliates grew, but it was not until the late 1960s that the movement actually became a separate denomination, when the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College opened its doors in 1968. By the beginning of the 21st century, it would include over 100 congregations and \"havurot\".\nKaplan was a prolific writer. In addition to his published works, he kept a journal from 1913 until the late 1970s, comprising 27 volumes, each with 350-400 handwritten pages. The journal is certainly the largest by a Jew, and may even be one of the most extensive on record.\nAfter the death of his wife in 1958, he married Rivka Rieger, an Israeli artist, in 1959. He died in New York City in 1983 at the age of 102. He was survived by Rivka and his daughters Judith Kaplan Eisenstein, Hadassah Musher, Naomi Wenner, and Selma Jaffe-Goldman, as well as seven grandchildren and nine great-grandchildren.\nRelationship with Orthodox Judaism.\nKaplan began his career as an Orthodox rabbi at Congregation Kehilath Jeshurun in New York City, assisted in the founding of the Young Israel movement of Modern Orthodox Judaism in 1912, and was the first rabbi hired by the new (Orthodox) Jewish Center in Manhattan when it was founded in 1918. He proved too radical in his religious and political views for the organization and resigned from the Jewish Center in 1921. He was the subject of a number of polemical articles published by Rabbi Leo Jung (who became the rabbi of the Jewish Center in 1922) in the Orthodox Jewish press.\nHe then became involved in the Society for the Advancement of Judaism, where on March 18, 1922, he held (possibly) the first public celebration of a bat mitzvah in America, for his daughter Judith. This led to considerable criticism of Kaplan in the Orthodox Jewish press.\nKaplan's central idea of understanding Judaism as a religious civilization was an easily accepted position within Conservative Judaism, but his naturalistic conception of God was not as acceptable. Even at the Conservative movement's JTS, as The Forward writes, \"He was an outsider, and often privately considered leaving the institution. In 1941, the faculty illustrated its distaste with Kaplan by penning a unanimous letter to the professor of homiletics, expressing complete disgust with Kaplan's \"The New Haggadah\" for the Passover seder. Four years later, seminary professors Alexander Marx, Louis Ginzberg and Saul Lieberman went public with their rebuke by writing a letter to the Hebrew newspaper \"Hadoar\", lambasting Kaplan's prayer book and his entire career as a rabbi.\" In 1945 the Union of Orthodox Rabbis \"formally assembled to excommunicate from Judaism what it deemed to be the community's most heretical voice: Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan, the man who eventually would become the founder of Reconstructionist Judaism. Kaplan, a critic of both Orthodox and Reform Judaism, believed that Jewish practice should be reconciled with modern thought, a philosophy reflected in his \"Sabbath Prayer Book\"...\"\nDue to Kaplan's evolving position on Jewish theology and the liturgy, he was also condemned as a heretic by members of Young Israel, which he had assisted in founding. His followers attempted to induce him to formally leave Conservative Judaism, but he stayed with its Jewish Theological Seminary until he retired in 1963. Finally, in 1968, his closest disciple and son-in-law Ira Eisenstein founded a separate school, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College, in which Kaplan's philosophy, Reconstructionist Judaism, would be promoted as a separate religious movement.\nUniversity establishment.\nKaplan wrote a seminal essay \"On the Need for a University of Judaism,\" in which he called for a university setting that could present Judaism as a deep culture and developing civilization. His proposal included programs on dramatic and fine arts to stimulate Jewish artistic creativity, a college to train Jews to live fully in American and Jewish culture as contributing citizens, a school to train Jewish educators, and a rabbinical seminary to train creative and visionary rabbis. In 1947, with the participation of Rabbi Simon Greenberg, his efforts culminated in the establishment of the American Jewish University, then known as the University of Judaism. His vision continues to find expression in the graduate, undergraduate, rabbinical, and continuing education programs of the university.\nKaplan's theology.\nKaplan said: To believe in God means to accept life on the assumption that it harbors conditions in the outer world and drives in the human spirit which together impel man to transcend himself. To believe in God means to take for granted that it is man's destiny to rise above the brute and to eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation from human society. In brief, God is the Power in the cosmos that gives human life the direction that enables the human being to reflect the image of God.\nNot all of Kaplan's writings on the subject were consistent; his position evolved somewhat over the years, and two distinct theologies can be discerned with careful reading. The view more popularly associated with Kaplan is strict naturalism, \u00e0 la Dewey, which has been criticized as using religious terminology to mask a non-theistic (if not outright atheistic) position\u2014one JTS colleague in the 1950s, Will Herberg, went so far as to compare it to the position of Charles Maurras toward the Catholic Church. A second strand of Kaplanian theology makes clear that God has ontological reality, a real and absolute existence independent of human beliefs, while rejecting classical theism and any belief in miracles. In 1973 he was one of the signers of the Humanist Manifesto II.\nBibliography.\nKaplan was a prolific writer. His work \"Judaism as a Civilization\" was published in 1934 when Kaplan was 53. A full bibliography of over 400 items can be found in The American Judaism of Mordecai Kaplan, ed. by Emanuel S. Goldsmith, Mel Scult, and Robert Seltzer (1990).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20701", "revid": "37195583", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20701", "title": "Mathilde Roth Schechter", "text": "American Conservative Jew (1859\u20131924)\nMathilde Roth Schechter (also Matilda; December 16, 1859 \u2013 August 27, 1924) was the American founder of the U.S. National Women's League of Conservative Judaism in 1918.\nBiography.\nSchechter was born in Breslau, Prussia (now Wroc\u0142aw, Poland). She was married to Dr. Solomon Schechter, a prominent rabbi who was chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTSA). They lived in Cambridge, England before immigrating to the United States in 1902.\nShe founded and taught at the Columbia Religious and Industrial School for Jewish Girls. After assisting Henrietta Szold in creating Hadassah, Schechter later served as its national chairwoman of education. The Mathilde Schechter Residence Hall formerly contained undergraduate housing for students of the JTSA's List College.\nShe died at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan on August 27, 1924, following an operation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20703", "revid": "44770420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20703", "title": "MOS Technology", "text": "Semiconductor company based in Pennsylvania, U.S.\nMOS Technology, Inc. (\"MOS\" being short for Metal Oxide Semiconductor), later known as CSG (Commodore Semiconductor Group) and GMT Microelectronics, was a semiconductor design and fabrication company based in Audubon, Pennsylvania. It is most famous for its 6502 microprocessor and various designs for Commodore International's range of home computers.\nHistory.\nThree former General Instrument executives, John Paivinen, Mort Jaffe and Don McLaughlin, formed MOS Technology in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania in 1969. The Allen-Bradley Company was looking to provide a second source for electronic calculators and their chips designed by Texas Instruments (TI). In 1970 Allen-Bradley acquired a majority interest in MOS Technology.\nIn the early 1970s, TI decided to release their own line of calculators, instead of selling just the chips inside them, and introduced them at a price that was lower than the price of the chipset alone. Many early chip companies were reliant on sales of calculator chips and were wiped out in the aftermath; those that survived did so by finding other chips to produce. MOS became a supplier to Atari, producing a custom single-chip \"Pong\" system.\nThings changed dramatically in 1975. Several of the designers of the Motorola 6800 left Motorola shortly after its release, after management told them to stop working on a low-cost version of the design. At the time there was no such thing as a pure-play semiconductor foundry, so they had to join a chip-building company to produce their new CPU. MOS was a small firm with good credentials in the right area, the east coast of the US. The team of four design engineers was headed by Chuck Peddle and included Bill Mensch. At MOS they set about building a new CPU that would outperform the 6800 while being similar to it in purpose and much less expensive. The resulting 6501 design was somewhat similar to the 6800, but by using several design simplifications, the 6501 would be up to four times faster.\nMask fixing.\nPrevious CPU designs, like the 6800, were produced using a device known as a contact aligner. This was essentially a complex photocopier, which optically reproduced a CPU design, or \"mask\", on the surface of the silicon chip. The name \"contact\" referred to the fact that the mask was placed directly on the surface of the chip, which had the significant disadvantage that it sometimes pulled away materials from the chip, which were then copied to subsequent chips. This caused the mask to become useless after about a dozen copies, and resulted in the vast majority of chips having fatal flaws; for a complex chip like the 6800, only about 10% of the chips would work once the masking process was complete.\nIn 1974 Perkin-Elmer publicly introduced the Micralign system, the first projection scanner. Instead of placing the mask on the surface of the chip, it held it far from the surface and used highly accurate optics to project the image. Masks now lasted for thousands of copies instead of tens, and the flaw rate of the chips inverted so that perhaps 70% of the chips produced would work. The result was a similar inversion in pricing. The 6800 sold in small lots for $; with no other changes than using a Micralign, the same design could sell for $.\nThe change to the Micralign revealed a further advantage. Previously the masks were mass-produced by photography companies like Kodak, who would make tens of thousands of copies of a master mask, or \"reticle\", and ship the masks to the aligners by the truckload. This meant that if a flaw was found in the design, it would cost a significant amount of money to fix it, as all the older masks would have to be thrown out. In contrast, with Micralign there was only one mask per aligner, so there was no inherent cost in replacing the mask if need be, although the cost, and especially time, of producing these master masks was considerable.\nMOS developed the ability to \"fix\" its masks after they had been produced. This meant that as flaws in the design were discovered, the masks could be removed from the aligners, fixed, and put back in. This allowed them to rapidly drive out flaws in the original masks.\nThe company's production lines typically reversed the numbers others were achieving; even the early runs of a new CPU design\u2014what would become the 6502\u2014were achieving a success rate of 70 percent or better. This meant that not only were its designs faster, but they also cost much less as well.\n6502 family.\nFollowing announcement of the 6501 in the summer of 1975, Motorola filed a lawsuit in November. Although the 6501 instruction set was not compatible with the 6800, it could nevertheless be plugged into existing motherboard designs because it had the same functional pin arrangement and IC package footprint. In March 1976, MOS reached a settlement with Motorola and agreed to stop selling the 6501 and pay Motorola US$. \nIn the meantime MOS had started selling the 6502, a chip capable of operating at in September 1975 for a mere US$. It was nearly identical to the 6501, with only a few minor differences: an added on-chip clock oscillator, a different functional pinout arrangement, generation of the SYNC signal (supporting single-instruction stepping), and removal of data bus enablement control signals (DBE and BA, with the former directly connected to the phase 2 clock instead). It outperformed the more-complex 6800 and Intel 8080, but cost much less and was easier to work with. Although it did not have the 6501's advantage of being able to be used in place of the Motorola 6800 in existing hardware, it was so inexpensive that it quickly became more popular than the 6800, making that a moot point.\nThe 6502 was so cheap that many people believed it was a scam when MOS first showed it at a 1975 trade show. They were not aware of MOS's masking techniques and when they calculated the price per chip at the current industry yield rates, it did not add up. But any hesitation to buy it evaporated when both Motorola and Intel dropped the prices on their own designs from to at the same show in order to compete. Their moves legitimized the 6502, and by the show's end, the wooden barrel full of samples was empty.\nThe 6502 would quickly go on to be one of the most popular chips of its day. A number of companies licensed the 650x line from MOS, including Rockwell International, GTE, Synertek, and Western Design Center (WDC).\nA number of different versions of the basic CPU, known as the 6503 through 6507, were offered in 28-pin packages for lower cost. The various models removed signal or address pins. Far and away the most popular of these was the 6507, which was used in the Atari 2600 and Atari disk drives. The 6504 was sometimes used in printers. MOS also released a series of similar CPUs using external clocks, which added a \"1\" to the name in the third digit, as the 6512 through 6515. These were useful in systems where the clock support was already being provided on the motherboard by some other source. The final addition was the \"crossover\" 6510, used in the Commodore 64, with additional I/O ports.\nCommodore Semiconductor Group.\nHowever successful the 6502 was, the company itself was having problems. At about the same time the 6502 was being released, MOS's entire calculator IC market collapsed, and its prior existing products stopped shipping. Soon they were in serious financial trouble. Another company, Commodore Business Machines (CBM), had invested heavily in the calculator market and was also nearly wiped out by TI's entry into the market. A fresh injection of capital saved CBM, and allowed it to invest in company suppliers in order to help ensure their IC supply would not be upset in this fashion again. Among the several companies were LED display manufacturers, power controllers, and suppliers of the driver chips, including MOS.\nIn September 25, 1976, CBM, publicly traded on the NYSE with a market capitalization around US$, purchased MOS (whose market cap was around US$) in an all-stock deal. Holders of MOS received a 9.4 percent equity stake in CBM on the condition that Chuck Peddle would join Commodore as chief engineer. The deal went through, and while the firm basically became Commodore's production arm, they continued using the name MOS for some time so that manuals would not have to be reprinted. After a while MOS became the Commodore Semiconductor Group (CSG). Despite being renamed to CSG, all chips produced were still stamped with the old \"MOS\" logo until week 22/23 of 1989.\nMOS had previously designed a simple computer kit called the KIM-1, primarily to \"show off\" the 6502 chip. At Commodore, Peddle convinced the owner, Jack Tramiel, that calculators were a dead end, and that home computers would soon be huge.\nHowever, the original design group appeared to be even less interested in working for Jack Tramiel than it had for Motorola, and the team quickly started breaking up. One result was that the newly completed 6522 (VIA) chip was left undocumented for years.\nBill Mensch left MOS even before the Commodore takeover, and moved home to Arizona. After a short stint consulting for a local company called ICE, he set up the Western Design Center (WDC) in 1978. As a licensee of the 6502 line, their first products were bug-fixed, power-efficient CMOS versions of the 6502 (the 65C02, both as a separate chip and embedded inside a microcontroller called the 65C150). But then they expanded the line greatly with the introduction of the 65816, a fairly straightforward 16-bit upgrade of the original 65C02 that could also run in 8-bit mode for compatibility. Since then WDC moved much of the original MOS catalog to CMOS, and the 6502 continued to be a popular CPU for the embedded systems market, like medical equipment and car dashboard controllers.\nGMT Microelectronics.\nAfter Commodore's bankruptcy in 1994, Commodore Semiconductor Group, MOS's successor, was bought by its former management for about $, plus an additional $ to cover miscellaneous expenses including a United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) license. Dennis Peasenell became CEO. In December 1994, the EPA entered into a Prospective Purchase Agreement (limiting the company's liability in exchange for sharing the costs of cleanup) with GMT Microelectronics. In 1994, the company, operating under the name GMT Microelectronics (\"Great Mixed-signal Technologies\"), reopened MOS Technology's original, circa-1970 one-micrometre process fab (semiconductor fabrication plant) in Audubon, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania that Commodore had closed in 1993.\nThe plant had been on the EPA's National Priorities List of hazardous waste sites since October 4, 1989. This was due to a 1978 leak of trichloroethylene (TCE) from an underground 250-gallon (946-liter) concrete storage tank used by Commodore Business Machines in the semiconductor cleaning process. Leaks from the tank had caused the local groundwater to become contaminated with TCE and other volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in 1978. By 1999, GMT Microelectronics had $ in revenues and 183 employees working on the site. Announced in March 1999, GMT would have provided foundry services based on TelCom's Bipolar and SiCr (silicon chromium) Thin Film Resistor processes and would have been a licensed alternate source for TelCom's Bipolar based products, with production running at 10,000 5-inch semiconductor wafers per month, producing CMOS, BiCMOS, NMOS, bipolar and SOI (silicon on insulator) devices. In 2000, GMT Microelectronics discontinued operations and abandoned all of its assets at the Commodore Semiconductor Group superfund site. \nChip naming convention.\nMost of the MOS chips are named according to following rules, which shows used technology (logic gate design):\nProducts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20707", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20707", "title": "Margaret Sanger", "text": "American birth control activist and nurse (1879\u20131966)\nMargaret Sanger (n\u00e9e Higgins; September 14, 1879\u00a0\u2013\u00a0September 6, 1966) was an American birth control activist, sex educator, writer, and nurse. She opened the first birth control clinic in the United States, founded Planned Parenthood, and was instrumental in the development of the first birth control pill. Sanger is regarded as a founder and leader of the birth control movement.\nIn the early 1900s, contraceptives, abortion, and even birth control literature were illegal in much of the U.S.. Working as a nurse in the slums of New York City, Sanger often treated mothers desperate to avoid conceiving additional children, many of whom had resorted to back-alley abortions. Sanger was a first-wave feminist and believed that women should be able to decide if and when to have children, leading her to campaign for the legalization of contraceptives. As an adherent of the eugenics movement, she argued that birth control would reduce the number of unfit people and improve the overall health of the human race. She was also influenced by Malthusian concerns about the detrimental effects of overpopulation. \nTo promote birth control, Sanger gave speeches, wrote books, and published periodicals. Sanger deliberately flouted laws that prohibited distribution of information about contraceptives, and was arrested eight times. Her activism led to court rulings that legalized birth control, including one that enabled physicians to dispense contraceptives; and another\u00a0\u2013 \"Griswold v. Connecticut\"\u00a0\u2013 which legalized contraception, without a prescription, for couples nationwide.\nSanger established a network of dozens of birth control clinics across the country, which provided reproductive health services to hundreds of thousands of patients. She discouraged abortion, and her clinics never offered abortion services during her lifetime. She founded several organizations dedicated to family planning, including Planned Parenthood and International Planned Parenthood Federation. In the early 1950s, Sanger persuaded philanthropists to provide funding for biologist Gregory Pincus to develop the first birth control pill. She died in Arizona in 1966.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nSanger's parents were Irish Catholics who separately emigrated from Ireland. Her father, Michael Hennessey Higgins, immigrated to Canada with his family, then moved to the U.S. at the age of 14, and joined the Union army in the Civil War as a drummer at 15. Upon leaving the army, he studied medicine and phrenology but ultimately became a stonecutter. Her mother, Anne Purcell Higgins, immigrated to the U.S. with her family during the Great Famine. Anne and Michael were married in 1869.\nSanger was born Margaret Louise Higgins September 14, 1879 in Corning, New York. She spent her early years in a bustling household, under the influence of her father, who was a free-thinker, a socialist, and an agnostic. In 22 years, Anne Higgins conceived 18 times, and gave birth to 11 live babies. She died at the age of 50, when Margaret was 19 years old.\nWith financial help from two elder sisters, Margaret Higgins attended the Hudson River Institute at Claverack College from 1896 to 1900, then nursing school at White Plains Hospital from 1900 to 1902. After graduating as a nurse, she married architect William Sanger in 1902. Although she suffered from tuberculosis, she settled down to a quiet life in Hastings-on-Hudson and had three children.\nBeginning of activism and \"The Woman Rebel\".\nIn 1911, after a fire destroyed their home, the Sangers abandoned the suburbs for a new life in New York City. Margaret Sanger worked as a nurse, making house calls in the slums of the East Side, while her husband worked as an architect and artist. The couple socialized with the bohemian community of Greenwich Village, including local intellectuals, left-wing artists, socialists, and social activists, such as John Reed, Upton Sinclair, Mabel Dodge, and Emma Goldman. Sanger and her husband embraced socialism; Margaret joined the Women's Committee of the Socialist Party of New York and took part in the labor actions of the Industrial Workers of the World, including the 1912 Lawrence textile strike and the 1913 Paterson silk strike.\nWorking as a nurse, Sanger visited many working-class immigrant women in their homes; many of them underwent frequent childbirth, miscarriages, and self-induced abortions. Availability of contraceptive information was limited, due to the Comstock Act, a federal anti-obscenity law which prohibited\u00a0\u2013 among other things\u00a0\u2013 mailing contraceptives, or even information about contraception. In 1913, Sanger visited public libraries, searching for publications that instructed women how to avoid conception, but she found none.\nThe hardships women faced were epitomized in a story that Sanger often recounted in her speeches: while working as a nurse, she was called to the apartment of a woman, \"Sadie Sachs\", who had a severe sepsis infection due to a self-induced abortion. Sadie begged the attending doctor to tell her how she could prevent this from happening again. The doctor laughed and said \"You want your cake while you eat it too, do you? Well it can't be done. I'll tell you the only sure thing to do ... Tell Jake to sleep on the roof [abstain from sex].\" A few months later, Sanger was called back to Sadie's apartment and found that Sadie had attempted yet another self-induced abortion; she died shortly after Sanger arrived. Sanger would sometimes end the story by saying, \"I threw my nursing bag in the corner and announced\u00a0... that I would never take another case until I had made it possible for working women in America to have the knowledge to control birth.\"\nThe Sadie Sachs episode was described by Sanger as the origin of her commitment to spare women from dangerous and illegal abortions. Sanger opposed abortion, not on religious grounds, but as a societal ill and public health danger, which would disappear, she believed, if women were able to prevent unwanted pregnancy.\nSearching for a way to share her ideas with the public, she wrote two columns for the \"New York Call\" socialist magazine:\" What Every Mother Should Know\" (1911\u201312) and \"What Every Girl Should Know\" (1912\u201313). The columns gave advice to women and girls on love, masturbation, and sex; and emphasized the distinction between sex and love. By the standards of the day, Sanger's articles were extremely frank in their discussion of sexuality, and many \"New York Call\" readers were outraged by them. Other readers, however, praised the series for its integrity and candor. Both series were later published in book form.\nSanger's political interests, her emerging feminism, and her nursing experience led her to believe that only by liberating women from the risk of unwanted pregnancy would fundamental social change take place. In 1914, she undertook a decades-long campaign to free women, starting with \"The Woman Rebel\", an eight-page monthly newsletter that used the slogan \"No Gods, No Masters.\" The newsletter contained articles about a variety of progressive subjects, including contraception, and was designed to challenge governmental censorship of contraceptive information through confrontation. Seven issues of \"The Woman Rebel\" were published, from March to September, 1914. \"The Woman Rebel\" helped popularize the term \"birth control\", which was selected by Sanger and fellow activists as a more candid alternative to euphemisms then in use, such as \"family limitation\". \nSanger became estranged from her husband in 1913, and their divorce was finalized in 1921.\nYear as an outlaw.\nSanger's first obstacle to educating women about contraception was the Comstock Act, which banned dissemination of information about contraception. Her strategy was to deliberately violate the Act, hoping that the confrontation would eventually lead to amendment of the law. Throughout 1914, she attempted to mail copies of the monthly \"The Woman Rebel\" newsletter. This was meant to be provocative, rather than effective, as most copies of \"The Woman Rebel\" were distributed by a network of activists, not mailed. Postal authorities intercepted five of its seven issues, but Sanger continued publication. In August that year, Sanger was finally arrested for sending \"The Woman Rebel\" through the postal system.\nWhile awaiting trial, she wrote a 16-page pamphlet, \"Family Limitation\", which detailed several contraceptive methods, discussed marriage and sex, and chided husbands who\u00a0\u2013 after sex\u00a0\u2013 fell asleep without bringing their wife to a climax. Fearing arrest, several printers refused to print the pamphlet; she finally found a socialist printer willing to undertake the job, and he resorted to printing it secretly, at night. The pamphlet was very popular: 100,000 copies were printed of its first edition, it went through 18 editions, and it was translated into a dozen languages.\nFacing imprisonment if she went to trial, she fled to Canada, where fellow activists forged a passport that permitted her to sail to England in early November. Sanger spent most of her self-imposed exile in England, where contact with British Malthusians\u00a0\u2013 such as Charles Vickery Drysdale and Bessie Drysdale\u00a0\u2013 helped refine her socioeconomic justifications for birth control. She shared the concern of Malthusians that overpopulation led to poverty, famine, and war. She returned to Europe in 1922 to attend the Fifth International Neo-Malthusian Conference\u00a0\u2013 where she became the first woman to chair a session; and she organized the Sixth International Neo-Malthusian and Birth-Control Conference that took place in New York in 1925. Overpopulation would remain a concern of hers for the rest of her life.\nDuring her stay in England, she was profoundly influenced by British physician Havelock Ellis\u00a0\u2013 author of the multi-volume \"Studies in the Psychology of Sex\". Under his tutelage, she expanded her birth control strategy to incorporate the additional benefit of stress-free, enjoyable sex; and came to adopt his view of sexuality as a powerful, liberating force.\nWhile abroad, Sanger met with several Spanish anarchists, including activist Lorenzo Portet, with whom she had a passionate affair. \nNews reports from America signaled to Sanger that support for birth control was increasing, so she returned from England in October 1915 to face trial. Shortly before the December trial, her five-year-old daughter, Peggy, died of pneumonia she caught while at a boarding school. Sanger was offered a plea bargain, but refused, because she wanted to use the trial as a forum to advocate for the right of women to control their own bodies. The prosecutor dropped the charges because he did not want to turn Sanger into a martyr.\nEarly in 1915, an undercover representative of anti-vice politician Anthony Comstock asked Sanger's estranged husband, William, for a copy of \"Family Limitation\", and William obliged. William was tried and convicted, spending thirty days in jail while attracting interest in birth control as an issue of civil liberty.\nThe start of a movement.\nSome European countries had more liberal policies towards contraception than the United States. When Sanger visited a Dutch birth control clinic in 1915, she encountered diaphragms and became convinced that they were a more effective means of contraception than the suppositories and douches that she had been distributing back in the United States. Diaphragms were generally unavailable in the United States due to the Comstock Act, so Sanger and others began importing them from Europe, in defiance of United States law.\nOn October 16, 1916, Sanger opened a family planning and birth control clinic\u00a0\u2013 the first in the United States\u00a0\u2013 in the Brownsville neighborhood of the Brooklyn borough of New York City. She was unable to find a physician to join the staff, so she turned to her sister, Ethel Byrne (a nurse), to fill the medical role. Nine days after the clinic opened, Sanger was arrested for giving a birth control pamphlet to an undercover policewoman. After she bailed out of jail, she continued assisting women in the clinic until the police arrested her a second time. The clinic closed permanently after one month of operation, when the police forced the landlord to evict Sanger.\nSanger and her sister were charged with distributing contraceptives in violation of New York state law. They went to trial on 29 January 1917. Byrne was convicted and sentenced to 30 days in a workhouse, where she went on a hunger strike. She was force-fed, the first woman hunger striker in the U.S. to be so treated. After ten days\u00a0\u2013 when Sanger pledged that Byrne would never break the law\u00a0\u2013 her sister was pardoned. Sanger was also convicted; the trial judge was not persuaded by Sanger's argument that women had the right to enjoy sex without worrying about conceiving an unwanted child. Sanger was offered a more lenient sentence if she promised not to break the law again, but she refused and said: \"I cannot respect the law as it exists today.\" Against the wishes of her attorney, she chose a thirty-day sentence in a workhouse, rather than a $5,000 fine.\nAn initial appeal was rejected, but in a subsequent court proceeding in 1918 (after Sanger had served her sentence) the birth control movement secured a major victory when the New York Court of Appeals (New York's highest court) issued a ruling which allowed physicians in New York to dispense contraceptives. The publicity surrounding Sanger's arrest, trial, and appeal sparked birth control activism across the United States, and generated momentum for the birth control movement.\nIn February 1917, Sanger began publishing the periodical \"Birth Control Review\", serving as its editor until 1929. The magazine was published monthly until 1940.\nIn her 1920 book \"Woman and the New Race\", Sanger framed her fight for birth control in the context of history, psychology, and feminism. She wrote that male-dominated institutions, such as the church and state, have prohibited birth control throughout history\u00a0\u2013 leading women to have too many children, too closely spaced. This, in turn, was a direct cause of mental distress and social pathology, and prevented women from full expression of their \"feminine spirit\". Sanger asserted that women have always fought back against this oppression through secretive use of abortion, contraception, or infanticide. She believed that these efforts to limit family size were a manifestation of women's desire for freedom, writing: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"A free race cannot be born of slave mothers. A woman cannot choose but give a measure of that bondage to her sons and daughters. No woman can call herself free who does not own and control her body. No woman can call herself free until she can choose consciously whether she will or will not be a mother.\"\nSanger had a long-term, though infrequent, love affair with the novelist H. G. Wells from 1920 until his death in 1946. In 1922, she married her second husband, businessman James Noah H. Slee.\nOrganizing.\nAfter World War I, Sanger continued to be frustrated by the inverted priorities of charities: they provided free obstetric and post-birth care to indigent women, yet failed to offer birth control or assistance in raising the children. She wrote: \"The poor woman is taught how to have her seventh child, when what she wants to know is how to avoid ... her eighth.\" Sanger saw a societal need to limit births by those least able to afford children: the affluent and educated already limited their childbearing, yet the poor and uneducated lacked access to contraception and information about birth control.\nSupport from wealthy donors in the early 1920s enabled Sanger to expand her reach beyond local, small-scale activism, and allowed her to organize the American Birth Control League (ABCL). The founding principles of the ABCL were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"We hold that children should be (1) Conceived in love; (2) Born of the mother's conscious desire; (3) And only begotten under conditions which render possible the heritage of health. Therefore we hold that every woman must possess the power and freedom to prevent conception except when these conditions can be satisfied.\"\nThe 1918 New York court decision had created an exception to the Comstock Act: contraceptives could be obtained, provided they were prescribed by a physician. To exploit this new loophole, in 1923 she established the Clinical Research Bureau (CRB)\u00a0\u2013 a medical clinic with physicians on staff. The CRB was the first birth control clinic in the U.S. that could dispense contraceptives directly to patients; and its staff of doctors, nurses, and social workers was entirely female. The clinic received extensive funding from John D. Rockefeller Jr. and his family, who continued to make anonymous donations to Sanger's causes in subsequent decades.\nIn 1922, soon after the formation of the ABCL, Sanger raised her international profile by traveling to Asia\u00a0\u2013 giving speeches in Korea, Japan, and China. She ultimately visited Japan seven times, working with feminist Shidzue Kat\u014d to promote birth control in Japan. \nAs president of the ABCL, she chafed at bureaucratic interference from younger members of the board of directors. Seeking more independence, she resigned from the presidency in 1928 and took full control of the CRB, renaming it the Birth Control Clinical Research Bureau (BCCRB). The two organizations, ABCL and BCCRB, continued to collaborate, but Sanger had complete control over the BCCRB's operations. This marked the beginning of a schism that would last until 1939. By the 1930s, the BCCRB was serving over 10,000 patients per year, providing a range of gynecological services, conducting research, and training physicians and students.\nIn 1925, Sanger's second husband, Noah Slee, contributed to the birth control movement by smuggling diaphragms into New York from Canada, hidden inside his company's cargo. He then co-founded Holland-Rantos\u00a0\u2013 the first manufacturer of legal diaphragms in the United States.\nOutreach and expansion.\nSanger invested a great deal of effort in promoting birth control to the public. In 1916, she embarked on a cross-country lecture tour, speaking in dozens of cities\u00a0\u2013 at churches, women's clubs, homes, and theaters. Her audience included workers, churchmen, liberals, socialists, scientists, and upper-class women. She once lectured on birth control to the women's auxiliary of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) in Silver Lake, New Jersey. Explaining her decision to address them, Sanger said that she was willing to speak to any group that would listen, if it helped promote the birth control cause. She described the experience as weird, and reported that she had the impression that the audience were dull, and so she spoke to them in the simplest possible language, as if talking to children.\nShe wrote several books that had a nationwide impact in promoting the cause of birth control. Between 1920 and 1926, she sold 567,000 copies of \"Woman and the New Race\" and her 1922 book \"The Pivot of Civilization\". She wrote two autobiographies, both aimed at promoting birth control: \"Margaret Sanger: My Fight for Birth Control\" published in 1931; and \"Margaret Sanger An Autobiography\" published in 1938.\nDuring the 1920s, Sanger received hundreds of thousands of letters, many of them written in desperation by women begging for information on how to prevent unwanted pregnancies. Many of the letters were printed in the monthly \"Birth Control Review\", and 470 of these letters were compiled into the 1928 book, \"Motherhood in Bondage.\"\nThroughout the 1920s, Sanger and the ABCL expanded outward from their New York base by creating a network of birth control clinics across the country: Chicago (1924), Los Angeles (1925), San Antonio (1926), Detroit and Baltimore (1927), Cleveland, Newark, and Denver (1928), and Atlanta, Cincinnati, and Oakland (1929). These clinics were managed by local birth control advocates, and funded by local donors. Those that met Sanger's standards became official affiliates of the BCCRB. A survey in 1930 showed that twelve of the clinics were, collectively, seeing a total of about 8,000 new patients per year.\nAfrican American community.\nWomen of all races and religions were served by Sanger's birth control clinics. Sanger did not tolerate bigotry among her staff, nor would she tolerate any refusal to work within interracial projects. By 1929 about 12% of clinic patients listed Harlem as their address.\nIn 1924, James H. Hubert, an African American social worker and the leader of New York's Urban League, asked Sanger to consider opening a clinic in an African American neighborhood. In response, she established a clinic in the Columbus Hill neighborhood of New York City, but the clinic operated for only three months before closing due to low patient numbers.\nIn 1929, Hubert approached Sanger again, this time suggesting a clinic in Harlem. \nSanger secured funding from the Julius Rosenwald Fund and opened the clinic in 1930. The clinic was supported by an all-African American advisory board of 15 members and exclusively employed African American staff, including doctors, nurses, and social workers. The clinic was publicized in the African American press as well as in African American churches, and it received the approval of W. E. B. Du Bois, the co-founder of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and the editor of its magazine, \"The Crisis.\" The clinic's clientele was about half African American and half-white, and almost 3,000 patients visited the clinic in its first year and a half. The Harlem clinic provided contraceptives and information to thousands of African American women until it closed in the mid-1940s.\nIn June 1932, Sanger published a special issue of \"Birth Control Review\" titled \"The Negro Number\". Seven African American authors\u00a0\u2013 including W.E.B Du Bois, George Schuyler, and Charles S. Johnson\u00a0\u2013 contributed articles to the issue, providing reasons why contraception was beneficial for the African American community.\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s, Sanger toured the South and observed that African American women were neglected by the medical establishment, particularly in segregated areas. In 1939, she worked with fellow birth control advocates Mary Lasker and Clarence Gamble to create the Negro Project, an effort to deliver information about birth control to impoverished African American people. Sanger knew that the church played an important role in African American communities, so she advised Gamble (both Sanger and Gamble were white) on the importance of affiliating with African American ministers, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The ministers work is also important and also he should be trained, perhaps by the [Birth Control] Federation [of America] as to our ideals and the goal that we hope to reach. We do not want word to go out that we want to exterminate the Negro population and the minister is the man who can straighten out that idea if it ever occurs to any of their more rebellious members.\"\nWhen academic and activist Angela Davis, author of \"Women, Race and Class\", analyzed that quote, she concluded that by 1939 the birth control movement had lost its progressive potential, and had evolved into a racist program of population control. Davis' interpretation has been amplified by anti-abortion activists, leading many people to believe that Sanger was racist. However, most scholars interpret the passage as Sanger's effort to prevent the spread of unfounded rumors about nefarious purposes, and they find no evidence that Sanger was a racist.\nAfter the Negro Project was initiated, management was handed to the Birth Control Federation of America. The project lasted from 1940 to 1943, but was unsuccessful: no new clinics were established, and participation rates remained low.\nPlanned Parenthood.\nIn 1929, Sanger formed the National Committee on Federal Legislation for Birth Control to lobby for legislation to overturn restrictions on contraception. The lobbying did not produce results, so Sanger changed tack and in 1933 she ordered diaphragms from Japan to trigger a decisive battle in the courts. The diaphragms were seized by the U.S. government, and Sanger's subsequent legal challenge to the confiscation led to a breakthrough 1936 court decision\u00a0\u2013 \"United States v. One Package of Japanese Pessaries\"\u00a0\u2013 which permitted physicians to dispense contraceptives nationwide. This court victory motivated the American Medical Association to adopt contraception as a normal medical service (1937) and a key component of medical school curriculums (1942).\nEager to take advantage of the \"One Package of Japanese Pessaries\" court ruling, which permitted birth control clinics across the country to begin dispensing contraceptives, leaders of the birth control movement took steps in 1937 to mend the rift between the ABCL and the BCCRB. The two organizations merged in 1939 as the Birth Control Federation of America and, simultaneously, Sanger stepped down from her role as President/Chairman. She no longer wielded the same power as she had in the early years of the movement, and in 1942 more conservative forces within the organization changed the name to Planned Parenthood Federation of America, a name Sanger objected to because she considered it too euphemistic.\nIn the late 1940s, Sanger reduced her involvement in Planned Parenthood, and turned her attention to improving access to birth control globally. In 1948 she founded an exploratory committee, the International Committee on Planned Parenthood, which brought together representatives from birth control organizations in several countries around the world. Four years later, in 1952, the committee evolved into the International Planned Parenthood Federation, which\u00a0\u2013 as of 2025[ [update]]\u00a0\u2013 is the world's largest family planning NGO, consisting of 150 member associations working in 146 countries. Sanger was the organization's first president and served in that role from 1952 to 1959.\nIn the early 1950s, Sanger persuaded philanthropist Katharine McCormick to provide funding for biologist Gregory Pincus to develop the first birth control pill, which was eventually sold under the name Enovid. Pincus recruited John Rock, a gynecologist at Harvard, to investigate clinical use of progesterone to prevent ovulation. Pincus would later say that Sanger's role was essential in the development of the pill.\nIn 1954, Sanger returned to Japan for her fourth visit, and gave a speech before a committee of the National Diet on the topic of \"Population Problems and Family Planning\". \nLater life and death.\nIn the late 1930s, Sanger began spending the winters in Tucson, Arizona, intending to play a less critical role in the birth control movement. She moved to Arizona full-time in 1943, after her husband died. In spite of her intention to retire, she remained active in the birth control movement through the 1950s.\nSanger was silent about her personal religious beliefs through much of her life. At the time of her second marriage in 1922, Sanger was a socialist, bohemian atheist\u00a0\u2013 according to biographer Ellen Chesler. When Sanger was 78 years old, she stated she was Episcopalian.\nFaced with declining health, Sanger moved into a convalescent home at age 83. Before her death, the U.S. Supreme Court decided \"Griswold v. Connecticut\", which struck down state laws prohibiting birth control in the United States. The defendant in that case, Estelle Griswold, was the director of the Connecticut affiliate of Planned Parenthood. A year before Sanger died, the Japanese government bestowed upon her the Order of the Precious Crown in recognition of her contributions to Japanese society. She died of arteriosclerosis on September 6, 1966 in Tucson, Arizona, aged 86. Her funeral was held at St. Philip's in the Hills Episcopal Church in Tucson, followed a month later by a memorial service at St. George's Episcopal Church in Manhattan. Sanger is buried in Fishkill, New York, next to her sister, Nan Higgins, and her second husband, Noah Slee.\nViews.\nAbortion.\nIn the early 1900s, when Sanger started as an activist, abortion was illegal throughout the United States\u00a0\u2013 though medically necessary abortions were permitted in some states. Although abortion was illegal, it was widespread: in 1930, there were an estimated 800,000 illegal abortions performed in the U.S., resulting in 8,000 to 17,000 women's deaths from complications. Abortion frequency ranged from an estimated one abortion per five live births, to one abortion per 2.5 live births. Despite the high rates of morbidity and death from back-alley abortions, there was no prospect of legalizing abortion in Sanger's era; serious efforts to legalize abortion did not begin in the U.S. until the mid-1950s. \nSanger focused all her efforts on promoting contraception, rather than campaigning to make abortion legal. In her view, contraception was beneficial for many reasons: it was safe, simple, inexpensive, reduced the number of unwanted pregnancies, addressed overpopulation, and\u00a0\u2013 most importantly\u00a0\u2013 it eliminated the need for dangerous abortions. Historian Peter Engelman notes an irony in Sanger's desire to end abortions: \"... the birth control movement of the early 20th century, which evolved into a reproductive rights movement that vowed to make and keep abortion legal, set out initially to end the practice of abortion, which was then illegal.\"\nThe majority of the educational material that Sanger produced was focused on contraception, and abortion was rarely mentioned. In her \"Family Limitation\" pamphlet, published in 1914, she wrote that every woman is entitled to make a choice of whether to have an abortion or not, and she suggested (incorrectly) that quinine could be used to induce abortion. That pamphlet was the only time she mentioned a technique for abortion.\nSanger made many public statements discouraging abortion. When she opened her first birth control clinic in 1916, she distributed flyers to women, exhorting\u00a0\u2013 in all capitals\u00a0\u2013 \"Do not kill, do not take life, but prevent.\" After Pope Pius XI published \"Of Chaste Wedlock\", an encyclical on sex, Sanger wrote a critical reply in 1932, which included: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"[Abortion] is an alternative that I cannot too strongly condemn. Although abortion may be resorted to in order to save the life of the mother, the practice of it merely for limitation of offspring is dangerous and vicious.\"\nAbortions were not performed at clinics managed by Sanger. For many years, staff were not even permitted to refer patients to physicians (in other facilities) for medically necessary abortions. In 1932, sixteen years after the first clinic opened, Sanger authorized staff to refer patients to hospitals for medically necessary abortions. Planned Parenthood clinics would not offer abortions until 1970, several years after Sanger's death.\nDespite Sanger's public statements denouncing abortion for the purpose of limiting family size, historian Jean Baker suggests that Sanger privately felt that the procedure was ethical\u00a0\u2013 but only as a last resort.\nFree speech.\nAdvocates for birth control employed a variety of tactics. Some, such as Mary Dennett, preferred to work peacefully within the legislative system, and tried to amend the Comstock Act through lobbying. But Sanger chose to treat the undertaking as a battle for free speech, and repeatedly broke anti-obscenity laws, hoping to provoke arrest, which\u00a0\u2013 she hoped\u00a0\u2013 would lead to legal decisions in her favor.\nHer first brush with censorship came when she wrote a column, \"What Every Girl Should Know\", for the \"New York Call\". Her final article in that series, scheduled for publication on February 9, 1913, discussed syphilis and gonorrhea, so Comstock issued an order prohibiting publication. In response, Sanger and the \"Call\" replaced the column with a statement: \"What Every Girl Should Know \u2014 NOTHING! \u2014 by order of the Post-Office Department\".\nSanger's views on free speech were expanded when Emma Goldman introduced Sanger to physician Edward Bliss Foote and lawyer Theodore Schroeder, co-founders of the Free Speech League, in New York. Inspired by fellow free speech advocates, in 1914 she published \"The Woman Rebel\" with the express goal of triggering a legal challenge to the Comstock anti-obscenity laws banning dissemination of information about contraception. The Free Speech League provided funding and advice to help Sanger with legal battles.\nOne of the most formidable opponents to birth control in the 1920s was the Catholic Church, which often tried to prevent Sanger from giving speeches. Catholics persuaded the Syracuse city council to ban Sanger from giving a speech in 1924; the National Catholic Welfare Conference lobbied against birth control; the Knights of Columbus boycotted hotels that hosted birth control events; the Catholic police commissioner of Albany prevented Sanger from speaking there; and several newsreel companies, succumbing to pressure from Catholics, refused to cover stories related to birth control. Sanger turned some of the boycotted speaking events to her advantage by inviting the press, and the resultant news coverage often generated public sympathy for her cause. \nNumerous times in her career, local government officials prevented Sanger from speaking by shuttering a facility or threatening her hosts. In 1929, city officials under the leadership of Boston's Catholic mayor James Curley threatened to arrest her if she spoke. In response she stood on stage, silent, with a gag over her mouth, while Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr. read a statement from Sanger: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"... I have been gagged. I have been suppressed. I have been arrested numerous times. I have been hauled off to jail. Yet every time, more people have listened to me, more have protested, more have lifted up their own voices. As a pioneer fighting for a cause, I believe in free speech. As a propagandist I see immense advantages in being gagged. It silences me, but it makes millions of others talk and think the cause in which I live.\"\nOver the course of her career, Sanger was arrested several times for speaking or publishing prohibited information.\nEugenics.\nEugenics was one of many social reform movements that swept across America during the Progressive Era, which stretched from about 1890 to 1930. During the 1920s, when Margaret Sanger's work was gaining momentum, eugenics was a popular movement, promoted by major organizations, led by intellectuals and scientists, and funded by corporate foundations.\nEugenic beliefs in the early 1900s covered a wide spectrum: at one extreme were white supremacists who wanted to reduce the population of certain other ethnicities. Those at the other extreme wanted to improve the health and well-being of the entire human race out of altruistic motives. Many eugenicists were somewhere between: they did not categorize ethnicities as superior or inferior; but their list of unfit traits included attributes such as illiteracy or low scores on IQ tests which\u00a0\u2013 even if well-intended\u00a0\u2013 often had the effect of targeting certain ethnicities.\nSanger was surrounded by influential people who approved of eugenics, including close friends Havelock Ellis and H. G. Wells, and colleagues W. E. B. Du Bois and Winston Churchill. Some associates of Sanger used eugenics to support their white supremacist beliefs, including Charles Davenport and Lothrop Stoddard, a member of the KKK, and a founding board member of the ABCL who contributed an article to \"Birth Control Review\".\nSanger found common ground between eugenics and her birth control movement: both endeavors would benefit if contraception were legal and readily available. From her perspective as an activist struggling to develop support for her cause, Sanger viewed the eugenics movement as scientific, respectable, growing, international, and popular. Sanger adopted eugenics because it was an opportunity to advocate for the legalization of contraception\u00a0\u2013 eugenics was a means to her end. Whether she genuinely believed in eugenic principles is a matter of debate; several historians conclude that her belief was not sincere, and suggest that she joined with the eugenics movement simply to lend legitimacy to her birth control efforts.\nHer support of eugenics was first manifested in 1917, when she published an article on eugenics by Paul Popenoe in her periodical \"Birth Control Review\". From 1919 to 1921 she wrote several articles on the subject, leading to her\n1922 book focused on eugenics, \"The Pivot of Civilization\".\nSanger's approach to eugenics.\nSanger adopted the fundamental eugenic goal of reducing the number of unfit people. In that group, she included people who were insane, syphilitic, \"paupers, morons, feeble-minded, mentally and morally deficient persons\"; and included \"reckless\" people who were incapable of restraining themselves from having an excessive number of offspring.\nTo reduce the number of unfit children, Sanger initially emphasized contraceptives, which set her apart from mainstream eugenicists, who preferred sterilization. However, when the U.S. Supreme Court decided that involuntary sterilization was legal in 1927, she began to endorse voluntary sterilization (in addition to contraception). She also began to support involuntary sterilizations in limited circumstances: for parents who were incapable of managing their own fertility and were likely to produce disabled children. About 60,000 Americans were sterilized involuntarily between 1927 and World War II.\nSanger's approach to eugenics was heavily influenced by her feminism, which led her to deviate from mainstream eugenics in several ways: She supported the right of fit parents to limit the size of their families; whereas mainstream eugenicists felt it was the duty of fit parents to have a large number of offspring. And Sanger believed that mothers\u00a0\u2013 with some exceptions\u00a0\u2013 should individually regulate their family size; whereas mainstream eugenicists believed government mandates should be employed.\nHer eugenic proposals did not target specific ethnicities: instead, her goal was to improve the health of the whole human race by reducing the reproduction of those who were considered unfit. When she used the word \"race\" in the context of eugenics, the word invariably meant the entire human race, rather than a specific ethnicity; when she used the word \"unfit\" she meant an inherited defect, not an ethnicity. The consensus of scholars is that Sanger was not racist, but her collaboration with eugenicists indirectly assisted racist causes. Academic Dorothy Roberts, author of \"Killing the Black Body\", wrote \"Sanger did not tie fitness for reproduction to any particular ethnic group. It appears that Sanger was motivated by a genuine concern to improve the health of poor mothers she served rather than a desire to eliminate their stock.\" Roberts' assessment is echoed by other scholars, including scholar Carole McCann, historian Peter Engelman, and biographer Ellen Chesler.\nSanger had affiliated with eugenicists in the hope of gaining their support for her birth control movement\u00a0\u2013 but her devotion was not reciprocated: the American Eugenics Society refused to accept any papers submitted by Sanger, most eugenicists ridiculed the birth control movement, and only a few would associate with her. The reasons were that Sanger was a woman, she had no academic credentials, and she insisted that mothers should have the power to decide if and when to have children, which ran contrary to the mainstream eugenic policy that the state should order fit women to produce abundant offspring.\nLegacy and honors.\nSanger achieved her goal of improving the well-being of women around the world through family planning: contraception is now legal in the U.S., family planning clinics are commonplace, contraception is taught in medical schools, tens of millions of women have made use of Planned Parenthood services, and hundreds of millions of women around the globe have access to birth control pills. As a result, Sanger is viewed today as an important first-wave feminist and a founder and leader of the birth control movement.\nSanger's personal papers are held in two locations: the Sophia Smith Collection at Smith College, and the Library of Congress. The papers were curated by the Margaret Sanger Papers Project, led by Esther Katz, which published them in four printed volumes.\nSeveral biographers have documented Sanger's life, including David Kennedy, whose 1970 book \"Birth Control in America: The Career of Margaret Sanger\" won the Bancroft Prize and the John Gilmary Shea Prize. Television films \"Portrait of a Rebel: The Remarkable Mrs. Sanger\" and \"Choices of the Heart: The Margaret Sanger Story\" have portrayed Sanger's life as well as two graphic novels.\nMartin Luther King Jr. praised Sanger's work in his acceptance speech for the 1966 Margaret Sanger Award: \"[Sanger] went into the slums and set up a birth control clinic, and for this deed she went to jail because she was violating an unjust law... She launched a movement which is obeying a higher law to preserve human life under humane conditions... Our sure beginning in the struggle for equality by nonviolent direct action may not have been so resolute without the tradition established by Margaret Sanger.\"\n\"Time\" magazine designated Sanger as one of . Between 1953 and 1963, Sanger was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize 31 times. In 1957, the American Humanist Association named her Humanist of the Year. There is a bust of Sanger in the National Portrait Gallery, which was a gift from Cordelia Scaife May. Smith College awarded Sanger an honorary doctorate degree in 1949. In 1966, Planned Parenthood began issuing its Margaret Sanger Awards annually to honor \"individuals of distinction in recognition of excellence and leadership in furthering reproductive health and reproductive rights\". In 1981, Sanger was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame. In 1993, the United States National Park Service designated the Margaret Sanger Clinic\u00a0\u2013 where she provided birth-control services in New York in the mid-twentieth century\u00a0\u2013 as a National Historic Landmark. Government authorities and other institutions have memorialized Sanger by dedicating several landmarks in her name, including a room in Wellesley College's library, and Margaret Sanger Square in New York City's Noho area. There is a Margaret Sanger Lane in Plattsburgh, New York and an All\u00e9e Margaret Sanger in Saint-Nazaire, France. Sanger, a crater in the northern hemisphere of Venus, is named after her.\nAttacks by anti-abortion activists.\nSince the legalization of abortion in 1973, Sanger has become a target of frequent attacks by opponents of abortion. The attacks usually include falsehoods, and they often attribute quotes to Sanger that are either fabricated or presented out of context. Common falsehoods are: she was a racist, she was a proponent of abortion, she was a Nazi sympathizer, or she supported the KKK. Another persistent falsehood is the claim that Sanger applied her birth control policies with the intention of suppressing the African American community.\nBeginning in 2015, Planned Parenthood\u00a0\u2013 hoping to improve relations with minority communities\u00a0\u2013 took steps to distance itself from its founder: it removed Sanger's name from its annual awards, published an editorial in which it repudiated Sanger's advocacy of eugenics, and removed Sanger's name from its family planning clinic in Manhattan. Essayist Katha Pollitt and Sanger biographer Ellen Chesner criticized Planned Parenthood for succumbing to pressure from the anti-abortion movement.\nWorks.\nBooks and pamphlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; \nCollections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; \nLetters and articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; \nPeriodicals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; \nSpeeches.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; \n \nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "20708", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20708", "title": "Mobil", "text": "American petroleum brand owned by ExxonMobil\n \nMobil Oil Corporation, or just Mobil, is a petroleum brand owned and operated by American oil and gas corporation ExxonMobil, formerly known as Exxon, which took its name after it and Mobil merged in 1999.\nA direct descendant of Standard Oil, Mobil was originally known as the Standard Oil Company of New York (shortened to Socony) after Standard Oil was split into 43 different entities in a 1911 Supreme Court decision. Socony merged with Vacuum Oil Company, from which the Mobil name first originated, in 1931 and subsequently renamed itself to \"Socony-Vacuum Oil Company\". Over time, Mobil became the company's primary identity, which prompted a renaming in 1955 to the \"Socony Mobil Oil Company\", and then in 1966 to the \"Mobil Oil Corporation\". Mobil credits itself as the first company to introduce paying at the pump at its gas stations, the first company to produce aviation fuel, as well as the first company to introduce a mobile payment device, called Speedpass.\nIn 1998, Mobil announced it was merging with Exxon to form ExxonMobil, reuniting the two largest descendants of Standard Oil. The technicalities of the merger, which was completed on November 30, 1999, showed that Exxon bought Mobil, and Mobil shareholders received a payment of stock in Exxon. Mobil continues as a brand name within the combined company, as well as still being a gas station sometimes paired with its own store or On the Run. Mobil's brand name is primarily used to market motor oils, such as Mobil 1. The former Mobil headquarters in Fairfax County, Virginia, was used as ExxonMobil's downstream headquarters until 2015 when ExxonMobil consolidated employees into a new corporate campus in Spring, Texas.\nBrands.\nMobil continues to operate as a major brandname of ExxonMobil within the ExxonMobil Fuels, Lubricants &amp; Specialties division. Many of its products feature the Mobil symbol of a red winged horse, Pegasus, which has been a company trademark since its affiliation with Magnolia Petroleum Company in the 1930s.\nThe Mobil brand now mainly covers a wide range of automotive, industrial, aviation and marine lubricants. For historic reasons, the Mobil brand is still used by Mobil service stations and for fuel (gasoline, diesel, heating oil, kerosene, aviation fuels and marine fuel) products.\nThere are four main Mobil sub-brands:\nMobil Gasoline.\nMobil is ExxonMobil's primary retail gasoline brand in California, Florida, New York, New England, the Great Lakes and the Midwest. The Mobil brand is also used to market gasoline in Australia, Canada (since 2017), Colombia, Egypt, Guam, Japan (until 2019), Malaysia (until 2012), Mexico (starting about first quarter of 2018), New Zealand, Nigeria, Puerto Rico (since 2022) and Guyana (since 2024)\nThe Mobil brand has a significant market presence in the following metropolitan areas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMobil stores have made an increased presence in Arizona. Growing in size in the Phoenix area from fewer than 5 stations to over 20 in the mid-2010s, but in recent years the number of stations dwindled down back to 5. Mobil previously had a greater presence in the Phoenix area up until April 2009, when ExxonMobil sold 43 area stores to Alimentation Couche-Tard, parent company of Circle K, as part of a sale of the larger On the Run franchise. The stores were rebranded to Circle K, ending Mobil's presence in the Phoenix area until the mid-2010s. At the time, the closest Mobil locations were in Tonopah and Wickenburg, Arizona, both of which were unaffected by the sale as both locations were not On the Run franchises.\nAlso in the 2010s, Mobil stores have made an increased presence in Colorado, particularly in the Denver area, and in areas of northwest Oregon, southwest Washington, and northern California.\nExxon is the primary brand in the rest of the United States, with the highest concentration of Exxon retail outlets located in New Jersey (both Exxon and Mobil brands are used from 2014), Pennsylvania, Texas (Mobil has a sizeable number of stations in Dallas and Houston), Louisiana (mainly New Orleans as well as Baton Rouge) and in the Mid-Atlantic and Southeastern states. Esso is ExxonMobil's primary gasoline brand worldwide. Both the Esso and Mobil brands are used in Canada (since 2017), Colombia, Egypt, and formerly Japan and Malaysia, in which the latter were rebranded as Petron in 2013, and ENEOS for the former in 2019, separately. In Esso stations in Hong Kong and Singapore, the Mobil brand is used on fuel tanks, along with Esso.\nMobil 1.\nMobil 1, the successor to the Mobiloil brand, is a brand name of Exxon/ESSO Mobil. It was introduced in 1974 as a Multi-grade 5W20 viscosity synthetic motor oil. The brand now includes multi-grade motor oils, oil filters, synthetic grease, transmission fluids, and gear lubricants. The Esso and Exxon motor oil brands have largely been discontinued.\nMobil Delvac.\nMobil Delvac is a range of heavy-duty lubricants designed for commercial vehicles. The range includes engine oils, transmission fluids, drivetrain lubricants and various greases.\nMobil Industrial.\nMobil Industrial is a sub-brand of ExxonMobil for marketing oils and greases used in industrial applications. The main product lines are Mobil SHC synthetic oils and Mobil Grease greases.\nOn the Run Convenience Stores.\nMobil expanded the sale of convenience store items first pioneered at its discount gasoline stations under the Mobil Mart brand. Mobil continued to refine and enhance its convenience store offerings with the On-the-Run brand, which proved to be much more popular. In 2009, 450 On the Run stores in the United States was sold to Alimentation Couche-Tard, operator of the Circle K convenience store chain. Some other On the Run locations in the United States were sold to 7-Eleven in 2011. ExxonMobil continues to own the On the Run stores worldwide.\nFormer brands.\nDiscount gasoline stations.\nMobil rebranded numerous stations to the Hi-Val, Reelo and Sello discount gasoline brands after major price increases following the 1970s oil crisis made a significant number of consumers extremely price conscious. The stations were converted Mobil stations selling convenience store items in the station lobby, while the service bays were rented to customers for do-it-yourself auto repairs. These brands were discontinued in the 1980s, after the gasoline market had recovered.\nMobil Travel Guide.\nThe Mobil Guide was an annual book of hotel and restaurant recommendations based on a system developed by Mobil in 1958. It rated businesses from one to five stars according to their assessed quality. In October 2009, ExxonMobil licensed the brand to \"Forbes\" magazine, which retitled the guide's various designations, e.g., Forbes Travel Guide, Forbes Five Stars, and so on. Forbes launched revised versions of various guides in late 2009.\nMobil outside of the United States.\nMobil UK.\nVacuum Oil Company started selling lubricating oils in Europe in the late 19th century. In 1885, the company established its European marketing organization in Liverpool, setting up small works in 1896 and 1901. By the 1930s its Mobiloil had become one of the main brands. Mobil gradually expanded its operation into fuels retailing as well, and opened its first UK service stations in the early 1950s, after the wartime POOL monopoly was disbanded. Mobil grew to become the seventh largest brand of petrol in Britain, supplying 1,990 outlets in 1965, and claimed in the mid-1960s to be the first company to operate 100 self-service stations. As well as its downstream interests, Mobil was active in the North Sea and operated an oil refinery in Coryton (opened in 1953), on the Thames estuary. In 1996, Mobil's fuels operations in Europe were placed into a joint venture 70% owned by BP, and the Mobil brand disappeared from service stations. Mobil continued to sell lubricants through BP and independent service stations. Following Mobil's merger with Exxon, at the start of 2000 BP acquired all the petrol retailing assets as well as the Coryton refinery (but sold it to Petroplus in 2007). Mobil returned to being purely a lubricant brand in Europe, and became the premium quality oil on sale at Esso service stations.\nMobil Australia.\nThe Vacuum Oil Company began operating in Australia in 1895, introducing its Plume brand of petrol in 1916. The Flying Red Horse (Pegasus) logo was introduced in 1939, and in 1954, the Plume brand was replaced by Mobilgas.\nMobil Australia's corporate office is in Melbourne. In 1946, Mobil began construction of its refinery at Altona, in Melbourne's western suburbs, which originally produced lubricating oils and bitumen, before commencing the production of motor vehicle fuels in 1956. A second refinery at Port Stanvac, south of Adelaide, came on-stream in 1963, but was closed in 2003. Mobil commenced removal of the refinery in July 2009, together with site remediation works.\nIn 1985, Mobil swapped its Western Australian retail market with a large portion of BP's South Australian, Victorian and New South Wales retail market in a major asset swap. In 1990, Mobil acquired the service station and refining network of Esso Australia. This also resulted in Mobil's full ownership of Petroleum Refineries (Australia) Pty Ltd, which also operated the Altona and Adelaide Refineries. In December 1995, Mobil re-entered the West Australian retail fuel market when it purchased the Amgas service station network and related business.\nOn 27 May 2009, Caltex Australia announced it would be acquiring 302 Mobil service stations in Melbourne, Brisbane, Sydney and Adelaide, subject to approval of the Australian Competition &amp; Consumer Commission (ACCC). The ACCC subsequently announced its opposition to the takeover, citing the likelihood of increased fuel prices due to diminished competition.\nOn 27 May 2010, 7-Eleven announced that it had acquired Mobil's Australian network of 295 service stations, with fuel still to be supplied by Mobil. At the same time, it was announced that out of the 295 stations, 7-Eleven had sold 29 South Australian service stations to Peregrine Corporation. Peregrine's acquisition saw Mobil's sites in South Australia rebranded to On the Run (later OTR) convenience stores, but they continued to be supplied by Mobil until most were switched to BP. Meanwhile, since January 2012, all fuel in 7-Eleven stores is supplied by Mobil. 7-Eleven store renovations and openings since 2014 have included prominent placement of the Mobil logo (as the advertised fuel supplier), usually underneath the 7-Eleven logo, on main signage as well as on petrol pumps.\nAfter the 7-Eleven sale, Mobil has since returned to the country with its own-branded service stations. As of \u00a02022[ [update]], Mobil operates 229 own-branded service stations across the country; the majority in the Australian east coast (except Tasmania) and South Australia. There were also a few in Western Australia.\nMobil New Zealand.\nMobil is the oldest oil company in New Zealand. Its kerosene first appeared in the country under the Standard Oil brand in the 1870s. Early in 1896, Vacuum Oil of New York established a marketing office on Featherston Street in Wellington selling lamp oil and harness grease. It brought with it extensive collective production, marketing and management skills that presented a major advancement in business organisation. The company's unrivaled mineral lubricant products and associated services quickly dominated the market.\nWhen New Zealanders began taking to the motorcar in the early twentieth century, Vacuum Oil expanded into the oil refining business. Its marketing network and transportation fleet grew as it extended its range of operation. The company continued to meet New Zealand's fuel needs throughout World War One, holding roughly 85 percent of the market. After the war, Vacuum Oil began facing very strong competition, with a number of multinational oil companies which establishing operations in New Zealand. Among these competitors was the Atlantic Union Oil Company, another of the companies from which ExxonMobil is descended.\nAtlantic Union was bought by the New Jersey\u2013based Standard Oil Company, which would later become Exxon, and its eastern hemisphere interests were merged with those of Socony-Vacuum Oil Company to create the Standard-Vacuum Oil Company. The new company continued operations in New Zealand under both the Vacuum and Atlantic Union brand names.\nOn November 30, 1999, Exxon Corporation and Mobil Oil Corporation merged with Mobil Oil New Zealand Limited now owned by new entity ExxonMobil. The company currently owns a 17.2 percent share in The New Zealand Refining Company Limited which operates an oil refinery at Marsden Point. It supplies roughly 20 percent of the total fuels market in New Zealand, for which most of its products are sourced from the Marsden Point refinery. Mobil Oil New Zealand Limited has more than 150 locations across the country, some of which are franchisee-owned. It also operates six storage locations across the country and maintains a reputation as a dominant petroleum company in New Zealand.\nMobil New Zealand has 167 stations as of 2022, including 68 in Auckland. Its stations included 121 company-owned and 46 franchisee-owned outlets.\nMobil in Japan.\nSince the 1960s, Esso and Mobil stations in Japan had been run by T\u014dnen General Sekiyu, which had a controlling stake owned by ExxonMobil. In 2012, the company bought out much of ExxonMobil's stake, reducing it to a 22% minority. In 2016, ExxonMobil sold the remainder of its stake.\nIn 2017, the company announced that it would merge with JX Group to form JXTG Holdings, with its petroleum business operating as JXTG Nippon Oil &amp; Energy. Following the merger, it was announced that both the Esso and Mobil brands would be phased out by 2020, and replaced by the Eneos EneJet banner.\nMobil in Canada.\nIn April 2017, Loblaw Companies sold its network of 213 gas stations (all of which are attached to its various grocery store locations with the exception of its McKercher Drive and Edinburgh Place location off 8th Street East in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, which the pumps at that one is operated by a 7-Eleven location that was converted to Mobil in the summer of 2023) to Brookfield Business Partners. Brookfield (operating as BG Fuels) announced that it would license the Mobil brand from ExxonMobil for use on these locations, making them a sister to Imperial Oil's network of Esso-branded gas stations in Canada. As part of the sale agreement, the Mobil stations continue to offer Loblaw's PC Optimum rewards program (which Esso also joined the following year).\nBG Fuels stated that it would open further Mobil stations beyond the Loblaw properties. BG Fuels later merged with Greenergy, and adopted the new brand Waypoint for convenience stores associated with its fuel properties. In 2023, Greenergy sold its Canadian retail operations to Global Fuels.\nMobil Egypt.\nIn Egypt, ExxonMobil's operations started in 1902, it is known for providing lubricants and fuels as well as convenience products. It offers more than 350 service stations, more than 40 Mobil 1 centers and a variety of industrial products, lubrication programs and services. Some stations in Cairo, Alexandria and Giza feature On the Run convenience stores.\nMobil Portugal.\nVacuum Oil Company started its operations in Portugal in 1896. In 1941, it became the Socony-Vacuum Oil Company and in 1952, it was renamed Socony Vacuum Portuguesa. In 1955, it became the Mobil Oil Portuguesa. Vacuum Oil was involved in the support of the first auto sports events in Portugal, as well as being responsible for the edition of first road maps and auto drivers guides in the country. Between 1920 and 1928, Vacuum Oil had an important role in the traffic signage of the roads of Portugal, installing thousands of road signs which included the identification of their sponsor, making the company known throughout the country. Along its history, Mobil was pioneer in a number of aspect of the oil business in the country, including the introduction of the first metering pumps, the first network of self-service filling stations and the first motorway service area. The Mobil brand disappeared from the Portuguese service stations in 1996, in the scope of the European joint-venture with BP. In 2000, at the time being the oldest oil company operating in Portugal, Mobil Oil Portuguesa was acquired by BP and disbanded.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20709", "revid": "50169191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20709", "title": "Mary II", "text": "Queen of England, Scotland, and Ireland from 1689 to 1694\nMary II (30 April 1662 \u2013 28 December 1694) was Queen of England, Scotland, and Ireland with her husband, King William III and II, from 1689 until her death in 1694. She was also Princess of Orange following her marriage on 4 November 1677. Her joint reign with William over Britain is known as that of William and Mary. \nMary was born during the reign of her uncle King Charles II. She was the eldest daughter of James, Duke of York (the future James II of England), and his first wife, Anne Hyde. Mary and her sister Anne were raised as Anglicans at the behest of Charles II, although their parents both converted to Roman Catholicism. Charles lacked legitimate children, making Mary second in the line of succession. At the age of 15, she married her cousin William of Orange, a Protestant. Charles died in 1685 and James became king, making Mary heir presumptive. James's attempts at rule by decree and the birth of his son from a second marriage, James Francis Edward (later known as \"the Old Pretender\"), led to his deposition in the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and the adoption of the English Bill of Rights.\nWilliam and Mary became king and queen regnant. Mary mostly deferred to her husband when he was in England. She did, however, act alone when William was engaged in military campaigns abroad, proving herself to be a powerful, firm, and effective ruler. Mary's early death from smallpox in 1694 at the age of 32 left William as sole ruler until his death in 1702, when he was succeeded by Mary's sister, Anne.\nEarly life.\nMary, born at St James's Palace in London on 30 April 1662, was the eldest daughter of James, Duke of York (the future King James II &amp; VII), and his first wife, Anne Hyde. Mary's uncle was Charles II, who ruled the three kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland; her maternal grandfather, Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon, served for a lengthy period as Charles's chief advisor. She was baptised into the Anglican faith in the Chapel Royal at St James's, and was named after her ancestor Mary, Queen of Scots. Her godparents included her father's cousin Prince Rupert of the Rhine. Although her mother bore eight children, all except Mary and her younger sister Anne died very young, and Charles II had no legitimate children. Consequently, for most of her childhood, Mary was second in line to the throne after her father.\nThe Duke of York converted to Roman Catholicism in 1668 or 1669 and the Duchess about eight years earlier, but Mary and Anne were brought up as Anglicans, pursuant to the command of Charles II. They were moved to their own establishment at Richmond Palace, where they were raised by their governess Lady Frances Villiers, with only occasional visits to see their parents at St James's or their grandfather Lord Clarendon at Twickenham. Mary's education, from private tutors, was largely restricted to music, dance, drawing, French, and religious instruction. Her mother died in 1671, and her father remarried in 1673, taking as his second wife Mary of Modena, a Catholic who was only four years older than Mary.\nFrom about the age of nine until her marriage, Mary wrote passionate letters to an older girl, Frances Apsley, the daughter of courtier Sir Allen Apsley. Mary signed herself 'Mary Clorine'; Apsley was 'Aurelia'. In time, Frances Apsley became uncomfortable with the correspondence, and replied more formally. \nAt the age of 15, Mary became betrothed to her cousin, the Protestant Stadtholder of Holland, William III of Orange. William was the son of Charles II's late sister Mary, Princess Royal, and thus fourth in the line of succession after James, Mary, and Anne. At first, Charles opposed the alliance with the Dutch ruler\u2014he preferred that Mary wed the heir to the French throne, the Dauphin Louis, thus allying his realms with Catholic France and strengthening the odds of an eventual Catholic successor in Britain\u2014but later, under pressure from Parliament and with a coalition with the Catholic French no longer politically favourable, he approved the proposed union. The Duke of York agreed to the marriage, after pressure from chief minister Lord Danby and the King, who incorrectly assumed that it would improve James's popularity among Protestants. When James told Mary that she was to marry her cousin, \"she wept all that afternoon and all the following day\".\nMarriage.\nWilliam and a tearful Mary were married in St James's Palace by Bishop Henry Compton on 4 November 1677. The bedding ceremony to publicly establish the consummation of the marriage was attended by the royal family, with her uncle the King himself drawing the bedcurtains. Mary accompanied her husband on a rough sea crossing to the Netherlands later that month, after a delay of two weeks caused by bad weather. Rotterdam was inaccessible because of ice, and they were forced to land at the small village of Ter Heijde, and walk through the frosty countryside until met by coaches to take them to Huis Honselaarsdijk. On 14 December, they made a formal entry to The Hague in a grand procession.\nMary's animated and personable nature made her popular with the Dutch people, and her marriage to a Protestant prince was popular in Britain. She was devoted to her husband, but he was often away on campaigns, which led to Mary's family supposing him to be cold and neglectful. Within months of the marriage Mary was pregnant; however, on a visit to her husband at the fortified city of Breda, she suffered a miscarriage, which may have permanently impaired her ability to have children. Further bouts of illness, which may also have been miscarriages, occurred in mid-1678, early 1679, and early 1680. Her childlessness would be the greatest source of unhappiness in her life.\nFrom May 1684, Charles II's illegitimate son, James Scott, Duke of Monmouth, lived in the Netherlands, where he was hosted by William and Mary. Monmouth was viewed as a rival to the Duke of York, and as a potential Protestant heir who could supplant the Duke in the line of succession. William, however, did not consider him a viable alternative and correctly assumed that Monmouth had insufficient support.\nWhile the pair started out somewhat distant, they became quite close and trusting of each other over the course of their marriage. Their mutual fervour for Protestantism additionally helped bind them together.\nJames's reign.\nUpon the death of Charles II without legitimate issue in February 1685, the Duke of York became king as James II in England and Ireland and James VII in Scotland. Mary was playing cards when her husband informed her of her father's accession, with the knowledge that she was heir presumptive.\nWhen Charles's illegitimate son the Duke of Monmouth assembled an invasion force at Amsterdam, and sailed for Britain, William informed James of the Duke's departure, and ordered English regiments in the Low Countries to return to Britain. To William's relief, Monmouth was defeated, captured and executed, but both he and Mary were dismayed by James's subsequent actions.\nJames had a controversial religious policy; his attempt to grant freedom of religion to non-Anglicans by suspending acts of Parliament by royal decree was not well received. Mary considered such action illegal, and her chaplain expressed this view in a letter to the archbishop of Canterbury, William Sancroft, on her behalf. She was further dismayed when James refused to help when the Catholic king of France, Louis XIV, invaded Orange and persecuted Huguenot refugees there. In an attempt to damage William, James encouraged his daughter's staff to inform her that William was having an affair with Elizabeth Villiers, the daughter of her childhood governess Frances Villiers. Acting on the information, Mary waited outside Villiers's room and caught her husband leaving it late at night. William denied adultery, and Mary apparently believed and forgave him. Possibly, Villiers and William were not meeting as lovers but to exchange diplomatic intelligence. Mary's staff was dismissed and sent back to Britain.\nGlorious Revolution.\nDisgruntled Protestant politicians and noblemen were in contact with Mary's husband as early as 1686. After James took the step of forcing Anglican clergymen to read the Declaration of Indulgence\u2014the proclamation granting religious liberty to Catholics and dissenters\u2014from their churches in May 1688, his popularity plunged further. Alarm amongst Protestants increased when his wife, Mary of Modena, gave birth to a son\u2014James Francis Edward\u2014in June 1688, for the son would, unlike Mary and Anne, be raised a Roman Catholic. Some charged that the boy was supposititious, having been secretly smuggled into the Queen's room in a bed-warming pan as a substitute for her stillborn baby. Others thought the father was someone other than James. Seeking information, Mary sent a pointed list of questions to her sister, Anne, regarding the circumstances of the birth. Anne's reply, and continued gossip, seemed to confirm Mary's suspicions that the child was not her natural brother, and that her father was conspiring to secure a Catholic succession.\nOn 30 June, seven notable English nobles, later called \"the Immortal Seven\" secretly invited William\u2014then in the Dutch Republic with Mary\u2014to come to England with an army to depose James. William may have been jealous of his wife's position as the heiress to the English Crown, but according to Gilbert Burnet, Mary convinced her husband that she did not care for political power, and told him \"she would be no more but his wife, and that she would do all that lay in her power to make him king for life\". She would, she assured him, always obey her husband as she had promised to do in her marriage vows.\nWilliam agreed to invade and issued a declaration which referred to James's newborn son as the \"pretended Prince of Wales\". He also gave a list of grievances of the English people and stated that his proposed expedition was for the sole purpose of having \"a free and lawful Parliament assembled\". Having been turned back by storms in October, William and the Dutch army finally landed in England on 5 November 1688, without Mary, who stayed behind in the Netherlands. The disaffected English Army and Navy went over to William, and on 11 December the defeated King James attempted to flee, but was intercepted. A second attempt at flight, on 23 December, was successful; William deliberately allowed James to escape to France, where he lived in exile until his death.\nMary was upset by the circumstances surrounding the deposition of her father, and was torn between concern for him and duty to her husband, but was convinced that her husband's actions, however unpleasant, were necessary to \"save the Church and State\". When Mary travelled to England after the New Year, she wrote of her \"secret joy\" at returning to her homeland, \"but that was soon checked with the consideration of my father's misfortunes\". William ordered her to appear cheerful on their triumphant arrival in London. As a result, she was criticised by Sarah Churchill among others, for appearing cold to her father's plight.\nIn January 1689, a Convention Parliament of England summoned by the Prince of Orange assembled, and much discussion relating to the appropriate course of action ensued. A party led by Lord Danby held that Mary should be sole monarch, as the rightful hereditary heir, while William and his supporters were adamant that a husband could not be subject to his wife. William wished to reign as a king, rather than function as a mere consort of a queen. For her part, Mary did not wish to be queen regnant, believing that women should defer to their husbands, and \"knowing my heart is not made for a kingdom and my inclination leads me to a retired quiet life\".\nOn 13 February 1689, the English Parliament passed the Declaration of Right, in which it deemed that James, by attempting to flee on 11 December 1688, had abdicated the government of the realm, and that the Throne had thereby become vacant. Parliament offered the Crown not to James's son, who would have been the heir apparent under normal circumstances, but to William and Mary as joint sovereigns. The only precedent for a joint monarchy dated from the sixteenth century: when Queen Mary I married Philip of Spain, it was agreed that the latter would take the title of king, but only during his wife's lifetime, and restrictions were placed on his power. William, however, would be king even after his wife's death, and \"the sole and full exercise of the regal power [would be] executed by the said Prince of Orange in the names of the said Prince and Princess during their joint lives.\" The declaration was later extended to exclude not only James and his heirs (other than Anne) from the throne, but all Catholics, since \"it hath been found by experience that it is inconsistent with the safety and welfare of this Protestant kingdom to be governed by a papist prince\".\nThe bishop of London, Henry Compton (one of the \"Immortal Seven\"), crowned William and Mary together at Westminster Abbey on 11 April 1689. Normally, the archbishop of Canterbury performs coronations, but the incumbent archbishop, William Sancroft, although an Anglican, refused to recognise the validity of James II's removal. Neither William nor Mary enjoyed the ceremony; she thought it \"all vanity\" and William called it \"Popish\". \nOn the same day, the Convention of the Estates of Scotland\u2014which was much more divided than the English Parliament\u2014finally declared that James was no longer King of Scotland, that \"no Papist can be King or Queen of this Realm\", that William and Mary would be joint sovereigns, and that William would exercise sole and full power. The following day, they were proclaimed king and queen in Edinburgh. They took the Scottish coronation oath in London on 11 May.\nEven after the declaration, there was still substantial support for James from the Nonjuring schism in all three kingdoms, particularly in parts of Scotland. Viscount Dundee raised an army in the Scottish Highlands and won a convincing victory at Killiecrankie on 27 July. The huge losses suffered by Dundee's troops, however, coupled with his fatal wounding, served to remove the only effective resistance to William and the uprising was quickly crushed, suffering a resounding defeat by Scottish Covenanters the next month at the Battle of Dunkeld.\nReign.\nIn December 1689, Parliament passed the Bill of Rights. This measure\u2014which restated and confirmed many provisions of the earlier Declaration of Right\u2014established restrictions on the royal prerogative; it declared, among other things, that the Sovereign could not suspend laws passed by Parliament, levy taxes without parliamentary consent, infringe the right to petition, raise a standing army during peacetime without parliamentary consent, deny the right to bear arms to Protestant subjects, unduly interfere with parliamentary elections, punish members of either House of Parliament for anything said during debates, require excessive bail, or inflict cruel or unusual punishments. The Bill of Rights also confirmed the succession to the throne. Following the death of either William III or Mary II, the other was to continue to reign. Next in the line of succession would be any children of the couple, to be followed by Mary's sister Anne and her children. Last in the line of succession stood any children William III might have had from any subsequent marriage.\nFrom 1690 onwards, William was often absent from England on campaign, each year generally from the spring until the autumn. In 1690, he fought Jacobites (who supported James) in Ireland. William had crushed the Irish Jacobites by 1692, but he continued with campaigns abroad to wage war against France in the Netherlands. Whilst her husband was away, Mary administered the government of the realm with the advice of a nine-member Cabinet Council. She was not keen to assume power and felt \"deprived of all that was dear to me in the person of my husband, left among those that were perfect strangers to me: my sister of a humour so reserved that I could have little comfort from her.\" Anne had quarrelled with William and Mary over money, and the relationship between the two sisters had soured.\nWhen her husband was away, Mary acted on her own if his advice was not available; whilst he was in England, Mary completely refrained from interfering in political matters, as had been agreed in the Declaration and Bill of Rights, and as she preferred. However, she proved a firm ruler, ordering the arrest of her own uncle, Henry Hyde, 2nd Earl of Clarendon, for plotting to restore James II to the throne. In January 1692, the influential John Churchill, 1st Earl of Marlborough, was dismissed on similar charges; the dismissal somewhat diminished her popularity and further harmed her relationship with her sister Anne (who was strongly influenced by Churchill's wife, Sarah). Anne appeared at court with Sarah, obviously supporting the disgraced Churchill, which led to Mary angrily demanding that Anne dismiss Sarah and vacate her lodgings.\nMary fell ill with a fever in April 1692, and missed Sunday church service for the first time in 12 years. She also failed to visit Anne, who was suffering a difficult labour. After Mary's recovery and the death of Anne's baby soon after it was born, Mary did visit her sister, but chose the opportunity to berate Anne for her friendship with Sarah. The sisters never saw each other again. Marlborough was arrested and imprisoned, but then released after his accuser was revealed to be an impostor. Mary recorded in her journal that the breach between the sisters was a punishment from God for the \"irregularity\" of the Revolution. She was extremely devout, and attended prayers at least twice a day.\nMany of Mary's proclamations focus on combating licentiousness, insobriety and vice. She often participated in the affairs of the Church\u2014all matters of ecclesiastical patronage passed through her hands. On the death of Archbishop of Canterbury John Tillotson in December 1694, Mary was keen to appoint Bishop of Worcester Edward Stillingfleet to the vacancy, but William overruled her and the post went to Bishop of Lincoln Thomas Tenison.\nDeath.\nMary was tall (5\u00a0foot 11\u00a0inches; 180\u00a0cm) and apparently fit; she regularly walked between her palaces at Whitehall and Kensington, and it appeared likely she would outlive her husband and sister, both of whom suffered from ill health. In late 1694, however, she contracted smallpox. She sent away anyone who had not previously had the disease, to prevent the spread of infection. Anne, who was once again pregnant, sent Mary a letter saying she would run any risk to see her sister again, but the offer was declined by Mary's groom of the stool, the Countess of Derby. Several days into her illness, the smallpox lesions reportedly disappeared, leaving her skin smooth and unmarked, and Mary said that she felt improved. Her attendants initially hoped she had been ill with measles rather than smallpox, and that she was recovering. But the rash had \"turned inward\", a sign that Mary was suffering from a usually fatal form of smallpox, and her condition quickly deteriorated. Mary died at Kensington Palace shortly after midnight on the morning of 28 December, at the age of 32.\nWilliam, who had grown increasingly to rely on Mary, was devastated by her death, and told Burnet that \"from being the happiest\" he was \"now going to be the miserablest creature on earth\". While the Jacobites considered her death divine retribution for breaking the fifth commandment (\"honour thy father\"), she was widely mourned in Britain. During a cold winter, in which the Thames froze, her embalmed body lay in state in Banqueting House, Whitehall. On 5 March, she was buried at Westminster Abbey. Her funeral service was the first of any royal attended by all the members of both Houses of Parliament. For the ceremony, composer Henry Purcell wrote \"Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary\".\nLegacy.\nMary endowed the College of William and Mary in Virginia in 1693, supported Thomas Bray, who founded the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, and was instrumental in the foundation of the Royal Hospital for Seamen, Greenwich, after the Anglo-Dutch victory at the Battle of La Hougue. She is credited with influencing garden design at Het Loo and Hampton Court Palaces, and with popularising blue and white porcelain and the keeping of goldfish as pets.\nMary was depicted by Jacobites as an unfaithful daughter who destroyed her father for her own and her husband's gain. In the early years of their reign, she was often seen as completely under the spell of her husband, but after she had temporarily governed alone during his absences abroad, she was portrayed as capable and confident. Nahum Tate's \"A Present for the Ladies\" (1692) compared her to Queen Elizabeth I. Her modesty and diffidence were praised in works such as \"A Dialogue Concerning Women\" (1691) by William Walsh, which compared her to Cincinnatus, the Roman general who took on a great task when called to do so, but then willingly abandoned power.\nA week before her death, Mary went through her papers, weeding out some, which were burnt, but her journal survives, as do her letters to William and to Frances Apsley. The Jacobites lambasted her, but the assessment of her character that came down to posterity was largely the vision of Mary as a dutiful, submissive wife, who assumed power reluctantly, exercised it with considerable ability when necessary, and willingly deferred it to her husband.\nTitle, styles, honours and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nThe joint style of William III and Mary II was \"William and Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc.\" when they ascended the English throne. From 11 April 1689\u2014when the Estates of Scotland recognised them as sovereigns\u2014the royal couple used the style \"William and Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc.\".\nArms.\nThe coat of arms used by William and Mary were: Quarterly, I and IV Grandquarterly, Azure three fleurs-de-lis Or (for France) and Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or (for England); II Or a lion rampant within a double tressure flory-counter-flory Gules (for Scotland); III Azure a harp Or stringed Argent (for Ireland); overall an escutcheon Azure billetty a lion rampant Or (for the House of Orange-Nassau).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20712", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20712", "title": "Millennium Bug", "text": ""}
{"id": "20713", "revid": "24157476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20713", "title": "Mary I of England", "text": "Queen of England and Ireland from 1553 to 1558\nMary I (18 February 1516\u00a0\u2013 17 November 1558), also known as Mary Tudor, was Queen of England and Ireland from July 1553 and Queen of Spain as the wife of King Philip II from January 1556 until her death in 1558. She made vigorous attempts to reverse the English Reformation, which had begun during the reign of her father, King Henry VIII. Her attempt to restore to the Church the property confiscated in the previous two reigns was largely thwarted by Parliament but, during her five-year reign, more than 280 religious dissenters were burned at the stake in what became known as the Marian persecutions, leading later commentators to label her \"Bloody Mary\".\nMary was the only surviving child of Henry VIII by his first wife, Catherine of Aragon. She was declared illegitimate and barred from the line of succession following the annulment of her parents' marriage in 1533, but was restored via the Third Succession Act 1543. Her younger half-brother, Edward VI, succeeded their father in 1547 at the age of nine. When Edward became terminally ill in 1553, he attempted to remove Mary from the line of succession because he supposed, correctly, that she would reverse the Protestant reforms that had taken place during his reign. Upon his death, leading politicians proclaimed their Protestant cousin, Lady Jane Grey, as queen instead. Mary speedily assembled a force in East Anglia and deposed Jane.\nMary was\u2014excluding the disputed reigns of Jane and the Empress Matilda\u2014the first queen regnant of England. In July 1554, she married Philip of Spain, becoming queen consort of Habsburg Spain on his accession in 1556. After Mary's death in 1558, her re-establishment of Catholicism in England was reversed by her younger half-sister and successor, Elizabeth I.\nBirth and family.\nMary was born on 18 February 1516 at the Palace of Placentia in Greenwich, England. She was the only child of King Henry VIII and his first wife, Catherine of Aragon, to survive infancy. Before Mary, her mother had three miscarriages and stillbirths and one short-lived son, Henry, Duke of Cornwall.\nMary was baptised into the Catholic faith at the Church of the Observant Friars in Greenwich three days after her birth. Her godparents included Lord Chancellor Thomas Wolsey; her great-aunt Catherine, Countess of Devon; and Agnes Howard, Duchess of Norfolk. Henry VIII's first cousin once removed, Margaret Pole, Countess of Salisbury, stood sponsor for Mary's confirmation, which was conducted immediately after the baptism. The following year, Mary became a godmother herself when she was named as one of the sponsors of her cousin Frances Brandon. In 1520, the Countess of Salisbury was appointed Mary's governess. Sir John Hussey (later Lord Hussey) was her chamberlain from 1530, and his wife Lady Anne, daughter of George Grey, 2nd Earl of Kent, was one of Mary's attendants.\nChildhood.\nMary was a precocious child. In July 1520, when scarcely four and a half years old, she entertained a visiting French delegation with a performance on the virginals (a type of harpsichord). A great part of her early education came from her mother, who consulted the Spanish humanist Juan Luis Vives for advice and commissioned him to write \"De Institutione Feminae Christianae\", a treatise on the education of girls. By the age of nine, Mary could read and write Latin. She studied French, Spanish, music, dance, and perhaps Greek. Henry VIII doted on her and boasted to the Venetian ambassador Sebastian Giustinian that she never cried. Mary had a fair complexion with pale blue eyes and red or reddish-golden hair, traits very similar to those of her parents. She was ruddy-cheeked, a trait she inherited from her father.\nDespite his affection for Mary, Henry was deeply disappointed that his marriage had produced no sons. By the time Mary was nine years old, it was apparent that Henry and Catherine would have no more children, leaving Henry without a legitimate male heir. In 1525, Henry sent Mary to the border of Wales to preside, presumably in name only, over the Council of Wales and the Marches. She was given her own court based at Ludlow Castle and many of the royal prerogatives normally reserved for a Prince of Wales. Vives and others called her the Princess of Wales, although she was never technically invested with the title. She appears to have spent three years in the Welsh Marches, making regular visits to her father's court, before returning permanently to the home counties around London in mid-1528.\nThroughout Mary's childhood, Henry negotiated potential future marriages for her. When she was two years old, Mary was promised to Francis, Dauphin of France, the infant son of King Francis I, but the contract was repudiated after three years. In 1522, at age six, she was contracted to marry her 22-year-old cousin Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, but Charles broke off the engagement within a few years with Henry's agreement. Cardinal Wolsey, Henry's chief adviser, then resumed marriage negotiations with the French, and Henry suggested that Mary marry the French king Francis I, who was eager for an alliance with England. A marriage treaty was signed which provided that Mary marry either Francis I or his second son Henry, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, but Wolsey secured an alliance with France without the marriage.\nIn 1528, Wolsey's agent Thomas Magnus discussed the idea of Mary marrying her cousin James V of Scotland with the Scottish diplomat Adam Otterburn. According to the Venetian Mario Savorgnano, by this time she was developing into a pretty, well-proportioned young lady with a fine complexion.\nAdolescence.\nAlthough various possibilities for Mary's marriage had been considered, the marriage of Mary's parents was itself in jeopardy, which threatened her status. Disappointed at the lack of a male heir, and eager to remarry, Henry attempted to have his marriage to Catherine annulled, but Pope Clement VII refused his request. Henry claimed, citing biblical passages (Leviticus 20:21), that the marriage was unclean because Catherine was the widow of his brother Arthur, Prince of Wales (Mary's uncle). Catherine claimed that her marriage to Arthur was never consummated and so was not a valid marriage. Pope Julius II issued a dispensation on that basis. Clement VII may have been reluctant to act because he was influenced by Charles V, Catherine's nephew and Mary's former betrothed, whose troops had sacked Rome in the War of the League of Cognac.\nFrom 1531, Mary was often sick with irregular menstruation and depression, although it is not clear whether this was caused by stress, puberty, or a more deep-seated disease. She was not permitted to see her mother, whom Henry had sent to live away from court. In early 1533, Henry married Anne Boleyn, and in May Thomas Cranmer, the Archbishop of Canterbury, formally declared the marriage with Catherine void and the marriage to Anne valid. Henry repudiated the Pope's authority, declaring himself Supreme Head of the Church of England. Catherine was demoted to Dowager Princess of Wales (a title she would have held as Arthur's widow), and Mary was deemed illegitimate. She was styled \"The Lady Mary\" rather than Princess, and her place in the line of succession was transferred to Henry and Anne's newborn daughter, Elizabeth. Mary's household was dissolved; her servants (including the Countess of Salisbury) were dismissed; and, in December 1533, she was sent to join her infant half-sister's household at Hatfield Palace, Hertfordshire.\nMary determinedly refused to acknowledge that Anne was the queen or that Elizabeth was a princess, enraging King Henry. Under strain and with her movements restricted, Mary was frequently ill, which the royal physician attributed to her \"ill treatment\". The Imperial ambassador Eustace Chapuys became her close adviser, and interceded, unsuccessfully, on her behalf at court. The relationship between Mary and her father worsened; they did not speak to each other for three years. Although both she and her mother were ill, Mary was refused permission to visit Catherine. When Catherine died in 1536, Mary was \"inconsolable\". Catherine was interred in Peterborough Cathedral, while Mary grieved in semi-seclusion at Hunsdon in Hertfordshire.\nAdulthood.\nIn 1536, Queen Anne fell from the King's favour and was beheaded. Elizabeth, like Mary, was declared illegitimate and stripped of her succession rights. Within two weeks of Anne's execution, Henry married Jane Seymour, who urged her husband to make peace with Mary. Henry insisted that Mary recognise him as head of the Church of England, repudiate papal authority, acknowledge that the marriage between her parents was unlawful, and accept her own illegitimacy. She attempted to reconcile with Henry by submitting to his authority as far as \"God and my conscience\" permitted, but was bullied into signing a document agreeing to all of Henry's demands.\nReconciled with her father, Mary resumed her place at court. Henry granted her a household, which included the reinstatement of Mary's favourite, Susan Clarencieux. Mary's Privy Purse accounts for this period, kept by Mary Finch, show that Hatfield House, the Palace of Beaulieu (also called Newhall), Richmond and Hunsdon were among her principal places of residence, as well as Henry's palaces at Greenwich, Westminster and Hampton Court. Her expenses included fine clothes and gambling at cards, one of her favourite pastimes.\nRebels in the North of England, including Lord Hussey, Mary's former chamberlain, campaigned against Henry's religious reforms, and one of their demands was that Mary be made legitimate. The rebellion, known as the Pilgrimage of Grace, was ruthlessly suppressed. Along with other rebels, Hussey was executed, but there is no suggestion that Mary was directly involved. In 1537, Queen Jane died after giving birth to a son, Edward, who was thought to be a more suitable heir to the English throne. Mary was made godmother to her half-brother and acted as chief mourner at the Queen's funeral. Yet, after King Henry\u2019s refusal to legitimize Mary or determine her place in the succession, Mary described herself in 1542 as \u201cthe unhappiest woman in all of Christendom\u201d.\nMary was courted by Philip, Duke of Bavaria, from late 1539, but he was Lutheran and his suit for her hand was unsuccessful. In 1539, the King's chief minister, Thomas Cromwell, negotiated a potential alliance with the Duchy of Cleves. Suggestions that Mary marry William I, Duke of Cleves, who was the same age, came to nothing, but a match between Henry and the Duke's sister Anne was agreed. When the King saw Anne for the first time in late December 1539, a week before the scheduled wedding, he found her unattractive but was unable, for diplomatic reasons and without a suitable pretext, to cancel the marriage. Cromwell fell from favour and was arrested for treason in June 1540; one dubious charge against him was that he had plotted to marry Mary himself. Anne consented to the annulment of the marriage, which had not been consummated, and Cromwell was beheaded.\nIn 1541, Henry had the Countess of Salisbury, Mary's old governess and godmother, executed on the pretext of a Catholic plot in which her son Reginald Pole was implicated. Her executioner was \"a wretched and blundering youth\" who \"literally hacked her head and shoulders to pieces\". In 1542, after the execution of Henry's fifth wife, Catherine Howard, Henry invited Mary to the royal Christmas festivities. At court, while her father was between marriages and thus without a consort, Mary acted as hostess. In 1543, Henry married his sixth and last wife, Catherine Parr, who brought the family closer together. Henry returned Mary and Elizabeth to the line of succession through the Act of Succession 1544 (also known as the Third Succession Act), placing them after Edward\u00a0\u2013 though both remained legally illegitimate.\nHenry VIII died in 1547, and Edward succeeded him. Mary inherited estates in Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex, and was granted Hunsdon and Beaulieu as her own. Since Edward was still a child, rule passed to a regency council dominated by Protestants, who attempted to establish their faith throughout the country. For example, the Act of Uniformity 1549 prescribed Protestant rites for church services, such as the use of Cranmer's \"Book of Common Prayer\". Mary remained faithful to Roman Catholicism and defiantly heard traditional Mass in her own chapel. She appealed to her cousin Emperor Charles V to apply diplomatic pressure demanding that she be allowed to practise her religion.\nFor most of Edward's reign, Mary remained on her own estates and rarely attended court. A plan between May and July 1550 to smuggle her out of England to the safety of the European mainland came to nothing. Religious differences between Mary and Edward continued. Mary attended a reunion with Edward and Elizabeth for Christmas 1550, where the 13-year-old Edward embarrassed Mary, then 34, and reduced both her and himself to tears in front of the court, by publicly reproving her for ignoring his laws regarding worship. Mary repeatedly refused Edward's demands that she abandon Catholicism, and Edward persistently refused to drop his demands.\nAccession.\nOn 6 July 1553, at age 15, Edward VI died of a lung infection, possibly tuberculosis. He did not want the crown to go to Mary because he feared she would restore Catholicism and undo his and their father's reforms, and so he planned to exclude her from the line of succession. His advisers told him that he could not disinherit only one of his half-sisters: he would have to disinherit Elizabeth as well, even though she was a Protestant. Guided by John Dudley, 1st Duke of Northumberland, and perhaps others, Edward excluded both from the line of succession in his will.\nContradicting the Act of Succession 1544, which restored Mary and Elizabeth to the line of succession, Edward named Northumberland's daughter-in-law Lady Jane Grey, the granddaughter of Henry VIII's younger sister Mary, as his successor. Lady Jane's mother was Frances Brandon, Mary's cousin and goddaughter. Just before Edward's death, Mary was summoned to London to visit her dying brother, but was warned that the summons was a pretext on which to capture her and thereby facilitate Jane's accession to the throne. Therefore, instead of going to London from her residence at Hunsdon, Mary fled to East Anglia, where she owned extensive estates and Northumberland had ruthlessly put down Kett's Rebellion. Many adherents to the Catholic faith, opponents of Northumberland, lived there. On 9 July, from Kenninghall, Norfolk, she wrote to the privy council with orders for her proclamation as Edward's successor.\nOn 10 July 1553, Lady Jane was proclaimed queen by Northumberland and his supporters, and on the same day Mary's servant, Thomas Hungate, arrived in London with her letter to the council. By 12 July, Mary and her supporters had assembled a military force at Framlingham Castle, Suffolk. Northumberland's support collapsed, and Jane was deposed on 19 July. She and Northumberland were imprisoned in the Tower of London. Mary rode triumphantly into London on 3 August 1553 on a wave of popular support, accompanied by her half-sister Elizabeth and a procession of over 800 nobles and gentlemen.\nReign.\nOne of Mary's first actions as queen was to order the release of the Roman Catholic Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk, and Stephen Gardiner from imprisonment in the Tower of London, as well as her kinsman Edward Courtenay. Mary understood that the young Lady Jane was essentially a pawn in Northumberland's scheme, and Northumberland was the only conspirator of rank executed for high treason in the immediate aftermath of the attempted coup. Lady Jane and her husband, Lord Guildford Dudley, though found guilty, were kept under guard in the Tower rather than immediately executed, while Lady Jane's father, Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Suffolk, was released. Mary was left in a difficult position, as almost all the Privy Counsellors had been implicated in the plot to put Lady Jane on the throne. She appointed Gardiner to the council and made him both Bishop of Winchester and Lord Chancellor, offices he held until his death in November 1555. Susan Clarencieux became Mistress of the Robes. Pageants and performances were held in her honour on 31 September, with William Mundy's grand votive antiphon \"Vox Patris caelestis\" being sung while Mary processed through London. The antiphon references the Song of Songs and the Assumption of the Virgin Mary. On 1 October 1553, Gardiner crowned Mary at Westminster Abbey.\nSpanish marriage.\nNow aged 37, Mary turned her attention to finding a husband and producing an heir, which would prevent Elizabeth (still next in line under the terms of Henry VIII's will and the Act of Succession of 1544) from succeeding to the throne. While the English expected her to marry, there was a general consensus that the Queen should not marry a foreigner, since that could lead to the interference of a foreign power in English affairs. On 16 November 1553, a parliamentary delegation went to her and formally requested that she choose an English husband, the obvious though tacit candidates being her kinsmen Edward Courtenay, recently created Earl of Devon, and the Catholic Cardinal Reginald Pole. But Mary's first cousin, Charles V, also king of Spain, saw that an alliance with England would give him supremacy in Europe; he sent his minister to England to propose his only legitimate son, Philip, as a person whom the religious and political interests of the world recommended for Mary. The Spanish prince had been widowed a few years before by the death of his first wife, Maria Manuela of Portugal, mother of his son Carlos, and was heir apparent to vast territories in Continental Europe and the New World. Both Philip and Mary were descendants of John of Gaunt. As part of the marriage negotiations, a portrait of Philip by Titian was sent to Mary in the latter half of 1553.\nMary was convinced that the safety of England required her to form a closer relationship with Charles's family, the Habsburgs, and she decided to marry Philip. A marriage treaty was presented to the Privy Council on 7 December 1553, and even though the terms clearly favoured England and included several safeguards, many still thought that England would be drawn into Philip's wars and become a mere province of the Habsburg Empire. This was of particular concern to the landed gentry and parliamentary classes, who foresaw having to pay greater taxes to cover the cost of England's participation in foreign wars.\nLord Chancellor Gardiner and the English House of Commons unsuccessfully petitioned Mary to consider marrying an Englishman, fearing that England would be relegated to a dependency of the Habsburgs. The marriage was unpopular with the English; Gardiner and his allies opposed it on the basis of patriotism, while Protestants were motivated by a fear that with the restoration of Catholicism and the arrival of the Spanish King, the Inquisition would come to judge Protestant heretics. Many English people knew the stories of the torments and cruelties suffered by the prisoners of the Inquisition, and there were even those \"who had suffered from the rack of the inquisitors\" themselves.\nIt was not just the English who were alarmed by the pending marriage of Mary and Philip. France feared an alliance between England and Spain. Antoine de Noailles, the French ambassador to England, \"threatened war and began immediate intrigues with any malcontents he could find\". Before Christmas in 1553, anti-Spanish ballads and broadsheets were circulating in the streets of London.\nWhen Mary insisted on marrying Philip, insurrections broke out. Thomas Wyatt the Younger led a force from Kent to depose Mary in favour of Elizabeth, as part of a wider conspiracy now known as Wyatt's rebellion, which also involved the Duke of Suffolk, Lady Jane's father. Mary declared publicly that she would summon Parliament to discuss the marriage and if Parliament decided that the marriage was not to the kingdom's advantage, she would refrain from pursuing it. Wyatt rallied about 2,500 men in Kent, and his force grew when elements of the government army under the Duke of Norfolk defected to his side. However, his delay in besieging Cooling Castle, allowed Mary time to strengthen London's defences and secure the loyalty of its citizens through a speech at the Guildhall. When Wyatt advanced on the capital, Ludgate was barred against him, and his army surrendered within sight of the Tower. Wyatt was captured. Wyatt, the Duke of Suffolk, Lady Jane, and her husband Guildford Dudley were executed. Courtenay, who was implicated in the plot, was imprisoned and then exiled. Elizabeth, though protesting her innocence in the Wyatt affair, was imprisoned in the Tower of London for two months, then put under house arrest at Woodstock Palace.\nMary was\u2014excluding the brief, disputed reigns of the Empress Matilda and Lady Jane Grey\u2014England's first queen regnant. Further, under the English common law doctrine of \"jure uxoris\", the property and titles belonging to a woman became her husband's upon marriage, and it was feared that any man she married would thereby become king of England in fact and name. While Mary's grandparents Ferdinand and Isabella had retained sovereignty of their respective realms during their marriage, there was no precedent to follow in England. Under the terms of Queen Mary's Marriage Act, Philip was to be styled \"King of England\", all official documents (including Acts of Parliament) were to be dated with both their names, and Parliament was to be called under the joint authority of the couple, for Mary's lifetime only. England was not obliged to provide military support to Philip's father in any war, and Philip could not act without his wife's consent or appoint foreigners to office in England. Philip was unhappy with these conditions but ready to agree for the sake of securing the marriage. He had no amorous feelings for Mary, but sought the marriage for political and strategic gain; his aide Ruy G\u00f3mez de Silva wrote to a correspondent in Brussels, \"the marriage was concluded for no fleshly consideration, but in order to remedy the disorders of this kingdom and to preserve the Low Countries.\" A future child of Mary and Philip would be heir not only to the throne of England but also to the Spanish Empire in the event that Philip's eldest son, Don Carlos, died without issue.\nTo elevate his son to Mary's rank, Emperor Charles V ceded to Philip the crown of Naples as well as his claim to the Kingdom of Jerusalem. Mary thus became queen of Naples and titular queen of Jerusalem upon marriage. Their wedding at Winchester Cathedral on 25 July 1554 took place just two days after their first meeting. Philip did not speak English, and so they spoke a mixture of Spanish, French, and Latin.\nFalse pregnancy.\nIn September 1554, Mary stopped menstruating. She gained weight, and felt nauseated in the mornings. Almost the entirety of her court, including her physicians, believed she was pregnant. Parliament passed the Treason Act of 1554 making Philip regent in the event of Mary's death in childbirth. For the joint Chapel Royal and Capilla Flamenca choirs singing together in December 1554, Mary commissioned \"Missa Puer natus est nobis\" from Thomas Tallis. The festive mass setting is based on the plainchant 'A Child is born for us', which alludes to the birth of a baby boy for England. Elizabeth was released from house arrest in the last week of April 1555, and was called to court as a witness to the birth, which was expected imminently. According to Giovanni Michieli, the Venetian ambassador, Philip may have planned to marry Elizabeth if Mary died, but in a letter to his brother-in-law Maximilian of Austria, Philip expressed uncertainty as to whether Mary was pregnant. Mary's pregnancy had its pros and cons for Elizabeth: if Mary died during childbirth, Elizabeth would become the new queen, but if Mary gave birth to a healthy baby, Elizabeth's chances of becoming queen would recede sharply.\nThanksgiving services in the diocese of London were held at the end of April after false rumours that Mary had given birth to a son spread across Europe. Through May and June, the apparent delay in delivery fed gossip that Mary was not pregnant. Susan Clarencieux revealed her doubts to the French ambassador, Antoine de Noailles. Mary continued to exhibit signs of pregnancy until July 1555, when her abdomen receded. Michieli dismissively ridiculed the pregnancy as more likely to \"end in wind rather than anything else\". It was most likely a false pregnancy, perhaps induced by Mary's overwhelming desire to have a child. In August, soon after the disgrace of the false pregnancy, Philip left England to command his armies against France in Flanders. Mary was heartbroken and fell into a deep depression. Michieli was touched by the Queen's grief; he wrote she was \"extraordinarily in love\" with her husband and disconsolate at his departure.\nElizabeth remained at court until October, apparently restored to favour. In the absence of any children, Philip was concerned that one of the next claimants to the English throne after his sister-in-law was Mary, Queen of Scots, who was betrothed to Francis, Dauphin of France. Philip persuaded his wife that Elizabeth should marry his cousin Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, to secure the Catholic succession and preserve the Habsburg interest in England, but Elizabeth refused to agree and parliamentary consent was unlikely.\nReligious policy.\nIn the month following her accession, Mary issued a proclamation that she would not compel any of her subjects to follow her religion, much like how Mary and her immediate family were allowed to observe Mass privately. By the end of September 1553, however, leading Protestant churchmen\u2014including Thomas Cranmer, John Bradford, John Rogers, John Hooper, and Hugh Latimer\u2014were imprisoned. Mary's first Parliament, which assembled in early October, declared her parents' marriage valid and abolished Edward's religious laws. Church doctrine was restored to the form it had taken in the 1539 Six Articles of Henry VIII, which (among other things) reaffirmed clerical celibacy. Married priests were deprived of their benefices.\nMary rejected the break with Rome instituted by her father and the establishment of Protestantism by her brother's regents. Philip persuaded Parliament to repeal Henry's religious laws, returning the English church to Roman jurisdiction. Reaching an agreement took many months and Mary and Pope Julius III had to make a major concession: the confiscated monastery lands were not returned to the church but remained in the hands of their influential new owners. By the end of 1554, the Pope had approved the deal, and the Heresy Acts were revived by Parliament in January of 1555.\nAround 800 rich Protestants, including John Foxe, fled into exile. Those who stayed and persisted in publicly proclaiming their beliefs became targets of heresy laws. The first executions occurred over five days in February 1555: John Rogers on 4 February, Laurence Saunders on 8 February, and Rowland Taylor and John Hooper on 9 February. Thomas Cranmer, the imprisoned archbishop of Canterbury, was forced to watch Bishops Ridley and Latimer being burned at the stake. He recanted, repudiated Protestant theology, and rejoined the Catholic faith. Under the normal process of the law, he should have been absolved as a repentant, but Mary refused to reprieve him. On the day of his burning, he dramatically withdrew his recantation. In total, 283 were executed, most by burning. The burnings proved so unpopular that even Alfonso de Castro, one of Philip's own ecclesiastical staff, condemned them and another adviser, Simon Renard, warned him that such \"cruel enforcement\" could \"cause a revolt\". Mary persevered with the policy, which continued for the rest of her reign and exacerbated anti-Catholic and anti-Spanish feeling among the English people. The victims became lauded as martyrs.\nReginald Pole, the son of Mary's executed governess, arrived as papal legate in November 1554. He was ordained a priest and appointed Archbishop of Canterbury immediately after Cranmer's execution in March 1556.\nAs long as the Queen remained childless, her half-sister Elizabeth was her successor. Mary, concerned about her sister's Protestant convictions (Elizabeth attended mass only under obligation and had superficially converted to Catholicism only to save her life after being imprisoned following Wyatt's rebellion), seriously considered removing her from the succession and naming as her successor her Scottish first cousin and devout Catholic, Margaret Douglas.\nForeign policy.\nFurthering the Tudor conquest of Ireland, English colonists were settled in the Irish Midlands under Mary and Philip's reign. Queen's and King's Counties (later called Counties Laois and Offaly) were founded, and their plantation began. Their principal towns were named, respectively, Maryborough (later called Portlaoise) and Philipstown (later Daingean).\nIn January 1556, Mary's father-in-law the Emperor abdicated. Mary and Philip were still apart; he was declared king of Spain in Brussels, but she stayed in England. Philip negotiated an unsteady truce with the French in February 1556. The next month, the French ambassador in England, Antoine de Noailles, was implicated in a plot against Mary when Henry Dudley, a second cousin of the executed Duke of Northumberland, attempted to assemble an invasion force in France. The plot, known as the Dudley conspiracy, was betrayed, and the conspirators in England were rounded up. Dudley remained in exile in France, and Noailles prudently left Britain.\nPhilip returned to England from March to July 1557 to persuade Mary to support Spain in a renewed war against France. Mary was in favour of declaring war, but her councillors opposed it because French trade would be jeopardised, it contravened the foreign war provisions of the marriage treaty, and a bad economic legacy from Edward VI's reign and a series of poor harvests meant England lacked supplies and finances. War was only declared in June 1557 after Reginald Pole's nephew Thomas Stafford invaded England and seized Scarborough Castle with French help, in a failed attempt to depose Mary. As a result of the war, relations between England and the Papacy became strained, since Pope Paul IV was allied with Henry II of France. In August, English forces were victorious in the aftermath of the Battle of Saint Quentin, with one eyewitness reporting, \"Both sides fought most choicely, and the English best of all.\" Celebrations were brief, as in January 1558 French forces took Calais, England's sole remaining possession on the European mainland. Although the territory was financially burdensome, its loss was a mortifying blow to the Queen's prestige. According to \"Holinshed's Chronicles\", Mary later lamented (although this may be apocryphal), \"When I am dead and opened, you shall find 'Calais' lying in my heart\".\nCommerce and revenue.\nThe weather during the years of Mary's reign was consistently wet. The persistent rain and flooding led to famine. Another problem was the decline of the Antwerp cloth trade. Despite Mary's marriage to Philip, England did not benefit from Spain's enormously lucrative trade with the New World. The Spanish guarded their trade routes jealously, and Mary could not condone English smuggling or piracy against her husband's subjects. In an attempt to increase trade and rescue the English economy, Mary's counsellors continued Northumberland's policy of seeking out new commercial opportunities. She granted a royal charter to the Muscovy Company under governor Sebastian Cabot, and commissioned a world atlas from Diogo Homem. Adventurers such as John Lok and William Towerson sailed south in an attempt to develop links with the coast of Africa.\nFinancially, Mary's regime tried to reconcile a modern form of government\u2014with correspondingly higher spending\u2014with a medieval system of collecting taxation and dues. Mary retained the Edwardian appointee William Paulet, 1st Marquess of Winchester, as Lord High Treasurer and assigned him to oversee the revenue collection system. A failure to apply new tariffs to new forms of imports meant that a key source of revenue was neglected. To solve this, Mary's government published a revised \"Book of Rates\" (1558), which listed the tariffs and duties for every import. This publication was not extensively reviewed until 1604.\nEnglish coinage was debased under both Henry VIII and Edward VI. Mary drafted plans for currency reform but they were not implemented until after her death.\nDeath.\nAfter Philip's visit in 1557, Mary again thought she was pregnant, with a baby due in March 1558. She decreed in her will that her husband would be the regent during their child's minority. But no child was born, and Mary was forced to accept that Elizabeth would be her lawful successor.\nMary was weak and ill from May 1558. In pain, possibly from ovarian cysts or uterine cancer, she died on 17 November 1558, aged 42, at St James's Palace, during an influenza epidemic that also claimed Archbishop Pole's life later that day. She was succeeded by Elizabeth. Philip, who was in Brussels, wrote to his sister Joanna: \"I felt a reasonable regret for her death.\"\nMary's funeral was held on 13 December. Although Mary's will stated that she wished to be buried next to her mother, she was interred in Westminster Abbey on 14 December in a tomb she eventually shared with Elizabeth. The inscription on their tomb, affixed there by James I when he succeeded Elizabeth, is (\"Consorts in realm and tomb, we sisters Elizabeth and Mary here lie down to sleep in hope of the resurrection\").\nLegacy.\nJohn White, Bishop of Winchester, praised Mary at her funeral service: \"She was a king's daughter; she was a king's sister; she was a king's wife. She was a queen, and by the same title a king also.\" She was the first woman to successfully claim the throne of England, despite competing claims and determined opposition, and enjoyed popular support and sympathy during the earliest parts of her reign, especially from the Roman Catholics of England.\nProtestant writers at the time, and since, have often condemned Mary's reign. By the 17th century, the memory of her religious persecutions had led to the adoption of her sobriquet \"Bloody Mary\". John Knox attacked Mary in his \"First Blast of the Trumpet against the Monstrous Regiment of Women\" (1558), and John Foxe vilified her prominently in \"Actes and Monuments\" (1563). Foxe's book remained popular throughout the following centuries and helped shape enduring perceptions of Mary as a bloodthirsty tyrant. Historian Lucy Wooding notes misogynistic undertones in descriptions of Mary. \"She's simultaneously being lambasted for being 'vindictive and fierce' and 'spineless and weak', criticized for such actions as showing clemency to political prisoners and yielding authority to her husband.\"\nMary is remembered in the 21st century for her vigorous efforts to restore the primacy of Roman Catholicism in England after the rise of Protestant influence during the previous reigns. Protestant historians have long deplored her reign, emphasizing that in just five years, several hundred Protestants were burned at the stake. In the mid-20th century, H. F. M. Prescott attempted to redress the tradition that Mary was intolerant and authoritarian, and scholarship since then has tended to view the older, simpler assessments of Mary with increasing reservations. A historiographical revisionism since the 1980s has improved her reputation among scholars to some degree. Christopher Haigh argues that her revival of religious festivities and Catholic practices was generally welcomed. He concludes that the \"last years of Mary's reign were not a gruesome preparation for Protestant victory, but a continuing consolidation of Catholic strength.\" English Catholics often remembered Mary favourably; decades after her death, the epitaph for John Throckmorton refers to \"Queene Marie [Mary I] of happie memorie\". It has been hypothesised that the oeuvre of particularly sombre Lamentations settings from composers such as Thomas Tallis, William Byrd, Robert White and Osbert Parsley was produced out of Catholic nostalgia for the reign of Mary.\nCatholic historians such as John Lingard thought Mary's policies failed not because they were wrong but because she had too short a reign to establish them and because of natural disasters beyond her control. In other countries, the Catholic Counter-Reformation was spearheaded by Jesuit missionaries, but Mary's chief religious advisor, Cardinal Reginald Pole, refused to allow Jesuits into England. Her marriage to Philip was unpopular among her subjects and her religious policies resulted in deep-seated resentment. The military loss of Calais to France was a bitter humiliation to English pride. Failed harvests increased public discontent. Philip spent most of his time abroad, while Mary remained in England, leaving her depressed at his absence and undermined by their inability to have children. After her death, Philip sought to marry Elizabeth, but she refused him. Although Mary's rule was ultimately ineffectual and unpopular, the policies of fiscal reform, naval expansion, and colonial exploration later lauded as Elizabethan accomplishments were started in Mary's reign.\nTitles, style, and arms.\nWhen Mary ascended the throne, she was proclaimed under the same official style as Henry VIII and Edward VI: \"Mary, by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and of the Church of England and of Ireland on Earth Supreme Head\". The title Supreme Head of the Church was repugnant to Mary's Catholicism, and she omitted it after Christmas 1553.\nUnder Mary's marriage treaty with Philip, the official joint style reflected not only Mary's but also Philip's dominions and claims: \"Philip and Mary, by the grace of God, King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Princes of Spain and Sicily, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Milan, Burgundy and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tyrol\". This style, which had been in use since 1554, was replaced when Philip inherited the Spanish Crown in 1556 with \"Philip and Mary, by the Grace of God King and Queen of England, Spain, France, both the Sicilies, Jerusalem and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgundy, Milan and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tyrol\".\nMary I's coat of arms was the same as those used by all her predecessors since Henry IV: Quarterly, Azure three fleurs-de-lys Or [for France] and Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or (for England). Sometimes, her arms were impaled (depicted side-by-side) with those of her husband. She adopted \"Truth, the Daughter of Time\" () as her personal motto.\nFamily tree.\nBoth Mary and Philip were descended from John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster, a relationship that was used to portray Philip as an English king.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20714", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20714", "title": "Manu", "text": "Manu may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20715", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20715", "title": "Marbury v. Madison", "text": "1803 landmark U.S. Supreme Court case\n1803 United States Supreme Court case\nMarbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137 (1803), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court that established the principle of judicial review, meaning that American courts have the power to strike down laws and statutes they find to violate the Constitution of the United States. Decided in 1803, \"Marbury\" is regarded as the single most important decision in American constitutional law. It established that the U.S. Constitution is actual law, not just a statement of political principles and ideals. It also helped define the boundary between the constitutionally separate executive and judicial branches of the federal government.\nThe case originated in early 1801 and stemmed from the rivalry between outgoing President John Adams and incoming President Thomas Jefferson. Adams, a member of the Federalist Party, had lost the U.S. presidential election of 1800 to Jefferson, who led the Democratic-Republican Party. In March 1801, just two days before his term as president ended, Adams appointed several dozen Federalist Party supporters to new circuit judge and justice of the peace positions in an attempt to frustrate Jefferson and the Democratic-Republicans. The outgoing U.S. Senate quickly confirmed Adams's appointments, but outgoing secretary of state John Marshall was unable to deliver all of the new judges' commissions before Adams's departure and Jefferson's inauguration. Jefferson believed the undelivered commissions were void and instructed his secretary of state, James Madison, not to deliver them. One of the undelivered commissions belonged to William Marbury, a Maryland businessman who had been a strong supporter of Adams and the Federalists. In late 1801, after Madison had repeatedly refused to deliver his commission, Marbury filed a lawsuit in the Supreme Court asking the court to issue a writ of mandamus forcing Madison to deliver his commission.\nIn an opinion written by Marshall, who by then had been appointed Chief Justice of the United States, the Supreme Court held that Madison's refusal to deliver Marbury's commission was illegal. The court also held that it was normally proper in such situations for a court to order the government official in question to deliver the commission. In Marbury's case, however, the court did not order Madison to comply. Examining the law Congress had passed to define Supreme Court jurisdiction over types of cases like Marbury's\u2014section 13 of the Judiciary Act of 1789\u2014the court found that the Act had expanded the definition of the Supreme Court's jurisdiction beyond what was originally set forth in the U.S. Constitution. The court then struck down section 13 of the act, announcing that American courts have the power to invalidate laws that they find to violate the Constitution\u2014a power now known as \"judicial review\". Because striking down the law removed any jurisdiction the court might have had over the case, the court could not issue the writ that Marbury had requested.\nBackground.\nIn the fiercely contested U.S. presidential election of 1800, the three main candidates were Thomas Jefferson, Aaron Burr, and the incumbent president, John Adams. Adams espoused the pro-business and pro-national-government politics of the Federalist Party and its leader, Alexander Hamilton. Jefferson and Burr were leaders of the opposition Democratic-Republican Party, which favored rural agriculture and decentralization. American public opinion had gradually turned against the Federalists in the months leading up to the election. The shift was mainly due to the Federalists' use of the controversial Alien and Sedition Acts, but also due to growing tensions with Great Britain, with whom the Federalists favored close ties. Jefferson easily won the election's popular vote but only narrowly defeated Adams in the Electoral College.\nAfter the results of the election became clear, Adams and the Federalists became determined to exercise their remaining influence before Jefferson took office, and they did everything they could to fill federal offices with \"anti-Jeffersonians\" who were loyal to the Federalists. On March2, 1801, just two days before his presidential term ended, Adams nominated nearly 60 Federalist supporters to new circuit judge and justice of the peace positions the Federalist-controlled Congress had recently created. These last-minute nominees\u2014whom Jefferson's supporters derisively called the \"Midnight Judges\"\u2014included William Marbury, a prosperous businessman from Maryland. An ardent Federalist, Marbury was active in Maryland politics and had been a vigorous supporter of the Adams presidency.\nThe following day, March 3, the Senate approved Adams's nominations \"en masse\". The appointees' commissions were immediately written out on parchment, then signed by Adams and sealed by Secretary of State John Marshall, who had been named the new Chief Justice of the Supreme Court in January but agreed to continue serving as Secretary of State for the remaining weeks of Adams's presidency. Marshall then dispatched his younger brother James Markham Marshall to deliver the commissions to the appointees. With only one day left before Jefferson's inauguration, James Marshall was able to deliver most of the commissions, but a few\u2014including Marbury's\u2014were not delivered.\nThe day after, March 4, 1801, Jefferson was sworn in and became the third President of the United States. Jefferson instructed his new Secretary of State, James Madison, to withhold the undelivered commissions. In Jefferson's opinion, the commissions were void because they had not been delivered before Adams left office. Without their commissions, the appointees were unable to assume their new offices and duties. Over the next several months, Madison steadfastly refused to deliver Marbury's commission to him. Finally, in December 1801, Marbury filed a lawsuit against Madison at the Supreme Court, asking the court to force Madison to deliver his commission. This lawsuit resulted in the case of \"Marbury v. Madison\".\nDecision.\nOn February 24, 1803, the Supreme Court issued a unanimous 4\u20130 decision against Marbury. The court's opinion was written by Chief Justice John Marshall, who structured the court's opinion around a series of three questions it answered in turn:\nMarbury's right to his commission.\nThe court began by holding that Marbury had a legal right to his commission. Marshall reasoned that all appropriate procedures were followed: the commission had been properly signed and sealed. Madison had argued that the commissions were void if not delivered. The court disagreed, saying that the delivery of the commission was merely a custom, not an essential element of the commission itself.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The [President's] signature is a warrant for affixing the great seal to the commission, and the great seal is only to be affixed to an instrument which is complete. ... The transmission of the commission is a practice directed by convenience, but not by law. It cannot therefore be necessary to constitute the appointment, which must precede it and which is the mere act of the President.\u2014\u200a\nThe court said that because Marbury's commission was valid, Madison's withholding it was \"violative of a vested legal right\" on Marbury's part.\nMarbury's legal remedy.\nTurning to the second question, the court said that the law provided Marbury a remedy for Madison's unlawful withholding of his commission. Marshall wrote that \"it is a general and indisputable rule, that where there is a legal right, there is also a legal remedy by suit or action at law, whenever that right is invaded.\" This rule derives from the ancient Roman legal maxim (\"where there is a legal right, there is a legal remedy\"), which was well established in the English common law. In what the American legal scholar Akhil Reed Amar called \"one of the most important and inspiring passages\" of the opinion, Marshall wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The very essence of civil liberty certainly consists in the right of every individual to claim the protection of the laws whenever he receives an injury.\u2014\u200a\nThe court then confirmed that a writ of mandamus\u2014a type of court order that commands a government official to perform an act his official duties legally require him to perform\u2014was the proper remedy for Marbury's situation. But this raised the issue of whether the court, which was part of the judicial branch of the government, had the power to command Madison, who as secretary of state was part of the executive branch of the government. The court held that so long as the remedy involved a mandatory duty to a specific person and not a political matter left to discretion, the courts could provide the legal remedy. Borrowing a phrase John Adams had drafted in 1779 for the Massachusetts State Constitution, Marshall wrote: \"The government of the United States has been emphatically termed a government of laws, and not of men.\"\nThe Supreme Court's jurisdiction.\nThis brought the court to the third question: did the Supreme Court have proper jurisdiction over the case that would allow it to legally issue the writ of mandamus that Marbury wanted? The answer depended entirely on how the court interpreted the Judiciary Act of 1789. Congress had passed the Judiciary Act to establish the American federal court system. Section 13 of the Judiciary Act sets out the Supreme Court's original and appellate jurisdictions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And be it further enacted, That the Supreme Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all cases of a civil nature where a state is a party ... [and] suits or proceedings against ambassadors, or other public ministers ... The Supreme Court shall also have appellate jurisdiction from the circuit courts and courts of the several states, in the cases herein after specially provided for; and shall have power to issue ... writs of mandamus, in cases warranted by the principles and usages of law, to any courts appointed, or persons holding office, under the authority of the United States.\u2014\u200a\nMarbury had argued that the wording of section 13 had given the Supreme Court the authority to issue writs of mandamus when hearing cases under exclusive (original) jurisdiction, not only under appellate jurisdiction. As Marshall explains in the opinion, original jurisdiction gives a court the power to be the first to hear and decide a case; appellate jurisdiction gives a court the power to hear an appeal from a lower court's decision and to \"revise and correct\" the previous decision. The portion of section 13 that speaks of the court's power to issue writs of mandamus appears after its sentence on appellate jurisdiction, not with the earlier sentences on original jurisdiction, but a semicolon separates it from the clause on appellate jurisdiction. Section 13 does not make clear whether the mandamus clause was intended to be read as part of the appellate clause or on its own\u2014in the opinion, Marshall quoted only the end of the section\u2014and the wording of the law can plausibly be read either way.\nIn the end, the court agreed with Marbury and interpreted section 13 of the Judiciary Act to have authorized the court to exercise original jurisdiction over cases involving disputes over writs of mandamus. This interpretation, however, meant that the Judiciary Act conflicted with article III of the Constitution. Article III defines the Supreme Court's jurisdiction as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In all Cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, and those in which a State shall be Party, the supreme Court shall have \"original Jurisdiction\". In all the other Cases before mentioned, the supreme Court shall have \"appellate Jurisdiction\", both as to Law and Fact, with such Exceptions, and under such Regulations as the Congress shall make.\u2014\u200a\nArticle III says that the Supreme Court has original jurisdiction only in cases where a U.S. state is a party to a lawsuit or where a lawsuit involves foreign dignitaries. Neither of these categories covered Marbury's lawsuit, which was a dispute over a writ of mandamus for his justice of the peace commission. According to the Constitution, therefore, the court did not have original jurisdiction over a case like Marbury's.\nBecause the court had interpreted the Judiciary Act to have given it original jurisdiction over lawsuits for writs of mandamus, this meant the Judiciary Act had taken the Constitution's initial scope for the Supreme Court's original jurisdiction, which did not cover cases involving writs of mandamus, and expanded it to include them. The court ruled that Congress cannot increase the Supreme Court's original jurisdiction as it was set down in the Constitution, and it therefore held that the relevant portion of section 13 of the Judiciary Act violated article III of the Constitution.\nJudicial review and striking down the law.\nAfter ruling that section 13 of the Judiciary Act conflicted with the Constitution, the court struck down that section in its first ever declaration of the power of judicial review. The court ruled that American federal courts have the power to refuse to give any consideration to congressional legislation that is inconsistent with their interpretation of the Constitution\u2014a move colloquially known as \"striking down\" laws.\nThe U.S. Constitution does not explicitly give the federal judiciary the power of judicial review. Nevertheless, the court's opinion gives many reasons in support of the judiciary's possession of the power. First, Marshall reasoned that the written nature of the Constitution inherently established judicial review. Borrowing from Alexander Hamilton's essay \"Federalist No. 78\", Marshall wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The powers of the legislature are defined and limited; and that those limits may not be mistaken or forgotten, the constitution is written. ... Certainly all those who have framed written constitutions contemplate them as forming the fundamental and paramount law of the nation, and consequently the theory of every such government must be, that an act of the legislature, repugnant to the constitution, is void.\u2014\u200a\nSecond, the court declared that deciding the constitutionality of the laws it applies is an inherent part of the American judiciary's role. In what has become the most famous and most frequently quoted line of the opinion, Marshall wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is.\u2014\u200a\nMarshall reasoned that the Constitution places limits on the American government's powers, and that those limits would be meaningless unless they were subject to judicial review and enforcement. He reasoned that the provisions of the Constitution that limit Congress's power\u2014such as the prohibitions on \"ex post facto\" laws and bills of attainder\u2014meant that in some cases judges would be forced to choose between enforcing the Constitution or following Congress. Marshall held \"virtually as a matter of iron logic\" that in the event of conflict between the Constitution and statutory laws passed by Congress, constitutional law must be supreme.\nThird, the court said that denying the supremacy of the Constitution over Congress's acts would mean that \"courts must close their eyes on the constitution, and see only the law.\" This, Marshall wrote, would make Congress omnipotent, because none of the laws it passed would ever be invalid.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This doctrine ... would declare, that if the legislature shall do what is expressly forbidden, such act, notwithstanding the express prohibition, is in reality effectual. It would be giving to the legislature a practical and real omnipotence, with the same breath which professes to restrict their powers within narrow limits.\u2014\u200a\nMarshall then gave several other reasons in favor of judicial review. He reasoned that the authorization in Article III of the Constitution that the court can decide cases arising \"under this Constitution\" implied that the court had the power to strike down laws conflicting with the Constitution. This, Marshall wrote, meant that the Founders were willing to have the American judiciary use and interpret the Constitution when judging cases. He also said that federal judges' oaths of office\u2014in which they swear to discharge their duties impartially and \"agreeably to the Constitution and laws of the United States\"\u2014requires them to support the Constitution. Lastly, Marshall reasoned that judicial review is implied in the Supremacy Clause of article VI of the U.S. Constitution, because it declares that the supreme law of the United States is the Constitution and laws made \"in Pursuance thereof\".\nHaving given his list of reasons, Marshall concluded the court's opinion by reaffirming the court's ruling on the invalidity of section 13 of the Judiciary Act and, therefore, the court's inability to issue Marbury's writ of mandamus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thus, the particular phraseology of the Constitution of the United States confirms and strengthens the principle, supposed to be essential to all written Constitutions, that a law repugnant to the Constitution is void, and that courts, as well as other departments, are bound by that instrument. The rule must be discharged.\u2014\u200a\nAnalysis.\nPolitical dilemma.\nBesides its legal issues, the case of \"Marbury v. Madison\" also created a difficult political dilemma for John Marshall and the Supreme Court. If the court had ruled in Marbury's favor and issued a writ of mandamus ordering Madison to deliver Marbury's commission, then Jefferson and Madison would probably have simply ignored the writ. This would have made the court look impotent and emphasized the shakiness of the early American judiciary. On the other hand, a simple ruling against Marbury would have given Jefferson and the Democratic-Republicans a clear political victory over the Federalists.\nMarshall solved both problems. First, he had the court rule that Madison's withholding of Marbury's commission was illegal, which pleased the Federalists. Then, however, he also ruled that the court could not grant Marbury his requested writ of mandamus, which gave Jefferson and the Democratic-Republicans the result they desired. Lastly, in what the American legal scholar Laurence Tribe calls \"an oft-told tale ... [that] remains awe-inspiring\", Marshall had the court rule in a way that maneuvered Marbury's simple petition for a writ of mandamus into a case that presented a question that went to the heart of American constitutional law itself. The American political historian Robert G. McCloskey described:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[\"Marbury v. Madison\"] is a masterwork of indirection, a brilliant example of Marshall's capacity to sidestep danger while seeming to court it. ... The danger of a head-on clash with the Jeffersonians was averted by the denial of jurisdiction: but, at the same time, the declaration that the commission was illegally withheld scotched any impression that the Court condoned the administration's behavior. These negative maneuvers were artful achievements in their own right. But the touch of genius is evident when Marshall, not content with having rescued a bad situation, seizes the occasion to set forth the doctrine of judicial review. It is easy for us to see in retrospect that the occasion was golden, ... but only a judge of Marshall's discernment could have recognized it.\nMarshall had been looking for a case suitable for introducing judicial review and was eager to use the situation in \"Marbury\" to establish his claim. He introduced judicial review\u2014a move Jefferson decried\u2014but used it to strike down a provision of a law that he read to have expanded the Supreme Court's powers, and thereby produced Jefferson's hoped-for result of Marbury losing his case. Marshall \"seized the occasion to uphold the institution of judicial review, but he did so in the course of reaching a judgment that his political opponents could neither defy nor protest.\" Although Jefferson criticized the court's decision, he accepted it, and Marshall's opinion in \"Marbury\" \"articulate[d] a role for the federal courts that survives to this day.\" The American legal scholar Erwin Chemerinsky concludes: \"The brilliance of Marshall's opinion cannot be overstated.\"\nLegal criticism.\nThe Supreme Court's historic decision in \"Marbury v. Madison\" continues to be the subject of critical analysis and inquiry. In a 1955 \"Harvard Law Review\" article, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter emphasized that one can criticize Marshall's opinion in \"Marbury\" without demeaning it: \"The courage of \"Marbury v. Madison\" is not minimized by suggesting that its reasoning is not impeccable and its conclusion, however wise, not inevitable.\"\nCriticisms of Marshall's opinion in \"Marbury\" usually fall into two general categories. First, some criticize the way Marshall \"strove\" to reach the conclusion that the U.S. Supreme Court has constitutional authority over the other branches of the U.S. government. Today, American courts generally follow the principle of \"constitutional avoidance\": if a certain interpretation of a law raises constitutional problems, they prefer to use alternative interpretations that avoid these problems, as long as the alternative interpretations are plausible. In \"Marbury\", Marshall could have avoided the constitutional questions through different legal rulings. If the court had ruled that Marbury did not have a right to his commission until it was delivered, or if he had ruled that refusals to honor political appointments could only be remedied through the political process and not the judicial process, then it would have disposed of the case immediately and the court would not have reached the case's constitutional issues. Marshall did not do so, and many legal scholars have criticized him for it. Some scholars have responded that the \"constitutional avoidance\" principle did not exist in 1803 and that it is \"only a general guide for Court action\", not an \"ironclad rule\". Alternatively, it has also been argued that the claim that Marshall \"strove\" to create a controversy largely vanishes when the case is viewed from the legal perspective of the late 18th century when American colonies' and states' supreme courts were largely modeled on England's Court of King's Bench, which inherently possessed \"mandamus\" powers.\nSecond, Marshall's arguments for the court's authority are sometimes said to be mere \"series of assertions\", rather than substantive reasons logically laid out to support his position. Scholars generally agree that Marshall's series of assertions regarding the U.S. Constitution and the actions of the other branches of government do not \"inexorably lead to the conclusion that Marshall draws from them.\" Marshall's assertion of the American judiciary's authority to review executive branch actions was the most controversial issue when \"Marbury\" was first decided, and several subsequent U.S. presidents have tried to dispute it, to varying degrees.\nAdditionally, it is questionable whether Marshall should have participated in the adjudication of the \"Marbury\" case, because he had played a role in the underlying dispute. Marshall was still the acting secretary of state when Adams nominated Marbury and the other \"Midnight Judges\". He had signed Marbury and the other appointees' commissions and had been responsible for their delivery. This potential conflict of interest raises strong grounds for Marshall to have recused himself from the case. In hindsight, the fact that Marshall did not recuse himself from \"Marbury\" is likely indicative of his eagerness to hear the case and use it to establish judicial review.\nLegacy.\n\"Marbury v. Madison\" is regarded as the single most important decision in American constitutional law. It established U.S. federal judges' authority to review the constitutionality of Congress's legislative acts, and to this day the Supreme Court's power to review the constitutionality of American laws at both the federal and state level \"is generally rested upon the epic decision of \"Marbury v. Madison\".\"\nAlthough the court's opinion in \"Marbury\" established the power of judicial review in American federal law, it did not invent or create it. Some 18th-century British jurists had argued that English courts had the power to circumscribe Parliament. The idea became widely accepted in Colonial America\u2014especially in Marshall, Jefferson, and Madison's native Virginia\u2014under the theory that in America only the people were sovereign, not the government, and so the courts should only implement legitimate laws. American courts' \"independent power and duty to interpret the law\" was well established by the time of the Constitutional Convention in 1787, and Hamilton had defended the concept in \"Federalist No. 78\". In addition, the 1796 Supreme Court case \"Hylton v. United States\" considered whether a tax on carriages was constitutional, though the court ruled that the statute in question was in fact constitutional and did not actually exercise the power. Nevertheless, Marshall's opinion in \"Marbury\" was the Supreme Court's first mention of, and exercise of, that power. It made the practice more routine, rather than exceptional, and prepared the way for the Court's opinion in the 1819 case \"McCulloch v. Maryland\", in which Marshall implied that the Supreme Court was the supreme interpreter of the U.S. Constitution.\n\"Marbury\" also established that the power of judicial review covers actions by the executive branch\u2014the President and his cabinet members. However, American courts' power of judicial review over executive branch actions only extends to matters in which the executive has a legal duty to act or refrain from acting, and does not extend to matters that are entirely within the President's discretion, such as whether to veto a bill or whom to appoint to an office. This power has been the basis of later important Supreme Court decisions. In its 1974 decision \"United States v. Nixon\", for example, the Supreme Court held that President Richard Nixon had to comply with a subpoena to provide tapes of his conversations for use in a criminal trial related to the Watergate scandal, which ultimately led to Nixon's resignation.\nThe power of judicial review is a potent check on the other branches of the U.S. government, but federal courts rarely exercised it in early American history. After deciding \"Marbury\" in 1803, the Supreme Court did not strike down another federal law until 1857, when it struck down the Missouri Compromise in its now-infamous decision \"Dred Scott v. Sandford\", a ruling that contributed to the outbreak of the American Civil War.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n is available from: https:// http:// http:// http:// https:// "}
{"id": "20716", "revid": "4497767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20716", "title": "Mellitus", "text": "Archbishop of Canterbury from 619 to 624, Christian saint\nMellitus (; died 24 April 624) was the first bishop of London in the Saxon period, the third archbishop of Canterbury, and a member of the Gregorian mission sent to England to convert the Anglo-Saxons from their native paganism to Christianity. He arrived in 601 AD with a group of clergy sent to augment the mission, and was consecrated as Bishop of London in 604. Mellitus was the recipient of a famous letter from Pope Gregory I known as the \"Epistola ad Mellitum\", preserved in a later work by the medieval chronicler Bede, which suggested the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons be undertaken gradually, integrating pagan rituals and customs. In 610, Mellitus returned to Italy to attend a council of bishops, and returned to England bearing papal letters to some of the missionaries.\nMellitus was exiled from London by the pagan successors to his patron, King S\u00e6berht of Essex, following the latter's death around 616. King \u00c6thelberht of Kent, Mellitus's other patron, died at about the same time, forcing him to take refuge in Gaul. Mellitus returned to England the following year, after \u00c6thelberht's successor had been converted to Christianity, but he was unable to return to London, whose inhabitants remained pagan. Mellitus was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in 619. During his tenure, he was alleged to have miraculously saved the cathedral, and much of the town of Canterbury, from a fire. After his death in 624, Mellitus was revered as a saint.\nEarly life.\nThe medieval chronicler Bede described Mellitus as being of noble birth. In letters, Pope Gregory I called him an abbot, but it is unclear whether Mellitus had previously been abbot of a Roman monastery, or this was a rank bestowed on him to ease his journey to England by making him the leader of the expedition. The papal register, a listing of letters sent out by the popes, describes him as an \"abbot in Frankia\" in its description of the correspondence, but the letter itself only says \"abbot\". The first time Mellitus is mentioned in history is in the letters of Gregory, and nothing else of his background is known. It appears likely that he was a native of Italy, along with all the other bishops consecrated by Augustine.\nJourney to England.\nPope Gregory I sent Mellitus to England in June 601, in response to an appeal from Augustine, the first Archbishop of Canterbury. Augustine needed more clergy to join the Gregorian mission that was converting the kingdom of Kent, then ruled by \u00c6thelberht, from paganism to Christianity. The new missionaries brought with them a gift of books and \"all things which were needed for worship and the ministry of the Church.\" Thomas of Elmham, a 15th-century Canterbury chronicler, claimed that in his day there were a number of the books brought to England by Mellitus still at Canterbury. Examination of the remaining manuscripts has determined that one possible survivor of Mellitus's books is the St Augustine Gospels, now in Cambridge, as Corpus Christi College, MS (manuscript) 286. Along with the letter to Augustine, the missionaries brought a letter for \u00c6thelberht, urging the King to act like the Roman Emperor Constantine I and force the conversion of his followers to Christianity. The king was also encouraged to destroy all pagan shrines.\nThe historian Ian Wood has suggested that Mellitus's journey through Gaul probably took in the bishoprics of Vienne, Arles, Lyons, Toulon, Marseilles, Metz, Paris, and Rouen, as evidenced by the letters that Gregory addressed to those bishops soliciting their support for Mellitus's party. Gregory also wrote to the Frankish kings Chlothar II, Theuderic II, Theudebert II, along with Brunhilda of Austrasia, who was Theudebert and Theuderic's grandmother and regent. Wood feels that this wide appeal to the Frankish episcopate and royalty was an effort to secure more support for the Gregorian mission. While on his journey to England, Mellitus received a letter from Gregory allowing Augustine to convert pagan temples to Christian churches, and to convert pagan animal sacrifices into Christian feasts, to ease the transition to Christianity. Gregory's letter marked a sea change in the missionary strategy, and was later included in Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\". Usually known as the \"Epistola ad Mellitum\", it conflicts with the letter sent to \u00c6thelberht, which the historian R. A. Markus sees as a turning point in missionary history, when forcible conversion gave way to persuasion. This traditional view, that the \"Epistola\" represents a contradiction of the letter to \u00c6thelberht, has been challenged by the historian and theologian George Demacopoulos, who argues that the letter to \u00c6thelberht was mainly meant to encourage the King in spiritual matters, while the \"Epistola\" was sent to deal with purely practical matters, and thus the two do not contradict each other.\nBishop of London.\nExactly when Mellitus and his party arrived in England is unknown, but he was certainly in the country by 604, when Augustine consecrated him as bishop in the province of the East Saxons, making Mellitus the first Bishop of London after the Roman departure (London was the East Saxons' capital). The city was a logical choice for a new bishopric, as it was a hub for the southern road network. It was also a former Roman town; many of the Gregorian mission's efforts were centred in such locations. Before his consecration, Mellitus baptised S\u00e6berht, \u00c6thelberht's nephew, who then allowed the bishopric to be established. The episcopal church built in London was probably founded by \u00c6thelberht, rather than S\u00e6berht. Although Bede records that \u00c6thelberht gave lands to support the new episcopate, a charter that claims to be a grant of lands from \u00c6thelberht to Mellitus is a later forgery.\nAlthough Gregory had intended London to be the southern archbishopric for the island, Augustine never moved his episcopal see to London, and instead consecrated Mellitus as a plain bishop there. After Augustine's death in 604, Canterbury continued to be the site of the southern archbishopric, and London remained a bishopric. It may have been that the Kentish king did not wish greater episcopal authority to be exercised outside his own kingdom.\nMellitus attended a council of bishops held in Italy in February 610, convened by Pope Boniface IV. The historian N. J. Higham speculates that one reason for his attendance may have been to assert the English Church's independence from the Frankish Church. Boniface had Mellitus take two papal letters back to England, one to \u00c6thelbert and his people, and another to Laurence, the Archbishop of Canterbury. He also brought back the synod's decrees to England. No authentic letters or documents from this synod remain, although some were forged in the 1060s and 1070s at Canterbury. During his time as a bishop, Mellitus joined with Justus, the Bishop of Rochester, in signing a letter that Laurence wrote to the Celtic bishops urging the Celtic Church to adopt the Roman method of calculating the date of Easter. This letter also mentioned the fact that Irish missionary bishops, such as Dagan, refused to eat with the Roman missionaries.\nBoth \u00c6thelberht and S\u00e6berht died around 616 or 618, causing a crisis for the mission. S\u00e6berht's three sons had not converted to Christianity, and drove Mellitus from London. Bede says that Mellitus was exiled because he refused the brothers' request for a taste of the sacramental bread. Whether this occurred immediately after S\u00e6berht's death or later is impossible to determine from Bede's chronology, which has both events in the same chapter but gives neither an exact time frame nor the elapsed time between the two events. The historian N. J. Higham connects the timing of this episode with a change in the \"overkingship\" from the Christian Kentish \u00c6thelberht to the pagan East Anglian Raedwald, which Higham feels happened after \u00c6thelberht's death. In Higham's view, S\u00e6berht's sons drove Mellitus from London because they had passed from Kentish overlordship to East Anglian, and thus no longer needed to keep Mellitus, who was connected with the Kentish kingdom, in office.\nMellitus fled first to Canterbury, but \u00c6thelberht's successor Eadbald was also a pagan, so Mellitus, accompanied by Justus, took refuge in Gaul. Mellitus was recalled to Britain by Laurence, the second Archbishop of Canterbury, after his conversion of Eadbald. How long Mellitus's exile lasted is unclear. Bede claims it was a year, but it may have been longer. Mellitus did not return to London, because the East Saxons remained pagan. Although Mellitus fled, there does not seem to have been any serious persecution of Christians in the East Saxon kingdom. The East Saxon see was not occupied again until Cedd was consecrated as bishop in about 654.\nArchbishop and death.\nMellitus succeeded Laurence as the third Archbishop of Canterbury after the latter's death in 619. During his tenure as archbishop, Mellitus supposedly performed a miracle in 623 by diverting a fire that had started in Canterbury and threatened the church. He was carried into the flames, upon which the wind changed direction, thus saving the building. Bede praised Mellitus's sane mind, but other than the miracle, little happened during his time as archbishop. Bede also mentioned that Mellitus suffered from gout. Boniface wrote to Mellitus encouraging him in the mission, perhaps prompted by the marriage of \u00c6thelburh of Kent to King Edwin of Northumbria. Whether Mellitus received a pallium, the symbol of an archbishop's authority, from the pope is unknown.\nMellitus died on 24 April 624, and was buried at St Augustine's Abbey in Canterbury that same day. He became revered as a saint after his death, and was allotted the feast day of\u00a024 April. In the ninth century, Mellitus's feast day was mentioned in the Stowe Missal, along with Laurence and Justus. He was still venerated at St Augustine's in 1120, along with a number of other local saints. There was also a shrine to him at Old St Paul's Cathedral in London. Shortly after the Norman Conquest, Goscelin wrote a life of Mellitus, the first of several to appear around that time, but none contain any information not included in Bede's earlier works. These later medieval lives do, however, reveal that during Goscelin's lifetime persons suffering from gout were urged to pray at Mellitus's tomb. Goscelin records that Mellitus's shrine flanked that of Augustine, along with Laurence, in the eastern central chapel of the presbytery.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20723", "revid": "31831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20723", "title": "M'Naghten rules", "text": "Guideline governing legal pleas of insanity\nThe M'Naghten rule(s) (pronounced, and sometimes spelled, McNaughton) is a legal test defining the defence of insanity that was formulated by the House of Lords in 1843. It is the established standard in UK criminal law. Versions have been adopted in some US states, and other jurisdictions, either as case law or by statute. Its original wording is a proposed jury instruction:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe rule was created in reaction to the acquittal in 1843 of Daniel M'Naghten on the charge of murdering Edward Drummond. M'Naghten had shot Drummond after mistakenly identifying him as the British Prime Minister Robert Peel, who was the intended target. The acquittal of M'Naghten on the basis of insanity, a hitherto unheard-of defence \"per se\" in modern form, caused a public uproar, with protests from the establishment and the press, even prompting Queen Victoria to write to Robert Peel, calling for a \"wider interpretation of the verdict\". The House of Lords, using a medieval right to question judges, asked a panel of judges presided over by Sir Nicolas Conyngham Tindal, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, a series of hypothetical questions about the defence of insanity. The principles expounded by this panel have come to be known as the \"M'Naghten Rules\". M'Naghten himself would have been found guilty if the rules so expounded had been applied at his trial.\nThe rules so formulated as \"M'Naghten's Case\" 1843 10 C &amp; F 200, or variations of them, are a standard test for criminal liability in relation to mentally challenged defendants in various jurisdictions, either in common law or enacted by statute. When the tests set out by the rules are satisfied, the accused may be adjudged \"not guilty by reason of insanity\" or \"guilty but insane\" and the sentence may be a mandatory or discretionary, but usually indeterminate, period of treatment in a secure hospital facility, or otherwise at the discretion of the court, depending on the country and the offence charged, instead of a punitive disposal.\nHistorical development.\nThere are various justifications for the exemption of the insane from criminal responsibility. When mental incapacity is successfully raised as a defence in a criminal trial it absolves a defendant from liability: it applies public policies in relation to criminal responsibility by applying a rationale of compassion, accepting that it is morally wrong to punish a person if that person is deprived permanently or temporarily of the capacity to form a necessary mental intent that the definition of a crime requires. Punishment of the obviously mentally ill by the state may undermine public confidence in the penal system. A utilitarian and humanitarian approach suggests that the interests of society are better served by treatment.\nHistorically, insanity was seen as grounds for leniency. In pre-Norman times in England there was no distinct criminal code\u00a0\u2013 a murderer could pay compensation to the victim's family under the principle of \"buy off the spear or bear it\". The insane person's family were expected to pay any compensation for the crime. In Norman times, insanity was not seen as a defence in itself, but a special circumstance in which the jury would deliver a guilty verdict and refer the defendant to the King for a pardon\nsince they are without sense and reason and can no more commit a tort or a felony than a brute animal, since they are not far removed from brutes, as is evident in the case of a minor, for if he should kill another while under age he would not suffer judgment.\nIn \"R v Arnold\" 1724 16 How St. Tr. 765, the test for insanity was expressed in the following terms\nwhether the accused is totally deprived of his understanding and memory and knew what he was doing \"no more than a wild beast or a brute, or an infant\".\nThe next major advance occurred in \"Hadfield's Trial\" 1800 27 How St. Tr. 765, in which the court decided that a crime committed under some delusion would be excused, only if it would have been excusable had the delusion been true. This would deal with the situation, for example, when the accused imagines he is cutting through a loaf of bread, whereas in fact he is cutting through a person's neck.\nEach jurisdiction may have its own standards of the insanity defence. More than one standard can be applied to any case based on multiple jurisdictions.\nM'Naghten rules.\nThe House of Lords delivered the following exposition of the rules:\nthe jurors ought to be told in all cases that every man is to be presumed to be sane, and to possess a sufficient degree of reason to be responsible for his crimes, until the contrary be proved to their satisfaction; and that to establish a defence on the ground of insanity, it must be clearly proved that, at the time of the committing of the act, the party accused was labouring under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind, as not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing; or, if he did know it, that he did not know he was doing what was wrong.\nThe central issue of this definition may be stated as, \"Did the defendant know what he was doing, or, if so, that it was wrong?\", and the issues raised have been analysed in subsequent appellate decisions.\nPresumption of sanity and burden of proof.\nSanity is a rebuttable presumption and the burden of proof is on the party denying it; the standard of proof is on a balance of probabilities, that is to say that mental incapacity is more likely than not. If this burden is successfully discharged, the party relying upon it is entitled to succeed. In Lord Denning's judgement in \"Bratty v Attorney-General for Northern Ireland\" 1963 AC 386, whenever the defendant makes an issue of his state of mind, the prosecution can adduce evidence of insanity. However, this will normally only arise to negate the defence case when automatism or diminished responsibility is in issue. \nIn practical terms, the defence will be more likely to raise the issue of mental incapacity to negate or minimise criminal liability. In \"R v Clarke\" 1972 1 All E R 219 a defendant charged with a shoplifting claimed she had no \"mens rea\" because she had absent-mindedly walked out of the shop without paying because she suffered from depression. When the prosecution attempted to adduce evidence that this constituted insanity within the Rules, she changed her plea to guilty, but on appeal the Court ruled that she had been merely denying mens rea rather than raising a defence under the Rules and her conviction was quashed. The general rule was stated that the Rules apply only to cases in which the defect of reason is substantial.\nDisease of the mind.\nWhether a particular condition amounts to a disease of the mind within the Rules is not a medical but a legal question to be decided in accordance with the ordinary rules of interpretation. It seems that any disease which produces a malfunctioning of the mind is a disease of the mind and need not be a disease of the brain itself. The term has been held to cover numerous conditions:\nThe courts have clearly drawn a distinction between internal and external factors affecting a defendant's mental condition. This is partly based on risk of recurrence, whereby the High Court of Australia has expressed that the defence of automatism is unable to be considered when the mental disorder has been proved transient and as such not likely to recur. However, the distinction between insanity and automatism is difficult because the distinction between internal and external divide is difficult. \nMany diseases consist of a predisposition, considered an internal cause, combined with a precipitant, which would be considered an external cause. Actions committed while sleepwalking would normally be considered as \"non-insane automatism\", but often alcohol and stress trigger bouts of sleepwalking and make them more likely to be violent. The diabetic who takes insulin but does not eat properly\u00a0\u2013 is that an internal or external cause?\nNature and quality of the act.\nThis phrase refers to the physical nature and quality of the act, rather than the moral quality. It covers the situation where the defendant does not know what he is physically doing. Two common examples used are:\nThe judges were specifically asked if a person could be excused if he committed an offence in consequence of an insane delusion. They replied that if he labours under such partial delusion only, and is not in other respects insane, \"he must be considered in the same situation as to responsibility as if the facts with respect to which the delusion exists were real\". This rule requires the court to take the facts as the accused believed them to be and follows \"Hadfield's Trial\", above. If the delusions do not prevent the defendant from having mens rea there will be no defence. \nIn \"R v Bell\" 1984 Crim. LR 685, the defendant smashed a van through the entrance gates of a holiday camp because \"It was like a secret society in there, I wanted to do my bit against it\" as instructed by God. It was held that, as the defendant had been aware of his actions, he could neither have been in a state of automatism nor insane, and the fact that he believed that God had told him to do this merely provided an explanation of his motive and did not prevent him from knowing that what he was doing was wrong in the legal sense.\nKnowledge that the act was wrong.\nThe interpretation of this clause is a subject of controversy among legal authorities, and different standards may apply in different jurisdictions.\n\"Wrong\" was interpreted to mean \"legally\" wrong, rather than \"morally\" wrong, in the case of \"Windle\" 1952 2QB 826; 1952 2 All ER 1 246, where the defendant killed his wife with an overdose of aspirin; he telephoned the police and said, \"I suppose they will hang me for this.\" It was held that this was sufficient to show that although the defendant was suffering from a mental illness, he was aware that his act was wrong, and the defence was not allowed. \nUnder this interpretation, there may be cases where the mentally ill know that their conduct is legally prohibited, but it is arguable that their mental condition prevents them making the connection between an act being legally prohibited and the societal requirement to conform their conduct to the requirements of the criminal law.\nAs an example of a contrasting interpretation in which defendant lacking knowledge that the act was \"morally\" wrong meets the M'Naghten standards, there are the instructions the judge is required to provide to the jury in cases in New York State when the defendant has raised an insanity plea as a defence:\n... with respect to the term \"wrong\", a person lacks substantial capacity to know or appreciate that conduct is wrong if that person, as a result of mental disease or defect, lacked substantial capacity to know or appreciate either that the conduct was against the law or that it was against commonly held moral principles, or both.\nThere is other support in the authorities for this interpretation of the standards enunciated in the findings presented to the House of Lords regarding M'Naghten's case:\nIf it be accepted, as can hardly be denied, that the answers of the judges to the questions asked by the House of Lords in 1843 are to be read in the light of the then existing case-law and not as novel pronouncements of a legislative character, then the [Australian] High Court's analysis in \"Stapleton's Case\" is compelling. Their exhaustive examination of the extensive case-law concerning the defence of insanity prior to and at the time of the trial of M'Naughten establishes convincingly that it was morality and not legality which lay as a concept behind the judges' use of \"wrong\" in the M'Naghten rules.\nOffences of strict liability.\nIn \"DPP v Harper\" (1997) it was held that insanity is not generally a defence to strict liability offences. In this instance, the accused was driving with excess alcohol. By definition, the accused is sufficiently aware of the nature of the activity to commit the \"actus reus\" of driving and presumably knows that driving while drunk is legally wrong. Any other feature of the accused's knowledge is irrelevant.\nFunction of the jury.\nSection 1 of the United Kingdoms' https:// provides that a jury shall not return a special verdict that \"the accused is not guilty by reason of insanity\" except on the written or oral evidence of two or more registered medical practitioners of whom at least one has special experience in the field of mental disorder. This may require the jury to decide between conflicting medical evidence which they are not necessarily equipped to do, but the law goes further and allows them to disagree with the experts if there are facts or surrounding circumstances which, in the opinion of the court, justify the jury in coming to that conclusion.\nSentencing.\nUnder section 5 of the United Kingdom's https:// (as amended):\nCriticisms.\nThere have been four major criticisms of the law as it currently stands:\nAlternative rules.\nThe insanity defence article has a number of alternative tests that have been used at different times and places. As one example, the ALI test replaced the M'Naghten rule in many parts of the United States for many years until the 1980s; when, in the aftermath of John Hinckley shooting US President Ronald Reagan, many ALI states returned to a variation of M'Naghten.\nCase law.\n \nIn popular culture.\nThe M'Naghten rules are at the focus of John Grisham's legal thriller \"A Time to Kill\". The M'Naghten rules apply in the US State of Mississippi, where the plot is set, and using them is the only way for the lawyer protagonist to save his client.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "20724", "revid": "21840846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20724", "title": "Mongolism", "text": "Mongolism may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20725", "revid": "44008019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20725", "title": "Mineraloid", "text": "Non-crystalline mineral-like substance\nA mineraloid is a naturally occurring substance that resembles a mineral, but does not demonstrate the crystallinity of a mineral. Mineraloid substances possess chemical compositions that vary beyond the generally accepted ranges for specific minerals, for example, obsidian is an amorphous glass and not a true crystal; lignite (jet) is derived from the decay of wood under extreme pressure underground; and opal is a mineraloid substance because of its non-crystalline nature. Pearl is a mineraloid substance because the calcite crystals and the aragonite crystals are bonded by an organic material, and naturally occurs without definite proportions of the components.\nThe first usage of the term \"mineraloid\" substance was in 1909, by mineralogist and geologist Julian Niedzwiedzki, in identifying and describing amorphous substances that resemble minerals.\nExamples.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20728", "revid": "49685307", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20728", "title": "Mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics", "text": "Mathematical structures that allow quantum mechanics to be explained\nThe mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics are those mathematical formalisms that permit a rigorous description of quantum mechanics. This mathematical formalism uses mainly a part of functional analysis, especially Hilbert spaces, which are a kind of linear space. Such are distinguished from mathematical formalisms for physics theories developed prior to the early 1900s by the use of abstract mathematical structures, such as infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces (\"L\"2 space mainly), and operators on these spaces. In brief, values of physical observables such as energy and momentum were no longer considered as values of functions on phase space, but as eigenvalues; more precisely as spectral values of linear operators in Hilbert space.\nThese formulations of quantum mechanics continue to be used today. At the heart of the description are ideas of \"quantum state\" and \"quantum observables\", which are radically different from those used in previous models of physical reality. While the mathematics permits calculation of many quantities that can be measured experimentally, there is a definite theoretical limit to values that can be simultaneously measured. This limitation was first elucidated by Heisenberg through a thought experiment, and is represented mathematically in the new formalism by the non-commutativity of operators representing quantum observables.\nPrior to the development of quantum mechanics as a separate theory, the mathematics used in physics consisted mainly of formal mathematical analysis, beginning with calculus, and increasing in complexity up to differential geometry and partial differential equations. Probability theory was used in statistical mechanics. Geometric intuition played a strong role in the first two and, accordingly, theories of relativity were formulated entirely in terms of differential geometric concepts. The phenomenology of quantum physics arose roughly between 1895 and 1915, and for the 10 to 15 years before the development of quantum mechanics (around 1925) physicists continued to think of quantum theory within the confines of what is now called classical physics, and in particular within the same mathematical structures. The most sophisticated example of this is the Sommerfeld\u2013Wilson\u2013Ishiwara quantization rule, which was formulated entirely on the classical phase space.\nHistory of the formalism.\nThe \"old quantum theory\" and the need for new mathematics.\nIn the 1890s, Planck was able to derive the blackbody spectrum, which was later used to avoid the classical ultraviolet catastrophe by making the unorthodox assumption that, in the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter, energy could only be exchanged in discrete units which he called quanta. Planck postulated a direct proportionality between the frequency of radiation and the quantum of energy at that frequency. The proportionality constant, \"h\", is now called the Planck constant in his honor.\nIn 1905, Einstein explained certain features of the photoelectric effect by assuming that Planck's energy quanta were actual particles, which were later dubbed photons.\nAll of these developments were phenomenological and challenged the theoretical physics of the time. Bohr and Sommerfeld went on to modify classical mechanics in an attempt to deduce the Bohr model from first principles. They proposed that, of all closed classical orbits traced by a mechanical system in its phase space, only the ones that enclosed an area which was a multiple of the Planck constant were actually allowed. The most sophisticated version of this formalism was the so-called Sommerfeld\u2013Wilson\u2013Ishiwara quantization. Although the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom could be explained in this way, the spectrum of the helium atom (classically an unsolvable 3-body problem) could not be predicted. The mathematical status of quantum theory remained uncertain for some time.\nIn 1923, de Broglie proposed that wave\u2013particle duality applied not only to photons but to electrons and every other physical system.\nThe situation changed rapidly in the years 1925\u20131930, when working mathematical foundations were found through the groundbreaking work of Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, Pascual Jordan, and the foundational work of John von Neumann, Hermann Weyl and Paul Dirac, and it became possible to unify several different approaches in terms of a fresh set of ideas. The physical interpretation of the theory was also clarified in these years after Werner Heisenberg discovered the uncertainty relations and Niels Bohr introduced the idea of complementarity.\nThe \"new quantum theory\".\nWerner Heisenberg's matrix mechanics was the first successful attempt at replicating the observed quantization of atomic spectra. Later in the same year, Schr\u00f6dinger created his wave mechanics. Schr\u00f6dinger's formalism was considered easier to understand, visualize and calculate as it led to differential equations, which physicists were already familiar with solving. Within a year, it was shown that the two theories were equivalent.\nSchr\u00f6dinger himself initially did not understand the fundamental probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics, as he thought that the absolute square of the wave function of an electron should be interpreted as the charge density of an object smeared out over an extended, possibly infinite, volume of space. It was Max Born who introduced the interpretation of the absolute square of the wave function as the probability distribution of the position of a \"pointlike\" object. Born's idea was soon taken over by Niels Bohr in Copenhagen who then became the \"father\" of the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. Schr\u00f6dinger's wave function can be seen to be closely related to the classical Hamilton\u2013Jacobi equation. The correspondence to classical mechanics was even more explicit, although somewhat more formal, in Heisenberg's matrix mechanics. In his PhD thesis project, Paul Dirac discovered that the equation for the operators in the Heisenberg representation, as it is now called, closely translates to classical equations for the dynamics of certain quantities in the Hamiltonian formalism of classical mechanics, when one expresses them through Poisson brackets, a procedure now known as canonical quantization.\nAlready before Schr\u00f6dinger, the young postdoctoral fellow Werner Heisenberg invented his matrix mechanics, which was the first correct quantum mechanics \u2013 the essential breakthrough. Heisenberg's matrix mechanics formulation was based on algebras of infinite matrices, a very radical formulation in light of the mathematics of classical physics, although he started from the index-terminology of the experimentalists of that time, not even aware that his \"index-schemes\" were matrices, as Born soon pointed out to him. In fact, in these early years, linear algebra was not generally popular with physicists in its present form.\nAlthough Schr\u00f6dinger himself after a year proved the equivalence of his wave-mechanics and Heisenberg's matrix mechanics, the reconciliation of the two approaches and their modern abstraction as motions in Hilbert space is generally attributed to Paul Dirac, who wrote a lucid account in his 1930 classic \"The Principles of Quantum Mechanics\". He is the third, and possibly most important, pillar of that field (he soon was the only one to have discovered a relativistic generalization of the theory). In his above-mentioned account, he introduced the bra\u2013ket notation, together with an abstract formulation in terms of the Hilbert space used in functional analysis; he showed that Schr\u00f6dinger's and Heisenberg's approaches were two different representations of the same theory, and found a third, most general one, which represented the dynamics of the system. His work was particularly fruitful in many types of generalizations of the field.\nThe first complete mathematical formulation of this approach, known as the Dirac\u2013von Neumann axioms, is generally credited to John von Neumann's 1932 book \"Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics\", although Hermann Weyl had already referred to Hilbert spaces (which he called \"unitary spaces\") in his 1927 classic paper and 1928 book. It was developed in parallel with a new approach to the mathematical spectral theory based on linear operators rather than the quadratic forms that were David Hilbert's approach a generation earlier. Though theories of quantum mechanics continue to evolve to this day, there is a basic framework for the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics which underlies most approaches and can be traced back to the mathematical work of John von Neumann. In other words, discussions about \"interpretation\" of the theory, and extensions to it, are now mostly conducted on the basis of shared assumptions about the mathematical foundations.\nLater developments.\nThe application of the new quantum theory to electromagnetism resulted in quantum field theory, which was developed starting around 1930. Quantum field theory has driven the development of more sophisticated formulations of quantum mechanics, of which the ones presented here are simple special cases. \nA related topic is the relationship to classical mechanics. Any new physical theory is supposed to reduce to successful old theories in some approximation. For quantum mechanics, this translates into the need to study the so-called classical limit of quantum mechanics. Also, as Bohr emphasized, human cognitive abilities and language are inextricably linked to the classical realm, and so classical descriptions are intuitively more accessible than quantum ones. In particular, quantization, namely the construction of a quantum theory whose classical limit is a given and known classical theory, becomes an important area of quantum physics in itself.\nFinally, some of the originators of quantum theory (notably Einstein and Schr\u00f6dinger) were unhappy with what they thought were the philosophical implications of quantum mechanics. In particular, Einstein took the position that quantum mechanics must be incomplete, which motivated research into so-called hidden-variable theories. The issue of hidden variables has become in part an experimental issue with the help of quantum optics.\nPostulates of quantum mechanics.\nA physical system is generally described by three basic ingredients: states; observables; and dynamics (or law of time evolution) or, more generally, a group of physical symmetries. A classical description can be given in a fairly direct way by a phase space model of mechanics: states are points in a phase space formulated by symplectic manifold, observables are real-valued functions on it, time evolution is given by a one-parameter group of symplectic transformations of the phase space, and physical symmetries are realized by symplectic transformations. A quantum description normally consists of a Hilbert space of states, observables are self-adjoint operators on the space of states, time evolution is given by a one-parameter group of unitary transformations on the Hilbert space of states, and physical symmetries are realized by unitary transformations. (It is possible, to map this Hilbert-space picture to a phase space formulation, invertibly. See below.)\nThe following summary of the mathematical framework of quantum mechanics can be partly traced back to the Dirac\u2013von Neumann axioms.\nDescription of the state of a system.\nEach isolated physical system is associated with a (topologically) separable complex Hilbert space \"H\" with inner product \u27e8\"\u03c6\"|\"\u03c8\"\u27e9.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPostulate I\nThe state of an isolated physical system is represented, at a fixed time formula_1, by a state vector formula_2\nAs such, a quantum state is an element of a projective Hilbert space, conventionally termed a \"ray\".\nAccompanying Postulate I is the composite system postulate:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nComposite system postulate\n The Hilbert space of a composite system is the Hilbert space tensor product of the state spaces associated with the component systems. For a non-relativistic system consisting of a finite number of distinguishable particles, the component systems are the individual particles.\nIn the presence of quantum entanglement, the quantum state of the composite system cannot be factored as a tensor product of states of its local constituents; Instead, it is expressed as a sum, or superposition, of tensor products of states of component subsystems. A subsystem in an entangled composite system generally cannot be described by a state vector (or a ray), but instead is described by a density operator; Such quantum state is known as a mixed state. The density operator of a mixed state is a trace class, nonnegative (positive semi-definite) self-adjoint operator \"\u03c1\" normalized to be of trace 1. In turn, any density operator of a mixed state can be represented as a subsystem of a larger composite system in a pure state (see purification theorem).\nIn the absence of quantum entanglement, the quantum state of the composite system is called a separable state. The density matrix of a bipartite system in a separable state can be expressed as formula_3, where formula_4. If there is only a single non-zero formula_5, then the state can be expressed just as formula_6 and is called simply separable or product state.\nMeasurement on a system.\nDescription of physical quantities.\nPhysical observables are represented by Hermitian matrices on \"H\". Since these operators are Hermitian, their eigenvalues are always real, and represent the possible outcomes/results from measuring the corresponding observable. If the spectrum of the observable is discrete, then the possible results are \"quantized\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPostulate II.a\n Every measurable physical quantity formula_7 is described by a Hermitian operator formula_8 acting in the state space formula_9. This operator is an observable, meaning that its eigenvectors form a basis for formula_9. The result of measuring a physical quantity formula_7 must be one of the eigenvalues of the corresponding observable formula_8.\nResults of measurement.\nBy spectral theory, we can associate a probability measure to the values of \"A\" in any state \"\u03c8\". We can also show that the possible values of the observable \"A\" in any state must belong to the spectrum of \"A\". The expectation value (in the sense of probability theory) of the observable \"A\" for the system in state represented by the unit vector \"\u03c8\" \u2208 \"H\" is formula_13. If we represent the state \"\u03c8\" in the basis formed by the eigenvectors of \"A\", then the square of the modulus of the component attached to a given eigenvector is the probability of observing its corresponding eigenvalue.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPostulate II.b\nWhen the physical quantity formula_7 is measured on a system in a normalized state formula_15, and the probability of obtaining an eigenvalue formula_16 in a discrete, nondegenerate spectrum of the corresponding observable formula_17 is given by formula_18.\nIf the eigenvalue formula_16 has degenerate, orthonormal eigenvectors formula_20, then the projection operator onto the eigensubspace can be defined as the identity operator in the eigensubspace:\nformula_21\nand then formula_22.\nPostulates II.a and II.b are collectively known as the Born rule of quantum mechanics.\nEffect of measurement on the state.\nWhen a measurement is performed, only one result is obtained (according to some interpretations of quantum mechanics). This is modeled mathematically as the processing of additional information from the measurement, confining the probabilities of an immediate second measurement of the same observable. In the case of a discrete, non-degenerate spectrum, two sequential measurements of the same observable will always give the same value assuming the second immediately follows the first. Therefore, the state vector must change as a result of measurement, and \"collapse\" onto the eigensubspace associated with the eigenvalue measured. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPostulate II.c\nIf the measurement of the physical quantity formula_7 on the system in the state formula_24 onto the eigensubspace associated with formula_25 formula_26\nFor a mixed state \"\u03c1\", after obtaining an eigenvalue formula_16 in a discrete, nondegenerate spectrum of the corresponding observable formula_17, the updated state is given by formula_29. If the eigenvalue formula_16 has degenerate, orthonormal eigenvectors formula_31, then the projection operator onto the eigensubspace is formula_32.\nPostulates II.c is sometimes called the \"state update rule\" or \"collapse rule\"; Together with the Born rule (Postulates II.a and II.b), they form a complete representation of measurements, and are sometimes collectively called the measurement postulate(s).\nNote that the projection-valued measures (PVM) described in the measurement postulate(s) can be generalized to positive operator-valued measures (POVM), which is the most general kind of measurement in quantum mechanics. A POVM can be understood as the effect on a component subsystem when a PVM is performed on a larger, composite system (see Naimark's dilation theorem).\nTime evolution of a system.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation describes how a state vector evolves in time. Depending on the text, it may be derived from some other assumptions, motivated on heuristic grounds, or asserted as a postulate. Derivations include using the de Broglie relation between wavelength and momentum or path integrals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPostulate III\nThe time evolution of the state vector formula_33\nEquivalently, the time evolution postulate can be stated as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPostulate III\n The time evolution of a closed system is described by a unitary transformation on the initial state.formula_34.\nThe evolution of an open quantum system can be described by quantum operations (in an operator sum formalism) and quantum instruments, and generally does not have to be unitary.\nOther implications of the postulates.\nFurthermore, to the postulates of quantum mechanics one should also add basic statements on the properties of spin and Pauli's exclusion principle, see below.\nSpin.\nIn addition to their other properties, all particles possess a quantity called spin, an \"intrinsic angular momentum\". Despite the name, particles do not literally spin around an axis, and quantum mechanical spin has no correspondence in classical physics. In the position representation, a spinless wavefunction has position r and time \"t\" as continuous variables, \"\u03c8\" = \"\u03c8\"(r, \"t\"). For spin wavefunctions the spin is an additional discrete variable: \"\u03c8\" = \"\u03c8\"(r, \"t\", \"\u03c3\"), where \"\u03c3\" takes the values;\nformula_35\nThat is, the state of a single particle with spin \"S\" is represented by a (2\"S\" + 1)-component spinor of complex-valued wave functions.\nTwo classes of particles with \"very different\" behaviour are bosons which have integer spin (\"S\" = 0, 1, 2, ...), and fermions possessing half-integer spin (\"S\" = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20442, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5\u20442, ...).\nSymmetrization postulate.\nIn quantum mechanics, two particles can be distinguished from one another using two methods. By performing a measurement of intrinsic properties of each particle, particles of different types can be distinguished. Otherwise, if the particles are identical, their trajectories can be tracked which distinguishes the particles based on the locality of each particle. While the second method is permitted in classical mechanics, (i.e. all classical particles are treated with distinguishability), the same cannot be said for quantum mechanical particles since the process is infeasible due to the fundamental uncertainty principles that govern small scales. Hence the requirement of indistinguishability of quantum particles is presented by the symmetrization postulate. The postulate is applicable to a system of bosons or fermions, for example, in predicting the spectra of helium atom. The postulate, explained in the following sections, can be stated as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSymmetrization postulate\nThe wavefunction of a system of \"N\" identical particles (in 3D) is either totally symmetric (Bosons) or totally antisymmetric (Fermions) under interchange of any pair of particles.\nExceptions can occur when the particles are constrained to two spatial dimensions where existence of particles known as anyons are possible which are said to have a continuum of statistical properties spanning the range between fermions and bosons. The connection between behaviour of identical particles and their spin is given by spin statistics theorem.\nIt can be shown that two particles localized in different regions of space can still be represented using a symmetrized/antisymmetrized wavefunction and that independent treatment of these wavefunctions gives the same result. Hence the symmetrization postulate is applicable in the general case of a system of identical particles.\nExchange Degeneracy.\nIn a system of identical particles, let \"P\" be known as exchange operator that acts on the wavefunction as:\n formula_36\nIf a physical system of identical particles is given, wavefunction of all particles can be well known from observation but these cannot be labelled to each particle. Thus, the above exchanged wavefunction represents the same physical state as the original state which implies that the wavefunction is not unique. This is known as exchange degeneracy.\nMore generally, consider a linear combination of such states, formula_37. For the best representation of the physical system, we expect this to be an eigenvector of \"P\" since exchange operator is not excepted to give completely different vectors in projective Hilbert space. Since formula_38, the possible eigenvalues of \"P\" are +1 and \u22121. The formula_37 states for identical particle system are represented as symmetric for +1 eigenvalue or antisymmetric for -1 eigenvalue as follows:\n formula_40\n formula_41\nThe explicit symmetric/antisymmetric form of formula_37 is constructed using a symmetrizer or antisymmetrizer operator. Particles that form symmetric states are called bosons and those that form antisymmetric states are called as fermions. The relation of spin with this classification is given from spin statistics theorem which shows that integer spin particles are bosons and half integer spin particles are fermions.\nPauli exclusion principle.\nThe property of spin relates to another basic property concerning systems of \"N\" identical particles: the Pauli exclusion principle, which is a consequence of the following permutation behaviour of an \"N\"-particle wave function; again in the position representation one must postulate that for the transposition of any two of the \"N\" particles one always should have\nPauli principle\nformula_43\ni.e., on transposition of the arguments of any two particles the wavefunction should \"reproduce\", apart from a prefactor (\u22121)2\"S\" which is +1 for bosons, but (\u22121) for fermions.\nElectrons are fermions with \"S\" = 1/2; quanta of light are bosons with \"S\" = 1.\nDue to the form of anti-symmetrized wavefunction:\n formula_44\nif the wavefunction of each particle is completely determined by a set of quantum number, then two fermions cannot share the same set of quantum numbers since the resulting function cannot be anti-symmetrized (i.e. above formula gives zero). The same cannot be said of Bosons since their wavefunction is:\n formula_45\nwhere formula_46 is the number of particles with same wavefunction.\nExceptions for symmetrization postulate.\nIn nonrelativistic quantum mechanics all particles are either bosons or fermions; in relativistic quantum theories also \"supersymmetric\" theories exist, where a particle is a linear combination of a bosonic and a fermionic part. Only in dimension \"d\" = 2 can one construct entities where (\u22121)2\"S\" is replaced by an arbitrary complex number with magnitude 1, called anyons. In relativistic quantum mechanics, spin statistic theorem can prove that under certain set of assumptions that the integer spins particles are classified as bosons and half spin particles are classified as fermions. Anyons which form neither symmetric nor antisymmetric states are said to have fractional spin.\nAlthough \"spin\" and the \"Pauli principle\" can only be derived from relativistic generalizations of quantum mechanics, the properties mentioned in the last two paragraphs belong to the basic postulates already in the non-relativistic limit. Especially, many important properties in natural science, e.g. the periodic system of chemistry, are consequences of the two properties.\nMathematical structure of quantum mechanics.\nPictures of dynamics.\n&lt;/math&gt; is Dyson's time-ordering symbol.\n(This symbol permutes a product of noncommuting operators of the form\nformula_47\ninto the uniquely determined re-ordered expression\nformula_48 with formula_49\nThe result is a causal chain, the primary \"cause\" in the past on the utmost r.h.s., and finally the present \"effect\" on the utmost l.h.s.\u00a0.)\nformula_50\nformula_51\nIt is then easily checked that the expected values of all observables are the same in both pictures\nformula_52\nand that the time-dependent Heisenberg operators satisfy\nHeisenberg picture \"(general)\"\nformula_53\nwhich is true for time-dependent \"A\" = \"A\"(\"t\"). Notice the commutator expression is purely formal when one of the operators is unbounded. One would specify a representation for the expression to make sense of it.\nDirac picture\nformula_54\nSo the above-mentioned Dyson-series has to be used anyhow.\nThe Heisenberg picture is the closest to classical Hamiltonian mechanics (for example, the commutators appearing in the above equations directly translate into the classical Poisson brackets); but this is already rather \"high-browed\", and the Schr\u00f6dinger picture is considered easiest to visualize and understand by most people, to judge from pedagogical accounts of quantum mechanics. The Dirac picture is the one used in perturbation theory, and is specially associated to quantum field theory and many-body physics.\nSimilar equations can be written for any one-parameter unitary group of symmetries of the physical system. Time would be replaced by a suitable coordinate parameterizing the unitary group (for instance, a rotation angle, or a translation distance) and the Hamiltonian would be replaced by the conserved quantity associated with the symmetry (for instance, angular or linear momentum).\nSummary:\nRepresentations.\nThe original form of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation depends on choosing a particular representation of Heisenberg's canonical commutation relations. The Stone\u2013von Neumann theorem dictates that all irreducible representations of the finite-dimensional Heisenberg commutation relations are unitarily equivalent. A systematic understanding of its consequences has led to the phase space formulation of quantum mechanics, which works in full phase space instead of Hilbert space, so then with a more intuitive link to the classical limit thereof. This picture also simplifies considerations\nof quantization, the deformation extension from classical to quantum mechanics.\nThe quantum harmonic oscillator is an exactly solvable system where the different representations are easily compared. There, apart from the Heisenberg, or Schr\u00f6dinger (position or momentum), or phase-space representations, one also encounters the Fock (number) representation and the Segal\u2013Bargmann (Fock-space or coherent state) representation (named after Irving Segal and Valentine Bargmann). All four are unitarily equivalent.\nTime as an operator.\nThe framework presented so far singles out time as \"the\" parameter that everything depends on. It is possible to formulate mechanics in such a way that time becomes itself an observable associated with a self-adjoint operator. At the classical level, it is possible to arbitrarily parameterize the trajectories of particles in terms of an unphysical parameter {{math|\"s\"}}, and in that case the time \"t\" becomes an additional generalized coordinate of the physical system. At the quantum level, translations in {{math|\"s\"}} would be generated by a \"Hamiltonian\" {{math|\"H\" \u2212 \"E\"}}, where \"E\" is the energy operator and {{math|\"H\"}} is the \"ordinary\" Hamiltonian. However, since \"s\" is an unphysical parameter, \"physical\" states must be left invariant by \"\"s\"-evolution\", and so the physical state space is the kernel of {{math|\"H\" \u2212 \"E\"}} (this requires the use of a rigged Hilbert space and a renormalization of the norm).\nThis is related to the quantization of constrained systems and quantization of gauge theories. It\nProblem of measurement.\nThe picture given in the preceding paragraphs is sufficient for description of a completely isolated system. However, it fails to account for one of the main differences between quantum mechanics and classical mechanics, that is, the effects of measurement.{{sfn | Greenstein | Zajonc | 2006 | p=215}} The von Neumann description of quantum measurement of an observable {{math|\"A\"}}, when the system is prepared in a pure state {{math|\"\u03c8\"}} is the following (note, however, that von Neumann's description dates back to the 1930s and is based on experiments as performed during that time \u2013 more specifically the Compton\u2013Simon experiment; it is not applicable to most present-day measurements within the quantum domain):\nFor example, suppose the state space is the {{math|\"n\"}}-dimensional complex Hilbert space {{math|C\"n\"}} and {{math|\"A\"}} is a Hermitian matrix with eigenvalues {{math|\"\u03bb\"\"i\"}}, with corresponding eigenvectors {{math|\"\u03c8i\"}}. The projection-valued measure associated with {{math|\"A\"}}, {{math|E\"A\"}}, is then\nformula_57\nwhere {{math|\"B\"}} is a Borel set containing only the single eigenvalue {{math|\"\u03bbi\"}}. If the system is prepared in state\nformula_58\nThen the probability of a measurement returning the value {{math|\"\u03bbi\"}} can be calculated by integrating the spectral measure\nformula_59\nover {{math|\"Bi\"}}. This gives trivially\nformula_60\nThe characteristic property of the von Neumann measurement scheme is that repeating the same measurement will give the same results. This is also called the \"projection postulate\".\nA more general formulation replaces the projection-valued measure with a positive-operator valued measure (POVM). To illustrate, take again the finite-dimensional case. Here we would replace the rank-1 projections\nformula_61\nby a finite set of positive operators\nformula_62\nwhose sum is still the identity operator as before (the resolution of identity). Just as a set of possible outcomes {{math|{\"\u03bb\"1 ... \"\u03bbn\"} }} is associated to a projection-valued measure, the same can be said for a POVM. Suppose the measurement outcome is {{math|\"\u03bbi\"}}. Instead of collapsing to the (unnormalized) state\nformula_63\nafter the measurement, the system now will be in the state\nformula_64\nSince the {{math|\"Fi Fi*\"}} operators need not be mutually orthogonal projections, the projection postulate of von Neumann no longer holds.\nThe same formulation applies to general mixed states.\nIn von Neumann's approach, the state transformation due to measurement is distinct from that due to time evolution in several ways. For example, time evolution is deterministic and unitary whereas measurement is non-deterministic and non-unitary. However, since both types of state transformation take one quantum state to another, this difference was viewed by many as unsatisfactory. The POVM formalism views measurement as one among many other quantum operations, which are described by completely positive maps which do not increase the trace.\nList of mathematical tools.\nPart of the folklore of the subject concerns the mathematical physics textbook Methods of Mathematical Physics put together by Richard Courant from David Hilbert's G\u00f6ttingen University courses. The story is told (by mathematicians) that physicists had dismissed the material as not interesting in the current research areas, until the advent of Schr\u00f6dinger's equation. At that point it was realised that the mathematics of the new quantum mechanics was already laid out in it. It is also said that Heisenberg had consulted Hilbert about his matrix mechanics, and Hilbert observed that his own experience with infinite-dimensional matrices had derived from differential equations, advice which Heisenberg ignored, missing the opportunity to unify the theory as Weyl and Dirac did a few years later. Whatever the basis of the anecdotes, the mathematics of the theory was conventional at the time, whereas the physics was radically new.\nThe main tools include:"}
{"id": "20732", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20732", "title": "Multiple-document interface", "text": "Type of software application interface\nA multiple-document interface (MDI) is a graphical user interface in which multiple windows reside under a single parent window. Such systems often allow child windows to embed other windows inside them as well, creating complex nested hierarchies. This contrasts with single-document interfaces (SDI) where all windows are independent of each other.\nComparison with single-document interface.\nIn the usability community, there has been much debate about whether the multiple-document or single-document interface is preferable. Software companies have used both interfaces with mixed responses. For example, Microsoft changed its Office applications from SDI to MDI mode and then back to SDI, although the degree of implementation varies from one component to another. SDI can be more useful in cases where users switch more often between separate applications than among the windows of one application.\nMDI can be confusing if it has a lack of information about the currently opened windows. In MDI applications, the application developer must provide a way to switch between documents or view a list of open windows, and the user might have to use an application-specific menu (\"window list\" or something similar) to switch between open documents. This is different from SDI applications where the window manager's task bar or task manager displays the currently opened windows. In recent years it has become increasingly common for MDI applications to use \"tabs\" to display the currently opened windows. An interface in which tabs are used to manage open documents is referred to as a \"tabbed document interface\" (TDI). Another option is \"tiled\" panes or windows, which make it easier to prevent content from overlapping.\nSome applications allow the user to switch between these modes at their choosing, depending on personal preference or the task at hand.\nNearly all graphical user interface toolkits to date provide at least one solution for designing MDIs. A notable exception was Apple's Cocoa API until the advent of tabbed window groups in MacOS High Sierra. The Java GUI toolkit, Swing, for instance, provides the class which serves as a container for individual frames (class ). GTK lacks any standardized support for MDI.\nIDE-style interface.\nGraphical computer applications with an IDE-style interface (IDE) are those whose child windows reside under a single parent window (usually with the exception of modal windows). An IDE-style interface is distinguishable from the Multiple-Document Interface (MDI), because all child windows in an IDE-style interface are enhanced with added functionality not ordinarily available in MDI applications. Because of this, IDE-style applications can be considered a functional superset and descendant of MDI applications.\nExamples of enhanced child-window functionality include:\nCollapsible child windows.\nA common convention for child windows in IDE-style applications is the ability to collapse child windows, either when inactive, or when specified by the user. Child windows that are collapsed will conform to one of the four outer boundaries of the parent window, with some kind of label or indicator that allows them to be expanded again.\nTabbed document interface for sub-panes.\nIn contrast to (MDI) applications, which ordinarily allow a single tabbed interface for the parent window, applications with an IDE-style interface allow tabs for organizing one or more subpanes of the parent window.\nMacintosh.\nMacOS and its GUI are document-centric instead of window-centric or application-centric. Every document window is an object with which the user can work. The menu bar changes to reflect whatever application the front window belongs to. Application windows can be hidden and manipulated as a group, and the user may switch between applications (i.e., groups of windows) or between individual windows, automatically hiding palettes, and most programs will stay running even with no open windows. Indeed, prior to Mac OS X, it was purposely impossible to interleave windows from multiple applications.\nIn spite of this, some unusual applications breaking the human interface guidelines (most notably Photoshop) do exhibit different behavior."}
{"id": "20733", "revid": "34838293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20733", "title": "MDI", "text": "MDI may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20734", "revid": "50707677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20734", "title": "Microlith", "text": "Stone tool\nA microlith is a small stone tool usually made of flint or chert and typically a centimetre or so in length and half a centimetre wide. They were made by humans from around 6,000 years ago, across Europe, Africa, Asia and Australia. The microliths were used in spear points and arrowheads.\nMicroliths are produced from either a small blade (microblade) or a larger blade-like piece of flint by abrupt or truncated retouching, which leaves a very typical piece of waste, called a microburin. The microliths themselves are sufficiently worked so as to be distinguishable from workshop waste or accidents.\nTwo families of microliths are usually defined: laminar and geometric. An assemblage of microliths can be used to date an archeological site. Laminar microliths are slightly larger, and are associated with the end of the Upper Paleolithic and the beginning of the Epipaleolithic era; geometric microliths are characteristic of the Mesolithic and the Neolithic. Geometric microliths may be triangular, trapezoid or lunate. Microlith production generally declined following the introduction of agriculture (8000 BCE) but continued later in cultures with a deeply rooted hunting tradition.\nRegardless of type, microliths were used to form the points of hunting weapons, such as spears and (in later periods) arrows, and other artifacts and are found throughout Africa, Asia and Europe. They were utilised with wood, bone, resin and fiber to form a composite tool or weapon, and traces of wood to which microliths were attached have been found in Sweden, Denmark and England. An average of between six and eighteen microliths may often have been used in one spear or harpoon, but only one or two in an arrow. The shift from earlier larger tools had an advantage. Often the haft of a tool was harder to produce than the point or edge: replacing dull or broken microliths with new easily portable ones was easier than making new hafts or handles.\nTypes.\nLaminar and non-geometric microliths.\nLaminar microliths date from at least the Gravettian culture or possibly the start of the Upper Paleolithic era, and they are found all through the Mesolithic and Neolithic eras. \"Noailles\" burins and micro-gravettes &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt; indicate that the production of microliths had already started in the Gravettian culture.\nThis style of flint working flourished during the Magdalenian period and persisted in numerous Epipaleolithic traditions all around the Mediterranean basin. These microliths are slightly larger than the geometric microliths that followed and were made from the flakes of flint obtained \"ad hoc\" from a small nucleus or from a depleted nucleus of flint. They were produced either by percussion or by the application of a variable pressure (although pressure is the best option, this method of producing microliths is complicated and was not the most commonly used technique).\nTruncated blade.\nThere are three basic types of laminar microlith. The truncated blade type can be divided into a number of sub-types depending on the position of the truncation (for example, oblique, square or double) and according to its form, for example, concave or convex. \"Raclette scrapers\" are notable for their particular form, being blades or flakes whose edges have been sharply retouched until they are semicircular or even shapeless. Raclettes are indefinite cultural indicators, as they appear from the Upper Paleolithic through to the Neolithic.\nBacked edge blades.\nBacked edge blades have one of the edges, generally a side one, rounded or chamfered by abrupt retouching. There are fewer types of these blades, and may be divided into those where the entire edge is rounded and those where only a part is rounded, or even straight. They are fundamental in the blade-forming processes, and from them, innumerable other types were developed. Dufour bladelets are up to three centimeters in length, finely shaped with a curved profile whose retouches are semi-abrupt and which characterize a particular phase of the Aurignacian period. Solutrean backed edge blades display pronounced and abrupt retouching, so that they are long and narrow and, although rare, characterize certain phases of the Solutrean period. Ouchtata bladelets are similar to the others, except that the retouched back is not uniform but irregular; this type of microlith characterizes certain periods of the Epipaleolithic Saharans. The Ibero-Maurusian and the Montbani bladelet, with a partial and irregular lateral retouching, is characteristic of the Italian Tardenoisian.\nMicro points.\nThese are very sharp bladelets formed by abrupt retouching. There are a huge number of regional varieties of these microliths, nearly all of which are very hard to distinguish (especially those from the western area) without knowing the archaeological context in which they appear. The following is a small selection. Omitted are the foliaceous tips (also called leafed tips), which are characterized by a covering retouch and which constitute a group apart.\nThe next group contains a number of points from the Middle East characterized as cultural markers.\nThe \"Adelaide point\" is found in Australia. Its construction, based on truncations on a blade, has a nearly trapezoidal form. The Adelaide point emphasizes the range of variation in both time and culture of the laminar microliths; it also shows their technological differences, but sometimes morphological similarities, with geometric microliths. Laminar microliths can also sometimes be described as trapezoidal, triangular or lunate. However, they are distinct from the geometric microliths because of the strokes used in the manufacture of geometric microliths, which mainly involved the microburin technique.\nGeometric microliths.\nGeometric microliths are a clearly defined type of stone tool, at least in their basic forms. They can be divided into trapezoid, triangular and lunate (half-moon) forms, although there are many subdivisions of each of these types. A microburin is included among the illustrations below because, although it is not a geometrical microlith (or even a tool), it is now seen as a characteristic waste product from the manufacture of these geometric microliths:\nGeometric microliths, though rare, are present as trapezoids in Northwest Africa in the Iberomaurusian. They later appear in Europe in the Magdalenian initially as elongated triangles and later as trapezoids (although the microburin technique is seen from the Perigordian), they are mostly seen during the Epipaleolithic and the Neolithic. They remained in existence even into the Copper Age and Bronze Age, competing with \"leafed\" and then metallic arrowheads.\nMicroburin technique.\nAll the currently known geometric microliths share the same fundamental characteristics \u2013 only their shapes vary. They were all made from blades or from microblades (nearly always of flint), using the microburin technique (which implies that it is not possible to conserve the remains of the heel or the conchoidal flakes from the blank). The pieces were then finished by a percussive retouching of the edges (generally leaving one side with the natural edge of the blank), giving the piece its definitive polygonal form. For example, in order to make a triangle, two adjacent notches were retouched, leaving free the third edge or \"base\" (using the terminology of Fortea). They generally have one long axis and concave or convex edges, and it is possible for them to have a gibbosity (hump) or indentations. Triangular microliths may be isosceles, scalene or equilateral. In the case of trapezoid geometric microliths, on the other hand, the notches are not retouched, leaving a portion of the natural edge between them. Trapezoids can be further subdivided into symmetrical, asymmetrical and those with concave edges. Lunate microliths have the least diversity of all and may be either semicircular or segmental.\nArcheological findings and the analysis of wear marks, or use-wear analysis, has shown that, predictably, the tips of spears, harpoons and other light projectiles of varying size received the most wear. Microliths were also used from the Neolithic on arrows, although a decline in this use coincided with the appearance of bifacial or \"leafed\" arrowheads that became widespread in the Chalcolithic period, or Copper Age (that is, stone arrowheads were increasingly made by a different technique during this later period).\nWeapons and tools.\nNot all the different types of laminar microliths had functions that are clearly understood. It is likely that they contributed to the points of spears or light projectiles, and their small size suggests that they were fixed in some way to a shaft or handle.\nBacked edge bladelets are particularly abundant at a site in France that preserves habitation from the late Magdalenian \u2013 the Pincevent. In the remains of some of the hearths at this location, bladelets are found in groups of three, perhaps indicating that they were mounted in threes on their handles. A javelin tip made of horn has been found at this site with grooves made for flint bladelets that could have been secured using a resinous substance. Signs of much wear and tear have been found on some of these finds.\nSpecialists have carried out lithic or microwear analysis on artefacts, but it has sometimes proved difficult to distinguish those fractures made during the process of fashioning the flint implement from those made during its use. Microliths found at Hengistbury Head in Dorset, England, show features that can be confused with chisel marks, but which might also have been produced when the tip hit a hard object and splintered. Microliths from other locations have presented the same problems of interpretation.\nAn exceptional piece of evidence for the use of microliths has been found in the excavations of the cave at Lascaux in the French Dordogne. Twenty backed edge bladelets were found with the remains of a resinous substance and the imprint of a circular handle (a horn). It appears that the bladelets might have been fixed in groups like the teeth of a harpoon or similar weapon.\nIn all these locations, the microliths found have been backed edge blades, tips and crude flakes. Despite the great number of geometric microliths that have been found in Western Europe, few examples show any clear evidence of their use, and all the examples are from the Mesolithic or Neolithic periods. Despite this, there is unanimity amongst researchers that these items were used to increase the penetrating potential of light projectiles such as harpoons, assegais, javelins and arrows.\nDiscoveries.\nAustralia.\nThe most common form of microliths found in Australia are backed artefacts. The earliest backed artefacts have been dated to the terminal Pleistocene, however they become increasingly common in Aboriginal Australian societies in the mid-Holocene, before declining in use and disappearing from the archaeological record approximately 1000 years before the British invasion of the continent in 1788. The cause of this proliferation event is debated amongst archaeologists.\nGeographically they are found across almost all of continental Australia, except for the far north, but are particularly common in south-east Australia. Historically, backed artefacts were divided into asymmetrical Bondi points and symmetrical geometric microliths, however there appears to be no geographic or temporal pattern in the distribution of these shapes. Backed artefact manufacturing workshops have been identified at Ngungara show significant variation in shape, which has been linked to the need to replace components of composite tools.\nSeveral studies in the production of backed artefacts have linked identified heat treatment as a key component as well as the use of large flank blanks.\nFunctional studies of backed artefacts from south-eastern Australia show that they were multipurpose and multifunctional tools with a similar range of uses as unretouched flakes found at the same sites. There is one unambiguous example of them being used as part of composite weapon, either a spear or a club, as 17 backed artefacts were found embedded into the skeleton of an adult male dated to approximately 4000 years BP in the Sydney suburb of Narrabeen.\nFrance.\nIn France, one unusual site stands out: the Mesolithic cemetery of T\u00e9viec, an island in Brittany. Numerous flint microliths were discovered here. They are believed to date to between 6740 and 5680 years BP - quite a long occupation. The end of the settlement came at the beginning of the Neolithic period.\nOne of the skeletons that has been found has a geometric microlith lodged in one of its vertebra. All indications suggest that the person died because of this projectile; whether by intention or by accident is unknown. It is widely agreed that geometric microliths were mainly used in hunting and fishing, but they may also have been used as weapons.\nScandinavia.\nWell-preserved examples of arrows with microliths in Scandinavia have been found at Loshult, at Osby in Sweden, and Tv\u00e6rmose, at Vinderup in Denmark. These finds, which have been preserved practically intact due to the special conditions of the peat bogs, have included wooden arrows with microliths attached to the tip by resinous substances and cords.\nAccording to radiocarbon measurements, the Loshult arrows are dated to around 8000 BC, which represents a middle part of the Maglemose culture. This is close to the Early Boreal/Late Boreal transition.\nEngland.\nThere are many examples of possible tools from Mesolithic deposits in England. Possibly the best known is a microlith from Star Carr in Yorkshire that retains residues of resin, probably used to fix it to the tip of a projectile. Recent excavations have found other examples. Archeologists at the Risby Warren V site in Lincolnshire have uncovered a row of eight triangular microliths that are equidistantly aligned along a dark stain indicating organic remains (possibly the wood from an arrow shaft). Another clear indication is from the Readycon Dene site in West Yorkshire, where 35 microliths appear to be associated with a single projectile. In Urra Moor, North Yorkshire, 25 microliths give the appearance of being related to one another, due to the extreme regularity and symmetry of their arrangement in the ground.\nThe study of English and European artifacts in general has revealed that projectiles were made with a widely variable number of microliths: in \"Tv\u00e6rmose\" there was only one, in \"Loshult\" there were two (one for the tip and the other as a fin), in White Hassocks, in West Yorkshire, more than 40 have been found together; the average is between 6 and 18 pieces for each projectile.\nIndia.\nEarly research regard the microlithic industry in India as a Holocene phenomenon, however a new research provides solid data to put the South Asia microliths industry up to 45 ka across whole South Asia subcontinent. This new research also synthesizes the data from genetic, paleoenvironmental and archaeological research, and proposes that the emergence of microlith in India subcontinent could reflect the increase of population and adaptation of environmental deterioration.\nSri Lanka.\nIn 1968 human burials sites were uncovered inside the Fa Hien Cave in Sri Lanka. A further excavation in 1988 yielded microlith stone tools, remnants of prehistoric fireplaces and organic material, such as floral and human remains. Radiocarbon dating indicates that the cave had been occupied from about 33,000 years ago, the Late Pleistocene and Mesolithic to 4,750 years ago, the Neolithic in the Middle Holocene. Human remains of the several sediment deposits were analyzed at Cornell University and studied by Kenneth A. R. Kennedy and graduate student Joanne L. Zahorsky. Sri Lanka has yielded the earliest known microliths, which did not appear in Europe until the Early Holocene. 2019 study found Fa-Hien Lena cave microlith assemblage represents the earliest microlith assemblage in South Asia dating back to c. 48,000\u201345,000 years ago.\nDating.\nLaminar microliths are common artifacts from the Upper Paleolithic and the Epipaleolithic, to such a degree that numerous studies have used them as markers to date different phases of prehistoric cultures.\nDuring the Epipaleolithic and the Mesolithic, the presence of laminar or geometric microliths serves to date the deposits of different cultural traditions. For instance, in the Atlas Mountains of northwest Africa, the end of the Upper Paleolithic period coincides with the end of the Aterian tradition of producing laminar microliths, and deposits can be dated by the presence or absence of these artifacts. In the Near East, the laminar microliths of the Kebarian culture were superseded by the geometric microliths of the Natufian tradition a little more than 11,000 years ago. This pattern is repeated throughout the Mediterranean basin and across Europe in general.\nA similar thing is found in England, where the preponderance of elongated microliths, as opposed to other frequently occurring forms, has permitted the Mesolithic to be separated into two phases: the Earlier Mesolithic of about 8300\u20136700 BCE, or the ancient and laminar Mesolithic, and the Later Mesolithic, or the recent and geometric Mesolithic. Deposits can be thus dated based upon the assemblage of artifacts found.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20735", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20735", "title": "Temple menorah", "text": "Ancient Hebrew lampstand\nThe Temple menorah (; , Tiberian Hebrew ) is a seven-branched candelabrum that is described in the Hebrew Bible and later ancient sources as having been used in the Tabernacle and the Temple in Jerusalem.\nSince ancient times, it has served as a symbol representing the Jews and Judaism in both the Land of Israel and the Jewish diaspora. It became the State of Israel's official emblem when it was founded in 1948.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, the menorah was made out of pure gold, and the only source of fuel that was allowed to be used to light the lamps was fresh olive oil. The menorah was placed in the Tabernacle. Biblical tradition holds that Solomon's Temple was home to ten menorahs, which were later plundered by the Babylonians; the Second Temple is also said to have been home to a menorah. Following the Roman destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple in 70 CE, the menorah was taken to Rome; the Arch of Titus, which still stands, depicts the menorah being carried away by the triumphant Romans along with other spoils of the destroyed temple. The menorah was reportedly taken to Carthage by the Vandals after the sacking of Rome in 455. Byzantine historian Procopius reported that the Byzantine army recovered it in 533 and brought it to Constantinople, then later returned it to Jerusalem. Many other theories have been advanced for its eventual fate, and no clear evidence of its location has been recorded since late antiquity.\nThe menorah is frequently used as a symbol in Jewish art. There are no representations of the menorah from the First Temple period, but some examples dating from the Second Temple period have been recorded. Menorah images that were discovered include the coins of Antigonus II Mattathias, the last Hasmonean king of Judea, as well as on the walls of an Upper City mansion and Jason's Tomb in Jerusalem, and objects such as the Magdala stone. Following the destruction of the Second Temple, the menorah came to be recognized as a distinctively Jewish symbol and was depicted on tomb walls, synagogue floors, sculptures and reliefs, as well as glass and metal objects. The menorah has been also used since then to distinguish synagogues and Jewish cemeteries from the places of worship and cemeteries of Christians and pagans. The symbol has also been found in several archaeological artifacts from ancient Samaritan, Christian and Islamic communities. The Hanukkah menorah, a nine-branched variant of the menorah, is closely associated with the Jewish festival of Hanukkah.\nConstruction and appearance.\nHebrew Bible.\nThe Book of Exodus of the Hebrew Bible states that God revealed the design for the menorah to Moses and describes the construction of the menorah as follows:\n31Make a lampstand of pure gold. Hammer out its base and shaft, and make its flowerlike cups, buds and blossoms of one piece with them.\n32Six branches are to extend from the sides of the lampstand\u2014three on one side and three on the other.\n33Three cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms are to be on one branch, three on the next branch, and the same for all six branches extending from the lampstand.\n34And on the lampstand are to be four cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms.\n35One bud shall be under the first pair of branches extending from the lampstand, a second bud under the second pair, and a third bud under the third pair\u2014six branches in all.\n36The buds and branches shall be all of one piece with the lampstand, hammered out of pure gold.\n37Then make its seven lamps and set them up on it so that they light the space in front of it.\n38Its wick trimmers and trays are to be of pure gold.\n39A talent of pure gold is to be used for the lampstand and all these accessories.\n40See that you make them according to the pattern shown you on the mountain.\nThe Book of Numbers (Chapter 8) adds that the seven lamps are to give light in front of the lampstand and reiterates that the lampstand was made in accordance with the pattern shown to Moses on the mountain.\nIn other sources.\nRabbinic sources teach that the menorah stood 18 handbreadths/palms (three common cubits) high, or approximately . Although the menorah was placed in the antechamber of the Temple sanctuary, over against its southernmost wall, the Talmud (\"Menahot\" 98b) brings down a dispute between two scholars on whether or not the menorah was situated north to south, or east to west. The branches are often artistically depicted as semicircular, but Rashi, (according to some contemporary readings) and Maimonides (in a sketch commented on by his son Avraham), held that they were straight; all other Jewish authorities, both classical (e.g. Philo and Josephus) and medieval (e.g. Ibn Ezra), who express an opinion on the subject state that the arms were round.\nThe Roman-Jewish historian Josephus, who witnessed the Temple's destruction, says that the menorah was actually situated obliquely, to the east and south.\nArch of Titus.\nThe most famous preserved representation of the menorah of the Second Temple was depicted in a frieze on the Arch of Titus, commemorating his triumphal parade in Rome following the destruction of Jerusalem in the year 70 CE. In that frieze, the menorah is shown resting upon a hexagonal base, which in turn rests upon a slightly larger but concentric and identically shaped base; a stepwise appearance on all sides is thus produced. Each facet of the hexagonal base was made with two vertical stiles and two horizontal rails, a top rail and a bottom rail, resembling a protruding frame set against a sunken panel. These panels have some relief design set or sculpted within them.\nMagdala Stone.\nIn 2009, the ruins of a synagogue in Magdala with pottery dating from before the destruction of the Second Temple were discovered under land owned by the Legionaries of Christ, who had intended to construct a center for women's studies. Inside that synagogue's ruins, a carved stone block was discovered, which had on its surface, among other ornate carvings, a depiction of the seven-lamp menorah differing markedly from the depiction on the Arch of Titus, which could possibly have been carved by an eyewitness to the actual menorah present at the time in the Temple at Jerusalem. This menorah has arms which are polygonal, not rounded, and the base is not graduated but triangular. It is notable, however, that this artifact was found a significant distance from Jerusalem and the Arch of Titus has often been interpreted as an eyewitness account of the original menorah being looted from the temple in Jerusalem.\nUsage.\nAccording to the Book of Exodus, the lamps of the menorah were lit daily from fresh, consecrated olive oil and burned from evening until morning.\nJosephus states that three of the seven lamps were allowed to burn during the day also; however, according to one opinion in the Talmud, only the center lamp was left burning all day, into which as much oil was put as into the others. Although all the other lights were extinguished, that light continued burning oil, in spite of the fact that it had been kindled first. This miracle, according to the Talmud, was taken as a sign that the Shechinah rested among Israel. It was called the \"ner hama'aravi\" (Western lamp) because of the direction of its wick. This lamp was also referred to as the \"ner Elohim\" (lamp of God), mentioned in I Samuel 3:3. According to the Talmud, the miracle of the \"ner hama'aravi\" ended after the High Priesthood of Simon the Just in the 3rd or 4th century BC.\nContrary to some modern designs, the ancient menorah burned oil and did not contain anything resembling candles, which were unknown in the Middle East until about 400 CE.\nHistory.\nTabernacle.\nThe original menorah was made for the tabernacle, and the Bible records it as being present until the Israelites crossed the Jordan River. When the tabernacle tent was pitched in Shiloh, it is assumed that the menorah was also present. However, no mention is made of it during the years that the Ark of the Covenant was moved in the times of Samuel and Saul.\nBenjamin D. Sommer suggests that while the Holy of Holies in the tabernacle was reserved for God\u2019s presence, the main room featured a metal menorah with six branches on each side, potentially echoing the asherah, a sacred tree or pole. However, Rachel Hachili argues that theories positing that the menorah had its roots in some kind of sacred tree or plant have several problems.\nSolomon's Temple.\nAccording to 2 Kings and the Books of Chronicles, Solomon created ten lampstands (\"menorahs\"), that were put in the \"heikal,\" Solomon's Temple main chamber. The weight of the lampstands forms part of the detailed instructions given to Solomon by David. According to the Book of Jeremiah, the lampstands were taken away by the Babylonian general Nebuzaradan following the destruction of Jerusalem.\nSecond Temple.\nDuring the construction of the Second Temple following the Return to Zion, no mention is made of the return of the menorah but only of \"vessels.\" The book of Maccabees records that Antiochus IV took away the lampstands (plural) when he pillaged the Temple. The later record of the making of \"new holy vessels\" may refer to the manufacture of new lampstands. According to the Talmud, the returning Hasmoneans were poor and forced to construct the Menorah out of wood. They later upgraded it to silver and ultimately gold.\nRome.\nThe menorah from the Second Temple was carried to Rome after the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 CE at the height of the First Jewish\u2013Roman War. Its fate is recorded by Josephus, who states that it was brought to Rome and carried along during the triumph of Vespasian and Titus. The bas relief on the Arch of Titus in Rome depicts a scene of Roman soldiers carrying away the spoils of the Second Temple, including the menorah.\nFor centuries, the menorah and the other temple treasures were displayed as war trophies either at the Temple of Peace in Rome, or in the Imperial Palace. It was still there when the city was sacked by Vandals in 455 CE.\nWhereabouts following the Vandal sack of Rome.\nThe location and state of the Menorah following the Vandal sack of Rome remains a mystery. Many scholars assume that at this point the Menorah left Rome for Carthage and further destinations, but some believe that the Menorah remains in Rome to this day.\nSymbolism.\nJudaism.\nThe menorah symbolized the ideal of universal enlightenment. The idea that the menorah symbolizes wisdom is noted in the Talmud, for example, in the following: \"Rabbi Isaac said: He who desires to become wise should incline to the south [when praying]. The symbol [by which to remember this] is that\u2026 the Menorah was on the southern side [of the Temple].\"\nThe seven lamps allude to the branches of human knowledge, represented by the six lamps inclined inwards towards, and symbolically guided by, the light of God represented by the central lamp. The menorah also symbolizes the creation in seven days, with the center light representing the Sabbath.\nHannukah menorah.\nA nine-branched menorah is also a symbol closely associated with the Jewish holiday of Hanukkah. According to the Talmud, after the Seleucid desecration of the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem, there was only enough sealed (and therefore not desecrated) consecrated olive oil left to fuel the eternal flame in the Temple for one day. Miraculously, the oil burned for eight days, which was enough time to make new pure oil.\nThe Talmud states that it is prohibited to use a seven-lamp menorah outside of the Temple. A Hanukkah menorah therefore has eight main branches, plus the raised ninth lamp set apart as the \"shamash\" (servant) light which is used to kindle the other lights. The word \"shamash\" was not originally a \"Hanukkah word\" and only became associated with the holiday in the 16th century although it first appeared in the Mishnah (c. 200 C.E.) and Talmud (c. 500 C.E.). This type of menorah is called a \"hanukkiah\" in Modern Hebrew.\nKabbalah and the symbol of light.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is alluded to in the verses: \"Though I walk through the valley of the deepest darkness, I will fear no evil, because You are with me\" and \"because even if I have fallen, I will rise again; even if I feel in the darkness, Hashem is my light. \"Let the light of Divinity perceptions descend into the depths of \"darkness \", into \"the valley of the deepest darkness\", to illuminate the lowest, so that even that light and consciousness of Divinity reaches them, so that He can heal and correct them to return them to Him.\nIn Kabbalah \"Or Panim\" (\"the light of the Face\") is a fundamental conception for the process called Tikkun. All the \"Kavvanot\", the spiritual measures of faith for the realization of the Kingdom of God, focus on the manifestation of the \"Or Panim\"; actually darkness is in itself a negative element, that is, it does not give the hope of obtaining complete devotion: \"darkness\" is like an inaccessible place, darkness conceals the depth of the gaze; in Chassidut \"an awakening from below\" is the \"service\" for God, i.e. the Avodah.\nDuring the victory of the Kedushah in Hanukkah, the Kohen Gadol almost declared that \"divine light\" must triumph. When the risk of \"fall\" can do the loss of faith in the Jewish religion as the abyss of Israel's personal and collective identity, the Kohen Gadol thus insists for the \"awakening\" of the most distant souls in order to direct them with Kavanah towards the fulfillment of the Mitzvot: \"...because the Torah is the light and the Mitzvah is a lamp\".\nChristianity.\nThe New Testament Book of Revelation refers to a mystery of seven golden lampstands representing seven churches. The messages to the seven churches from Jesus Christ found have at least four applications: (1) a local application to the specific cities and believers in the church; (2) to all the churches of all generations; (3) a prophetic application unveiling seven distinct phases of church history from the days of the apostle John until today; (4) a personal application to individual believers who have ears to hear what the Spirit is saying.\nAccording to Clement of Alexandria and Philo Judaeus, the seven lamps of the golden menorah represented the seven classical planets in this order: the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.\nIt is also said to symbolize the burning bush as seen by Moses on Mount Horeb.Kevin Conner has noted of the original menorah, described in Exodus 25, that each of the six tributary branches coming out of the main shaft was decorated with three sets of \"cups... shaped like almond blossoms... a bulb and a flower...\" (Exodus 25:33, NASB). This would create three sets of three units on each branch, a total of nine units per branch. The main shaft, however, had four sets of blossoms, bulbs and flowers, making a total of twelve units on the shaft (Exodus 25:34). This would create a total of 66 units, which Conner claims is a picture of the Protestant canon of scripture (containing 66 books). Moreover, Conner notes that the total decorative units on the shaft and three branches equate to 39 (the number of Old Testament books within Protestant versions of the Bible); and the units on the remaining three branches come to 27 (the number of New Testament books). Conner connects this to Bible passages that speak of God's word as a light or lamp (e.g. Psalms 119:105; Psalms 119:130; cf. Proverbs 6:23).\nIn the Byzantine Rite the use of the menorah has been preserved, always standing on or behind the altar in the sanctuary. Though candles may be used, the traditional practice is to use olive oil in the seven-lamp lampstand. There are varying liturgical practices, and usually all seven lamps are lit for the services, though sometimes only the three centermost are lit for the lesser services. If the church does not have a sanctuary lamp the centermost lamp of the seven lamps may remain lit as an eternal flame.\nIn art.\nJewish art.\nThe use of the temple menorah as an artistic decoration during the Second Temple period and up to the Bar Kokhba revolt is quite rare. Examples were uncovered in burial caves near Mukhmas (ancient Michmas), in the Herodian Quarter in the Old City of Jerusalem, and in Magdala (on the Magdala Stone). The use of menorahs in Jewish art and in particular in Jewish funerary art became much more common in the late Roman and Byzantine periods.\nSamaritan art.\nThe menorah was a distinctive symbol of Samaritan identity during the Byzantine and Islamic periods. Artistic depictions of the menorah have been uncovered at sites of ancient Samaritan synagogues, including El-Khirbe, Tzur Natan, and Sha'alvim. Repurposed stone menorah reliefs, some with accompanying plant decorations, have been found in contemporary structures in several villages of ancient Samaria, including Qariyet Hajjah, Kafr Abbush, Kafr Zibad, Kafr Qaddum and Kafr Jit.\nModern Jewish use.\nIn synagogues.\nSynagogues have a continually lit lamp or light in front of the Torah ark, where the Torah scroll is kept, called the \"ner tamid\" (eternal light). This lamp represents the continually lit \"ner Elohim\" of the menorah used in Temple times. In addition, many synagogues display either a menorah or an artistic representation of a menorah.\nState of Israel.\nA menorah appears in the Emblem of Israel, based on the depiction of the menorah on the Arch of Titus.\nTemple Institute reconstruction.\nThe Temple Institute has created a life-sized menorah, designed by goldsmith Chaim Odem, intended for use in a future Third Temple. The Jerusalem Post describes the menorah as made \"according to excruciatingly exacting Biblical specifications and prepared to be pressed into service immediately should the need arise.\" The menorah is made of one talent (interpreted as 45\u00a0kg) of 24 karat pure gold, hammered out of a single block of solid gold, with decorations based on the depiction of the original in the Arch of Titus and the Temple Institute's interpretation of the relevant religious texts.\nOther modern Jewish uses.\nA menorah appeared on the cap badge of the First Judeans of the Jewish Legion (1919\u20131921).\nSometimes when teaching learners of the Hebrew language, a chart shaped like the seven-lamp menorah is used to help students remember the role of the \"binyanim\" of the Hebrew verb.\nThe menorah is the main element in several Holocaust memorials.\nSimilar objects.\nThe kinara is also, like the menorah, a seven candleholder which is associated with the African American festival of Kwanzaa. One candle is lit on each day of the week-long celebration, in a similar manner as the Hannukah menorah.\nIn Taoism, the Seven-Star Lamp \"qi xing deng\" \u4e03\u661f\u71c8 is a seven-lamp oil lamp lit to represent the seven stars of the Northern Dipper. This lampstand is a requirement for all Taoist temples, never to be extinguished. In the first 9 days of the lunar 9th month festival, an oil lamp of nine connected lamps may also be lit to honour both the Northern Dipper and two other assistant stars (collectively known as the Nine Emperor Stars), sons of Dou Mu appointed by the Taoist Trinity (the Three Pure Ones) to hold the Books of Life and Death of humanity. The lamps represent the illumination of the 7 stars, and lighting them are believed to absolve sins while prolonging one's lifespan.\nIn popular culture.\nThe menorah features prominently in the 2013 crypto-thriller \"The Sword of Moses\" by Dominic Selwood. It is also featured in the archaeology novels \"Crusader Gold\", by David Gibbins, \"The Last Secret of the Temple\", by Paul Sussman, and \"The Testament of Elias\", by W.S. Mahler. A menorah can be seen in the movie \"\", when Charles Xavier reads Erik Lehnsherr's mind, searching for a happy memory from his childhood before the Holocaust, and together they see Erik as a young child lighting his first menorah with his mother.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20736", "revid": "1318254762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20736", "title": "Pointing device gesture", "text": "Computer input method\nIn computing, a pointing device gesture or mouse gesture (or simply gesture) is a way of combining pointing device or finger movements and clicks that the software recognizes as a specific computer event and responds to accordingly. They can be useful for people who have difficulties typing on a keyboard. For example, in a web browser, a user can navigate to the previously viewed page by pressing the right pointing device button, moving the pointing device briefly to the left, then releasing the button.\nHistory.\nThe first pointing device gesture, the \"drag\", was introduced by Apple to replace a dedicated \"move\" button on mice shipped with its Macintosh and Lisa computers. Dragging involves holding down a pointing device button while moving the pointing device; the software interprets this as an action distinct from separate clicking and moving behaviors. Unlike most pointing device gestures, it does not involve the tracing of any particular shape. Although the \"drag\" behavior has been adopted in a huge variety of software packages, few other gestures have been as successful.\nCurrent use.\nAs of 2005[ [update]], most programs do not support gestures other than the drag operation. Each program that recognizes pointing device gestures does so in its own way, sometimes allowing for very short mouse movement distances to be recognized as gestures, and sometimes requiring very precise emulation of a certain movement pattern (e.g. circle). Some implementations allow users to customize these factors.\nSome video games have used gestures. For example, in the ' real-time tactics series, originally created by Bungie, players use them to order battlefield units to face in a desired direction. Another game using gestures is Lionhead's \"Black &amp; White\". The game \"Arx Fatalis\" uses mouse gestures for drawing runes in the air to cast spells. Several Nintendo Wii games take advantage of such a system. \"\u014ckami\" uses a system similar to mouse gestures; the player can enter a drawing mode in which the shape they create (circle, lightning bolt, line, etc.) performs a function in the game such as creating a bomb or changing the time from night to day. Other examples of computer games that use mouse gestures are \"Die by the Sword\" and \"Silver\" where basic mouse gestures actually map attack moves and such in real-time combat, along with ', which has a control scheme that implements its titular rider \"reflex\" system with mouse gestures. The Nintendo Switch 2's Joy-Con 2 controllers, which also double as mice, can also support mouse gestures, as evidenced in the online sports game \"Drag x Drive\".\nThe Opera web browser has recognized gestures since version 5.10 (April 2001) but this feature was disabled by default. However, this feature was introduced in Vivaldi Browser, a web browser meant to be a solution for the users of the former Opera, a more powerful browser than the current one. Opera browser also supports mouse chording which serves a similar function but doesn't necessitate mouse movement. The first browser that used advanced mouse gestures (in 2002) was Maxthon, in which a highly customizable interface allowed the assignment of almost every action to one of 52 mouse gestures and few mouse chords. Several mouse gesture extensions are also available for the Mozilla Firefox browser. These extensions use almost identical gestures as Opera.\nSome tools provide mouse gestures support in any application for Microsoft Windows. K Desktop Environment 3 includes universal mouse gesture support since version 3.2.\nWindows Aero provides three mouse gestures called Aero Peek, Aero Shake and Aero Snap. See the corresponding article for a description.\nTouchpad and touchscreen gestures.\nTouchscreens of tablet-type devices, such as the iPad, utilize multi-touch technology, with gestures acting as the main form of user interface. Many touchpads, which in laptops replace the traditional mouse, have similar gesture support. For example, a common gesture is to use two fingers in a downwards or upwards motion to scroll the currently active page. The rising popularity of touchscreen interfaces has led to gestures becoming a more standard feature in computing. Windows 7 introduced touchscreen support and touchpad gestures. Its successor, Windows 8 is designed to run both on traditional desktops and mobile devices and hence gestures are now enabled by default where the hardware allows it.\nRelated to gestures are touchpad hotspots, where a particular region of the touchpad has additional functionality. For example, a common hotspot feature is the far right side of the touchpad, which will scroll the active page if a finger is dragged down or up it.\nMulti-touch touchscreen gestures are predefined motions used to interact with multi-touch devices. An increasing number of products like smartphones, tablets, laptops or desktop computers have functions that are triggered by multi-touch gestures. Common touchscreen gestures include:\nOther gestures including more than 2 fingers on screen have also been developed such as Sticky Tools. These techniques are often developed for 3D applications and are not considered standard.\nDrawbacks.\nA major drawback of current gesture interaction solutions is the lack of support for two necessary user interface design principles, feedback and visibility (or affordance). Feedback notification is required to indicate whether the gesture has been entered correctly by indicating the gesture recognized and the corresponding command activated, although Sensiva does approach this to some extent in providing voice notification. The other principle is visibility of gestures, providing the user some means of learning the necessary gestures and the contexts they can be used in. Both Mouse Gestures for Internet Explorer and ALToolbar Mouse Gestures display colored tracers that indicate the current motion that the user is taking to facilitate visual clues for the user. Pie menus and marking menus have been proposed as solutions for both problems, since they support learning of the available options but can also be used with quick gestures. Most recent versions of Opera (11 and above) uses an on-screen pie menu to simply and instructively display which mouse gestures are available and how to activate them, providing feedback and visibility.\nOne limitation with gesture interaction is the scope context in which the gestures can be used. For example, each gesture has only one corresponding command for each application window.\nHolding down buttons while moving the mouse can be awkward and requires some practice, since the downwards action increases friction for the horizontal motion. An optical mouse would be less susceptible to changes in behavior than a ball mouse with increased friction because the sensor does not rely on mechanical contact to sense movement; a touchpad provides no added friction with all its buttons held down with a thumb. However, it was also argued that muscular tension resulting from holding down buttons could be exploited in user interface design as it gives constant feedback that the user is in a temporary state, or mode (Buxton, 1995).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20737", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20737", "title": "Maglev (disambiguation)", "text": "Maglev is a form of rail transport using magnetic levitation.\nMaglev may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20739", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20739", "title": "Monorail", "text": "Railway with a single rail or beam\nA monorail is a railway in which the track consists of a single rail or beam. Colloquially, the term \"monorail\" is often used to describe any form of elevated rail or people mover. More accurately, the term refers to the style of track. Monorail systems are most frequently implemented in large cities, airports, and theme parks.\nEtymology.\nThe term possibly originated in 1897 from German engineer Eugen Langen, who called an elevated railway system with wagons suspended the \"Eugen Langen One-railed Suspension Tramway\" (Einschieniges H\u00e4ngebahnsystem Eugen Langen).\nDifferentiation from other transport systems.\nMonorails have found applications in airport transfers and medium capacity metros. To differentiate monorails from other transport modes, the Monorail Society defines a monorail as a \"single rail serving as a track for passenger or freight vehicles. In most cases, rail is elevated, but monorails can also run at grade, below grade, or in subway tunnels. Vehicles either are suspended from or straddle a narrow guide way. Monorail vehicles are wider than the guideway that supports them.\"\nSimilarities.\nMonorails are often elevated, sometimes leading to confusion with other elevated systems such as the Docklands Light Railway, Vancouver SkyTrain, the AirTrain JFK and cable propelled systems like the Cable Liner people mover which run on two rails.\nMonorail vehicles often appear similar to light rail vehicles, and can be staffed or unstaffed. They can be individual rigid vehicles, articulated single units, or multiple units coupled into trains. Like other advanced rapid transit systems, monorails can be driven by linear induction motors; like conventional railways, vehicle bodies can be connected to the beam via bogies, allowing curves to be negotiated.\nMonorails are sometimes used in urban areas alongside conventional parallel railed metro systems. Mumbai Monorail serves alongside Mumbai Metro, while monorail lines are integrated with conventional rail rapid transit lines in Bangkok's MRT network.\nDifferences.\nUnlike some trams and light rail systems, modern monorails are always separated from other traffic and pedestrians due to the geometry of the rail. They are both guided and supported via interaction with the same single beam, in contrast to other guided systems like rubber-tyred metros, such as the Sapporo Municipal Subway; or guided buses or trams, such as Translohr. Monorails can also use pantographs.\nAs with other grade-separated transit systems, monorails avoid red lights, intersection turns, and traffic jams. Surface-level trains, buses, automobiles, and pedestrians can collide each one with the other, while vehicles on dedicated, grade-separated rights-of-way such as monorails can collide only with other vehicles on the same system, with much fewer opportunities for collision. As with other elevated transit systems, monorail passengers receive sunlight and views. Monorails can be quieter than diesel buses and trains. They obtain electricity from the track structure, whereas other modes of transit may use either third rail or overhead power lines and poles. Compared to the elevated train systems of New York, Chicago, and elsewhere, a monorail beamway casts a narrow shadow. \nConversely, monorails can be more expensive than light-rail systems that do not include tunnels. In addition, monorails must either remain above ground or use larger tunnels than conventional rail systems, and they require complex track-switching equipment.\nMaglev.\nUnder the Monorail Society's beam-width criterion, some, but not all, maglev systems are considered monorails, such as the Transrapid and Linimo. Maglevs differ from other monorails in that they do not physically contact the beam while moving.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nThe first monorail prototype was made in Russia in 1820 by Ivan Elmanov. Attempts at creating monorail alternatives to conventional railways have been made since the early part of the 19th century.\nThe Centennial Monorail was featured at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia in 1876. Based on its design the Bradford and Foster Brook Railway was built in 1877 and ran for one year from January 1878 until January 1879.\nAround 1879 a \"one-rail\" system was proposed independently by Haddon and by Stringfellow, which used an inverted \"V\" rail (and thus shaped like \"\u039b\" in cross-section). It was intended for military use, but was also seen to have civilian use as a \"cheap railway\". Similarly, one of the first systems put into practical use was that of French engineer Charles Lartigue, who built a line between Ballybunion and Listowel in Ireland, opened in 1888 and lasting 36 years, being closed in 1924 (due to damage from Ireland's Civil War). It used a load-bearing single rail and two lower, external rails for balance, the three carried on triangular supports. It was cheap to construct but tricky to operate. Possibly the first monorail locomotive was a 0-3-0 steam locomotive on this line. A high-speed monorail using the Lartigue system was proposed in 1901 between Liverpool and Manchester.\nThe Boynton Bicycle Railroad was a steam-powered monorail in Brooklyn on Long Island, New York. It ran on a single load-bearing rail at ground level, but with a wooden overhead stabilising rail engaged by a pair of horizontally opposed wheels. The railway operated for only two years beginning in 1890.\nThe Hotchkiss Bicycle Railroad was a monorail on which a matching pedal bicycle could be ridden. The first example was built between Smithville and Mount Holly, New Jersey, in 1892. It closed in 1897. Other examples were built in Norfolk from 1895 to 1909, Great Yarmouth, and Blackpool, UK from 1896.\n1900s\u20131950s.\nEarly designs used a double-flanged single metal rail alternative to the double rail of conventional railways, both guiding and supporting the monorail car. A surviving suspended version is the oldest still in service system: the Wuppertal monorail in Germany. Also in the early 1900s, Gyro monorails with cars gyroscopically balanced on top of a single rail were tested, but never developed beyond the prototype stage. The Ewing System, used in the Patiala State Monorail Trainways in Punjab, India, relies on a hybrid model with a load-bearing single rail and an external wheel for balance. A highspeed monorail using the Lartigue system was proposed in 1901 between Liverpool and Manchester.\nIn 1910, the Brennan gyroscopic monorail was considered for use to a coal mine in Alaska. In June 1920, the French Patent Office published FR 503782, by Henri Coanda, on a 'Transporteur A\u00e9rien' -Air Carrier. One of the first monorails planned in the United States was in New York City in the early 1930s, scrubbed for an elevated train system.\nThe first half of the 20th century saw many further proposed designs that either never left the drawing board or remained short-lived prototypes. Another project created on the layout was the ball-bearing train by Nikolai Grigorievich Yarmolchuk. This train moved on spherical wheels with electric motors embedded in them, which were located in semi-circular chutes under a wooden platform (in the full-scale project the trestle would have been concrete). A model train, built to 1/5 scale to test the vehicle concept, was capable of reaching speeds of up to 70\u00a0km/h. The full-scale project was expected to reach speeds of up to 300\u00a0km/h.\n1950s\u20131980s.\nIn the latter half of the 20th century, monorails had settled on using larger beam- or girder-based track, with vehicles supported by one set of wheels and guided by another. In the 1950s, a 40% scale prototype of a system designed for speed of on straight stretches and on curves was built in Germany. There were designs with vehicles supported, suspended or cantilevered from the beams. In the 1950s the ALWEG straddle design emerged, followed by an updated suspended type, the SAFEGE system. Versions of ALWEG's technology are used by the two largest monorail manufacturers, Hitachi Monorail and Bombardier.\nIn 1956, the first monorail to operate in the US began test operations in Houston, Texas. Disneyland in Anaheim, California, opened the United States' first daily operating monorail system in 1959. Later during this period, additional monorails were installed at Walt Disney World in Florida, Seattle, and in Japan. Monorails were promoted as futuristic technology with exhibition installations and amusement park purchases, as seen by the legacy systems in use today. However, monorails gained little foothold compared to conventional transport systems. In March 1972, Alejandro Goicoechea-Omar had patent DE1755198 published, on a 'Vertebrate Train', build as experimental track in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.\nNiche private enterprise uses for monorails emerged, with the emergence of air travel and shopping malls, with shuttle-type systems being built.\n1980s\u2013present.\nFrom the 1980s, most monorail mass transit systems are in Japan, with a few exceptions. Tokyo Monorail, is one of the world's busiest, averages 127,000 passengers per day and has served over 1.5 billion passengers since 1964. China recently started development of monorails in the late 2000s, already home to the world's largest and busiest monorail system and has a number of mass transit monorails under construction in several of cities. A Bombardier Innovia Monorail-based system is under construction in Wuhu and several \"Cloudrail\" systems developed by BYD under construction a number of cities such as Guang'an, Liuzhou, Bengbu and Guilin. Monorails have seen continuing use in niche shuttle markets and amusement parks.\nModern mass transit monorail systems use developments of the ALWEG beam and tyre approach, with only two suspended types in large use. Monorail configurations have also been adopted by maglev trains. Since the 2000s, with the rise of traffic congestion and urbanization, there has been a resurgence of interest in the technology for public transport with a number of cities, such as Malta and Istanbul, today investigating monorails as a possible mass transit solution.\nIn 2004, Chongqing Rail Transit in China adopted a unique ALWEG-based design with rolling stock that is much wider than most monorails, with capacity comparable to heavy rail. This is because Chongqing is criss-crossed by numerous hills, mountains and rivers, therefore tunneling is not feasible except in some cases (for example, lines 1 and 6) due to the extreme depth involved. Today it is the largest and busiest monorail system in the world.\nIn July 2009, two Walt Disney World monorails collided, killing one of the drivers and injuring seven passengers. The National Transportation Safety Board found the cause of the accident to be human error by both the driver and controller, contributed to by a lack of standard operating procedures.\nS\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil, is building two high-capacity monorail lines as part of its public transportation network. Line 15 was partially opened in 2014, will be long when completed in 2022 and has a capacity of 40,000 pphpd using Bombardier Innovia Monorail trains. Line 17 will be long and is using the BYD SkyRail design. Other significant monorail systems are under construction such as two lines for the Cairo Monorail, two lines for the MRT (Bangkok) and the SkyRail Bahia in Brazil.\nTypes and technical aspects.\nModern monorails depend on a large solid beam as the vehicles' running surface. There are a number of competing designs divided into two broad classes, \"straddle-beam\" and \"suspended\" monorails. The most common type is the straddle-beam, in which the train straddles a steel or reinforced concrete beam wide. A rubber-tired carriage contacts the beam on the top and both sides for traction and to stabilize the vehicle. The style was popularized by the German company ALWEG. There is also a historical type of \"suspension monorail\" developed by German inventors Nicolaus Otto and Eugen Langen in the 1880s. It was built in the twin cities of Barmen and Elberfeld in Wuppertal, Germany, opened in 1901, and is still in operation. The Chiba Urban Monorail is the world's largest suspended network.\nPower.\nAlmost all modern monorails are powered by electric motors fed by dual third rails, contact wires or electrified channels attached to or enclosed in their guidance beams. Historically some systems, such as the Lartigue Monorail, used steam locomotives, but diesel-powered monorail systems also existed. Some monorail systems use linear induction motors, for example Disney's Tomorrowland Monorail.\nMagnetic levitation.\nMagnetic levitation train (maglev) systems such as the German Transrapid were built as straddle-type monorails. The Shanghai Maglev Train runs in commercial operation at , and there are also slower maglev monorails intended for urban transport in Japan (Linimo), Korea (Incheon Airport Maglev) and China (Beijing Subway Line S1 and the Changsha Maglev Express). However, it is argued that the larger width of the guideway for the maglevs makes it not legitimate to be called monorails.\nSwitching.\nSwitching in monorail systems varies by design and technology. One of the earliest systems, the Wuppertal Suspension Railway in Germany, uses vehicles suspended beneath a single elevated rail, with steel wheels running on top. Due to the design of the cars, switching required a complex rotating mechanism that physically turned the track structure. As a result, the system operates without bypasses or spur lines with a loop at either end to turn trains around.\nThe mechanical complexity and limitations of early switching systems contributed to the perception that monorails are generally inflexible or unsuited for branching routes. However, modern monorail technologies have introduced a variety of switching methods that address these limitations.\nFor suspended monorails, newer designs such as those used by SAFEGE and H-Bahn systems, incorporate internal pivoting components. These systems use movable plates within the guideway to change direction without moving the entire beam, allowing for more compact and efficient switches\nStraddle-beam monorails employ either segmented or beam-moving switching systems. The segmented switch, developed by ALWEG in the 1950s and is still in use in Japan, uses flexible beam sections that can shift between straight and curved alignments, requiring relatively little space and enabling faster switching. Another method, known as the beam replacement switch, involves moving a straight beam section aside while a curved beam section moves into place and is capable of completing a switch in approximately 12 seconds.\nRotary switches, have a straight beam and a curved beam on either side of a plate, which can rotate 180 degrees.\nIn addition to these switching mechanisms, some systems use turntables or transfer tables at maintenance facilities or depots. These allow vehicles to be redirected to and from storage or service lines.\nGrades.\nRubber-tired monorails are typically designed to cope with a 6% grade. Rubber-tired light rail or metro lines can cope with similar or greater grades \u2013 for example, the Lausanne Metro has grades of up to 12% and the Montreal Metro up to 6.5%, while VAL systems can handle 7% grades.\nMonorail systems.\nManufacturers of monorail rolling stock with operating systems include Hitachi Monorail, BYD, Bombardier Transportation (now Alstom), Scomi, PBTS (a joint venture of CRRC Nanjing Puzhen &amp; Bombardier), Intamin and EMTC.\nOther developers include CRRC Qingdao Sifang, China Railway Science and Industry Group, Zhongtang Air Rail Technology, Woojin and SkyWay Group.\nIn popular culture.\nFran\u00e7ois Truffaut's 1966 film adaptation of Ray Bradbury's 1953 novel \"Fahrenheit 451\" contains suspended monorail exterior scenes filmed at the French SAFEGE test track in Ch\u00e2teauneuf-sur-Loire near Orl\u00e9ans, France (since dismantled).\nThe \"Thunderbirds\" February 1966 episode \"Brink of Disaster\" is about the financing and building of a high speed driverless cross-country monorail project. Two of the Thunderbirds-crew find themselves trapped on board the a monorail train, and with no possibility of escape, when it is discovered it is speeding towards a stricken bridge.\nThe James Bond film franchise features monorails in three movies, all belonging to the villain. In \"You Only Live Twice\" (1967) there is a working ground level monorail inside the SPECTRE volcano base. During \"Live and Let Die\" (1973), a prop monorail is shown in the villain's lair on the fictional Caribbean island of San Monique. In the 1977 \"The Spy Who Loved Me\" there is working monorail on the villain's \"supertanker\" (submarine dock).\nIn 1987, Lego released a monorail among the \"Futuron\" Space line. Despite being the most expensive Lego set of its time (due to being massive and including electrical elements), it was very popular, with Lego releasing a \"Town\" themed monorail in 1990 and another Space monorail in 1994 among the \"Unitron\" line, as well as additional track. The monorail system was also prominent in the unreleased \"Seatron\" Space line and prototype \"Wild West\" sets. Its popularity has still endured over thirty years later, where Lego has paid homage in promotional sets and fans have manufactured compatible components.\nThe fourth season of the American animated television show \"The Simpsons\" features the episode \"Marge vs. the Monorail\", in which the town of Springfield impulsively purchases a faulty monorail from a confidence trickster at a wildly inflated price. The Monorail Society, an organization with 14,000 members worldwide, has blamed the episode for sullying the reputation of monorails, to which \"Simpsons\" creator Matt Groening responded \"That's a by-product of our viciousness...Monorails are great, so it makes me sad, but at the same time if something's going to happen in \"The Simpsons\", it's going to go wrong, right?\"\nThe 2005 feature film \"Batman Begins\" features a monorail, constructed by Bruce Wayne's father through Gotham City, that is part of the climax of the film. The monorail is also included in the spin-off video game.\nBlaine the Mono is a train featured in Stephen King's \"The Dark Tower\" series of books and first appears in \"\".\nMonorails have also appeared in a number of other video games including \"Transport Tycoon\", \"Japanese Rail Sim 3D: Monorail Trip to Okinawa\" by Sonic Powered, ', \"Cities in Motion 2\", ' in the \"Mass transit\" expansion pack of 2017, \"Planet Zoo\" and a rideable elevated monorail system in the 2020 video game \"Cyberpunk 2077\". \nPerceptions of monorail as public transport.\nFrom 1950 to 1980, the monorail concept may have suffered, as with all public transport systems, from competition with the automobile. At the time, the was riding high and people were buying automobiles in large numbers due to suburbanization and the Interstate Highway System. Monorails in particular may have suffered from the reluctance of public transit authorities to invest in the perceived high cost of un-proven technology when faced with cheaper mature alternatives. There were also many competing monorail technologies, splitting their case further. One notable example of a public monorail is the AMF Monorail that was used as transportation around the 1964\u20131965 World's Fair.\nThis high-cost perception was challenged most notably in 1963 when the ALWEG consortium proposed to finance the construction of a major system in Los Angeles County, California, in return for the right of operation. This was turned down by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors under pressure from Standard Oil of California and General Motors (which were strong advocates for automobile dependency), and the later proposed subway system faced criticism by famed author Ray Bradbury as it had yet to reach the scale of the proposed monorail.\nSeveral monorails initially conceived as transport systems survive on revenues generated from tourism, benefiting from the unique views offered from the largely elevated installations.\nFarm, mining and logistics applications.\nMonorails have been used for number of applications other than passenger transportation. Small suspended monorail are also widely used in factories either as part of moveable assembly lines.\nHistory.\nInspired by the Centennial Monorail demonstrated in 1876, in 1877 the Bradford and Foster Brook Railway began construction of a line connecting Bradford and Foster Township, McKean County in Pennsylvania. The line operated from 1878 until 1879 delivering machinery and oil supplies. The first twin-boiler locomotive wore out quickly. It was replaced by a single boiler locomotive which was too heavy and crashed through the track on its third trip. The third locomotive again had twin boilers. On a trial run one of the boilers ran dry and exploded, killing six people. The railway was closed soon after.\nMonorails in Central Java were used to transport timber from the forests of Central Java located in the mountains to the rivers. In 1908 and 1909, the forester H. J. L. Beck built a manually operated monorail of limited but sufficient capacity for the transport of small timber and firewood in the Northern Surabaya forest district. In later years, this idea was further developed by L. A. van de Ven, who was a forester in the Grobogan forest district around 1908\u20131910. Monorails were built by plantation operators and wood processing companies throughout the mountains of Central Java. In 1919/1920, however, the hand-operated monorails gradually disappeared and were replaced by narrow-gauge railways with steam locomotives as forest utilization changed.\nIn the 1920s the Port of Hamburg used a petrol powered, suspended monorail to transport luggage and freight from ocean-going vessels to a passenger depot.\nIn the northern Mojave Desert, the Epsom Salts Monorail was built in 1924. It ran for 28 miles from a connection on the Trona Railway, eastward to harvest epsomite deposits in the Owlshead Mountains. This Lartigue type monorail achieved gradients of up to ten percent. It only operated until June 1926, when the mineral deposits become uneconomic, and was dismantled for scrap in the late 1930s.\nIn the Soviet Union the Lyskovsky monorail in the Nizhny Novgorod region was designed by the engineer of the timber industry Ivan Gorodtsov. A Lartigue type line of about long was opened in November 1934 to connect the village of Selskaya Maza with the villages of Bakaldy and Yaloksha to carry timber. Following this example a separate cargo-and-passenger monorail was built from the town of Bor to the village of Zavrazhnoe, where forest and peat were exploited. The Lyskovsky monorail stopped operating in 1949.\nThe British firm \"Road Machines (Drayton) Ltd\" developed a modular-track ground-level monorail system with a high rail segments, long, running between support plates. The first system was sold in 1949 and it was used in industrial, construction and agricultural applications around the world. The company ceased trading in 1967. The system was adapted for the use in the 1967 James Bond film \"You Only Live Twice\". An example of the system exists at the Amberley Museum &amp; Heritage Centre in Britain.\nRecent applications.\nVery small and lightweight systems are used widely on farms to transport crops such as bananas. First developed in Japan, industrial versions of slope cars are used in agriculture in steep sloped areas such as citrus orchards in Japan and vineyards in Italy. One European manufacturer says they have installed 650 systems worldwide.\nIn the mining industry suspended monorails have been used because of their ability to descend and climb steep tunnels using rack and pinion drive. This significantly reduces cost and length of tunnels, by up to 60% in some cases, which otherwise must be at gentle gradients to suit road vehicles or conventional railways.\nA suspended monorail capable of carrying fully loaded 20' and 40' containers has been under construction since 2020 at the Port of Qingdao, the first phase of which was put into operation in 2021.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20741", "revid": "42267714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20741", "title": "Michael Halliday", "text": "British linguist (1925\u20132018)\nMichael Alexander Kirkwood Halliday (often M. A. K. Halliday; 13 April 1925 \u2013 15 April 2018) was a British linguist who developed the internationally influential systemic functional linguistics (SFL) model of language. His grammatical descriptions go by the name of systemic functional grammar. Halliday described language as a semiotic system, \"not in the sense of a system of signs, but a systemic resource for meaning\". For Halliday, language was a \"meaning potential\"; by extension, he defined linguistics as the study of \"how people exchange meanings by 'languaging'\". Halliday described himself as a \"generalist\", meaning that he tried \"to look at language from every possible vantage point\", and has described his work as \"wander[ing] the highways and byways of language\". But he said that \"to the extent that I favoured any one angle, it was the social: language as the creature and creator of human society\".\nHalliday's grammar differs markedly from traditional accounts that emphasise the classification of individual words (e.g. noun, verb, pronoun, preposition) in formal, written sentences in a restricted number of \"valued\" varieties of English. Halliday's model conceives grammar explicitly as how meanings are coded into wordings, in both spoken and written modes in all varieties and registers of a language. Three strands of grammar operate simultaneously. They concern (i) the interpersonal exchange between speaker and listener, and writer and reader; (ii) representation of our outer and inner worlds; and (iii) the wording of these meanings in cohesive spoken and written texts, from within the clause up to whole texts. Notably, the grammar embraces intonation in spoken language. Halliday's seminal \"Introduction to Functional Grammar\" (first edition, 1985) spawned a new research discipline and related pedagogical approaches. By far the most progress has been made in English, but the international growth of communities of SFL scholars has led to the adaptation of Halliday's advances to some other languages.\nBiography.\nHalliday was born and raised in England. His parents nurtured his fascination for language: his mother, Winifred, had studied French, and his father, Wilfred, was a dialectologist, a dialect poet, and an English teacher with a love for grammar and Elizabethan drama. In 1942, Halliday volunteered for the National Services' foreign language training course. He was selected to study Chinese on the strength of his success in being able to differentiate tones. After 18 months' training, he spent a year in India working with the Chinese Intelligence Unit doing counter-intelligence work. In 1945 he was brought back to London to teach Chinese. He took a BA honours degree in modern Chinese language and literature (Mandarin) through the University of London\u2014an external degree for which he studied in China. He then lived for three years in China, where he studied under Luo Changpei at Peking University and under Wang Li at Lingnan University, before returning to take a PhD in Chinese linguistics at Cambridge under the supervision of Gustav Hallam and then J.R. Firth. Having taught languages for 13 years, he changed his field of specialisation to linguistics, and developed systemic functional linguistics, including systemic functional grammar, elaborating on the foundations laid by his British teacher J.R. Firth and a group of European linguists of the early 20th century, the :Prague school. His seminal paper on this model was published in 1961.\nHalliday's first academic position was as an assistant lecturer in Chinese, at Cambridge University, from 1954 to 1958. In 1958 he moved to the University of Edinburgh, where he was a lecturer in general linguistics until 1960, and a reader from 1960 to 1963. From 1963 to 1965 he was the director of the Communication Research Centre at University College, London. During 1964, he was also a Linguistic Society of America Professor, at Indiana University. From 1965 to 1971 he was a professor of linguistics at UCL. In 1972\u201373 he was a fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioural Sciences, Stanford, and in 1973\u201374 professor of linguistics at the University of Illinois. In 1974 he briefly moved back to Britain to be a professor of language and linguistics at Essex University. In 1976 he moved to Australia as a foundation professor of linguistics at the University of Sydney, where he remained until he retired in 1987.\nHalliday worked in multiple areas of linguistics, both theoretical and applied, and was especially concerned with applying the understanding of the basic principles of language to the theory and practices of education. In 1987 he was awarded the status of Emeritus Professor at the University of Sydney and Macquarie University, Sydney. He has honorary doctorates from the University of Birmingham (1987), York University (1988), the University of Athens (1995), Macquarie University (1996), Lingnan University (1999)\uff0cthe University of British Columbia (2007)\uff0c and Beijing Normal University(2011).\nHe died in Sydney of natural causes on 15 April 2018 at the age of 93.\nLinguistic theory and description.\nHalliday's grammatical theory and descriptions gained wide recognition after the publication of the first edition of his book \"An Introduction to Functional Grammar\" in 1985. A second edition was published in 1994, and then a third, in which he collaborated with Christian Matthiessen, in 2004. A fourth edition was published in 2014. Halliday's conception of grammar \u2013 or \"lexicogrammar\", a term he coined to argue that lexis and grammar are part of the same phenomenon \u2013 is based on a more general theory of language as a social semiotic resource, or \"meaning potential\" (see Systemic functional linguistics). Halliday follows Hjelmslev and Firth in distinguishing theoretical from descriptive categories in linguistics. He argues that \"theoretical categories, and their inter-relations, construe an abstract model of language ... they are interlocking and mutually defining. The theoretical architecture derives from work on the description of natural discourse, and as such 'no very clear line is drawn between '(theoretical) linguistics' and 'applied linguistics'\". So the theory \"is continually evolving as it is brought to bear on solving problems of a research or practical nature\". Halliday contrasts theoretical categories with descriptive categories, defined as \"categories set up in the description of particular languages\". His descriptive work has focused on English and Mandarin.\nHalliday argues against some claims about language associated with the generative tradition. Language, he argues, \"cannot be equated with 'the set of all grammatical sentences', whether that set is conceived of as finite or infinite\". He rejects the use of formal logic in linguistic theories as \"irrelevant to the understanding of language\" and the use of such approaches as \"disastrous for linguistics\". On Chomsky specifically, he writes that \"imaginary problems were created by the whole series of dichotomies that Chomsky introduced, or took over unproblematized: not only syntax/semantics but also grammar/lexis, language/thought, competence/performance. Once these dichotomies had been set up, the problem arose of locating and maintaining the boundaries between them.\"\nStudies of grammar.\nFundamental categories.\nHalliday's first major work on grammar was \"Categories of the Theory of Grammar\", in the journal \"Word\" in 1961. In this paper, he argued for four \"fundamental categories\" in grammar: \"unit\", \"structure\", \"class\", and \"system\". These categories are \"of the highest order of abstraction\", but he defended them as necessary to \"make possible a coherent account of what grammar is and of its place in language\" In articulating unit, Halliday proposed the notion of a \"rank scale\". The units of grammar form a hierarchy, a scale from largest to smallest, which he proposed as a \"sentence\", \"clause\", \"group/phrase\", \"word,\" and \"morpheme\". Halliday defined structure as \"likeness between events in successivity\" and as \"an arrangement of elements ordered in places\". He rejects a view of the structure as \"strings of classes, such as nominal group + verbalgroup + nominal group\", describing structure instead as \"configurations of functions, where the solidarity is organic\".\nGrammar as systemic.\nHalliday's early paper shows that the notion of \"system\" has been part of his theory from its origins. Halliday explains this preoccupation in the following way: \"It seemed to me that explanations of linguistic phenomena needed to be sought in relationships among systems rather than among structures \u2013 in what I once called \"deep paradigms\" \u2013 since these were essentially where speakers made their choices\". Halliday's \"systemic grammar\" is a semiotic account of grammar, because of this orientation to choice. Every linguistic act involves choice, and choices are made on many scales. Systemic grammars draw on system networks as their primary representation tool as a consequence. For instance, a major clause must display some structure that is the formal realisation of a choice from the system of \"voice\", i.e. it must be either \"middle\" or \"effective\", where \"effective\" leads to the further choice of \"operative\" (otherwise known as 'active') or \"receptive\" (otherwise known as \"passive\").\nGrammar as functional.\nHalliday's grammar is not just \"systemic\", but \"systemic functional\". He argues that the explanation of how language works \"needed to be grounded in a functional analysis since language had evolved in the process of carrying out certain critical functions as human beings interacted with their ... 'eco-social' environment\". Halliday's early grammatical descriptions of English, called \"Notes on Transitivity and Theme in English \u2013 Parts 1\u20133\" include reference to \"four components in the grammar of English representing four functions that the language as a communication system is required to carry out: the experiential, the logical, the discoursal and the speech functional or interpersonal\". The \"discoursal\" function was renamed the \"textual function\". In this discussion of functions of language, Halliday draws on the work of B\u00fchler and Malinowski. Halliday's notion of language functions, or \"metafunctions\", became part of his general linguistic theory.\nLanguage in society.\nThe final volume of Halliday's 10 volumes of Collected Papers is called \"Language in society\", reflecting his theoretical and methodological connection to language as first and foremost concerned with \"acts of meaning\". This volume contains many of his early papers, in which he argues for a deep connection between language and social structure. Halliday argues that language does not exist merely to reflect social structure. For instance, he writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... if we say that linguistic structure \"reflects\" social structure, we are really assigning to language a role that is too passive ... Rather we should say that linguistic structure is the realization of social structure, actively symbolizing it in a process of mutual creativity. Because it stands as a metaphor for society, language has the property of not only transmitting the social order but also maintaining and potentially modifying it. (This is undoubtedly the explanation of the violent attitudes that under certain social conditions come to be held by one group towards the speech of others.)\nStudies in child language development.\nIn enumerating his claims about the trajectory of children's language development, Halliday eschews the metaphor of \"acquisition\", in which language is considered a static product that the child takes on when sufficient exposure to natural language enables \"parameter setting\". By contrast, for Halliday what the child develops is a \"meaning potential\". Learning language is \"Learning how to mean\", the name of his well-known early study of a child's language development.\nHalliday (1975) identifies seven functions that language has for children in their early years. For Halliday, children are motivated to develop language because it serves certain purposes or functions for them. The first four functions help the child to satisfy physical, emotional, and social needs. Halliday calls them instrumental, regulatory, interactional, and personal functions.\nThe next three functions are heuristic, imaginative, and representational, all helping the child to come to terms with his or her environment.\nAccording to Halliday, as the child moves into the mother tongue, these functions give way to the generalised \"metafunctions\" of language. In this process, in between the two levels of the simple protolanguage system (the \"expression\" and \"content\" pairing of the Saussure's sign), an additional level of content is inserted. Instead of one level of content, there are now two: lexicogrammar and semantics. The \"expression\" plane also now consists of two levels: phonetics and phonology.\nHalliday's work is sometimes seen as representing a competing viewpoint to the formalist approach of Noam Chomsky. Halliday's stated concern is with \"naturally occurring language in actual contexts of use\" in a large typological range of languages. Critics of Chomsky often characterise his work, by contrast, as focused on English with Platonic idealisation, a characterisation that Chomskyans reject (see Universal Grammar).\nOrdered typology of systems.\nHalliday proposed an ordered typology of systems to account for different types of complex systems operating in different phenomenal realms.\nHe proposed four types of system, in order of increasing complexity\u2014systems of a higher order encompass systems of a lower order:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20742", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20742", "title": "Muslim Brotherhood", "text": "Transnational Sunni Islamist organization\nThe Society of the Muslim Brothers (\" \"), better known as the Muslim Brotherhood ( \"\"), is a transnational Sunni Islamist organization founded in Egypt by Islamic scholar, Imam and schoolteacher Hassan al-Banna in 1928. Al-Banna's teachings spread far beyond Egypt, influencing various Islamist movements from charitable organizations to political parties.\nInitially, as a pan-Islamist, religious, and social movement, it preached Islam in Egypt, taught the illiterate, and set up hospitals and business enterprises. It later advanced into the political arena, aiming to end British colonial rule in Egypt. The movement's self-stated aim is the establishment of a state ruled by sharia law under a caliphate \u2014 its most famous slogan is \"Islam is the solution\". Charity is a major aspect of its work.\nThe group spread to other Muslim countries but still has one of its largest organizations in Egypt, despite a succession of government crackdowns since 1948. It remained a fringe group in the politics of the Arab world until the 1967 Six-Day War, when Islamism replaced popular secular Arab nationalism after a resounding Arab defeat by Israel. The movement was also supported by Saudi Arabia, with which it shared mutual enemies like communism.\nThe Arab Spring brought it legalization and substantial political power at first, but as of 2013 it has suffered severe reversals. The Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood was legalized in 2011 and won several elections, including the 2012 presidential election when its candidate Mohamed Morsi became Egypt's first president to gain power through an election. A year later, following massive demonstrations and unrest, he was overthrown by the military and placed under house arrest; with a later review finding that the group failed to moderate its views or embrace democratic values during its time in power. The group was then banned in Egypt and declared a terrorist organization. The Persian Gulf monarchies of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates followed suit, driven by the perception that the Brotherhood is a threat to their authoritarian rule.\nThe group's founder accepted the utility of political violence and members of Brotherhood conducted assassinations and attempted assassinations on Egyptian state figures during his lifetime, including Egyptian Prime Minister Mahmud El Nokrashi in 1948. Sayyid Qutb, one of the group's most prominent thinkers, promoted takfirism in \"Ma'alim fi-l-Tariq\" (\"Milestones\"), a doctrine that permits \"the stigmatisation of other Muslims as infidel or apostate, and of existing states as unIslamic, and the use of extreme violence in the pursuit of the perfect Islamic society\"; this doctrine continues to inspire many Jihadist movements. The group abandoned the use of violence in the 1970s. However, Hamas, a Palestinian militant group that controls the Gaza Strip, is an off-shoot of the Brotherhood that continues to use violence. The Brotherhood itself claims to be a peaceful, democratic organization, and that its leader \"condemns violence and violent acts\".\nIn recent times, the primary state backers of the Muslim Brotherhood have been Qatar and the AKP-ruled Turkey. As of 2015, it is considered a terrorist organization by the governments of Bahrain, Egypt, Russia, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.\nFoundation and history in Egypt.\nEarly years.\nFormative period (1928\u20131936).\nHassan al-Banna founded the Muslim Brotherhood in the city of Ismailia in March 1928 along with six workers of the Suez Canal Company, as a Pan-Islamic, religious, political, and social movement. They appointed Al-Banna as their leader and vowed to work for Islam through \"Jihad\" and revive Islamic Brotherhood. Thus, the Muslim Brothers were born; under the pledge that its members would\nbe soldiers in the call to Islam, and in that is the life for the country and the honour for the \"Umma\"... We are brothers in the service of Islam.. Hence we are the \"Muslim Brothers\".\nThe Suez Canal Company helped Banna build the mosque in Ismailia that would serve as the Brotherhood's headquarters, according to Richard P. Mitchell's \"The Society of Muslim Brothers\". According to al-Banna, contemporary Islam had lost its social dominance, because most Muslims had been corrupted by Western influences. Sharia law based on the Qur'an and the Sunnah were seen as laws passed down by God that should be applied to all parts of life, including the organization of the government and the handling of everyday problems.\nAl-Banna was populist in his message of protecting workers against the tyranny of foreign and monopolist companies. It founded social institutions such as hospitals, pharmacies, schools, etc. Al-Banna held highly conservative views on issues such as women's rights, opposing equal rights for women, but supporting the establishment of justice towards women. The Brotherhood grew rapidly going from 800 members in 1936, to 200,000 by 1938 and over 2 million by 1948.\nEntry into politics (1936\u20131939).\nAs its influence grew, it opposed British rule in Egypt starting in 1936. al-Banna had been in contact with Amin al-Husseini since 1927. A central concern for the early Muslim Brotherhood was its pro-Arab activism for the Arab-Zionist conflict in Palestine, which in 1936\u20131939 culminated in the great Arab revolt. While absent before the outbreak of the revolt, the Brotherhood now began to make use of aggressive anti-Jewish rhetorics which also targeted the Jewish community in Egypt. The official weekly of the Brotherhood, \"al-Nadhir\", published a series of articles titled \"The Danger of Jews\", warning of alleged Jewish plots against Islam like Freemasonry or Marxism. In 1938 \"al-Nadhir\" demanded from Egypt's Jews to either adopt an openly anti-Zionist stance or to face \"hostility\". It also criticized the prominent role of Jews in Egypt's society and their prominence in journalism, commercial spheres and the entertainment industry. \"al-Nadhir\" even called for a boycott and their expulsion, \"for they have corrupted Egypt and its population.\" In another instance the Jews were referred to as a \"societal cancer\". The Brotherhood eventually distributed a list of Jewish business owners and called for their boycott, claiming that they supported the Zionists. Such conflations of Jews and Zionists were common.\nIn the years preceding World War II the Muslim Brothers grew connections with Nazi Germany, maintained via the in Cairo and Amin al-Husseini, who himself received funds from the Abwehr. Being interested in strengthening a militant anti-British organization, Germany may have funded the Brotherhood as early as 1934. One later British source claimed that in 1936 alone, Germany transferred over \u00a35.000. al-Banna and other members of the Brotherhood voiced admiration for aspects of Nazi ideology, including its militarism and its centralization revolving around a charismatic leader, but opposed others like its racial policies and ethnic nationalism. The outbreak of the war ended the relationship between Germany and the Muslim Brothers. al-Banna denied that he had ever received German funding. Italian funding of the Brotherhood is unlikely, as the latter vehemently opposed the Italian occupation of Libya.\nWorld War II (1939\u20131945).\nOver the course of the war, the Brotherhood displayed pro-Axis sympathies. Worried, the British kept the Brotherhood under firm control by temporarily banning its newsletters, surveiling its meetings and arresting various provincial leaders. al-Banna himself was briefly taken into custody and eventually acknowledged his loyalty to the British, although the latter remained suspicious.\nBetween 1938 and 1940 or 1941 the Brotherhood formed an armed wing called the (\"al-Nizam al-Khas\"), also known as \"Special Apparatus\". This group was a successor of the \"battalions\" (\"kata'ib\") established in late 1937. Its goal was to fight the British until their expulsion from Egypt, British collaborators as well as Zionists. It also protected the Brotherhood against the police and infiltrated the Communist movement. The \"Secret Apparatus\" was led by a committee of five, with each of them commanding one tightly knit cell. Only the most committed members, mostly young students or men with salaried jobs, were invited to join. New members of the \"Secret Apparatus\" were taught to obey, were given weapons, underwent heavy physical training and were taught the concepts of Jihad and underground operations. The result was a zealous elite force. Its first operation was allegedly towards the end of World War II, when members of the group threw a bomb at a British club. Militarized youth sections were also raised, namely the junior \"kashafa\" (\"scouts\") and the more senior \"jawala\" (\"travellers\").\nIn 1948, al-Banna denounced fascism and militarism in his book \"Peace in Islam\":\"Nazism came to power in Germany, Fascism in Italy and both Hitler and Mussolini began to force their people to conform to what they thought; unity, order, development, and power. Certainly, this system led the two countries to stability and a vital international role. This cultivated much hope, reawakened aspiration, and united the whole country under one leader. Then what happened? It became apparent that these seemingly powerful systems were a real disaster. The inspiration and aspirations of the people were shattered and the system of democracy did not lead to the empowerment of the people but to the establishment of chosen tyrants. Eventually after a deadly war in which innumerable men, women, and children died, these regimes collapsed.\"\nPost\u2013World War II.\nConflict in Palestine and Egypt (1945\u20131952).\nAfter the war the Brotherhood lobbied for granting Amin al-Husseini, who had served as a German propaganda mouthpiece between 1941 and 1945, asylum in Egypt. In May 1946 al-Husseini managed to escape from French imprisonment and arrived in Cairo. He received a warm welcome, especially by al-Banna, who ennobled him to a \"miracle of a man\" with \"a divine spark in his heart which makes him above human beings\", followed by a martial pledge of loyalty against the Zionists. Soon after his arrival the Arab League established the Arab Higher Executive (rebranded as Arab Higher Committee in January 1947) as supreme Palestinian party with Amin al-Husseini as Cairo-based chairman. al-Banna designated al-Husseini a local Brotherhood leader to spread the influence of the new Palestinian branch established in October 1945. Another small branch was founded in Jordan at the turn of 1946.\nThe Brotherhood opposed the UN's involvement in Palestine from April 1947, with the latter eventually voting for its partition into a Jewish and an Arab state in November 1947. Consequently, the society prepared for war, with volunteers entering Palestine as early as October 1947. By 30 November 1947 Palestine descended into a civil war fought between the Yishuv and al-Husseini's Arab Higher Committee, eventually ending in a Palestinian defeat by May 1948. Of the 10,000 fighters al-Banna had promised in October 1947 some 1.500 were present by March 1948. The fighters came from all three branches and were originally engaged in guerrilla activities. The end of Mandatory Palestine and Israel's declaration of independence on 14 May resulted in an invasion by five Arab states in 15 May, among them Egypt. Brotherhood fighters assisted the Egyptian army northeast of Gaza, although some were also active in the West Bank. The volunteers suffered a few hundred casualties dead and wounded and had only a limited impact on the course of the war, although they played a decisive role in several engagements. The war was an Arab failure, resulting in a truce fiercely opposed by the Muslim Brothers.\nOn 2 November 1945 the Brotherhood organized a general strike protesting the Balfour declaration that eventually escalated into deadly riots targeting Jews and foreigners.\nIn March 1948 the \"Secret Apparatus\" assassinated a respected judge for issuing a life sentence against a Muslim Brother for attacking British soldiers. In late 1948 the Brotherhood was estimated to have 2,000 branches and 500,000 members or sympathizers. In November, following several bombings and alleged assassination attempts by the Brotherhood, the Egyptian government arrested 32 leaders of the Brotherhood's \"Secret Apparatus\" and banned the Brotherhood. It was accused of preparing the overthrow of the government, linked to a jeep loaded with weapons. The headquarters were closed and its funds confiscated, while 4,000 Brothers were detained and al-Banna was placed under temporary house arrest. The reaction to the dissolution was the assassination of prime minister Mahmoud El Nokrashy Pasha on 28 December by a young \"Secret Apparatus\" member. al-Banna claimed that the killer acted independently and publicly denounced his faith. After a failed yet lethal bombing in mid-January 1949 which was intended to destroy legal evidence pending against the Brotherhood al-Banna himself was killed in 12 February by vengeful Nokrashy supporters.\nIn 1952, members of the Muslim Brotherhood were accused of taking part in the Cairo Fire that destroyed some 750 buildings in downtown Cairo\u00a0\u2013 mainly night clubs, theatres, hotels, and restaurants frequented by British and other foreigners.\nDissolution under the \"Free Officers\" and Nasser (1952\u20131970).\nIn 1952 Egypt's monarchy was overthrown by a group of nationalist military officers (Free Officers Movement) who had formed a cell within the Brotherhood during the first war against Israel in 1948. However, after the revolution Gamal Abdel Nasser, the leader of the 'free officers' cell, after deposing the first President of Egypt, Muhammad Neguib, in a coup, quickly moved against the Brotherhood, blaming them for an attempt on his life. The Brotherhood was again banned and this time thousands of its members were imprisoned, many being tortured and held for years in prisons and concentration camps. In the 1950s and 1960s many Brotherhood members sought sanctuary in Saudi Arabia. From the 1950s, al-Banna's son-in-law Said Ramadan emerged as a major leader of the Brotherhood and the movement's unofficial foreign minister. Ramadan built a major center for the Brotherhood centered on a mosque in Munich, which became \"a refuge for the beleaguered group during its decades in the wilderness\". In the 1960s, Ramadan worked closely with Mahmoud K. Mufti\u0107, a Bosnian Muslim exile who had married his cousin, who helped build links between the Muslim Brotherhood and various anti-communist exile groups in Europe and the Middle East.\nIn the 1970s after the death of Nasser and under the new President (Anwar Sadat), the Egyptian Brotherhood was invited back to Egypt and began a new phase of participation in Egyptian politics.\nMubarak era.\nDuring the Mubarak era, observers both defended and criticized the Brotherhood. It was the largest opposition group in Egypt, calling for \"Islamic reform\", and a democratic system in Egypt. It had built a vast network of support through Islamic charities working among poor Egyptians. According to ex-Knesset member and author Uri Avnery the Brotherhood was religious but pragmatic, \"deeply embedded in Egyptian history, more Arab and more Egyptian than fundamentalist\". It formed \"an old established party which has earned much respect with its steadfastness in the face of recurrent persecution, torture, mass arrests and occasional executions. Its leaders are untainted by the prevalent corruption, and admired for their commitment to social work\". It also developed a significant movement online.\nIn the 2005 parliamentary elections, the Brotherhood became \"in effect, the first opposition party of Egypt's modern era\". Despite electoral irregularities, including the arrest of hundreds of Brotherhood members, and having to run its candidates as independents (the organization being technically illegal), the Brotherhood won 88 seats (20% of the total) compared to 14 seats for the legal opposition.\nDuring its term in parliament, the Brotherhood \"posed a democratic political challenge to the regime, not a theological one\", according to one \"The New York Times\" journalist, while another report praised it for attempting to transform \"the Egyptian parliament into a real legislative body\", that represented citizens and kept the government \"accountable\".\nBut fears remained about its commitment to democracy, equal rights, and freedom of expression and belief\u2014or lack thereof. In December 2006, a campus demonstration by Brotherhood students in uniforms, demonstrating martial arts drills, betrayed to some such as Jameel Theyabi, \"the group's intent to plan for the creation of militia structures, and a return by the group to the era of 'secret cells'\". Another report highlighted the Muslim Brotherhood's efforts in Parliament to combat what one member called the \"current US-led war against Islamic culture and identity,\" forcing the Minister of Culture at the time, Farouk Hosny, to ban the publication of three novels on the ground they promoted blasphemy and unacceptable sexual practices. In October 2007, the Muslim Brotherhood issued a detailed political platform. Among other things, it called for a board of Muslim clerics to oversee the government, and limiting the office of the presidency to Muslim men. In the \"Issues and Problems\" chapter of the platform, it declared that a woman was not suited to be president because the office's religious and military duties \"conflict with her nature, social and other humanitarian roles\". While proclaiming \"equality between men and women in terms of their human dignity\", the document warned against \"burdening women with duties against their nature or role in the family\".\nInternally, some leaders in the Brotherhood disagreed on whether to adhere to Egypt's 32-year peace treaty with Israel. A deputy leader declared the Brotherhood would seek dissolution of the treaty, while a Brotherhood spokesman stated the Brotherhood would respect the treaty as long as \"Israel shows real progress on improving the lot of the Palestinians\".\n2011 revolution and after.\nFollowing the 2011 Egyptian revolution and fall of Hosni Mubarak, the Brotherhood was legalized and was at first very successful, dominating the 2011 parliamentary election and winning the 2012 presidential election, before the overthrow of President Mohamed Morsi a year later, leading to a crackdown on the Brotherhood again.\nOn 30 April 2011, the Brotherhood launched a new party called the Freedom and Justice Party, which won 235 of the 498 seats in the 2011 Egyptian parliamentary elections, far more than any other party. The party rejected the \"candidacy of women or Copts for Egypt's presidency\", but not for cabinet positions.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood's candidate for Egypt's 2012 presidential election was Mohamed Morsi, who defeated Ahmed Shafiq\u2014the last prime minister under Mubarak's rule\u2014with 51.73% of the vote. Although during his campaign Morsi himself promised to stand for peaceful relations with Israel, some high level supporters and former Brotherhood officials (from the organization's 15-member Guidance Council) reiterated hostility towards Zionism. For example, Egyptian cleric Safwat Hegazi spoke at the announcement rally for the Muslim Brotherhood's candidate Morsi and expressed his hope and belief that Morsi would liberate Gaza, restore the Caliphate of the \"United States of the Arabs\" with Jerusalem as its capital, and that \"our cry shall be: 'Millions of martyrs march towards Jerusalem.'\" Within a short period, serious public opposition developed to President Morsi. In late November 2012, he temporarily granted himself the power to legislate without judicial oversight or review of his acts, on the grounds that he needed to protect the nation from the Mubarak-era power structure. He also put a draft constitution to a referendum that opponents complained was \"an Islamist coup\". These issues\u2014and concerns over the prosecutions of journalists, the unleashing of pro-Brotherhood gangs on nonviolent demonstrators, the continuation of military trials, new laws that permitted detention without judicial review for up to 30 days, brought hundreds of thousands of protesters to the streets starting in November 2012.\nBy April 2013, Egypt had \"become increasingly divided\" between President Mohamed Morsi and \"Islamist allies\" and an opposition of \"moderate Muslims, Christians and liberals\". Opponents accused \"Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood of seeking to monopolize power, while Morsi's allies say the opposition is trying to destabilize the country to derail the elected leadership\". Adding to the unrest were severe fuel shortages and electricity outages, which raised suspicions among some Egyptians that the end of gas and electricity shortages since the ouster of President Mohamed Morsi was evidence of a conspiracy to undermine him, although other Egyptians say it was evidence of Morsi's mismanagement of the economy.\nOn 3 July 2013, Mohamed Morsi was removed from office and put into house arrest by the military, that happened shortly after mass protests against him began. demanding the resignation of Morsi. There were also significant counter-protests in support of Morsi; those were originally intended to celebrate the one-year anniversary of Morsi's inauguration, and started days before the uprising.\nOn 14 August, the interim government declared a month-long state of emergency, and riot police cleared the pro-Morsi sit-in during the Rabaa sit-in dispersal of August 2013. Violence escalated rapidly following armed protesters attacking police, according to the National Council for Human Rights' report; this led to the deaths of over 600 people and injury of some 4,000, with the incident resulting in the most casualties in Egypt's modern history. In retaliation, Brotherhood supporters looted and burned police stations and dozens of churches in response to the violence, though a Muslim Brotherhood spokesperson condemned the attacks on Christians and instead blamed military leaders for plotting the attacks. The crackdown that followed has been called the worst for the Brotherhood's organization \"in eight decades\". By 19 August, Al Jazeera reported that \"most\" of the Brotherhood's leaders were in custody. On that day Supreme Leader Mohammed Badie was arrested, crossing a \"red line\", as even Hosni Mubarak had never arrested him. On 23 September, a court ordered the group outlawed and its assets seized. Prime Minister, Hazem Al Beblawi on 21 December 2013, declared the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organisation after a car bomb ripped through a police building and killed at least 14 people in the city of Mansoura, which the government blamed on the Muslim Brotherhood, despite no evidence and an unaffiliated Sinai-based terror group claiming responsibility for the attack.\nOn 24 March 2014, an Egyptian court sentenced 529 members of the Muslim Brotherhood to death following an attack on a police station, an act described by Amnesty International as \"the largest single batch of simultaneous death sentences we've seen in recent years [...] anywhere in the world\". By May 2014, approximately 16,000 people (and as high as more than 40,000 by what \"The Economist\" calls an \"independent count\"), mostly Brotherhood members or supporters, have allegedly been arrested by police since the 2013 uprising. On 2 February 2015, an Egyptian court sentenced another 183 members of the Muslim Brotherhood to death.\nAn editorial in \"The New York Times\" claimed that \"leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood, which became the leading political movement in the wake of Egypt's 2011 popular uprising, are languishing in prison, unfairly branded as terrorists. ... Egypt's crushing authoritarianism could well persuade a significant number of its citizens that violence is the only tool they have for fighting back\".\nMohamed Morsi was sentenced to death on 16 May 2015, along with 120 others.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood claimed that Muslims did not carry out the Botroseya Church bombing and claimed it was a false flag conspiracy by the Egyptian government and Copts, in a statement released in Arabic on the FJP's website, but its claim was challenged by 100 Women participant Nervana Mahmoud and Hoover Institution and Hudson Institute fellow Samuel Tadros. The Muslim Brotherhood released an English-language commentary on the bombing and said it condemned the terrorist attack.\nQatar-based Muslim Brotherhood members are suspected to have helped a Muslim Brotherhood agent carry out the bombing, according to the Egyptian government. The Qatar-based supporter was named as Mohab Mostafa El-Sayed Qassem. The terrorist was named as Mahmoud Shafiq Mohamed Mostaf.\nThe Arabic-language website of the Muslim Brotherhood commemorated the anniversary of the death of its leader, Hassan al-Banna, and repeated his words calling for the teachings of Islam to spread all over the world and to raise the \"flag of Jihad\", taking their land, \"regaining their glory\", \"including diaspora Muslims\" and demanding an Islamic state and a Muslim government, a Muslim people, a Muslim house, and Muslim individuals.\nMekameleen TV, a Turkey-based free-to-air satellite television channel run by exiled Brotherhood supporters, mourned his death and claimed it was \"martyrdom\". Mekameleen supports the Brotherhood. Condolences were sent upon Omar Abdel Rahman's death by the website of the Muslim Brotherhood's Freedom and Justice Party in Egypt.\nControversy.\nHow much of the blame for the fall from power in Egypt of the Brotherhood and its allied Freedom and Justice Party (FJP) can be placed on the Brotherhood, and how much of it can be placed on its enemies in the Egyptian bureaucracy, media and security establishment is disputed. The Mubarak government's state media portrayed the Brotherhood as secretive and illegal, and numerous TV channels such as OnTV spent much of their air time vilifying the organization. But the Brotherhood took a number of controversial steps and also acquiesced to or supported crackdowns by the military during Morsi's presidency. Before the revolution, the Muslim Brotherhood's supporters appeared at a protest at Al-Azhar University wearing military-style fatigues, after which the Mubarak government accused the organization of starting an underground militia. When it came to power, the Muslim Brotherhood indeed tried to establish armed groups of supporters and it sought official permission for its members to be armed.\nGeneral leaders.\n Supreme guides or General leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood have been:\nPresence outside of Egypt.\nIn the Middle East.\nBahrain.\nFollowing parliamentary elections in 2002, Al Menbar became the largest joint party with eight seats in the forty-seat Chamber of Deputies. Prominent members of Al Menbar include Dr. Salah Abdulrahman, Dr. Salah Al Jowder, and outspoken MP Mohammed Khalid. Additionally, it has strongly opposed the government's accession to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.\nIran.\nIranian Call and Reform Organization, a Sunni Islamist group active in Iran, predominantly among Kurds, has been described as an organization \"that belongs to the Muslim Brotherhood\" or \"Iranian Muslim Brotherhood\", while it has officially stated that it is not affiliated with the latter.\nTurkey.\nThe Turkish AKP, the ruling party of Turkey, publicly supported the Muslim Brotherhood during and a few months after the overthrow of the Muslim Brotherhood-affiliated Egyptian president Mohamed Morsi in July 2013. Then-Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan claimed in an interview that this was because \"Turkey would stand by whoever was elected as a result of legitimate elections.\" According to the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, each year after Morsi's overthrow has seen the AKP \"significantly detach itself from the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt.\"\nIraq.\nThe Iraqi Islamic Party was formed in 1960 as the Iraqi branch of the Brotherhood, but was banned from 1961 during the nationalist rule of Abd al-Karim Qasim. As government repression hardened under the Baath Party from February 1963, the group was forced to continue underground. After the fall of the Saddam Hussein government in 2003, the Islamic Party has reemerged as one of the main advocates of the country's Sunni community. Its leader is Iraqi Vice-president Tariq Al-Hashimi.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood was an active participation in the \"Faith Campaign\".\nKhaled al-Obaidi said that he received a death threat and was declared a non-Muslim by the Muslim Brotherhood.\nAlso, in the north of Iraq there are several Islamic movements inspired by or part of the Muslim Brotherhood network. The Kurdistan Islamic Union (KIU), a small political party holding 10 seats in the Kurdish parliament, was believed to be supportive of the Muslim Brotherhood in the 90's. The group leaders and members have been continuously arrested by Kurdish authorities.\nIsrael.\n'Abd al-Rahman al-Banna, the brother of the Muslim Brotherhood founder Hasan al-Banna, went to Mandatory Palestine and established the Muslim Brotherhood there in 1935. Al-Hajj Amin al-Husseini, eventually appointed by the British as Grand Mufti of Jerusalem in hopes of accommodating him, was the leader of the group in Palestine. Another important leader associated with the Muslim Brotherhood in Palestine was 'Izz al-Din al-Qassam, an inspiration to Islamists because he had been the first to lead an armed resistance in the name of Palestine against the British in 1935.\nBrotherhood members fought alongside the Arab armies during the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli war, and, after Israel's creation, the ensuing Palestinian refugee crisis encouraged more Palestinian Muslims to join the group. After the war, in the West Bank, the group's activity was mainly social and religious, not political, so it had relatively good relations with Jordan during the Jordanian annexation of the West Bank. In contrast, the group frequently clashed with the Egyptian government that controlled the Gaza Strip until 1967.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, the Brotherhood's goal was \"the upbringing of an Islamic generation\" through the restructuring of society and religious education, rather than opposition to Israel, and so it lost popularity to insurgent movements and the presence of Hizb ut-Tahrir. Eventually, however, the Brotherhood was strengthened by several factors:\nIn 2006, the Brotherhood supported Hezbollah's military action against Israel. It does not recognize the State of Israel.\nPalestine.\nBetween 1967 and 1987, the year Hamas was founded, the number of mosques in Gaza tripled from 200 to 600, and the Muslim Brotherhood named the period between 1975 and 1987 a phase of \"social institution building.\" During that time, the Brotherhood established associations, used zakat (alms giving) for aid to poor Palestinians, promoted schools, provided students with loans, used waqf (religious endowments) to lease property and employ people, and established mosques. Likewise, antagonistic and sometimes violent opposition to Fatah, the Palestine Liberation Organization and other secular nationalist groups increased dramatically in the streets and on university campuses.\nIn 1987, following the First Intifada, the \"Islamic Resistance Movement\", or Hamas was established from Brotherhood-affiliated charities and social institutions that had gained a strong foothold among the local population. During the First Intifada (1987\u201393), Hamas militarized and transformed into one of the strongest Palestinian militant groups.\nThe Hamas takeover of the Gaza Strip in 2007 was the first time since the Sudanese coup of 1989 that brought Omar al-Bashir to power, that a Muslim Brotherhood group ruled a significant geographic territory. However, the 2013 overthrow of the Mohammad Morsi government in Egypt significantly weakened Hamas's position, leading to a blockade of Gaza and economic crisis.\nJordan.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood in Jordan originates from the merging of two separate groups which represent the two components of the Jordanian public: the Transjordanian and the West Bank Palestinian.\nOn 9 November 1945 the Association of the Muslim Brotherhood (Jam'iyat al-Ikhwan al-Muslimin) was officially registered and Abu Qura became its first General Supervisor. Abu Qura originally brought the Brotherhood to Jordan from Egypt after extensive study and spread of the teachings of Imam Hasan al-Banna. While most political parties and movements were banned for a long time in Jordan such as Hizb ut-Tahrir, the Brotherhood was exempted and allowed to operate by the Jordanian monarchy. In 1948, Egypt, Syria, and Transjordan offered \"volunteers\" to help Palestine in its war against Israel. Due to the defeat and weakening of Palestine, the Transjordanian and Palestinian Brotherhood merged.\nThe newly merged Muslim Brotherhood in Jordan was primarily concerned with providing social services and charitable work as well as with politics and its role in the parliament. It was seen as compatible with the political system and supported democracy without the forced implementation of Sharia law which was part of its doctrine. However, internal pressures from younger members of the Brotherhood who called for more militant actions as well as his failing health, Abu Qura resigned as the leader of the Jordanian Muslim Brotherhood. On 26 December 1953, Muhammad 'Abd al-Rahman Khalifa, was elected by the movement's administrative committee as the new leader of the Transjordanian Brotherhood and he retained this position until 1994. Khalifa was different from his predecessor and older members of the organization because he was not educated in Cairo, he was educated in Syria and Palestine. He established close ties with Palestinian Islamists during his educational life which led him to be jailed for several months in Jordan for criticizing Arab armies in the war.\nKhalifa also reorganized the Brotherhood and applied to the government to designate the Brotherhood as \"a comprehensive and general Islamic Committee, instead of the previous basis of operation under the Societies and Clubs Law\". This allowed the Brotherhood to spread throughout the country each with slight socioeconomic and political differences although the majority of the members were of the upper middle class. The radicalization of the Brotherhood began to take place after the peace process between Egypt and Israel, the Islamic Revolution of Iran, as well as their open criticism towards the Jordan-US relationship in the 1970s. Support for the Syrian branch of the Brotherhood also aided the radicalization of the group through open support and training for the rebel forces in Syria. The ideology began to transform into a more militant one which without it would not have the support of the Islamic radicals.\nThe Jordanian Brotherhood has formed its own political party, the Islamic Action Front. In 1989 they become the largest group in parliament, with 23 out of 80 seats, and 9 other Islamist allies. A Brother was elected president of the National Assembly and the cabinet formed in January 1991 included several MBs.\nIn 2011, against the backdrop of the Arab Spring, the Jordanian Muslim Brotherhood \"mobilized popular protests on a larger, more regular, and more oppositional basis than ever before\". and had uniquely positioned themselves as \"the only traditional political actor to have remained prominent during [the] new phase of post-Arab Spring activism\" which led King Abdullah II and then-Prime Minister Marouf al-Bakhit to invite the Muslim Brotherhood to join Bakhit's cabinet, an offer they refused. The Muslim Brotherhood also boycotted the 2011 Jordanian municipal elections and led the 2011\u201312 Jordanian protests demanding a constitutional monarchy and electoral reforms, which resulted in the firing of Prime Minister Bakhit and the calling of early general elections in 2013.\nAs of late 2013, the movement in Jordan was described as being in \"disarray\". The instability and conflict with the monarchy has led the relationship between the two to crumble. In 2015, some 400 members of the Muslim Brotherhood defected from the original group including top leaders and founding members, to establish another Islamic group, with an allegedly moderate stance. The defectors said that they didn't like how things were run in the group and due to the group's relations with Hamas, Qatar and Turkey, which put suspicion on the group questioning if they are under the influence and working for the benefit of these states and organizations on the expense of the Jordanian state.\nOn 13 April 2016, Jordanian police raided and shut the Muslim Brotherhood headquarters in Amman. This comes despite the fact that the Jordanian branch cut ties with the mother Egyptian group in January 2016, a designated terrorist organization, a move that is considered to be exclusively cosmetic by experts. Jordanian authorities state that the reason of closure is because that the Brotherhood is unlicensed and is using the name of the defectors' licensed group. This comes after the Jordanian senate passed a new legislation for the regulation of political parties in 2014, the Muslim Brotherhood did not adhere by the regulations of the new law and so they did not renew their membership.\nIn 2020, a Jordanian Court of Cassation decided that the local branch of the Muslim Brotherhood will be dissolved after the branch did not renew its license after a new law was issued on organizations.\nOn 23 April 2025, Jordan's Interior Minister Mazin Al Farrayeh announced the immediate ban of the Muslim Brotherhood and the seizure of its assets and offices, following the uncovering of a sabotage plot linked to members of the group. The Muslim Brotherhood has had a longstanding presence in Jordan, officially registered in 1945, and has been involved in both social services and political activities, including forming its own political party, the Islamic Action Front. Over the years, the group has experienced internal divisions and increasing tensions with the Jordanian government, leading to previous actions such as the 2016 closure of its headquarters and a 2020 court ruling ordering its dissolution for failing to renew its license. This latest move reflects the government's ongoing efforts to curb the organization's influence within the country.\nQatar.\nIn 1999 the Muslim Brotherhood was disbanded in Qatar. The country's longstanding support for the group has been often explained as determined by a strategic calculus that limited the role played by religion in Qatar. As the director of the Center for International and Regional Studies at the Doha-based branch of Georgetown University, Mehran Kamrava, posited, Qatar presenting itself as the state patron of the Muslim Brotherhood has caused religion in Qatar to not \"play any role in articulating or forming oppositional sentiments.\"\nQatar's patronage has been primarily expressed through the ruling family's endorsement of Muslim Brotherhood's most representative figures, especially Yusuf al-Qaradawi. Qaradawi is a prominent, yet controversial Sunni preacher and theologian who continues to serve as the spiritual leader of the Muslim Brotherhood. An Egyptian citizen, Qaradawi fled Egypt for Qatar in 1961 after being imprisoned under President Gamal Abdul Nasser. In 1962 he chaired the Qatari Secondary Institute of Religious Studies, and in 1977 he founded and directed the Shariah and Islamic Studies department at the University of Qatar. He left Qatar to return to Egypt shortly before the 2011 Egyptian revolution.\nFor twenty years, Qaradawi has hosted a popular show titled Shariah and Life on the Qatari-based media channel Al-Jazeera, a government sponsored channel notoriously supportive of the Muslim Brotherhood and Islamism and often designated as a propaganda outlet for the Qatari government. From that platform, he has promoted his Islamist\u2014and often radical views\u2014on life, politics, and culture.\nHis positions, as well as his controversial ties to extremist and terrorist individuals and organizations, made him persona non grata to the U.S., UK and French governments respectively in 1999, 2008, and 2012.\nBefore 2013, however, Qatar had made a substantial investment on Morsi's leadership and had devolved about $10 million to Egypt since Morsi was elected, allegedly also to \"buy political advantage\" in the country.\nIn December 2019, Qatari Foreign Minister Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al Thani told CNN in an interview that Qatar never supported Muslim Brotherhood and does not fund terrorism.\nKuwait.\nEgyptian Brethren came to Kuwait in the 1950s as refugees from Arab nationalism and integrated into the education ministry and other parts of the state. The Brotherhood's charity arm in Kuwait is called Al Eslah (Social Reform Society) and its political arm is called the Islamic Constitutional Movement (ICM) or \"Hadas\". Members of ICM have been elected to parliament and served in the government and are \"widely believed to hold sway with the Ministry of Awqaf\" (Islamic endowment) and Islamic Affairs, but have never reached a majority or even a plurality\u2014\"a fact that has required them to be pragmatic about working with other political groups\". During the invasion of Kuwait, the Kuwait MB (along with other MB in the Gulf States) supported the American-Saudi coalition forces against Iraq and \"quit the brotherhood's international agency in protest\" over its pro-Saddam stand. However following the Arab Spring and the crackdown on the Egyptian Brotherhood, the Saudi government has put \"pressure on other states that have Muslim Brotherhood adherents, asking them to decree that the group is a terrorist organization\", and the local Kuwaiti and other Gulf state Brotherhoods have not been spared pressure from their local governments.\nSaudi Arabia.\nThe Kingdom of Saudi Arabia helped the Brotherhood financially for \"over half a century\", but the two became estranged during the Gulf War, and enemies after the election of Mohamed Morsi. Inside the kingdom, before the crushing of the Egyptian MB, the Brotherhood was called a group whose \"many quiet supporters\" made it \"one of the few potential threats\" to the royal family's control.\nThe Brotherhood first had an impact inside Saudi Arabia in 1954 when thousands of Egyptian Brethren sought to escape president Gamal Abdel Nasser's clampdown, while (the largely illiterate) Saudi Arabia was looking for teachers\u2014who were also conservative pious Arab Muslims\u2014for its newly created public school system. The Muslim Brotherhood's brand of Islam and Islamic politics differs from the Salafi creed called Wahhabiyya, officially held by the state of Saudi Arabia, and MB members \"obeyed orders of the ruling family and \"ulama\" to not attempt to proselytize or otherwise get involved in religious doctrinal matters within the Kingdom. Nonetheless, the group \"methodically ... took control of Saudi Arabia's intellectual life\" by publishing books and participating in discussion circles and salons held by princes. Although the organization had no \"formal organizational presence\" in the Kingdom, (no political groups or parties are allowed to operate openly) MB members became \"entrenched both in Saudi society and in the Saudi state, taking a leading role in key governmental ministries\". In particular, many established themselves in Saudi educational system. One expert on Saudi affairs (Stephane Lacroix) has stated: \"The education system is so controlled by the Muslim Brotherhood, it will take 20 years to change\u2014if at all. Islamists see education as their base\" in Saudi Arabia.\nRelations between the Saudi ruling family and the Brotherhood became strained with Saudi opposition to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the willingness of Saudi government to allow US troops to be based in the Kingdom to fight Iraq. The Brotherhood supported the \"Sahwah\" (\"Awakening\") movement that pushed for political change in the Kingdom. In 2002, the then Saudi Interior Minister Prince Nayef denounced the Brotherhood, saying it was guilty of \"betrayal of pledges and ingratitude\" and was \"the source of all problems in the Islamic world\". The ruling family was also alarmed by the Arab Spring and the example set by the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, with president Mohamed Morsi bringing an Islamist government to power by means of popular revolution and elections. Sahwa figures published petitions for reform addressed to the royal government (in violation of Wahhabi quietist doctrine). After the overthrow of the Morsi government in Egypt, all the major Sahwa figures signed petitions and statements denouncing the removal of Morsi and the Saudi government support for it.\nIn March 2014, in a \"significant departure from its past official stance\" the Saudi government declared the Brotherhood a \"terrorist organization\", followed with a royal decree announced that, from now on,\nbelonging to intellectual or religious trends or groups that are extremist or categorized as terrorist at the local, regional or international level, as well supporting them, or showing sympathy for their ideas and methods in whichever way, or expressing support for them through whichever means, or offering them financial or moral support, or inciting others to do any of this or promoting any such actions in word or writing\nwill be punished by a prison sentence \"of no less than three years and no more than twenty years\".\nSyria.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood in Syria was founded in the 1930s (according to lexicorient.com) or in 1945, a year before independence from France, (according to journalist Robin Wright). In the first decade or so of independence it was part of the legal opposition, and in the 1961 parliamentary elections it won ten seats (5.8% of the house). But after the 1963 coup that brought the secular Ba'ath Party to power it was banned. It played a major role in the mainly Sunni-based movement that opposed the secularist, pan-Arabist Ba'ath Party. This conflict developed into an armed struggle that continued until culminating in the Hama uprising of 1982, when the rebellion was crushed by the military.\nMembership in the Syrian Brotherhood became a capital offense in Syria in 1980 (under Emergency Law 49, which was revoked in 2011), but the headquarters of the Muslim Brotherhood-linked Palestinian group, Hamas, was located in the Syria's capital Damascus, where it was given Syrian government support. This has been cited as an example of the lack of international centralization or even coordination of the Muslim Brotherhood.\nThe Brotherhood is said to have \"resurrected itself\" and become the \"dominant group\" in the opposition by 2012 during the Syrian Civil War according to the \"Washington Post\" newspaper. But by 2013 another source described it as having \"virtually no influence on the conflict\". Syrian President Bashar al-Assad welcomed the fall of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt and remarked that \"Arab identity is back on the right track after the fall from power of Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood, which had used religion for its own political gain\".\nA major turning point for the Muslim Brotherhood in Syria came in December 2024, when the Ba'ath regime fell and the President fled the country. The succeeding government and president have been directly linked to the Brotherhood.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nMuslim Brotherhood presence in the United Arab Emirates began with the formation of the Al Islah group in the United Arab Emirates in 1974 with the approval of Sheikh Rashid bin Saeed Al Maktoum.\nAl Islah in the UAE has openly stated that it shares ideology with the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt. Al Islah has criticized the UAE for the country's religious tolerance and presence of community Christian churches in the UAE. Since its formation, its members have sought to impose control on state social issues, such as promoting several measures limiting the rights of women. Emirati Al Islah member Tharwat Kherbawi said the Muslim Brotherhood finds the present UAE government to be an \"impediment\", and the country itself to be a \"treasure and a crucial strategic and economic prize\".\nAl Islah was reported to have been secretly forming a military wing that has sought to recruit retired military officers and young Emiratis and is alleged to have plotted the overthrow of the current government and the establishment of an Islamist state in the UAE.\nIn March 2013, a trial began in Abu Dhabi for 94 individuals linked to Al Islah for an attempted coup on the government. Of the 94, 56 suspects received prison sentences ranging between three and ten years. Eight suspects were sentenced in absentia to 15 years in jail and 26 were acquitted.\nOn 7 March 2014, the Muslim Brotherhood was designated as a terrorist group by the UAE government.\nYemen.\nThe Muslim Brothers fought with North Yemen in the NDF rebellion as Islamic Front.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood is the political arm of the Yemeni Congregation for Reform, commonly known as Al-Islah. Former President Ali Abdullah Saleh made substantial efforts to entrench the accusations of being in league with Al Qaeda.\nThe Treasury Department of the US used the label \"Bin Laden loyalist\" for Abdul Majeed al-Zindani, the Yemeni Muslim Brotherhood's leader.\nRest of Africa.\nAlgeria.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood reached Algeria during the later years of the French colonial presence in the country (1830\u20131962). Sheikh Ahmad Sahnoun led the organization in Algeria between 1953 and 1954 during the French colonialism. Brotherhood members and sympathizers took part in the uprising against France in 1954\u20131962, but the movement was marginalized during the largely secular FLN one-party rule which was installed at independence in 1962. It remained unofficially active, sometimes protesting the government and calling for increased Islamization and Arabization of the country's politics.\nWhen a multi-party system was introduced in Algeria in the early 1990s, the Muslim Brotherhood formed the Movement of Society for Peace (MSP, previously known as Hamas), led by Mahfoud Nahnah until his death in 2003 (he was succeeded by present party leader Boudjerra Soltani). The Muslim Brotherhood in Algeria did not join the Front islamique du salut (FIS), which emerged as the leading Islamist group, winning the 1991 elections and which was banned in 1992 following a military coup d'\u00e9tat, although some Brotherhood sympathizers did. The Brotherhood subsequently also refused to join the violent post-coup uprising by FIS sympathizers and the Armed Islamic Groups (GIA) against the Algerian state and military which followed, and urged a peaceful resolution to the conflict and a return to democracy. It has thus remained a legal political organization and enjoyed parliamentary and government representation. In 1995, Sheikh Nahnah ran for President of Algeria finishing second with 25.38% of the popular vote. During the 2000s (decade), the party\u2014led by Nahnah's successor Boudjerra Soltani\u2014has been a member of a three-party coalition backing President Abdelaziz Bouteflika.\nLibya.\nA group of the Muslim Brotherhood came to the Libyan kingdom in the 1950s as refugees escaping crackdown by the Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser, but it was not able to operate openly until after the First Libyan Civil War. They were viewed negatively by King Idris of Libya who had become increasingly wary of their activities. Muammar Gaddafi forbade all forms of Islamism in Libya and was an archenemy to the Muslim Brotherhood for long time. The group held its first public press conference on 17 November 2011, and on 24 December the Brotherhood announced that it would form the Justice and Construction Party (JCP) and contest the General National Congress elections the following year. The Libyan Muslim Brotherhood has \"little history of interactions with the masses.\"\nDespite predictions based on fellow post-Arab Spring nations Tunisia and Egypt that the Brotherhood's party would easily win the elections, it instead came a distant second to the National Forces Alliance, receiving just 10% of the vote and 17 out of 80 party-list seats. Their candidate for Prime Minister, Awad al-Baraasi was also defeated in the first round of voting in September, although he was later made a Deputy Prime Minister under Ali Zeidan. A JCP Congressman, Saleh Essaleh is also the vice speaker of the General National Congress.\nThe Party of Reform and Development is led by Khaled al-Werchefani, a former member of the Muslim Brotherhood.\nSallabi, the Head of Homeland Party, has close ties to Yusuf al-Qaradawi, the spiritual leader of the international Muslim Brotherhood.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood in Libya has come under widespread criticism, particularly for their alleged ties with extremist organizations operating in Libya. In fact, the text of the U.S. Congress Muslim Brotherhood Terrorist Designation Act of 2015 directly accuses the militias of the Libyan Muslim Brotherhood of \"joining forces with United States designated terrorist organizations, particularly Ansar al-Sharia\" who the United States blames for the attack on its compound in Benghazi. There have been similar reports that those tasked with guarding the Benghazi consulate on the night of the assault were connected to the Muslim Brotherhood.\nThe Libyan Muslim Brotherhood has lost much of its popular support since 2012 as the group was blamed for divisions in the country. Secular Libyan politicians have continued to voice concerns of the Brotherhood's ties to extremist groups. In October 2017, spokesman of the Libyan National Army (LNA) colonel Ahmed Al Masmary claimed that \"branches of the Muslim Brotherhood affiliated to al-Qaeda\" had joined forces with ISIS in Libya. In the 2014 parliamentary elections, the Muslim Brotherhood won only 25 of the 200 available seats.\nMauritania.\nChanges to the demographic and political makeup of Mauritania in the 1970s heavily contributed to the growth of Islamism within Mauritanian society. Periods of severe drought resulted in urbanization, as large numbers of Mauritanians moved from the countryside to the cities, particularly Nouakchott, to escape the drought. This sharp increase in urbanization resulted in new civil associations being formed, and Mauritania's first Islamist organisation, known as Jemaa Islamiyya (Islamic Association) was formed by Mauritanians sympathetic to the Muslim Brotherhood.\nThere was increased activism relating to the Muslim Brotherhood in the 1980s, partially driven by members of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood.\nIn 2007 the National Rally for Reform and Development, better known as Tewassoul, was legalized as a political party. The party is associated with the Mauritanian branch of the Muslim Brotherhood.\nMorocco.\nThe Justice and Development Party was the largest vote-getter in Morocco's 2011 election, and as of May 2015, held the office of Prime Minister. It is historically affiliated with the Muslim Brotherhood, however, despite this, PJD was never an official branch and the party has reportedly \"ostentatiously\" praised the King of Morocco, while \"loudly insisting that it is in no sense whatsoever a Muslim Brotherhood party\".\nSomalia.\nAl-Islah has been described as \"a generally nonviolent and modernizing Islamic movement that emphasizes the reformation and revival of Islam to meet the challenges of the modern world\", whose \"goal is the establishment of an Islamic state\" and which \"operates primarily in Mogadishu\".\nSudan.\nAn offshoot of the Sudanese branch of the Muslim Brotherhood, the Islamic Charter Front grew during the 1960, with Islamic scholar Hasan al-Turabi becoming its Secretary general in 1964. The Islamic Charter Front (ICM) was renamed several times most recently being called the National Islamic Front (NIF). The Muslim Brotherhood/NIF's main objective in Sudan was to Islamize the society \"from above\" and to institutionalize the Islamic law throughout the country where they succeeded. To that end the party infiltrated the top echelons of the government where the education of party cadre, frequently acquired in the West, made them \"indispensable\". This approach was described by Turabi himself as the \"jurisprudence of necessity\".\nMeeting resistance from non-Islamists, from already established Muslim organisations, and from non-Muslims in the south, the Sudanese NIF government under Turabi and the NIF organized a coup to overthrow a democratically elected government in 1989, organized the Popular Defense Force which committed \"widespread, deliberate and systematic atrocities against hundreds of thousands of southern civilians\" in the 1990s. The NIF government also employed \"widespread arbitrary and extrajudicial arrest, torture, and execution of labor union officials, military officers, journalists, political figures and civil society leaders\".\nThe NCP was dissolved in the aftermath of the military takeover on 11 April 2019.\nEurope.\nMuslim Brotherhood organisations in Europe find themselves in different circumstances compared to their counterparts in the Muslim World, as they in Europe operate in societies which do not have a Muslim majority. The first Brotherhood members active in Europe migrated from the Middle East during the late 1950s and early 1960s. Some were in the leadership of the Egyptian Brotherhood who fled the dictatorship of Gamal Abdel Nasser. Most were foreign students who already had Brotherhood sympathies while others were experienced militants. Together they continued their Islamic activities in the destination countries, where Europe's freedoms allowed them to openly conduct activities which had been banned in the Muslim countries of origin.\nStudent groups affiliated to the MB grew into organizations and they often structured their mosques as community centres. Following al-Banna's organizational model they founded women's groups, think tanks and schools. This growth was funded by both public and private donors in the Arab gulf countries.\nBy establishing a multitude of organizations devoted to anything from education, financial investments, political lobbying and charity they supported the growing Muslim populations of Europe and sought to shape the direction of Islam in Europe. Thereby the brothers created a \"de facto\" branch of the Muslim Brotherhood in every European country. To increase their potential for gaining influence, the organisations established by the MB are often given names which portray a facade of broad representation (e.g. \"Muslim association of European Country\") or religious moderation (e.g. \"Islamic Co-Existence Alliance\"). This is in contrast to the views propagated by many speakers at MB events where the Western countries are condemned as being corrupt, unjust and immoral along with a narrative where Muslims are portrayed as better, but beleaguered. On certain issues such as religious freedom, women's rights and homosexuality Brotherhood spokespersons espouse ideas contrary to mainstream European values and basic human rights.\nThe pan-European umbrella organization of the Brotherhood in Europe is the Federation of Islamic Organizations in Europe which was founded in 1989 and in 2020 changed its name to Council of European Muslims. It has its headquarters a few blocks away from key European Union institutions in Brussels.\nFrance.\nThe brotherhood's build-up in France started with \"Union des organisations islamiques en France\" (UOIF) which later changed its name to Musulmans de France. The organization primarily consisted of foreign students who entered France from Tunisia and Morocco. By 2020, there were 147 mosques and 18 Islamic schools associated with the brotherhood. UOIF has about 50 000 members distributed among 200 member organizations.\nThe Brotherhood pursues a communitarianist philiosophy and works against Muslims adopting liberal lifestyles and becoming assimilated into French society. In the long term, they aim towards entering politics by increasing the number of Muslims until they can form a political party of their own.\nGermany.\nThe Islamic Community of Germany \"(de: Islamische Gemeinschaft in Deutschland e.V, IGD)\" being constituent and founding organisation of the MB umbrella organisation FIOE, the MB is active in Germany with the IGD as a proxy. IGD members take care to not publicly declare their affiliation to the MB.\nRussia.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood is banned in Russia as a terrorist organisation.\nAs affirmed on 14 February 2003 by the decision of the Supreme Court of Russia, the Muslim Brotherhood coordinated the creation of an Islamic organisation called \"The Supreme Military Majlis ul-Shura of the United Forces of Caucasian Mujahedeen\" (, led by Ibn Al-Khattab and Basaev; an organisation that committed multiple terror-attack acts in Russia and was allegedly financed by drug trafficking, counterfeiting of coins and racketeering.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood uses London as an administration base.\nThe first Muslim Brotherhood-affiliated organisations in the UK were founded in the 1960s, which comprised exiles and overseas students. They promoted the works of Indian theologician Abu A'la Mawdudi and represented the Jama'at-e-Islami. In their initial phase they were politically inactive in the UK as they assumed they would return to their home countries and instead focused on recruiting new members and to support the MB in the Arab world.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, the MB and its associated organisations changed to a new strategy of political activity in western countries with the purpose to promote the MB overseas but also preserve the autonomy of Muslim communities in the UK.\nIn the 1990s, the MB established publicly visible organisations and ostensibly \"national\" organisations to further its agenda, but membership in the MB was and remains a secret. The MB dominated the Islamic Society of Britain (ISB), the Muslim Association of Britain (MAB) and founded the Muslim Council of Britain (MCB). MAB became politically active in foreign policy issues such as Palestine and Iraq, while MCB established a dialogue with the then governments.\nSince 2001, the ISB has distanced itself from Muslim Brotherhood ideology along with the MCB.\nIn April 2014, David Cameron, who was the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom at the time, launched an investigation into the Muslim Brotherhood's activities in the UK and its alleged extremist activities.\nIn a 2015 government report, the MB was found to not have been linked to terrorist related activity against in the UK and MAB has condemned Al-Qaeda terrorist activity in the UK.\nOther states.\nAustralia.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood Movement is an Arab street gang in Sydney that uses the same name as the Muslim Brotherhood.\nIn 2013, members of Sydney's Egyptian community reported that the Muslim Brotherhood had opened an office in Western Sydney, following the election and later overthrowing of Egyptian President Mursi, both of which caused protests in Sydney.\nIndonesia.\nSeveral parties and organizations in Indonesia are linked or at least inspired by the Muslim Brotherhood, although none have a formal relationship with the Muslim Brotherhood. One of the Muslim Brotherhood-linked parties is the PKS (Prosperous Justice Party), which gained 6.79% of votes in the 2014 legislative election, down from 7.88% in the 2009 election. The PKS's relationship with the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood was confirmed by Yusuf al-Qaradawi, a prominent Muslim Brotherhood leader.\nMalaysia.\nThe Malaysian Islamic Party (PAS), the oldest and largest mainstream Islamist party in Malaysia, has close personal and ideological ties with the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood. Founded in 1951, PAS's founders were exposed to the ideas and teachings while they were studying in Cairo during the 1940s. PAS was the main rival to the Malay nationalist United Malays National Organisation, which dominated Malaysian politics until 2018. Due to changes in political situation created by Pakatan Harapan (PH)'s win in 2018 election, PAS has made a cooperation pact with UMNO in 2019. Together with a former PH component party (BERSATU) both parties ultimately took over the government during 2020\u201321 Malaysian political crisis. According to the think tank Institute for Democracy and Economic Affairs' CEO Wan Saiful Wan Jan, PAS is regarded by the Muslim Brotherhood as an electorally successful Islamic political party; PAS has governed the state of Kelantan since 2002. PAS representatives are often invited to Muslim Brotherhood speaking engagements overseas. In 2012, PAS President Abdul Hadi Awang spoke alongside Muslim Brotherhood scholar Sheikh Yusuf al-Qaradawi at a speaking event in London. In April 2014, PAS leader Abdul Awang spoke out against Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and the United Arab Emirates' decision to designate the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization.\nAccording to Bubalo and Fealy, \"Angkatan Belia Islam Malaysia\" (or the Muslim Youth Movement of Malaysia) was inspired or influenced by the Muslim Brotherhood.\nNew Zealand.\nIn 2016, Papanui ward candidate John Stringer alleged that a Muslim Brotherhood cell was active in northwestern Christchurch.\nUnited States.\nAccording to a 2004 article by \"The Washington Post\", U.S. Muslim Brotherhood supporters \"make up the U.S. Islamic community's most organized force\" by running hundreds of mosques and business ventures, promoting civic activities, and setting up American Islamic organizations to defend and promote Islam. In 1963, the U.S. chapter of Muslim Brotherhood was started by activists involved with the Muslim Students Association (MSA). U.S. supporters of the Brotherhood also started other organizations including: North American Islamic Trust in 1971, the Islamic Society of North America in 1981, the American Muslim Council in 1990, the Muslim American Society in 1992 and the International Institute of Islamic Thought in the 1980s. In addition, according to \"An Explanatory Memorandum on the General Strategic Goal for the Group in North America\", the \"Understanding of the Role of the Muslim Brotherhood in North America\", and a relatively benign goal of the Muslim Brotherhood in North America is identified as the following:\nEstablishing an effective and a stable Islamic movement led by the Muslim Brotherhood which adopts Muslims' causes domestically and globally, and which works to expand the observant Muslim base, aims at unifying and directing Muslims' efforts, presents Islam as a civilization alternative, and supports the global Islamic state wherever it is.\nThe process of settlement is a 'Civilization-Jihadist Process' with all the word means. The Ikhwan [Muslim Brotherhood] must understand that their work in America is a kind of grand jihad in eliminating and destroying the Western civilization from within and 'sabotaging' its miserable house by their hands and the hands of the believers so that it is eliminated and God's religion [Islam] is made victorious over all other religions.\nDuring the Holy Land Foundation trial in 2007, several documents pertaining to the Brotherhood were unsuccessful in convincing the courts that the Brotherhood was involved in subversive activities. In one, dated 1984 called \"Ikhwan in America\" (Brotherhood in America), the author alleges that the activities of the Muslim Brotherhood in the US include going to camps to do weapons training (referred to as \"special work\" by the Muslim Brotherhood), as well as engaging in counter-espionage against U.S. government agencies such as the FBI and CIA (referred to as \"Securing the Group\"). Another (dated 1991) outlined a strategy for the Muslim Brotherhood in the United States that involved \"eliminating and destroying the Western civilization from within\".\nPenned in May 1991 by a man named Mohamed Akram Adlouni, the 'Explanatory Memorandum on the General Strategic Goal for the Group in North America' was discovered during an FBI raid of a Virginia home in 2004. The document was admitted as an exhibit to the court during the 2007 Holy Land Foundation trial, in which that group was charged with laundering money. After the trial, the document became public. But, according to a 2009 opinion by the presiding judge, the memo was not considered 'supporting evidence' for that alleged money laundering scheme, nor any other conspiracy.\nThe documents continue to be widely publicized in American conservative circles.\nU.S. Congress attempts to pass legislation criminalizing the group, put forward by the 114th Congress, were defeated. The Bill, called the Muslim Brotherhood Terrorist Designation Act of 2015, was introduced to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations by Senator Ted Cruz (R-TX). In it the bill states that the Department of State should designate the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization. If passed, the bill would have required the State Department to report to Congress within 60 days whether or not the group fits the criteria, and if it did not, to state which specific criteria it had not met.\nThis bill came after a handful of foreign countries made similar moves in recent years including Egypt, Russia, Saudi Arabia, and others, and after, according to Cruz, recent evidence emerged suggesting that the group supports terrorism. The senator further alleged that the group's stated goal is to wage violent jihad against its enemies, which includes the United States, and the fact that the Obama administration has listed numerous group members on its terror list. Cruz further stated that the bill would \"reject the fantasy that [the] parent institution [of the Muslim Brotherhood] is a political entity that is somehow separate from these violent activities\".\nThe bill identifies three Muslim Brotherhood entities in the U.S. including the Council on American Islamic Relations (CAIR), a non-profit group denounced by the UAE for its MB ties. The other two entities are the Islamic Society of North America (ISNA) and the North American Islamic Trust (NAIT).\nConservatives in the Congress believe that the group is a breeding ground for radical Islam. Previous attempts were made in the previous year by Representative Michele Bachmann (R-MN), but it failed largely due to her allegation that Huma Abedin, Hillary Clinton's aide, had links to the organization, a statement which was dismissed by establishment Democrats and Republicans.\nIn February 2016, the House Judiciary Committee approved the legislation in a 17 to 10 vote, which if enacted could increase grounds for enforcing criminal penalties and give permission to the Secretary of Treasury to block financial transactions and freeze assets of anyone who has showed material support for the group. Scholars against this classification claim that the group simply promotes Islamism, or the belief that society should be governed according to Islamic values and Sharia law.\nPast U.S. presidential administrations have examined whether to designate the Muslim Brotherhood as a Foreign Terrorist Organization and have decided not to do so. During the George W. Bush administration, the U.S. government investigated the Brotherhood and associated Islamist groups, but \"after years of investigations, ... the U.S. and other governments, including Switzerland's, closed investigations of the Brotherhood leaders and financial group for lack of evidence, and removed most of the leaders from sanctions lists.\" The Obama administration was also pressured to designate the Brotherhood as a terrorist organization, but did not do so. During the first Donald Trump administration, there were serious steps towards designating the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization.\nBeliefs.\nThe Brotherhood's English-language website describes its principles as including firstly the introduction of the Islamic Sharia as \"the basis for controlling the affairs of state and society\" and secondly, working to unify \"Islamic countries and states, mainly among the Arab states, and liberate them from foreign imperialism\". The Brotherhood is heavily influenced by the early \"Salafiyya\" movement and regularly advocates Salafi revivalist themes that address the contemporary challenges faced by Muslims, calling for the establishment of an Islamic state through implementation of the \"Shari'ah\" and Jihad against disbelievers. Science and technology should be harnessed through Islamic means to revive the Islamic prowess and Jihad should be waged personally as well as communally to bring forth effective political transformations. The Brotherhood share common creedal beliefs with other \"Salafiyya\" movements, such as i) strict monotheism with regard to Divine attributes, ii) purifying Islam from accretions and folk practices associated with Sufism, and iii) focusing on the moral integrity of individuals through \"Tazkiyya.\" Activist Salafis have a historical tradition of influential political activism across the various branches and affiliates of the Muslim Brotherhood movement.\nIts founder, Hassan Al-Banna, was influenced by pan-Islamic scholars Muhammad Abduh and Rashid Rida (who attacked the \"taqlid\" of the official \"`ulama\", and he insisted that only the Quran and the best-attested hadiths should be sources of the \"Sharia\"), with the group structure and approach being influenced by Sufism. However, Al-Banna avoided controversies over doctrine and would distance himself from the anti-Sufi dogmas of Rashid Rida. As a teen, Al-Banna had been initiated into the Hasafi branch of \"Shadhiliyya\" order and was not hostile to various Sufi practices condemned as aspects of polytheism by Rida. While Al-Banna agreed with Rida on the need to purify religious practices of illegitimate innovations, he saw nothing wrong with visits to the graves of \"Awliyaa\" (saints) so long as one did not seek their intercession. He would later declare the Hasafiyya society as a precursor to the Muslim Brotherhood; while also acknowledging his debt to the \"Salafiyya\" tradition.\nAl-Banna downplayed doctrinal differences between schools (acknowledging Shi'ism as a valid \"fifth school\", while declaring Ahmadiyya and the Islam-related Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed and Druze religions to be \"takfir\") emphasizing the political importance of worldwide unity of the \"ummah\". In the few occasions a mature Al-Banna did address theology, he espoused Salafi views by expressing his dislike of \"Ilm al-Kalam\", philosophy, etc. and seeking his preference to draw directly from \"Qur'an\", \"Sunnah\" and \"Salaf\". However he would not openly side with Atharis against the Ash'aris, instead lumping all the medieval theological debates as irrelevant. While his religious activism resembled Ibn Taymiyya, Banna's approach to theological prioritisation was imparted through Sufi-inspired Ghazalian expressions. After the creation of Muslim Brotherhood organisation, Al-Banna would not maintain formal affiliations with Sufi orders. While the Brothers acknowledged the validity of the true spiritual \"Tasawwuf\", they would be critical of institutionalised Sufi orders; which in their view led to divisions amongst the Muslims.\nAs Islamic Modernist beliefs were co-opted by secularist rulers and official \"ulama\", the Brotherhood has become traditionalist and conservative, \"being the only available outlet for those whose religious and cultural sensibilities had been outraged by the impact of Westernization\". Al-Banna believed the Quran and Sunnah constitute a perfect way of life and social and political organization that God has set out for man. Islamic governments must be based on this system and eventually unified in a Caliphate. The Muslim Brotherhood's goal, as stated by its founder al-Banna was to drive out British colonial and other Western influences, reclaim Islam's manifest destiny\u2014an empire, stretching from Spain to Indonesia. The Brotherhood preaches that Islam will bring social justice, the eradication of poverty, corruption and sinful behavior, and political freedom (to the extent allowed by the laws of Islam). Blended with methods of modern social sciences, some key thinkers of Brotherhood have also contemplated the Islamic perspective on bureaucratic effectiveness, mapping out solutions to problems of formalism and irresponsiveness to public concerns in public administration, which pertains to the pro-democratic tenets of Muslim Brotherhood. Such variations of thoughts have also purportedly negated the realities of contemporary Muslim countries as their authors have proclaimed.\nOn the issue of women and gender the Muslim Brotherhood interprets Islam conservatively. Its founder called for \"a campaign against ostentation in dress and loose behavior\", \"segregation of male and female students\", a separate curriculum for girls, and \"the prohibition of dancing and other such pastimes ... \"\nThere have been breakaway groups from the movement, including the al-Jama'a al-Islamiyya and Takfir wal-Hijra. Prominent figures of the Brotherhood include Sayyid Qutb, a highly influential thinker of Islamism, and the author of \"Milestones\". Osama bin Laden criticized the Brotherhood, and accused it of betraying \"jihad\" and the ideals of Qutb.\nStance on democracy, civil rights and secularism.\nAccording to Deputy of the Chairman of the Muslim Brotherhood, Dr. Mohamed El-Sayed Habib, the Muslim Brotherhood believes in implementing various political reforms for enabling freedom of assembly, press freedoms, democracy, political pluralism, peaceful transition of power, etc.\nWe believe that the political reform is the true and natural gateway for all other kinds of reform. We have announced our acceptance of democracy that acknowledges political pluralism, the peaceful rotation of power and the fact that the nation is the source of all powers. As we see it, political reform includes the termination of the state of emergency, restoring public freedoms, including the right to establish political parties, whatever their tendencies may be, and the freedom of the press, freedom of criticism and thought, freedom of peaceful demonstrations, freedom of assembly, etc. It also includes the dismantling of all exceptional courts and the annulment of all exceptional laws, establishing the independence of the judiciary, enabling the judiciary to fully and truly supervise general elections so as to ensure that they authentically express people's will, removing all obstacles that restrict the functioning of civil society organizations, etc.\nHowever, the Brotherhood is opposed to secularism and seeks the implementation of Shari'a (Islamic law) as the basis of Egyptian legal system and insists on complying the political system with Islamic legal precepts. When asked whether the Muslim Brotherhood seeks to establish a religious theocracy; the same spokesperson replied:\nThis concern stems from a wrong understanding of the nature of Islam. To those who speak about a religious state, in the same ecclesiastical meaning given to it in Europe in the Middle Ages, when the church had hegemony over a State's authorities, we wish to say that the issue here is completely different. The Muslim Brotherhood has gone through the latest legislative elections on the basis of a clear-cut program under the slogan \"Islam is the Solution\", given the fact that Islam, as Imam el-Banna said, is a comprehensive program that encompasses all aspects of life: it is a state and a country, a government and people, ethics and power, mercy and justice, culture and law, science and justice, resources and wealth, defense and advocacy, an army and an idea, a true belief and correct acts of worship.\nMottos.\nThe Brotherhood's \"most frequently used slogan\" (according to the BBC) is \"Islam is the Solution\" (\u0627\u0644\u0625\u0633\u0644\u0627\u0645 \u0647\u0648 \u0627\u0644\u062d\u0644). According to academic Khalil Yusuf, its motto \"was traditionally\" \"Believers are but Brothers.\"\nHasan Al-Banna presented the reform programme of the Muslim Brothers as one that sought to encompass every sphere of life; defining the movement as:\na \"Salafiyya\" message, a Sunni way, a Sufi truth, a political organization, an athletic group, a cultural-educational union, an economic company, and a social idea\nStrategy and organization.\nThe Muslim Brothers consider their movement to be the practical extension of the pan-Islamist movement championed by Sayyid Jamal al-Din Afghani, Muhammad 'Abduh, and Rashid Rida. Afghani is regarded as the 'caller' or 'announcer' (\"mu'adhdhin\", \"sarkha\"); Rida as the 'archivist' or 'historian' (\"sijal\", \"mu'arrikh\") and Banna was seen as the 'builder' (\"bani\") of the Islamic renaissance movement. Afghani was considered as the spiritual father of the movement and as a fiery defender of the faith against both internal corruption and external encroachment. 'Abduh was viewed as \"a well-meaning shaykh who inspired reforms in the Azhar\". The methodology of the Brotherhood was characterised by the scholarly orthodoxy and conservatism of Muhammad Rashid Rida. Like Rida, Banna too advocated a conservative revival to values of early Muslim generations and viewed Islam to be a comprehensive faith, outlining it as: \"a faith and a ritual, a nation (watan) and a nationality, a religion and a state, spirit and deed, holy text and sword\".\nThe Muslim Brotherhood movement sought the re-establishment of a World Islamic Caliphate which was envisaged to come through several Islamic national states, united in a league, and appointing a single leader to rule over them after \"Shura\" (consultation). This vision was based upon the Islamic state doctrines of Muhammad Rashid Rida. However, Al-Banna prioritised the immediate form of governance that the Brotherhood had to establish and did not advocate the radical overthrow of these structures, instead preferring gradualism. He favored a constitutional government with a representative parliamentary system that implemented Islamic law (\"Sharia\"). The aim for Caliphate was more of an utopian ideal than an explicit and practical political goal which was the construction of Islamic national units which would then bond together towards a global Islamic polity.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood's position on political participation varied according to the \"domestic situation\" of each branch, rather than ideology. For many years its stance was \"collaborationist\" in Kuwait and Jordan; for \"pacific opposition\" in Egypt; \"armed opposition\" in Libya and Syria. It was written on 1 December 1982, by Yusuf al-Qaradawi at the culmination of a series of two meetings held in 1977 and 1982 in Lugano, Switzerland. The treaty instructs Brotherhood members to show \"flexibility\" when it comes to their activity outside the Islamic world, encouraging them to temporarily adopt Western values without deviating from their \"basic [Islamic] principles.\"\nThe Muslim Brotherhood is a transnational organization as opposed to a political party, but its members have created political parties in several countries, such as the Islamic Action Front in Jordan, Hamas in Gaza and the West Bank, and the former Freedom and Justice Party in Egypt. These parties are staffed by Brotherhood members, but are otherwise kept independent from the Muslim Brotherhood to some degree, unlike Hizb ut-Tahrir, which is highly centralized. The Brotherhood has been described as a \"combination of neo-Sufic \"tariqa\"\" (with al-Banna as the original \"murshid\" i.e., guide of the tariqa) \"and a political party\". The Egyptian Brotherhood has a pyramidal structure with \"families\" (or \"usra\", which consists of four to five people and is headed by a \"naqib\", or \"captain\") at the bottom, \"clans\" above them, \"groups\" above clans and \"battalions\" or \"phalanxes\" above groups. Potential Brethren start out as \"Muhib\" or \"lovers\", and if approved move up to become a \"muayyad\", or \"supporter\", then to \"muntasib\" or \"affiliated\", (who are nonvoting members). If a muntasib \"satisfies his monitors\", he is promoted to \"muntazim\", or \"organizer\", before advancing to the final level\u2014\"ach 'amal\", or \"working brother\". With this slow careful advancement, the loyalty of potential members can be \"closely probed\" and obedience to orders assured.\nAt the top of the hierarchy is the Guidance Office (\"Maktab al-Irshad\"), and immediately below it is the Shura Council. Orders are passed down through a chain of command:\nThe Muslim Brotherhood aimed to build a transnational organization. In the 1940s, the Egyptian Brotherhood organized a \"section for Liaison with the Islamic World\" endowed with nine committees. Groups were founded in Lebanon (1936), in Syria (1937), and Transjordan (1946). It also recruited members among the foreign students who lived in Cairo where its headquarters became a center and a meeting place for representatives from the whole Muslim world.\nIn each country with an MB there is a Branch committee with a Masul (leader) appointed by the General Executive leadership with essentially the same Branch-divisions as the Executive office. \"Properly speaking\" Brotherhood branches exist only in Arab countries of the Middle East where they are \"in theory\" subordinate to the Egyptian General Guide. Beyond that the Brotherhood sponsors national organizations in countries like Tunisia (\"Ennahda Movement\"), Morocco (Justice and Charity party), Algeria (Movement of Society for Peace). Outside the Arab world it also has influence, with former President of Afghanistan, Burhanuddin Rabbani, having adopted MB ideas during his studies at Al-Azhar University, and many similarities between mujahideen groups in Afghanistan and Arab MBs. Angkatan Belia Islam Malaysia in Malaysia is close to the Brotherhood. According to scholar Olivier Roy, as of 1994 \"an international agency\" of the Brotherhood \"assures the cooperation of the ensemble\" of its national organizations. The agency's \"composition is not well known, but the Egyptians maintain a dominant position\".\nCriticism.\nThe Brotherhood was criticised by Ayman al-Zawahiri, then the Deputy Emir of al-Qaeda, in 2007 for its refusal to advocate the violent overthrow of the Mubarak government. Essam el-Erian, a top Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood figure, denounced the al-Qaeda leader: \"Zawahiri's policy and preaching bore dangerous fruit and had a negative impact on Islam and Islamic movements across the world\".\nDubai police chief Dhahi Khalfan accused Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood of an alleged plot to overthrow the UAE government. He referred to the Muslim Brotherhood as \"dictators\" who want \"Islamist rule in all the Gulf States\".\nMotives.\nNumerous officials and reporters question the sincerity of the Muslim Brotherhood's pronouncements. These critics include, but are not limited to:\nResponse to criticisms.\nAccording to authors writing in the Council on Foreign Relations magazine \"Foreign Affairs\": \"At various times in its history, the group has used or supported violence and has been repeatedly banned in Egypt for attempting to overthrow Cairo's secular government. Since the 1970s, however, the Egyptian Brotherhood has disavowed violence and sought to participate in Egyptian politics\". Jeremy Bowen, the Middle East editor for the BBC, called it \"conservative and non-violent\". The Brotherhood \"has condemned\" terrorism and the 9/11 attacks.\nThe Brotherhood itself denounces the \"catchy and effective terms and phrases\" like \"fundamentalist\" and \"political Islam\" which it claims are used by \"Western media\" to pigeonhole the group, and points to its \"15 Principles\" for an Egyptian National Charter, including \"freedom of personal conviction ... opinion ... forming political parties ... public gatherings ... free and fair elections ...\"\nSimilarly, some analysts maintain that whatever the source of modern Jihadi terrorism and the actions and words of some rogue members, the Brotherhood now has little in common with radical Islamists and modern jihadists who often condemn the Brotherhood as too moderate. They also deny the existence of any centralized and secretive global Muslim Brotherhood leadership. Some claim that the origins of modern Muslim terrorism are found in Wahhabi ideology, not that of the Muslim Brotherhood.\nAccording to anthropologist Scott Atran, the influence of the Muslim Brotherhood even in Egypt has been overstated by Western commentators. He estimates that it can count on only 100,000 militants (out of some 600,000 dues paying members) in a population of more than 80\u00a0million, and that such support as it does have among Egyptians\u2014an often cited figure is 20 percent to 30 percent\u2014is less a matter of true attachment than an accident of circumstance: secular opposition groups that might have countered it were suppressed for many decades, but in driving the Egyptian revolution of 2011, a more youthful constellation of secular movements has emerged to threaten the Muslim Brotherhood's dominance of the political opposition. This has not yet been the case, however, as evidenced by the Brotherhood's strong showing in national elections. Polls also indicate that a majority of Egyptians and other Arab nations endorse laws based on \"Sharia\".\nForeign relations.\nOn 29 June 2011, as the Brotherhood's political power became more apparent and solidified following the Egyptian revolution of 2011, the United States announced that it would reopen formal diplomatic channels with the group, with whom it had suspended communication as a result of suspected terrorist activity. The next day, the Brotherhood's leadership announced that they welcomed the diplomatic overture.\nIn September 2014, Brotherhood leaders were expelled from Qatar. \"The New York Times\" reported: \"Although the Brotherhood's views are not nearly as conservative as the puritanical, authoritarian version of Islamic law enforced in Saudi Arabia, the Saudis and other gulf monarchies fear the group because of its broad organization, its mainstream appeal and its calls for elections\".\nDesignation as a terrorist organization.\nCountries and organizations below have listed the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization.\nLibya's Tobruk-based House of Representatives also designated the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist group on 14 May 2019.\nOutside the Middle East.\nIn February 2003, the Supreme Court of Russia banned the Muslim Brotherhood, labelling it as a terrorist organization, and accusing the group of supporting Islamist rebels who want to create an Islamic state in the North Caucasus.\nIn an interview published on 1 March 2014, the Aga Khan IV spoke well of the Muslim Brotherhood \u2013 praising the way they \"act in civil society\".\nIn January 2017, during his confirmation hearing, the former U.S. Secretary of State, Rex Tillerson, referred to the Muslim Brotherhood, along with Al-Qaeda, as an agent of radical Islam\u2014a characterization that Human Rights Watch member Sarah Leah Whitson criticized on social media, disseminating a statement from the HRW Washington director saying that the conflation of the group with violent extremists was inaccurate. In February 2017, \"The New York Times\" reported that the first administration of U.S. President Donald Trump was considering an order designating the Muslim Brotherhood as a foreign terrorist organization. On 24 November 2025, the second Trump administration started the process of designating branches of the Muslim Brotherhood as terrorist organizations. These included the Jordanian branch which it accused of providing \"material support\" to Hamas, the Islamic Group in Lebanon which it said sided with Hamas and Hezbollah in their war against Israel, and the Egyptian branch of the Muslim Brotherhood, claiming one of its leaders \"called for violent attacks against United States partners and interests\" during the Gaza war. On 24 November 2025, a Trump administration executive order began the process to designate the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, Lebanon and Jordan as foreign terrorist organizations and specially designated global terrorists.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood was criticized by Secretary Tillerson. The terrorist designation for the Muslim Brotherhood is opposed by Human Rights Watch and \"The New York Times\", both liberal-leaning institutions. The potential terrorist designation was criticized, in particular, by Human Rights Watch member Laura Pitter. \"The New York Times\" set forth its opposition in an editorial that claimed that the Muslim Brotherhood is a collection of movements, and argued that the organization as a whole does not merit the terrorist designation: \"While the Brotherhood calls for a society governed by Islamic law, it renounced violence decades ago, has supported elections and has become a political and social organization\". The designation of the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization is opposed by the Brennan Center for Justice, Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, Council on American-Islamic Relations and American Civil Liberties Union.\nHuman Rights Watch and its director Kenneth Roth oppose proposals to designate the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization.\nGehad El-Haddad, a Muslim Brotherhood member, denied that terrorism was practiced by the Muslim Brotherhood in an editorial published by \"The New York Times\".\nIn a report by the Carnegie Middle East Center, Nathan Brown and Michele Dunne argued that \"designating the Muslim Brotherhood a foreign terrorist organization may actually backfire,\" writing: \"The sweeping measure to declare the Brotherhood a foreign terrorist organization now being contemplated not only does not accord with the facts, but is also more likely to undermine than achieve its ostensible purpose and could result in collateral damage affecting other U.S. policy goals. The greatest damage might be in the realm of public diplomacy, as using a broad brush to paint all Muslim Brotherhood organizations as terrorists would be understood by many Muslims around the world as a declaration of war against non-violent political Islamists\u2014and indeed against Islam itself.\"\nThe Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt avoids directly implicating itself materially in terrorism while it supports terrorism with words and encourages it, according to WINEP fellow Eric Trager, who advocated pushing them into a corner instead of designating them due to issues with materially connecting them to terrorism other than with their words.\nThe editorial boards of \"The New York Times\" and \"The Washington Post\" oppose designation of the group as a terrorist organization.\nCivil rights lawyer and adjunct professor of law Arjun Singh Sethi wrote that the push to designate the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization was based on anti-Islamic conspiracy theories, noting that \"Two previous U.S. administrations concluded that it does not engage in terrorism, as did a recent report by the British government.\"\nIshaan Tharoor of \"The Washington Post\" condemned the movement to designate the Brotherhood as a terrorist group.\nA Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) intelligence report from January 2017 warned that designation of the Brotherhood as a terrorist organization \"may fuel extremism\" and harm relations with U.S. allies. The report noted that the Brotherhood had \"rejected violence as a matter of official policy and opposed al-Qa'ida and ISIS\" and that while \"a minority of MB [Muslim Brotherhood] members have engaged in violence, most often in response to harsh regime repression, perceived foreign occupation, or civil conflicts\", designation of the organization as a terrorist group would prompt concern from U.S. allies in the Middle East \"that such a step could destabilize their internal politics, feed extremist narratives, and anger Muslims worldwide.\" The CIA analysis stated: \"MB groups enjoy widespread support across the Near East-North Africa region and many Arabs and Muslims worldwide would view an MB designation as an affront to their core religious and societal values. Moreover, a US designation would probably weaken MB leaders' arguments against violence and provide ISIS and al-Qa'ida additional grist for propaganda to win followers and support, particularly for attacks against US interests.\"\nAn article in \"The Atlantic\" against designating the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization was written by Shadi Hamid.\nIn September 2025, Kenya designated the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization.\nRelationship to diplomatic crises in Qatar.\nQatar's relationship with Muslim Brotherhood has been a persistent point of contention between Qatar and other Arab states, including Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Bahrain, and Egypt, which view the Brotherhood as a serious threat to social stability in those countries.\nFollowing the overthrow of Mohamed Morsi in July 2013, Qatar allowed some Brotherhood members who fled Egypt to live in the country. The Qatar-based Al Jazeera \"housed them in a five-star Doha hotel and granted them regular airtime for promoting their cause\"; the station also broadcast protests against the post-Brotherhood authorities in Egypt by the Brotherhood, \"and in some cases allegedly paid Muslim Brothers for the footage.\" Saudi Arabia, the UAE, and Bahrain said that Qatar had violated the Gulf Cooperation Council rule against interference in the internal affairs of other members, and in March 2014 all three countries withdrew their ambassadors from Qatar. After two months of diplomatic tensions the issue was resolved, with Brotherhood leaders departing from Doha later in 2014.\nHowever, \"from Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and the UAE's standpoint, Qatar never lived up to the 2014 agreement and continued to serve as the nexus of the Brotherhood's regional networks.\" This led to the 2017 Qatar diplomatic crisis, which is viewed as being precipitated in large part by a conflict over the Muslim Brotherhood. Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Bahrain, and Egypt made 13 demands of the government of Qatar, six of which reflect the group's opposition to Qatar's relationship with the Muslim Brotherhood and demand that the country cut ties to the Brotherhood."}
{"id": "20745", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20745", "title": "Maglevs", "text": ""}
{"id": "20746", "revid": "50170463", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20746", "title": "Moctezuma I", "text": "Fifth Tlatoani of Tenochtitlan\nMoctezuma I (c.\u20091398\u20131469), also known as Montezuma I, Moteuczomatzin Ilhuicamina ( ) or Huehuemoteuczoma ( ), was the second Aztec emperor and fifth king of Tenochtitlan. During his reign, the Aztec Empire was consolidated, major expansion was undertaken, and Tenochtitlan started becoming the dominant partner of the Aztec Triple Alliance. Often mistaken for his popular descendant, Moctezuma II, Moctezuma I greatly contributed to the famed Aztec Empire that thrived until Spanish arrival. He ruled over a period of peace from 1440 to 1453. Moctezuma brought social, economical, and political reform to strengthen Aztec rule, and Tenochtitlan benefited from relations with other cities.\nAncestry.\nMoctezuma was the son of emperor Huitzilihuitl (meaning 'Hummingbird Feather') and queen Miahuaxihuitl. He was a brother of Chimalpopoca, Tlacaelel I, and Huehue Zaca. He was the grandson of the first ruler of Tenochtitlan. His name meant \"he is angry like a lord\" (from the root 'lord' combined with the reflexive verb 'becomes angry').\nAccession and coronation.\nAfter emperor Huitzilihuitl's death, Moctezuma's brother Chimalpopoca ruled for ten years until his assassination. During his reign, Moctezuma and his brother Tlacaelel I led an opposition group of young nobles. This group was militant in nature, and they chose his half-uncle Itzcoatl as the next ruler. Under Itzcoatl, Moctezuma and Tlacaelel were generals in his army.\nMoctezuma then was elected to power in 1440 by this group of nobles at the age of 42, after the death of Itzcoatl. He held the title of \"Great Speaker.\" This title was bestowed upon him as opposed to the title of \"Speaker,\" as he spoke for both the Aztecs and the other peoples under their control.\nHis coronation was a large ceremony, involving many human sacrifices of prisoners. Moctezuma was seated on a basketwork throne and was crowned by the ruler of Texoco. His crown was a turquoise diadem known as the fire crown.\nReign.\nAs \"tlatoani\", Moctezuma solidified the alliance with two neighboring states, Tlacopan (a small city-state) and Texcoco. Tlacopan, located on the western shore of Lake Texcoco, controlled seven city-states to the northwest, while Texcoco was located on the eastern shore and rule over nine city-states in the northeast. As the two regions were added to Moctezuma's empire, the Aztecs relied on already established city-states to increase military power. In this skillfully crafted Triple Alliance, 2/5ths of the spoils would go to Tenochtitlan and another 2/5ths to Texcoco, with the remaining 1/5 given to Tlacopan.\nAmong the Aztecs' greatest achievements, Moctezuma and Nezahualcoyotl of Texcoco organized the construction and completion of a double aqueduct pipe system, supplying the city of Tenochtitlan with fresh water. This provided an ample supply of fresh water to Texcoco's various communities, which extended over a distance of from their lakeshore to the hills of Tetxcotxinco.\nEarly in his rule, he conquered the state of Oaxaca in 1445. Moctezuma then went on to extend the boundaries of the Aztec empire beyond the Valley of M\u00e9xico to the Gulf Coast, known as the \"Sea of the Sky\", for the first time, subjugating the Huastec people and Totonac peoples and thereby gaining access to exotic goods such as cocoa, rubber, cotton, fruits, feathers, and seashells. The Aztec were then known as the \"Neighbors of the Sea of the Sky\", as they controlled all the territory up to the Gulf of Mexico.\nNatural disasters.\nAs a ruler, Moctezuma faced and overcame many natural disasters. In 1446, a swarm of locusts destroyed the region's crops In 1449, Lake Texcoco flooded the city. In 1450, a frost and drought again destroyed the region's crops. These droughts and frosts continued for four years. The famines resulted in some selling their children or themselves into slavery, and the city lost most of its population. This drought resulted in Moctezuma's period of peace ending.\nFlower War.\nAfter the famine ravaged through Aztec agricultural resources, a series of conflicts, known as the Flower War, involved the Triple Alliance and the city-states of Huejotzingo, Tlaxcala, Cholula, in the Tlaxcala-Pueblan Valley of central Mexico. Believing the famine to have occurred due to their gods' anger, Moctezuma supported the order for an increase of human sacrifices to please them. Thus began the war to accumulate as many victims as possible for sacrifice. The war lasted until the Spanish arrived and recruited enemies of the Triple Alliance to conquer all of Mexico. In preparation for the war, Moctezuma would issue three declarations of war and provide weapons to the enemy region. If the last declaration was not accepted by the enemy region, then within 20 days the Aztecs would attack.\nExpeditions as ruler.\nIn the 1450s, Aztec forces under Moctezuma would invade the Valley of Oaxaca in a bid to extend Aztec hegemony. In about 1458, Moctezuma led an expedition into Mixtec territory against the city-state of Coixtlahuaca. The Mixtecs were defeated, despite the support of contingents of Tlaxcala and Huexotzinco warriors, traditional enemies of the Aztecs. While most of the defeated princes were allowed to retain their positions, the Mixtec ruler Atonal was ritually strangled and his family was taken as slaves. The Codex Mendoza records that the tribute owed by Coixtlahuaca consisted of 2000 blankets (of five types), two military outfits with headdresses and shields, green gemstone beads, 800 bunches of green feathers, 40 bags of cochineal dye, and 20 bowls of gold dust. He took many girls from Coixtlahuaca and had ten harems all to himself. He stole three of them from his dead brother Huehue Zaca. Similar campaigns were conducted against Cosamaloapan, Ahuilizapan (Orizaba), and Cuetlachtlan (Cotaxtla).\nOpposition to his reign.\nIt is reported that Moctezuma's half-brother Tlacaelel opposed his leadership in the early years. However, other historians report that he was once given the opportunity to rule and turned the opportunity down. He took over the empire in 1469 after the death of Moctezuma.\nSocial, political, and economic reforms.\nWhile Moctezuma did lead conquests against others, he was able to maintain peace from 1440 to 1453 within his empire. With this peace, his government was able to enact social, political, and economic reforms.\nHe enacted codes which determined what people of certain classes could wear and what their houses could look like. For example, only noblemen or great warriors could have a home with a second story. No one was allowed to have towers, because he claimed they could only be granted by the gods.\nHe also created legal and education policies that were determined by class. In the palace, different classes were to be received in different rooms. No mixing was allowed under the punishment of death. Only Moctezuma was allowed to give a death sentence, and all judges had to notify him of any death penalty rulings. Religion was also emphasized, and religious schools were required in every neighborhood.\nDescendants and legacy.\nThis Moctezuma was an ancestor of Moctezuma II, who met Hernan Cortes.\nMoctezuma was succeeded by his daughter Atotoztli, who was either Tlatoani or regent for her son Axayacatl. Moctezuma is also now used as a symbol of Mexican independence and resistance. Moctezuma I is depicted less than Moctezuma II in popular culture, but he has appeared in strategy games such as the \"Sid Meier's Civilization\" series and Rise of Kingdoms.\nMoctezuma is also seen as a \"hero-god\" by several Southwestern Native American tribes, especially the Tohono O'odham and Pueblo. His legend is somewhat distinct from the actual historical figure, but shares elements of him and likely originated with tales of the real one. He is a somewhat ambiguous Noah figure, who is subservient to the Great Spirit.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20747", "revid": "47638339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20747", "title": "Moctezuma II", "text": "Tlahto\u0101ni of the Aztec Empire until 1520\nMoctezuma Xocoyotzin (c.\u20091466 \u2013 29 June 1520), retroactively referred to in European sources as Moctezuma II, and often simply called Montezuma, was the ninth emperor of the Aztec Empire (also known as the Mexica Empire), reigning from 1502 or 1503 to 1520. Through his marriage with Queen Tlapalizquixochtzin of Ecatepec, one of his two wives, he was also the king consort of the \"altepetl\".\nThe first contact between the indigenous civilizations of Mesoamerica and Europeans took place during his reign. He was killed during the initial stages of the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire when Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s, the Spanish conquistador, and his men seized the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan. During his reign, the Aztec Empire reached its greatest size. Through warfare, Moctezuma expanded the territory as far south as Xoconosco in Chiapas and the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, and incorporated the Zapotec and Yopi people into the empire. He changed the previous meritocratic system of social hierarchy and widened the divide between \"pipiltin\" (nobles) and \"macehualtin\" (commoners) by prohibiting commoners from working in the royal palaces.\nThough two other Aztec rulers succeeded Moctezuma after his death, their reigns were short-lived and the empire quickly collapsed under them. Historical portrayals of Moctezuma have mostly been colored by his role as ruler of a defeated nation, and many sources have described him as weak-willed, superstitious, and indecisive. However, depictions of his person among his contemporaries are divided; some depict him as one of the greatest leaders Mexico had, a great conqueror who tried his best to maintain his nation together at times of crisis, while others depict him as a tyrant who wanted to take absolute control over the whole empire. Accounts of how he died and who were the perpetrators (Spaniards or natives) differ. His story remains one of the most well-known conquest narratives from the history of European contact with Native Americans, and he has been mentioned or portrayed in numerous works of historical fiction and popular culture.\nName.\nThe Classical Nahuatl pronunciation of his name is . It is a compound of a noun meaning 'lord' and a verb meaning 'to frown in anger', and so is interpreted as 'he frowns like a lord' or 'he who is angry in a noble manner'. His name glyph, shown in the upper left corner of the image from the \"Codex Mendoza\" below, was composed of a diadem () on straight hair with an attached earspool, a separate nosepiece, and a speech scroll.\nRegnal number.\nThe Aztecs did not use regnal numbers; they were given retroactively by historians to more easily distinguish him from the first Moctezuma, referred to as Moctezuma I. The Aztec chronicles called him , while the first was called or ('Old Moctezuma'). () means 'honored young one' (from 'younger son' + suffix added to nouns or personal names when speaking about them with deference).\nBiography.\nAncestry and early life.\nMoctezuma II was the great-grandson of Moctezuma I through his daughter Atotoztli II and her husband Huehue Tezoz\u00f3moc (not to be confused with the Tepanec leader). According to some sources, Tezoz\u00f3moc was the son of emperor Itzc\u00f3atl, which would make Moctezuma his great-grandson, but other sources claim that Tezoz\u00f3moc was Chimalpopoca's son, thus nephew of Itzc\u00f3atl, and a lord in Ecatepec. Moctezuma was also Nezahualc\u00f3yotl's grandson; he was a son of emperor Axay\u00e1catl and one of Nezahualc\u00f3yotl's daughters, Izelcoatzin or Xochicueyetl. Two of his uncles were T\u00edzoc and Ahuizotl, the two previous emperors.\nAs was customary among Mexica nobles, Moctezuma was educated in the calmecac, the educational institution for the nobility. He would have been enrolled into the institution at a very early age, likely at the age of five years, as the sons of the kings were expected to receive their education at a much earlier age than the rest of the population. According to some sources, Moctezuma stood out in his childhood for his discipline during his education, finishing his works correctly and being devout to the Aztec religion.\nMoctezuma was an already famous warrior by the time he became the \"tlatoani\" of Mexico, holding the high rank of \"tlacatecuhtli\" (lord of men) and/or \"tlacochcalcatl\" (person from the house of darts) in the Mexica military, and thus his election was largely influenced by his military career and religious influence as a priest, as he was also the main priest of Huitzilopochtli's temple.\nOne example of a celebrated campaign in which he participated before ascending to the throne was during the last stages of the conquest of Ayotlan, during Ahuizotl's reign in the late 15th century. During this campaign, which lasted 4 years, a group of Mexica \"pochteca\" merchants were put under siege by the enemy forces. This was important because the merchants were closely related to Ahuizotl and served as military commanders and soldiers themselves when needed. To rescue the merchants, Ahuizotl sent then-prince Moctezuma with many soldiers to fight against the enemies, though the fight was brief, as the people of Ayotlan surrendered to the Mexica shortly after he arrived.\nApproximately in the year 1490, Moctezuma obtained the rank of \"tequihua\", which was reached by capturing at least 4 enemy commanders.\nCoronation.\nThe year in which Moctezuma was crowned is uncertain. Most historians suggest the year 1502 to be most likely, though some have argued in favor of the year 1503. A work currently held at the Art Institute of Chicago known as the Stone of the Five Suns is an inscription written in stone representing the Five Suns and a date le 11 reed, which is equivalent to 15 July 1503 in the Gregorian calendar. Some historians believe this to be the exact date on which the coronation took place, as it is also included in some primary sources. Other dates have been given from the same year; Fernando de Alva Cort\u00e9s Ixtlilx\u00f3chitl states that the coronation took place on 24 May 1503. However, most documents say Moctezuma's coronation happened in the year 1502, and therefore most historians believe this to have been the actual date.\nReign.\nAfter his coronation, Moctezuma set up thirty-eight more provincial divisions, largely to centralize the empire. He sent out bureaucrats, accompanied by military garrisons, who made sure tax was being paid, national laws were being upheld and served as local judges in case of disagreement.\nInternal policy.\nNatural disasters.\nMoctezuma's reign began with difficulties. In the year 1505, a major drought resulted in widespread crop failure, and thus a large portion of the population of central Mexico began to starve. One of the few places in the empire not affected by this drought was Totonacapan, and many people from Tenochtitlan and Tlatelolco sought refuge in this region to avoid starvation. Large amounts of maize were brought from this area to aid the population. Moctezuma and the lords of Texcoco and Tlacopan, Nezahualpilli, and Totoquihuatzin, attempted to aid the population during the disaster, including using all available food supplies to feed the population and raising tributes for one year. The drought and famine ultimately lasted three years, and at some point became so severe that some noblemen reportedly sold their children as slaves in exchange for food to avoid starvation. Moctezuma ordered the \"tlacxitlan\", the criminal court of Tenochtitlan (which aside from judging criminals also had the job of freeing \"unjustified\" slaves), to free those children and offer food to those noblemen. Another natural disaster, of lesser intensity, occurred in the winter of 1514, when a series of dangerous snowstorms resulted in the destruction of various crops and property across Mexico.\nPolicies and other events during his reign.\nDuring his government, he applied multiple policies that centered the government of the empire on his person, though it is difficult to tell exactly to which extent those policies were applied, as the records written about such policies tend to be affected by propaganda in favor of or against his person.\nAccording to Alva Ixtlilx\u00f3chitl, among Moctezuma's policies were the replacement of a large portion of his court (including most of his advisors) with people he deemed preferable, and increasing the division between the commoner and noble classes, which included the refusal to offer certain honors to various politicians and warriors for being commoners. He also prohibited any commoners or illegitimate children of the nobility from serving in his palace or high positions of government. This was contrary to the policies of his predecessors, who did allow commoners to serve in such positions.\nMoctezuma's elitism can be attributed to a long conflict of interests between the nobility, merchants, and warrior class. The struggle occurred as the result of the conflicting interests between the merchants and the nobility and the rivalry between the warrior class and the nobility for positions of power in the government. Moctezuma likely sought to resolve this conflict by installing despotist policies that would settle it. However, it is also true that many of his elitist policies were put in place because he did not want to \"work with inferior people\", and instead wanted to be served by and interact with people he deemed more prestigious, both to avoid giving himself and the government a bad reputation and to work with people he trusted better. However, some of his policies also affected the nobility, as he had intentions of reforming it so that it would not pose a potential threat to the government; among these policies was the obligation of the nobility to reside permanently in Tenochtitlan and abandon their homes if they lived elsewhere.\nRegarding his economic policies, Moctezuma's rule was largely affected by natural disasters in the early years. As mentioned before, the famine during his first years as \"tlatoani\" resulted in a temporary increase in tribute in some provinces to aid the population. Some provinces, however, ended up paying more tribute permanently, most likely as the result of his primary military focus shifting from territorial expansion to stabilization of the empire through the suppression of rebellions. Most of the provinces affected by these new tributary policies were in the Valley of Mexico. For example, the province of Amaquemecan, which formed part of the Chalco region, was assigned to pay an additional tribute of stone and wood twice or thrice a year for Tenochtitlan's building projects. This tributary policy eventually backfired, as some of the empire's subjects grew disgruntled with Moctezuma's government and launched rebellions against him, which eventually resulted in many of these provinces\u2014including Totonacapan (under the \"de facto\" leadership of Chicomacatl), Chalco and Mixquic (which were near Tenochtitlan)\u2014forming alliances with Spain against him.\nThe famine at the beginning of his rule also resulted in the abolishment of the \"huehuetlatlacolli\" system, which was a system of serfdom in which a family agreed to maintain a \"tlacohtli\" (slave or serf) perpetually. This agreement also turned the descendants of the ones who agreed into serfs.\nDuring his campaign against Jaltepec and Cuatzontlan (\"see below\"), he made negotiations with the Tlatelolca to obtain the weapons and resources needed. As a result of these negotiations, Tlatelolco was given more sovereignty; they were permitted to rebuild their main temple which was partially destroyed in the Battle of Tlatelolco in a civil war during Axay\u00e1catl's reign, act largely independently during military campaigns, and be absolved from paying tribute.\nMany of these policies were planned together with his uncle Tlilpotonqui, \"cihuacoatl\" of Mexico and son of Tlacaelel, at the beginning of his reign, while others, such as his tributary policies, were created as the result of various events, like the famine which occurred at the beginning of his rule. His policies, in general, had the purpose of centralizing the government in his person through the means of implementing policies to settle the divide between the nobility and commoners and abolishing some of the more feudal policies of his predecessors, while also making his tributary policies more severe to aid the population during natural disasters and to compensate for a less expansionist focus in his military campaigns.\nMost of the policies implemented during his rule would not last long after his death, as the empire fell into Spanish control on 13 August 1521 as a result of the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, one year after he died. The new Spanish authorities implemented their laws and removed many of the political establishments founded during the pre-Hispanic era, leaving just a few in place. Among the few policies that lasted was the divide between the nobility and the commoners, as members of the pre-Hispanic nobility continued to enjoy various privileges under the Viceroyalty of New Spain, such as land ownership through a system known as \"cacicazgo\".\nConstruction projects.\nMoctezuma, like many of his predecessors, built a \"tecpan\" (palace) of his own. This was a particularly large palace, which was somewhat larger than the National Palace that exists today which was built over it, being about 200 meters long and 200 meters wide. However, little archaeological evidence exists to understand what his palace looked like, but the various descriptions of it and the space it covered have helped reconstruct various features of its layout. Even so, these descriptions tend to be limited, as many writers were unable to describe them in detail. The Spanish captain Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s, the main commander of the Spanish troops that entered Mexico in the year 1519, himself stated in his letters to the king of Spain that he would not bother describing it, claiming that it \"was so marvelous that it seems to me impossible to describe its excellence.\"\nThe palace had a large courtyard that opened into the central plaza of the city to the north, where Templo Mayor was. This courtyard was a place where hundreds of courtiers would hold multiple sorts of activities, including feasts and waiting for royal business to be conducted. This courtyard had suites of rooms that surrounded smaller courtyards and gardens.\nHis residence had many rooms for various purposes. Aside from his room, at the central part of the upper floor, there were two rooms beside it which were known as \"coacalli\" (guest house). One of these rooms was built for the lords of Tlacopan and Texcoco, the other two members of the Triple Alliance, who came to visit. The other room was for the lords of Colhuacan, Tenayohcan (today known as Tenayuca) and Chicuhnautlan (today, Santa Mar\u00eda Chiconautla). The exact reason why this room had this purpose remains uncertain, though a few records like Codex Mendoza say the reason was that these lords were personal friends of Moctezuma. There was also another room which became known as (Spanish: Moctezuma's Black House), a room with no windows and fully painted black which was used by Moctezuma to meditate. Remains of this room have been found in recent years in modern Mexico City. The upper floor had a large courtyard which was likely used as a \"cuicacalli\", for public shows during religious rituals. The bottom floor had two rooms which were used by the government. One of them was used for Moctezuma's advisors and judges who dealt with the situations of the commoners (likely the \"Tlacxitlan\"). The other room was for the war council (likely the \"Tequihuacalli\"), where high-ranking warriors planned and commanded their battles.\nAs part of the construction of Moctezuma's palace, various projects were made which made it more prestigious by providing entertainment to the public.\nOne of the most famous among these projects was the \"Totocalli\" (House of Birds), a zoo which had multiple sorts of animals, mainly avian species, but also contained several predatory animals in their section. These animals were taken care of by servants who cleaned their environments, fed them, and offered them care according to their species. The species of birds held within the zoo were widely varied, holding animals like quetzals, eagles, true parrots, and others, and also included water species like roseate spoonbills and various others that had their pond.\nThe section with animals other than birds, which was decorated with figures of gods associated with the wild, was also considerably varied, having jaguars, wolves, snakes, and other smaller predatory animals. These animals were fed on hunted animals like deer, turkeys, and other smaller animals. Allegedly, the dead bodies of sacrificial victims were also used to feed these animals, and after the battle known as La Noche Triste, which occurred during the early stages of the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire in June 1520 (during which Moctezuma died), the bodies of dead Spaniards may have been used to feed them.\nThis place was highly prestigious, and all sorts of important people are said to have used to visit this place, including artists, craftsmen, government officials, and blacksmiths.\nThe \"Totocalli\", however, was burnt and destroyed, along with many other constructions, in the year 1521 during the Siege of Tenochtitlan, as the Spanish captain Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s ordered for many of the buildings that formed part of the royal palaces to be burnt to demoralize the Mexica army and civilians. Though Cort\u00e9s himself admitted that he enjoyed the zoo, he stated that he saw it as a necessary measure in his third letter to King Charles I of Spain.\nAnother construction was the Chapultepec aqueduct, built in 1506 to bring fresh water directly from Chapultepec to Tenochtitlan and Tlatelolco. This water was driven to the merchant ports of the city for people to drink and to the temples. This aqueduct was destroyed less than a year after Moctezuma's death, during the Siege of Tenochtitlan in 1521, as the Spaniards decided to destroy it to cut Tenochtitlan's water supply. Some Mexica warriors attempted to resist its destruction, but were repelled by the Tlaxcalan allies of the Spanish.\nTerritorial expansion during his rule, military actions and foreign policy.\nAt the beginning of his rule, he attempted to build diplomatic ties with Tlaxcala, Huexotzinco (today, Huejotzingo), Chollolan (Cholula), Michoacan, and Metztitl\u00e1n, by secretly inviting the lords of these countries to attend the celebrations for his coronation before the continuation of the flower wars, which were wars of religious nature arranged voluntarily by the parties involved with no territorial purposes, but instead to capture and sacrifice as many soldiers as possible. During this period, Mexico and Tlaxcala still were not at war, but the tension between these nations was high, and the embassy sent for this purpose was put in a highly risky situation, for which reason Moctezuma chose as members of the embassy only experts in diplomacy, espionage, and languages. Fortunately, his invitation was accepted, and Moctezuma used this opportunity to show his greatness to the lords who attended. However, because the invitation was secret to avoid a scandal for inviting his rivals to this ceremony, Moctezuma ordered that no one should know that the lords were present, not even the rulers of Tlacopan (today known as Tacuba) and Texcoco, and the lords saw themselves often forced to pretend to be organizers to avoid confusion. Though Moctezuma would continue to hold meetings with these people, where various religious rituals were held, it did not take long for large-scale conflicts to erupt between these nations.\nAn important thing to note is that contrary to popular belief, Tlaxcala was not Mexico's most powerful rival in the central Mexican region in this period, and it would not be so until the final years of pre-Hispanic Mexico in 1518\u201319. In the opening years of the 16th century, Huejotzingo was Mexico's actual military focus, and it proved itself to be one of the most powerful political entities until these final years, as a series of devastating wars weakened the state into being conquered by Tlaxcala.\nDuring his reign, he married the queen of Ecatepec, Tlapalizquixochtzin, making him king consort of this \"altepetl\", though according to the chronicle written by Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo, very few people in Mexico knew about this political role, being only a few among his closest courtiers among those who knew.\nEarly military campaigns.\nThe first military campaign during his rule, which was done in honor of his coronation, was the violent suppression of a rebellion in Nopala and Icpatepec. For this war, a force of over 60,000 soldiers from Tenochtitlan, Texcoco, Tepanec lands, Chalco, and Xochimilco participated, and Moctezuma himself went to the frontlines. Approximately 5100 prisoners were taken after the campaign, many of whom were given to inhabitants of Tenochtitlan and Chalco as slaves, while the rest were sacrificed in his honor on the fourth day of his coronation. In Nopala, Mexica soldiers committed a massacre and burned down the temples and houses, going against Moctezuma's wishes. After the campaign, celebrations for his coronation continued in Tenochtitlan. Moctezuma's territorial expansion, however, would not truly begin until another rebellion was suppressed in Tlachquiauhco (today known as Tlaxiaco), where its ruler, Malinalli, was killed after trying to start the rebellion. In this campaign, all adults above the age of 50 within the city were killed under Moctezuma's orders as he blamed them for the rebellion. A characteristic fact about Moctezuma's wars was that a large portion of them had the purpose of suppressing rebellions rather than conquering new territory, contrary to his predecessors, whose main focus was territorial expansion.\nRebellions.\nDuring his reign, multiple rebellions were suppressed by the use of force and often ended with violent results. As mentioned previously, the first campaign during his reign, which was done in honor of his coronation, was the suppression of a rebellion in Nopallan (today known as Santos Reyes Nopala) and Icpatepec (a Mixtec town that no longer exists which was near Silacayoapam), both in modern-day Oaxaca. The prisoners taken during this campaign were later used as slaves or for human sacrifice.\nAfter Mexico suffered a humiliating defeat at Atlixco during a flower war against Huejotzingo (\"see below\"), many sites in Oaxaca rebelled, likely under the idea that the empire's forces were weakened. However, Moctezuma was able to raise an army numbering 200,000 and marched over the city of Yancuitlan (today known as Yanhuitlan), a city which had been previously conquered by Tizoc, and conquered Zozollan in the process. Abundant territorial expansion was carried out following this.\nAnother notable rebellion occurred in Atlixco (in modern-day Puebla), a city neighboring Tlaxcala which had previously been conquered by Ahuizotl. This rebellion occurred in 1508, and was repressed by a prince named Macuilmalinatzin. This wasn't the first conflict that occurred in this region, as its proximity with Tlaxcala and Huejotzingo would cause multiple conflicts to erupt in this area during Moctezuma's reign.\nA large series of rebellions occurred in 1510, likely as a result of astrological predictions halting some Mexica military operations to a degree. Moctezuma would try to campaign against these rebellions one at a time throughout the following years, campaigning against territories in Oaxaca, including Icpatepec again, in 1511 or 1512. Some of these revolts occurred as far south as Xoconochco (today known as Soconusco) and Huiztlan (today, Huixtla), far down where the Mexican-Guatemalan border is today. These territories were highly important to the empire and had been previously conquered by his predecessor Ahuizotl, thus Moctezuma had to maintain them under his control. These revolts occurred in so many locations that the empire was unable to deal with all of them effectively.\nTerritorial expansion.\nThe empire's expansion during Moctezuma's rule was mainly focused on southwestern Mesoamerican territories, in Oaxaca and modern-day Guerrero. The earliest conquests in this territory were held by Moctezuma I.\nThe first important conquest during Moctezuma's rule occurred in the year 1504 when the city of Achiotlan (today known as San Juan Achiutla) was conquered. This war, according to some sources, was supposedly mainly caused by \"a small tree which belonged to a lord of the place which grew such beautiful flowers Moctezuma's envy couldn't resist it\", and when Moctezuma asked for it, the lord of the city refused to offer it, thus starting the war. After the conquest, this tree was supposedly taken to Tenochtitlan. The second conquest occurred in Zozollan, a place neighboring east of Achiutla, on 28 May 1506, during the campaign against the Yanhuitlan rebellion. This conquest had a particularly violent result, as a special sacrifice was held after the campaign where the prisoners captured in Zozollan were the victims. \"The Mexicans killed many of the people from Zozola [\"sic\"] which they captured in war\", according to \"History of the Mexicans as Told by Their Paintings\", an early colonial source based on Aztec codices.\nIn the year 1507, the year of the New Fire Ceremony, abundant military action occurred. Among the towns that are listed to have been conquered this year are: Tecuhtepec (from which multiple prisoners were sacrificed for the ceremony), Iztitlan, Nocheztlan (an important town northeast of Achiutla), Quetzaltepec, and Tototepec.\nThe conquest of Tototepec formed part of the conquests of some of the last few Tlapanec territories of modern-day Guerrero, an area which had already been in decline since Moctezuma I began his first campaigns in the region and probably turned the Kingdom of Tlachinollan (modern-day Tlapa) into a tributary province during the rule of Lord Tlaloc between 1461 and 1467 (though the kingdom would not be invaded and fully conquered until the reign of Ahuizotl in 1486, along with Caltitlan, a city neighboring west of Tlapa). In between the years of 1503 and 1509, a campaign was launched against Xipetepec, and another was launched (as mentioned previously) in 1507 against Tototepec, which had previously been a territory conquered by Tlachinollan in the mid-14th century. The campaign in Tototepec occurred as the result of a large group of Mexica merchants sent by Moctezuma being killed after they attempted to trade for some of the resources of the area on his behalf. During the conquest of Tototepec, two important Mexica noblemen, Ixtlilcuechahuac and Huitzilihuitzin (not to be confused with the \"tlatoani\" of this name), were killed. All the population of Tototepec, except for the children, was massacred by the Mexica forces, and about 1350 captives were taken. Another campaign was launched in 1515 to conquer Acocozpan and Tetenanco and reconquer Atlitepec, which had been previously conquered by Ahuizotl in 1493.\nQuetzaltepec was conquered on the same campaign as Tototepec, as both reportedly murdered the merchants sent by Moctezuma in the area. The Mexica managed to raise an army of 400,000 and first conquered Tototepec. Quetzaltepec was also conquered, but it rebelled along with various sites across Oaxaca soon after when the Mexica lost the Battle of Atlixco against Huejotzingo. Being a fortified city with six walls, the Mexica put the city under siege for several days, with the each of groups of the Triple Alliance attacking from various locations and having over 200 wooden ladders constructed under Moctezuma's orders. The Mexica eventually emerged victorious, successfully conquering the city.\nSeveral military defeats occurred in some of these expansionist campaigns, however, such as the invasion of Amatlan in 1509, where an unexpected series of snowstorms and blizzards killed many soldiers, making the surviving ones too low in numbers to fight.\nAn important campaign was the conquest of Xaltepec (today known as Jaltepec) and Cuatzontlan and the suppression of the last revolt in Icpatepec, all in Oaxaca. This war started as the result of provocations given by Jaltepec against Moctezuma through killing as many Mexicas as they could find in their area, as some sort of way to challenge him, and the beginning of the revolt by Icpatepec as the result. The Xaltepeca had done this before with previous \"tlatoanis\" and other nations. Moctezuma and the recently elected ruler of Tlacopan themselves went to the fight, along with Tlacaelel's grandson and \"cihuacoatl\" of Mexico in this period Tlacaeleltzin Xocoyotl. A large portion of the weapons and food was brought by Tlatelolco, though they were initially hesitant to do so, but were ordered by Moctezuma to offer it as a tribute to Tenochtitlan, and they received multiple rewards as the result, including the permission to rebuild their main temple (which had been partially destroyed during the Battle of Tlatelolco which occurred during Axayacatl's reign). This campaign had a highly violent result; Moctezuma, after receiving information on the cities gathered by his spies, ordered for all adults in the sites above the age of 50 to be killed to prevent a rebellion once the cities were conquered, similar to the war in Tlachquiauhco. The conquest was done by dividing the army that was brought in 3 divisions; one from Tlacopan, one from Texcoco, and one from Tenochtitlan, so that each one attacked a different city. The Tenochtitlan company attacked Jaltepec. Moctezuma came out victorious and then returned to Mexico through Chalco, where he received many honors for his victory. This war likely happened in 1511, as a war against Icpatepec is recorded to have happened again in that year.\nAfter the campaigns in the Oaxaca region, Moctezuma began to move his campaigns into northern and eastern territories around 1514, conquering the site of Quetzalapan, a Chichimec territory through the Huastec region, taking 1332 captives and suffering minimal casualties, with only 95 reported losses. Likely around this time, many other territories in the region were also conquered. He also went to war against the Tarascan Empire for the first time since Axay\u00e1catl was defeated in his disastrous invasion. This war caused high casualties on both sides. The Mexica succeeded at taking a large amount of captives, but failed to conquer any territory.\nAmong the final military campaigns carried out by Moctezuma, aside from the late stages of the war against Tlaxcala, were the conquests of Mazatzintlan and Zacatepec, which formed part of the Chichimec region.\nThe approximate number of military engagements during his rule before European contact was 73, achieving victory in approximately 43 sites (including territories already within the empire), making him one of the most active monarchs in pre-Hispanic Mexican history in terms of military actions.\nHowever, his rule and policies suffered a very sudden interruption upon the news of the arrival of Spanish ships in the east in 1519 (\"see below\").\nTexcoco crisis.\nOne of the most controversial events during his reign was the supposed overthrow of the legitimate government of Nezahualpilli in Texcoco. Historians such as Alva Ixtlilx\u00f3chitl even went as far as referring to this action as \"diabolical\", while also making claims that are not seen in other chronicles and are generally not trusted by modern historians.\nNezahualpilli's death.\nThe circumstances of Nezahualpilli's death are not clear, and many sources offer highly conflicting stories about the events that resulted in it.\nAccording to Alva Ixtlilx\u00f3chitl, the issue began when Moctezuma sent an embassy to Nezahualpilli reprimanding him for not sacrificing any Tlaxcalan prisoners since the last 4 years, during the war with Tlaxcala (\"see below\"), threatening him saying that he was angering the gods. Nezahualpilli replied to this embassy stating that the reason he had not sacrificed them was that he simply did not want to wage war because he and his population wanted to live peacefully for the time being, as the ceremonies that would be held in the following year, 1 reed, would make war inevitable, and that soon his wishes would be granted. Eventually, Nezahualpilli launched a campaign against Tlaxcala, though he did not go himself, instead sending two of his sons, Acatlemacoctzin and Tecuanehuatzin, as commanders. Moctezuma then decided to betray Nezahualpilli by sending a secret embassy to Tlaxcala telling them about the incoming army. The Tlaxcalans then began to take action against the Texcoca while they were unaware of this betrayal. The Texcoco armies were ambushed in the middle of the night. Almost none of the Texcoca survived the fight. Upon receiving the news of Moctezuma's betrayal, understanding that nothing could be done about it and fearing for the future of his people, Nezahualpilli committed suicide in his palace.\nThis story, however, as mentioned before, is not generally trusted by modern historians, and much of the information given contradicts other sources.\nSources do agree, however, that Nezahualpilli's last years as ruler were mainly characterized by his attempts to live a peaceful life, likely as the result of his old age. He spent his last months mostly inactive in his rule and his advisors, on his request, took most of the government's decisions during this period. He assigned two men (of whom details are mostly unknown) to take control of almost all government decisions. These sources also agree that he was found dead in his palace, but the cause of his death remains uncertain.\nHis death is recorded to have been mourned in Texcoco, Tenochtitlan, Tlacopan, and even Chalco and Xochimilco, as all of these \"altepeme\" gave precious offerings, like jewelry and clothes, and sacrifices in his honor. Moctezuma himself was reported to have broken into tears upon receiving the news of his death. His death was mourned for 80 days. This was recorded as one of the largest funeral ceremonies in pre-Hispanic Mexican history.\nSuccession crisis.\nElections.\nSince Nezahualipilli died abruptly in the year 1516, he left no indication as to who his successor would be. He had six legitimate sons: Cacamatzin, Coanacochtli (later baptized as Don Pedro), Tecocoltzin (baptized as Don Hernando), Ixtlilxochitl II (baptized as Don Hernando), Yoyontzin (baptized as Don Jorge) and Tetlahuehuetzquititzin (baptized as Don Pedro), all of whom would eventually take the throne, though most of them after the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire. His most likely heir was Tetlahuehuetzquititzin, as he was the wealthiest among Nezahualpilli's sons, but he was considered inept for the job. His other most likely heirs were Ixtlilxochitl, Coanacochtli, and Cacamatzin, though not everyone supported them as they were considerably younger than Tetlahuehuetzquititzin, as Ixtlilxochitl was 19 years old and Cacamatzin was about 21. Moctezuma supported Cacamatzin since he was his nephew. In the end, the Texcoco council voted in favor of Moctezuma's decision, and Cacamatzin was declared \"tlatoani\", being that he was the son of Moctezuma's sister Xocotzin and was older than his two other brothers. Though Coanacochtli felt the decision was fair, Ixtlilxochitl disagreed with the results and protested against the council. Ixtlilxochitl argued that the reason why Moctezuma supported Cacamatzin was because he wanted to manipulate him so that he could take over Texcoco, being that he was his uncle. Coanacochtli responded that the decision was legitimate and that even if Cacamatzin was not elected Ixtlilxochitl would not have been elected either, as he was younger than the two. Cacamatzin stayed quiet during the whole debate. Eventually, the members of the council shut down the debate to prevent a violent escalation. Though Cacamatzin was officially declared \"tlatoani\", the coronation ceremony didn't occur that day, and Ixtlilxochitl used this as an opportunity to plan his rebellion against him.\nIxtlilx\u00f3chitl's rebellion.\nShortly after the election, Ixtlilxochitl began to prepare his revolt by going to Metztitl\u00e1n to raise an army, threatening civil war. Cacamatzin went to Tenochtitlan to ask Moctezuma for help. Moctezuma, understanding Ixtlilxochitl's war-like nature, decided to support Cacamatzin with his military forces should a conflict begin and try to talk Ixtlilxochitl into stopping the conflict, and also suggested taking Nezahualpilli's treasure to Tenochtitlan to prevent a sacking. According to Alva Ixtlilx\u00f3chitl, Cacamatzin asked Moctezuma for help after Ixtlilxochitl went to Metztitl\u00e1n, while other sources claim that Ixtlilxochitl went to Metztitl\u00e1n because of Cacamatzin's visit to Moctezuma.\nIxtlilxochitl first went to Tulancingo with 100,000 men, where he was received with many honors and recognized as the real king of Texcoco. He then accelerated his pace, possibly because he received worrying news from Texcoco, and advanced to the city of Tepeapulco, where he was also welcomed. He soon advanced to Otompan (today known as Otumba, State of Mexico), where he sent a message before his entrance in hopes of being received as a king there as well. However, the people of Otumba supported Cacamatzin and informed Ixtlilxochitl that such a demand would not be fulfilled. Ixtlilxochitl therefore sent his troops to invade the city, and after a long fight the troops began to gradually retreat and its ruler was killed. When the news of this fight was heard in Texcoco, all events, religious or not, were canceled, soldiers were recruited, troops were sent from Tenochtitlan to the city and Cacamatzin and Coanacochtli fortified the city to avoid an invasion.\nHe eventually reached Texcoco and placed the city under siege, while also occupying the cities of Papalotlan, Acolman, Chicuhnautlan (today known as Santa Mar\u00eda Chiconautla), Tecacman, Tzonpanco (Zumpango), and Huehuetocan to take every possible entrance Moctezuma could use to send his troops to Texcoco. Moctezuma, however, used his influence to enter the city of Texcoco and obtain access to the Acolhua cities not yet occupied by Ixtlilxochitl. Cacamatzin used this opportunity to send a commander from Iztapalapa named Xochitl to arrest Ixtlilxochitl as peacefully as possible. Moctezuma approved this decision and Xochitl was sent along with some troops. Ixtlilxochitl was quickly informed about this and, as per the custom of war, informed Xochitl that he was going to fight him. A short battle occurred some time after in which Xochitl was captured and later publicly executed by burning. Once the news of this defeat was heard by Moctezuma, he ordered that no more military engagements be done for the moment to prevent further escalation and that he wanted to rightfully punish Ixtlilxochitl for what he did at a more appropriate moment. In the meantime, the brothers agreed to try to reach a consensus through a peaceful debate, as Ixtlilxochitl did not want to fight either, as he claimed that he only sent the troops as a means of protest and not to wage war. However, this would only be done under the condition that Moctezuma would not get involved by any means. The three brothers then agreed to divide the province of Acolhuacan (where Texcoco was the \"de facto\" capital) in three parts, one for each brother, and that Cacamatzin would continue to rule over Texcoco.\nAt some point, however, Ixtlilxochitl sought refuge outside of Texcoco to avoid facing a conflict with Cacamatzin.\nSpanish involvement.\nThis crisis would later become relevant again after the Spanish arrived at Tenochtitlan, when Cacamatzin, who initially welcomed the Spaniards when they first entered in November 1519, attempted to raise an army against them for imprisoning Moctezuma (\"see below\") by calling for the people of Coyoacan, Tlacopan, Iztapalapa and the Matlatzinca people to enter the city, kill the Spaniards and free Moctezuma in early 1520. The Spanish captain Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s, who was the main commander of the Spanish troops who entered Mexico, decided to act and ordered Moctezuma to send someone to arrest Cacamatzin before the attack. Moctezuma suggested that Ixtlilxochitl be sent due to the crisis, as then he could take the throne and prevent another succession crisis. He still tried to establish negotiations between the Texcoco leadership and the Spaniards but was unable to change Cacamatzin's mind. Eventually, Moctezuma sent troops to secretly arrest Cacamatzin in his palace and send him to Mexico after he ordered for three of his commanders to be arrested for suggesting requesting Mocetzuma's permission for the attack and telling him that there was no chance of entering into negotiations with the Spaniards. Ixtlilxochitl became the likely \"de facto\" leader of Texcoco afterwards, though according to Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan, it was Tecocoltzin who officially took the title of \"tlatoani\" after Cacamatzin's arrest and Ixtlilxochitl would not officially become the \"tlatoani\" until a year later.\nIxtlilxochitl continued fighting for the Spaniards afterwards, became a personal friend of Cort\u00e9s, converted to Christianity and participated in the Spanish conquest of Honduras in 1525. His figure has remained controversial in the historical record, as some have seen him as a man who betrayed his people for his ambition, while others have seen him as a brave warrior who fought against the tyrannical rule of Moctezuma II and liberated the peoples he subjugated with the help of Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s.\nWar with Tlaxcala, Huejotzingo and their allies.\nThough the first conflicts between Mexico and Tlaxcala, Huejotzingo, and their allies began during the rule of Moctezuma I in the 1450s, it was during the reign of Moctezuma II that major conflicts broke through.\nBattle of Atlixco.\nPlanning and preparations.\nApproximately in the year 1503 (or 1507, after the conquest of Tototepec, according to historian Diego Dur\u00e1n), a massive battle occurred in Atlixco which was fought mainly against Huejotzingo, a kingdom that used to be one of the most powerful ones in the Valley of Mexico. The war was provoked by Moctezuma himself, who wanted to go to war against Huejotzingo because it had been many months since the last war. The local rulers of the region accepted Moctezuma's proposal to wage this war. It was declared as a flower war, and the invitation to go to war was accepted by the people of Huejotzingo, Tlaxcala, Cholula, and Tliliuhquitepec, a city-state nearby. The war was arranged to occur in the plains of Atlixco. Moctezuma went to the fight along with four or five of his brothers and two of his nephews.\nHe named one of his brothers (or children, according to some sources), Tlacahuepan, as the main commander of the troops against the troops of Huejotzingo. He was assigned 100,000 troops to fight. Tlacahuepan decided to begin the fight by dividing the troops into three groups which would attack one after the other, the first being the troops from Texcoco, then from Tlacopan, and lastly from Tenochtitlan.\nBattle.\nHe began by sending 200 troops to launch skirmishes against the Huexotzinca, but despite the large numbers and skirmishes, he was unable to break the enemy lines. The group of Texcoco suffered huge losses and once they were unable to fight they were put to rest while the group from Tlacopan was sent. However, they were still unable to break the lines. The Tenochca group then advanced and pushed to aid the Tepanecs of Tlacopan, causing multiple casualties against the Huexotzinca, but the lines were still not broken as more reinforcements arrived. Eventually, Tlacahuepan saw himself surrounded, and though he initially resisted, he finally surrendered. Though the Huexotzinca wanted to take him alive, he asked to be sacrificed there on the battlefield, and so he was killed, and then the rest of the Mexica troops retreated. The result of this battle was considered humiliating for the empire. According to primary records, about 40,000 people were killed on both sides (possibly meaning that about 20,000 died on each side). Some important Mexica noblemen were also killed during the engagement, including Huitzilihuitzin (not to be confused with the \"tlatoani\" of this name), Xalmich and Cuatacihuatl.\nAftermath.\nRegardless, multiple prisoners were taken after the fight, who were later sacrificed in Moctezuma's honor. Tlacahuepan was remembered as a hero despite the loss, and many songs were dedicated to him to be remembered through poetry. In one song called \"Ycuic ne\u00e7ahualpilli yc tlamato huexotzinco. Cuextecayotl, Quitlali cuicani Tececepouhqui\" (\"The song of Nezahualpilli when he took captives in Huexotzinco. [It tells of] the Huastec themes, it was written down by the singer Tececepouhqui\"), he's referred as \"the golden one, the Huastec lord, the owner of the sapota skirt\", about the god Xipe Totec, and also states \"With the flowery liquor of war, he is drunk, my nobleman, the golden one, the Huastec Lord\", about his Huastec heritage, using the stereotype that the Huastecs were drunkards. Anyway, the defeat was a humiliating one, and Moctezuma is said to have cried in anguish upon hearing of the death of Tlacahuepan and the massive loss of soldiers. Moctezuma himself welcomed the soldiers who survived back into Mexico, while the population that welcomed them mourned.\nThe fact that the Huexotzinca also suffered massive casualties caused their military power to be highly weakened by this battle and various others, and so this could be seen as the beginning of the fall of Huejotzingo, as multiple military losses against Tlaxcala and Mexico in the following years eventually led to its fall, despite the victory in the fight.\nOther battles against Huejotzingo and its allies.\nVarious other battles occurred in the following years between Mexico and Huejotzingo, and though none of them were as big as the Battle of Atlixco, they still caused significant losses on both sides; high losses for Mexico and significant losses for Huejotzingo.\nAn engagement which occurred likely in the year of 1506. This fight was another flower war which was proposed by Cholula, with support from Huejotzingo, to be fought in Cuauhquechollan (today known as Huaquechula, in modern-day Puebla), near Atlixco. Though Moctezuma did not want to fight as a result of the previous defeat in Atlixco, he saw no other option and prepared for the fight. In this fight, warriors from Texcoco, Tlacopan, Chalco, Xochimilco, and modern-day Tierra Caliente participated. This battle reportedly ended with 8200 Mexicas killed or captured. However, the Mexica are said to have dealt a similar number of casualties in this one-day battle. The result of this battle was indecisive, as some reported it as a victory, but it seems Moctezuma II took it as a defeat and was highly upset about it, to the point that he complained against the gods.\nFernando Alvarado Tezoz\u00f3moc, however, reports that 10,000 Mexicas died in this fight and that the Mexica were so angry about the fight that they called for reinforcements who committed a \"cruel slaughter\" and captured 800 more enemies. He lists the number of Huexotzinco-Cholula casualties as 5600 killed and 400 captured in one other engagement afterwards, which resulted in 8200 Mexicas killed or captured.\nInvasion of Tlaxcala.\nInitial stages.\nIt was approximately in the year 1504 or 1505 when the first large-scale conflicts between Mexico and Tlaxcala began. In this period, Moctezuma thought about placing the entire country under siege, understanding that most of it was surrounded by territories belonging to the empire. The ruler of Huejotzingo, Tecayahuatzin, sympathized with Moctezuma despite their connections with Tlaxcala and conflicts in the past, and through bribes and propaganda attempted to ally with Cholula and local Otomi populations to attack Tlaxcala, though with little success. The Tlaxcalans became greatly worried about this and began to grow suspicious of all allies they had fearing a betrayal, as Huejotzingo was one of Tlaxcala's closest states, as proven by its support at the battle of Atlixco. Moctezuma, however, had the disadvantage that many of his dominions surrounding Tlaxcala did not want to fight them, as many of them used to be their allies in the past even with all the promises Moctezuma made, and therefore his support was actually quite limited.\nOne of the first battles occurred in Xiloxochitlan (today known as San Vicente Xiloxochitla), where multiple atrocities were committed. Despite this, the Tlaxcalan resistance managed to hold out, and after a great struggle, the Huexotzinca armies were repelled, though during the fight the Ocotelolca commander Tizatlacatzin was killed. Many other smaller battles took place in other parts of the border, though none of them were successful.\nIn response, Tlaxcala launched a counter-invasion against Huejotzingo, knowing that the Huexotzinca had been severely weakened by their fights with the Mexica Empire; their towns were sacked repeatedly and the entire nation was put essentially under siege, and the remains of the nation were now cornered in the region around the Popocat\u00e9petl. The Huexotzinca became greatly worried and knew they couldn't win the war alone, therefore a prince named Teayehuatl decided to send an embassy to Mexico to request aid against the Tlaxcalans. According to historians like Dur\u00e1n, this embassy was sent in the year 1507, just after the New Fire Ceremony, while others date this embassy to the year 1512. The embassy informed Moctezuma about the Tlaxcalan counter-invasion, which had been happening for over a year by this point, requesting Moctezuma to do something about the situation to expel the Tlaxcalans from their land. This was not the first time the Huexotzinca had requested aid from Mexico for similar reasons, as the first time was actually around the year 1499, during the reign of Ahuizotl, though this previous request was denied. After consulting Nezahualpilli and the ruler of Tlacopan, Moctezuma agreed to help the Huexotzinca, despite the conflicts they had in the past, and sent a large number of soldiers to help this nation, while also allowing many of their refugees to stay in Tenochtitlan and Chalco.\nLate stages.\nWith the Mexica forces to support Huejotzingo, the invasion continued from the west with the main force from the towns of Cuauhquechollan, Tochimilco, Itzocan (today known as Iz\u00facar de Matamoros), and a smaller support force from a town named Tetellan (today, Tetela de Ocampo) and from a town named Chietla. The advance was quick, but the Tlaxcalans used the territories they had captured from Huejotzingo to advance safely to Atlixco through the captured areas with little population before the Mexica-Huejotzingo forces spread. Once done, a long fight began between the two forces. The battle lasted 20 days, and both armies suffered huge losses, as the Tlaxcalans had a famous general captured and the Mexica lost so many men that they requested emergency reinforcements, asking for \"all kinds of people in the shortest possible time\". The Tlaxcalans claimed victory in that fight, and the Mexica were fought into a complete standstill. The following year, Huejotzingo started to suffer a famine as the result of a lack of resources as the Tlaxcalans pushed further into their territory. The Tlaxcalans even went as far as burning down the royal palaces of Huejotzingo and stealing as much food as they could.\nApproximately in the year 1516, Huejotzingo abandoned its alliance with the empire.\nThe devastating wars that broke out against Huejotzingo caused this nation, which had been the most powerful nation in the Valley of Puebla in the opening years of the 16th century, to become weak enough to be conquered by Tlaxcala. This was the point at which Tlaxcala became Mexico's most powerful rival in the central Mexican area. The nation which used to be their main military focus was now the subject of a nation that would later bring the killing blow to the Mexica Empire.\nThe war between Mexico and Tlaxcala would eventually have devastating consequences, as the Tlaxcalans decided an alliance with Spain against Mexico on 23 September 1519 after a few battles proved that an alliance with this nation could help them destroy Moctezuma's reign.\nContact with the Spanish.\nFirst interactions with the Spanish.\nIn 1518, Moctezuma received the first reports of Europeans landing on the east coast of his empire; this was the expedition of Juan de Grijalva who had landed on San Juan de Ul\u00faa, which although within Totonac territory was under the auspices of the Aztec Empire. Moctezuma ordered that he be kept informed of any new sightings of foreigners at the coast and posted extra watchguards and watchtowers to accomplish this.\nWhen Cort\u00e9s arrived in 1519, Moctezuma was immediately informed and he sent emissaries to meet the newcomers; one of them was an Aztec noble named Tentlil in the Nahuatl language but referred to in the writings of Cort\u00e9s and Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo as \"Tendile\". As the Spaniards approached Tenochtitl\u00e1n they allied with the Tlaxcalteca, who were enemies of the Aztec Triple Alliance, and they helped instigate revolt in many towns under Aztec dominion. Moctezuma was aware of this and sent gifts to the Spaniards, probably to show his superiority to the Spaniards and Tlaxcalteca.\nOn 8 November 1519, Moctezuma met Cort\u00e9s on the causeway leading into Tenochtitl\u00e1n and the two leaders exchanged gifts. Moctezuma gave Cort\u00e9s the gift of an Aztec calendar, one disc of crafted gold, and another of silver. Cort\u00e9s later melted these down for their monetary value.\nAccording to Cort\u00e9s, Moctezuma immediately volunteered to cede his entire realm to Charles V, King of Spain. Though some indigenous accounts written in the 1550s partly support this notion, it is still unbelievable for several reasons. As Aztec rulers spoke an overly polite language that needed a translation for their subjects to understand, it was difficult to determine what Moctezuma said. According to an indigenous account, he said to Cort\u00e9s: \"You have come to sit on your seat of authority, which I have kept for a while for you, where I have been in charge for you, for your agents the rulers\u00a0...\" However, these words might be a polite expression that was meant to convey the exact opposite meaning, which was common in Nahua culture; Moctezuma might have intended these words to assert his stature and multigenerational legitimacy. Also, according to Spanish law, the king had no right to demand that foreign peoples become his subjects, but he had every right to bring rebels to heel. Therefore, to give the Spanish the necessary legitimacy to wage war against the indigenous people, Cort\u00e9s might just have said what the Spanish king needed to hear.\nHost and prisoner of the Spaniards.\nSix days after their arrival, Moctezuma became a prisoner in his own house. Exactly why this happened is not clear from the extant sources.\nAccording to the Spanish, the arrest was made as a result of an attack perpetrated by a tribute collector from Nautla named Qualpopoca (or Quetzalpopoca) on a Spanish Totonac garrison. The garrison was under the command of a Spanish captain named Juan de Escalante and the attack was in retaliation for the Totonac rebellion against Moctezuma which started in July 1519 after the Spanish arrived. This attack resulted in the death of many Totonacs and approximately seven Spaniards, including Escalante. Though some Spaniards described that this was the only reason for Moctezuma's arrest, others have suspected that Escalante's death was merely used as an excuse by Cort\u00e9s to imprison Moctezuma and usurp power over Mexico, positing that Cort\u00e9s might have planned to imprison Moctezuma before they even met. Cort\u00e9s himself admitted that he imprisoned Moctezuma primarily to avoid losing control over Mexico, understanding that nearly all of his forces were within his domains.\nMoctezuma claimed innocence for this incident, claiming that though he was aware of the attack as Quetzalpopoca brought him the severed head of a Spaniard as a demonstration of his success, he never ordered it and was highly displeased by these events.\nAround 20 days after his arrest, Quetzalpopoca was captured, together with his son and 15 nobles who allegedly participated in the attack, and after a brief interrogation, he admitted that indeed Moctezuma was innocent. He was publicly executed by burning soon after, but Moctezuma remained prisoner regardless.\nDespite his imprisonment, Moctezuma continued to live a somewhat comfortable life, being free to perform many of his daily activities and being respected as a monarch. Cort\u00e9s himself even ordered for any soldiers who disrespected him to be physically and roughly punished regardless of rank or position. However, despite still being treated as a respected monarch, he had virtually lost most of his power as emperor as the Spaniards oversaw nearly all of his activities.\nMoctezuma repeatedly protected the Spaniards against potential threats using the little power he had left, either under the threat of the Spanish or by his own will, such as during the succession crisis in Texcoco mentioned above, when he ordered for the ruler of Texcoco, Cacamatzin, to be arrested as he was planning to form an army to attack the Spaniards.\nThe Aztec nobility reportedly became increasingly displeased with the large Spanish army staying in Tenochtitl\u00e1n, and Moctezuma told Cort\u00e9s that it would be best if they left. Shortly thereafter, in April 1520, Cort\u00e9s left to fight P\u00e1nfilo de Narv\u00e1ez, who had landed in Mexico to arrest Cort\u00e9s. During his absence, tensions between Spaniards and Aztecs exploded into the Massacre in the Great Temple, and Moctezuma became a hostage used by the Spaniards to ensure their security.\nDeath.\nIn the subsequent battles with the Spaniards after Cort\u00e9s' return, Moctezuma was killed. The details of his death are unknown, with different versions of his demise given by different sources.\nIn his , Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo states that on 29 June 1520, the Spanish forced Moctezuma to appear on the balcony of his palace, appealing to his countrymen to retreat. Four leaders of the Aztec army met with Moctezuma to talk, urging their countrymen to cease their constant firing upon the stronghold for a time. D\u00edaz states: \"Many of the Mexican Chieftains and Captains knew him well and at once ordered their people to be silent and not to discharge darts, stones or arrows, and four of them reached a spot where Montezuma [Moctezuma] could speak to them.\"\nD\u00edaz alleges that the Aztecs informed Moctezuma that a relative of his had risen to the throne and ordered their attack to continue until all of the Spanish were annihilated, but expressed remorse at Moctezuma's captivity and stated that they intended to revere him even more if they could rescue him. Regardless of the earlier orders to hold fire, however, the discussion between Moctezuma and the Aztec leaders was immediately followed by an outbreak of violence. The Aztecs, disgusted by the actions of their leader, renounced Moctezuma and named his brother Cuitl\u00e1huac \"tlatoani\" in his place. To pacify his people, and undoubtedly pressured by the Spanish, Moctezuma spoke to a crowd but was struck dead by a rock. D\u00edaz gives this account:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They had hardly finished this speech when suddenly such a shower of stones and darts were discharged that (our men who were shielding him having neglected for a moment their duty because they saw how the attack ceased while he spoke to them) he was hit by three stones, one on the head, another on the arm and another on the leg, and although they begged him to have the wounds dressed and to take food, and spoke kind words to him about it, he would not. Indeed, when we least expected it, they came to say that he was dead.\nFranciscan friar Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan oversaw the recording of two versions of the conquest of the Aztec Empire from the Tenochtitl\u00e1n-Tlatelolco viewpoint. Book 12 of the Florentine Codex, which indigenous scholars composed under Sahag\u00fan's tutelage, is an illustrative, Spanish and Nahuatl account of the Conquest which attributes Moctezuma II's death to Spanish conquistadors. According to the Codex, the bodies of Moctezuma and Itzquauhtzin were cast out of the Palace by the Spanish; the body of Moctezuma was gathered up and cremated at Copulco.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And four days after they had been hurled from the [pyramid] temple, [the Spaniards] came to cast away [the bodies of] Moctezuma and Itzquauhtzin, who had died, at the water's edge at a place called Teoayoc. For at that place there was the image of a turtle carved of stone; the stone had an appearance like that of a turtle.\n\"History of the Indies of New Spain\" by Dominican friar Diego Dur\u00e1n references both Spanish and indigenous accounts of Moctezuma II's death. Dur\u00e1n notes that Spanish historians and the former conquistador he interviewed recall Moctezuma dying to Aztec projectiles. However, his indigenous text and a historical informant claimed that Cort\u00e9s' forces stabbed Moctezuma to death. In other indigenous annals, the Aztecs found Moctezuma strangled to death in his palace.\nAftermath.\nThe Spaniards were forced to flee the city and they took refuge in Tlaxcala and signed a treaty with the natives there to conquer Tenochtitl\u00e1n, offering the Tlaxcalans control of Tenochtitl\u00e1n and freedom from any kind of tribute.\nMoctezuma was then succeeded by his brother Cuitl\u00e1huac, who died shortly afterwards during a smallpox epidemic. He was succeeded by his adolescent nephew, Cuauht\u00e9moc. During the siege of the city, the sons of Moctezuma were murdered by the Aztecs, possibly because they wanted to surrender. By the following year, the Aztec Empire had fallen to an army of Spanish and their Native American allies, primarily Tlaxcalans, who were traditional enemies of the Aztecs.\nContemporary depictions.\nBernal D\u00edaz del Castillo.\nThe firsthand account of Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo's \"True History of the Conquest of New Spain\" paints a portrait of a noble leader who struggles to maintain order in his kingdom after he is taken prisoner by Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s. In his first description of Moctezuma, D\u00edaz del Castillo writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen Moctezuma was allegedly killed by being stoned to death by his people, \"Cort\u00e9s and all of us captains and soldiers wept for him, and there was no one among us that knew him and had dealings with him who did not mourn him as if he were our father, which was not surprising since he was so good. It was stated that he had reigned for seventeen years, and was the best king they ever had in Mexico, and that he had personally triumphed in three wars against countries he had subjugated. I have spoken of the sorrow we all felt when we saw that Montezuma was dead. We even blamed the Mercedarian friar for not having persuaded him to become a Christian.\"\nHern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s.\nUnlike Bernal D\u00edaz, who was recording his memories many years after the fact, Cort\u00e9s wrote his (\"Letters from Mexico\") to justify his actions to the Spanish Crown. His prose is characterized by simple descriptions and explanations, along with frequent personal addresses to the King. In his Second Letter, Cort\u00e9s describes his first encounter with Moctezuma thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMoctezuma [\"sic\"] came to greet us and with him some two hundred lords, all barefoot and dressed in a different costume, but also very rich in their way and more so than the others. They came in two columns, pressed very close to the walls of the street, which is very wide and beautiful and so straight that you can see from one end to the other. Moctezuma came down the middle of this street with two chiefs, one on his right hand and the other on his left. And they were all dressed alike except that Moctezuma wore sandals whereas the others went barefoot, and they held his arm on either side.\nAnthony Pagden and Eulalia Guzm\u00e1n have pointed out the Biblical messages that Cort\u00e9s seems to ascribe to Moctezuma's retelling of the legend of Quetzalcoatl as a vengeful Messiah who would return to rule over the Mexica. Pagden has written that \"There is no preconquest tradition which places Quetzalcoatl in this role, and it seems possible therefore that it was elaborated by Sahag\u00fan and Motolin\u00eda from informants who themselves had partially lost contact with their traditional tribal histories\".\nBernardino de Sahag\u00fan.\nThe Florentine Codex, made by Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan and indigenous scholars under his tutelage, relied on native informants from Tlatelolco and generally portrays Tlatelolco and Tlatelolcan rulers in a favorable light relative to those of Tenochtitlan. Historian Matthew Restall claims that the Codex depicts Moctezuma as weak-willed, superstitious, and indulgent. James Lockhart suggests that Moctezuma fills the role of a scapegoat for the Aztec defeat.\nOther historians have noted that the Codex may not necessarily cast Moctezuma as cowardly and responsible for Spanish colonization. Rebecca Dufendach argues that the Codex reflects the native informants' uniquely indigenous manner of portraying leaders who suffered from poor health brought on by fright.\nFernando Alvarado Tezoz\u00f3moc.\nFernando Alvarado Tezoz\u00f3moc, who may have written the , was possibly a grandson of Moctezuma II. His chronicle may relate mostly to the genealogy of the Aztec rulers. He described Moctezuma's issue and estimated them to be nineteen \u2013 eleven sons and eight daughters.\nDepiction in early post-conquest literature.\nSome of the Aztec stories about Moctezuma describe him as being fearful of the Spanish newcomers, and some sources, such as the Florentine Codex, comment that the Aztecs believed the Spaniards to be gods and Cort\u00e9s to be the returned god Quetzalcoatl. The veracity of this claim is difficult to ascertain, though some recent ethnohistorians specializing in early Spanish/Nahua relations have discarded it as post-conquest mythicalization.\nMuch of the idea of Cort\u00e9s being seen as a deity can be traced back to the Florentine Codex, written some 50 years after the conquest. In the codex's description of the first meeting between Moctezuma and Cort\u00e9s, the Aztec ruler is described as giving a prepared speech in classical oratorical Nahuatl, a speech which as described verbatim in the codex (written by Sahag\u00fan's Tlatelolcan informants) included such prostrate declarations of divine or near-divine admiration as \"You have graciously come on earth, you have graciously approached your water, your high place of Mexico, you have come down to your mat, your throne, which I have briefly kept for you, I who used to keep it for you\", and, \"You have graciously arrived, you have known pain, you have known weariness, now come on earth, take your rest, enter into your palace, rest your limbs; may our lords come on earth.\" While some historians such as Warren H. Carroll consider this as evidence that Moctezuma was at least open to the possibility that the Spaniards were divinely sent based on the Quetzalcoatl legend, others such as Matthew Restall argue that Moctezuma politely offered his throne to Cort\u00e9s (if indeed he did ever give the speech as reported) may well have been meant as the exact opposite of what it was taken to mean, as politeness in Aztec culture was a way to assert dominance and show superiority. Other parties have also propagated the idea that the Native Americans believed the conquistadors to be gods, most notably the historians of the Franciscan order such as Fray Ger\u00f3nimo de Mendieta. Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan, who compiled the Florentine Codex, was also a Franciscan priest.\nIndigenous accounts of omens and Moctezuma's beliefs.\nBernardino de Sahag\u00fan (1499\u20131590) includes in Book 12 of the Florentine Codex eight events said to have occurred before the arrival of the Spanish. These were purportedly interpreted as signs of a possible disaster, e.g. a comet, the burning of a temple, a crying ghostly woman, and others. Some speculate that the Aztecs were particularly susceptible to such ideas of doom and disaster because the particular year in which the Spanish arrived coincided with a \"tying of years\" ceremony at the end of a 52-year cycle in the Aztec calendar, which in Aztec belief was linked to changes, rebirth, and dangerous events. The belief of the Aztecs being rendered passive by their superstition is referred to by Matthew Restall as part of \"The Myth of Native Desolation\" to which he dedicates chapter 6 in his book \"Seven Myths of the Spanish Conquest\". These legends are likely a part of the post-conquest rationalization by the Aztecs of their defeat, and serve to show Moctezuma as indecisive, vain, and superstitious, and ultimately the cause of the fall of the Aztec Empire.\nAccording to 16th-century Spanish historian Diego Dur\u00e1n, who was one of the most important chroniclers of the indigenous stories of the empire, Nezahualpilli was among those who informed Moctezuma of the imminent destruction of the empire by a foreign invader, warning him that omens confirming his fears will soon appear. This warning caused Moctezuma great fear and he made a series of erratic decisions immediately after, such as severe punishments against his soldiers for disappointing results after battles against the Tlaxcalans.\nEthnohistorian Susan Gillespie has argued that the Nahua understanding of history as repeating itself in cycles also led to a subsequent rationalization of the events of the conquests. In this interpretation, the description of Moctezuma, the final ruler of the Aztec Empire before the Spanish conquest, was tailored to fit the role of earlier rulers of ending dynasties\u2014for example, Quetzalcoatl, the mythical last ruler of the Toltecs. In any case it is within the realm of possibility that the description of Moctezuma in post-conquest sources was coloured by his role as a monumental closing figure of Aztec history.\nPersonal life.\nWives, concubines, and children.\nMoctezuma had numerous wives and concubines by whom he fathered an enormous family, but only two women held the position of queen \u2013 Tlapalizquixochtzin and Teotlalco. His partnership with Tlapalizquixochtzin, daughter of Matlaccoatzin of Ecatepec, also made him king consort of Ecatepec since she was queen of that city. However, Spanish accounts describe that very few people in Mexico knew that these two women held such positions of power, some of those who knew being a few of his close servants.\nOf his many wives may be named the princesses Teitlalco, Acatlan, and Miahuaxochitl, of whom the first named appears to have been the only legitimate consort. By her, he left a son, Chimalpopoca, who fell during the Noche Triste, and a daughter, Tecuichpoch, later baptized as Isabel Moctezuma. By the Princess Acatlan were left two daughters, baptized as Maria and Mariana (also known as Leonor); the latter alone left offspring, from whom descends the Sotelo-Montezuma family.\nThough the exact number of his children is unknown and the names of most of them have been lost to history, according to a Spanish chronicler, by the time he was taken captive, Moctezuma had fathered 100 children and fifty of his wives and concubines were then in some stage of pregnancy, though this estimate may have been exaggerated. As Aztec culture made class distinctions between the children of senior wives, lesser wives, and concubines, not all of his children were considered equal in nobility or inheritance rights. Among his many children were Princess Isabel Moctezuma, Princess Mariana Leonor Moctezuma, and sons Chimalpopoca (not to be confused with the previous \"huey tlatoani\") and Tlaltecatzin. Noteworthy is also Francisca de Moctezuma, his daughter by Tlapalizquixochtzin, Queen-regant of Ecatepec. She married Don Diego de Alvarado Huanitzin, the first governor of Mexico City.\nActivities.\nMoctezuma was physically fit and practised a variety of sports, among them archery and swimming. He was well-trained in the arts of war, as he was experienced on the battlefield from an early age.\nAmong the sports he practised, he was an active hunter, and often used to hunt for deer, rabbits, and various birds in a certain section of a forest (likely the Bosque de Chapultepec) that was exclusive to him and whomever he invited. It was prohibited for anyone without permission to enter, and allegedly any trespassers would be put to death. He also used to invite servants to this forest, should he order for certain animals to be hunted for him, which would often be done for the entertainment of his guests.\nMoctezuma was recorded to have been heavily obsessed with cleanliness and personal hygiene, such as bathing multiple times a day in his private pool; as well as not wearing the same clothes every day.\nA Spanish soldier accompanying Hernan Cort\u00e9s during the conquest of the Aztec Empire reported that when Moctezuma II dined, he took no other beverage than chocolate, served in a golden goblet. Moctezuma was passionate about chocolate; he had it flavoured with vanilla or other spices such as chili peppers, and his chocolate was whipped into a froth that dissolved in the mouth. No fewer than 60 portions each day reportedly may have been consumed by Moctezuma II, and 2,000 more by the nobles of his court.\nLegacy.\nDescendants in Mexico and the Spanish nobility.\nSeveral lines of descendants exist in Mexico and Spain through Moctezuma II's son and daughters, notably Tlacahuepan Ihualicahuaca, or Pedro Moctezuma, and Tecuichpoch Ixcaxochitzin, or Isabel Moctezuma. Following the conquest, Moctezuma's daughter, Techichpotzin (or Tecuichpoch), became known as Isabel Moctezuma and was given a large estate by Cort\u00e9s, who also fathered a child by her, Leonor Cort\u00e9s Moctezuma, who in turn was the mother of Isabel de Tolosa Cort\u00e9s de Moctezuma. Isabel married consecutively to Cuauht\u00e9moc (the last Mexican sovereign), to a conquistador in Cort\u00e9s' original group, Alonso Grado (died c.\u00a01527), a \"poblador\" (a Spaniard who had arrived after the fall of Tenochtitl\u00e1n), to Pedro Andrade Gallego (died c.\u00a01531), and to conquistador Juan Cano de Saavedra, who survived her. She had children by the latter two, from whom descend the illustrious families of Andrade-Montezuma and Cano-Montezuma. A nephew of Moctezuma II was Diego de Alvarado Huanitzin.\nA further line of descendants originates with Do\u00f1a Francisca Moctezuma, the daughter of Moctezuma II. and Tlapalizquixochtzin, the Queen regnant of Ecatepec. Her grandson Don Pedro Cort\u00e9s Tetlepanquetzatzin de Tlacopan - his grandfather and husband of Do\u00f1a Francisca Moctezuma being Don Diego de Alvarado Huanitzin, King of Ecatepec and High-King of Tenochtitlan, later on its first governor under Spanish rule - married Ana de Chilapa, a direct descendant from the rulers of Chilapa, Coyoac\u00e1n, Xochimilco, Texcoco and also the High-King Axay\u00e1catl. Her great-grandson Don Joseph Tesif\u00f3n Moctezuma, Cacique de Chilapa, married a daughter of Don Antonio de Ordaz Villag\u00f3mez, the second encomendero of Chilapa, who in turn descended from the House of Ponce de Le\u00f3n. The offspring from this marriage thus claim descent not only from several Mexica royal houses but also the Kings of Leon and Castilla. Agust\u00edn Moctezuma, the grandson of Joseph Tesif\u00f3n Moctezuma de Chilapa, married Mar\u00eda Antonia Guerrero D\u00e1vila, a member of the Guerrero-D\u00e1vila family. The founders of this family Juan Guerrero de Luna and Beatriz G\u00f3mez D\u00e1vila were offspring of \"conquistadores\" and together with their children have established several mayorazgos in Mexico incorporating also the inheritance of Alonso \u201cEl Rico\u201d de Villaseca, one of the largest fortunes at that time. Their main seat were the Houses of the Mayorazgo de Guerrero in Mexico City. Thus, the Cacicazgo of Chilapa, held by old Mexica royalty, and one of the 16th century Mayorazgos of the Spanish nobility in New Spain, were merged within the House of Guerrero-D\u00e1vila-Moctezuma. Today, descendants of this branch can be found in Chilapa and Mexico City, the latter (for example the families Sandoval-Alvear and Mariscal-Alvear) being mostly descendants of Roque de Alvear y Herrera and Maria de la Luz Guerrero D\u00e1vila Moctezuma. These two played a prominent role in an infamous trial concerning the control over the Mayorazgo Guerrero-D\u00e1vila in 1775\u20131777.\nThe grandson of Moctezuma II, Pedro's son, Ihuitemotzin, baptized as Diego Luis de Moctezuma, was brought to Spain by King Philip II. There he married Francisca de la Cueva de Valenzuela. In 1627, their son Pedro Tesif\u00f3n de Moctezuma was given the title \"Count of Moctezuma\" (later altered to \"Moctezuma de Tultengo\") and thus became part of the Spanish nobility. In 1766, the holder of the title became a Grandee of Spain. In 1865 (coincidentally during the Second Mexican Empire), the title, which was held by Antonio Mar\u00eda Moctezuma-Marcilla de Teruel y Navarro, 14th Count of Moctezuma de Tultengo, was elevated to that of a duke, thus becoming \"Duke of Moctezuma\", with \"de Tultengo\" again added in 1992 by Juan Carlos I.\nDescendants of Pedro Tesif\u00f3n de Moctezuma included (through an illegitimate child of his son Diego Luis) General Jer\u00f3nimo Gir\u00f3n-Moctezuma, 3rd Marquis de las Amarillas (1741\u20131819), a ninth-generation descendant of Moctezuma II, who was commander of the Spanish forces at the Battle of Fort Charlotte, and his grandson, Francisco Javier Gir\u00f3n y Ezpeleta, 2nd Duke of Ahumada and 5th Marquess of the Amarillas who was the founder of the Guardia Civil in Spain. Other holders of Spanish noble titles that descend from the Aztec emperor include Dukes of Atrisco. Researchers believe an additional line of descent exists in Mexico through Ana Francisca de Gabadi y Moctezuma, the wife of Basque nobleman, and early colonist and settler in Mexico, Don Lope Ruiz de Esparza. This Ana Francisca de Gabadi y Moctezuma was the daughter of Mart\u00edn Navarro and Petronila de Moctezuma, believed by some experts to be a direct lineal descendant of Moctezuma II (documental evidence has not been found yet to support this).\nNotable descendants from this line include Mexican politicians and philanthropists, Secretary Gerardo Ruiz de Esparza and Luis Rub\u00e9n (n\u00e9 Valadez Bourbon) of the influential Macias-Valadez in the state of Jalisco, Mexico. According to family historian Blanca Barragan Moctezuma, there are between 600 and 700 living descendants of Emperor Moctezuma in Mexico and 350 living in Spain as of 2020. Another notable descendant is Estaban Moctezuma, who served as Secretary of Public Education of the Government of Mexico.\nIndigenous mythology and folklore.\nMany indigenous peoples in Mexico are reported to worship deities named after the Aztec ruler, and often a part of the myth is that someday the deified Moctezuma shall return to vindicate his people. In Mexico, the contemporary Pames, Otomi, Tepehu\u00e1n, Totonac, and Nahua peoples are reported to worship earth deities named after Moctezuma. His name also appears in Tzotzil Maya ritual in Zinacant\u00e1n where dancers dressed as a rain god are called \"Moctezumas\".\nHubert Howe Bancroft, writing in the 19th century (\"Native Races\", Volume 3), speculated that the name of the historical Aztec emperor Moctezuma had been used to refer to a combination of different cultural heroes who were united under the name of a particular salient representative of Mesoamerican identity.\nSymbol of indigenous leadership.\nAs a symbol of resistance against the Spanish, the name of Moctezuma has been invoked in several indigenous rebellions. One such example was the rebellion of the Virgin Cult in Chiapas in 1721, where the followers of the Virgin Mary rebelled against the Spanish after having been told by an apparition of the virgin that Moctezuma would be resuscitated to assist them against their Spanish oppressors. In the Quisteil rebellion of the Yucatec Maya in 1761, the rebel leader Jacinto Canek reportedly called himself \"Little Montezuma\".\nPortrayals and cultural references.\nArt, music, and literature.\nThe Aztec emperor is the title character in several 18th-century operas: \"Motezuma\" (1733) by Antonio Vivaldi; \"Motezuma\" (1771) by Josef Myslive\u010dek; \"Montezuma\" (1755) by Carl Heinrich Graun; and \"Montesuma\" (1781) by Niccol\u00f2 Antonio Zingarelli. He is also the subject of Roger Sessions' dodecaphonic opera \"Montezuma\" (1963), and the protagonist in the modern opera (2005) by Italian composer Lorenzo Ferrero, where his part is written in the Nahuatl language.\nNumerous other works of popular culture have mentioned or referred to Moctezuma:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20749", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20749", "title": "Malinche", "text": ""}
{"id": "20750", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20750", "title": "Malintzin", "text": ""}
{"id": "20751", "revid": "18054835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20751", "title": "Mustafa Alt\u0131oklar", "text": "Turkish film director, producer and screenwriter\nMustafa Alt\u0131oklar (born 1958) is a Turkish film director, producer and screenwriter. He is the chairman of the Turkish Film Directors Association and is fluent in English. Although he graduated from the medical faculty of Istanbul University and specialised in physiotherapy, he decided to pursue a career as a director, especially after the success of his short film \"The Scar\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20752", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20752", "title": "Mevlana", "text": ""}
{"id": "20753", "revid": "40993790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20753", "title": "Manitoba, towns and cities", "text": ""}
{"id": "20756", "revid": "14179551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20756", "title": "Mickey Hart", "text": "American percussionist (born 1943)\nMickey Hart (born Michael Steven Hartman, September 11, 1943) is an American percussionist. He is best known as one of the two drummers of the rock band Grateful Dead. He was a member of the Grateful Dead from September 1967 until February 1971, and again from October 1974 until their final show in July 1995. He and fellow Dead drummer Bill Kreutzmann earned the nickname \"the rhythm devils\".\nEarly life and education.\nMichael Steven Hartman was born in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, New York. He was raised in the nearby suburban community of Inwood, New York, by his mother, Leah, a drummer, gown maker and bookkeeper. His father Lenny Hart, a champion rudimental drummer, had abandoned his family when the younger Hart was a toddler. Although Hart (who was hyperactive and not academically inclined) became interested in percussion as a grade school student, his interest intensified after seeing his father's picture in a newsreel documenting the 1939 World's Fair. Shortly thereafter, he discovered a practice pad and a pair of snakewood sticks that belonged to his father. \"From the age of ten,\" he recalled, \"all I did was drum.\"\nHe attended Lawrence High School in Cedarhurst, New York. Hart would later recall that many champion rudimental drummers attended his high school; this inspired him to ascend to the first chair in the All State Band as a pupil of Arthur Jones, who served as a father figure to him and ensured that he was not suspended for neglecting his other classes.\nWhile employed as a soda jerk at El Patio, a jazz club in Atlantic Beach, New York, he was influenced by Tito Puente's regular appearances. A few months out of high school, he discovered the work of Nigerian drummer Babatunde Olatunji, another formative influence. Olatunji later taught and collaborated with Hart.\nHart dropped out of high school as a senior. Impressed by its musical pedigree, he enlisted in the United States Air Force in 1961. He served as a drummer in The Airmen of Note, an elite big band unit in the United States Air Force Band modeled after Glenn Miller's celebrated Army Air Forces Band.\nFor three and a half years he was stationed throughout Europe, where he also claimed to have taught \"combative measures\" (most notably judo, in which he had attained a black belt) to units of the Strategic Air Command and other units in Europe and Africa. During a tour in Spain, he reportedly sat in with a variety of notable jazz musicians (including Gerry Mulligan and Count Basie) in addition to performing in various ensembles (spanning the gamut from small jazz combos to marching bands) and on recording sessions for local pop stars. Hart would later intimate in a 1972 interview that his Airmen of Note assignment served as a \"cover\" for his instructive duties. While in the Air Force, he co-founded Joe and the Jaguars (alternatively billed as The Jaguars) with a fellow serviceman, guitarist Joe Bennett. Following his 1965 discharge, Hart briefly returned to the New York metropolitan area, where he filled in for the regular drummer in a \"staid fox-trot band\" as a member of the local musician's union.\nWhile stationed in southern California, he had discovered that his father (by then employed as a savings and loan association executive in Los Angeles) was still involved in the drumming community as an endorser for Remo. Founder Remo Belli facilitated an introduction before Hart was reassigned to Spain, but the elder Hart soon disappeared. A post-discharge reconciliation attempt (also mediated by Belli) proved to be more successful. Shortly thereafter, father and son established the Hart Music Center in San Carlos, California. In late 1965 or early 1966, Hart performed in an early iteration of William Penn and His Pals prior to Gregg Rolie's membership and the recording of the garage rock classic \"Swami.\" Later in 1966, Hart and Bennett briefly resumed their collaboration before the latter reenlisted for a tour of duty in Vietnam.\nBy the end of the year, Hart had moved in with Michael Hinton, a student and friend who would accompany him to a Count Basie Orchestra performance at The Fillmore in mid-1967. At the concert, Hart help fulfill Grateful Dead drummer Bill Kreutzmann's request to meet Basie Orchestra drummer Sonny Payne, leading to an informal tutorial between Hart and Kreutzmann and his eventual introduction to the Grateful Dead.\nCareer.\nHart joined the Grateful Dead in September 1967. His interests in polyrhythmic rudiments and exotic percussion were integral to the band's arrangements in the period that archivist Dick Latvala would subsequently characterize as the \"primal Dead era\" of 1968\u20131969. However, he left by mutual agreement in February 1971, extricating himself after his father (who briefly managed the group) embezzled $70,000 from the band. In his 2015 memoir, Kreutzmann divulged that Hart's use of heroin and other \"dark drugs\" had accelerated in the wake of the embezzlement and impacted his contributions to the group, also contributing to his departure: \"Mickey wasn't able to play at the level he was capable of and it was beginning to affect our performances. He was getting really spacey and just getting so far out there that he wasn't able to deliver the music. It became impossible for me to play with him. It wasn't out of anger or meanness, but we had to address it and deal with it. So our brother Mickey left the band and retreated to his ranch in Novato and it really strained our relationship for a while, sad to say.\"\nDuring his sabbatical, he released the album \"Rolling Thunder\" in 1972. Two additional solo albums (including an ambient music project that was envisaged as the soundtrack for \"The Silent Flute\", a screenplay co-written by Bruce Lee, James Coburn and Stirling Silliphant that was ultimately filmed in 1978 as the David Carradine vehicle \"Circle of Iron\") were completed but rejected by Warner Brothers due to the label's increasingly strained relationship with the Grateful Dead. Hart's home recording studio proved to be a haven for the more idiosyncratic endeavors pursued by various band members, and he continued to collaborate with his former bandmates on various projects, most notably Robert Hunter's \"Tales of the Great Rum Runners\" (1974) and Ned Lagin's \"Seastones\" (1975).\nHe returned to the Dead for their final pre-hiatus concert in October 1974 and was formally reinstated by the beginning of the group's 1976 tour. He remained with the group until their official dissolution in 1995. Hart's collaboration with the remaining members of the Grateful Dead has continued with The Other Ones, The Dead and Dead &amp; Company.\nAlongside his work with the Grateful Dead, Hart has performed as a solo artist, percussionist, and the author of several books. In these endeavors he has pursued a lifelong interest in ethnomusicology and world music.\nHart was influential in recording global musical traditions on the verge of possible extinction, working with archivists and ethnomusicologists at both the American Folklife Center at the Library of Congress and the Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage at the Smithsonian Institution. He is on the Board of Trustees of the American Folklife Center and has been a spokesperson for the \"Save Our Sounds\" audio preservation initiative. He also serves on the Library of Congress National Recorded Sound Preservation Board and is known for reissues and other recordings with historical and cultural value.\nIn 1991, Hart produced the album \"Planet Drum\", which remained at number one on the \"Billboard\" World Music chart for 26 weeks, and received the first ever Grammy Award for Best World Music Album.\nHart has written books on the history and traditions of drumming throughout history. His solo recordings (featuring a variety of guest musicians) are percussive but verge on New Age.\nIn 1994, Hart was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of the Grateful Dead.\nIn 2000, Hart became a member of the board of directors of the Institute for Music and Neurologic Function, a nonprofit organization that studies the healing power of music \u2013 continuing his investigation into the connection between healing and rhythm, and the neural basis of rhythm. In 2003, he was honored with the organization's Music Has Power Award, recognizing his advocacy and continuous commitment to raising public awareness of the positive effect of music.\nHart was also a judge for the 3rd annual Independent Music Awards to support independent artists' careers.\nAfter the death of Jerry Garcia and the consequent dissolution of the Grateful Dead in 1995, Hart continued to play music with various groups including members of the Grateful Dead. In the 1996 Furthur Festival, Mickey Hart's Mystery Box played, as did Bob Weir's band, Ratdog.\nIn 2005, Hart and the members of the band Particle joined to create the Hydra Project.\nDuring 2006, Hart teamed up with fellow Grateful Dead bandmate Bill Kreutzmann, Phish bassist Mike Gordon and former Other Ones lead guitarist Steve Kimock, to form the Rhythm Devils, a nickname that refers to Hart and Kreutzmann's drum duets and improvisation. The band features songs from their respective repertoires as well as new songs written by Jerry Garcia's songwriting companion Robert Hunter. The Rhythm Devils announced their first tour in 2006, which ended at the popular Vegoose festival in Las Vegas, Nevada over the Halloween weekend.\nIn June and July 2008, Hart led the Mickey Hart Band on a US concert tour. The band consists of Hart, Steve Kimock on guitar and pedal steel guitar, George Porter Jr. on bass, Kyle Hollingsworth on keyboards, Sikiru Adepoju on talking drum, Walfredo Reyes, Jr. on drums, and Jen Durkin on vocals.\nIn 2010 Hart debuted \"Rhythms of the Universe,\" a composition based on a variety of astrophysical data. The composition represents a collaboration between scientist and artist, using their own sophisticated tools. Nobel Laureate in physics George Smoot from the University of California, Berkeley, and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL), and Keith Jackson, a computer scientist and musician also from LBNL, provided some of the data for the project. The final result comprises a \"musical history of the universe\", from the Big Bang onwards through galaxy and star formation, up until modern times, including images from the Hubble Space Telescope and rhythms derived from the cosmic microwave background radiation, supernovae, quasars, and many other astrophysical phenomena. The work premiered at the conference \"Cosmology on the Beach\" in Playa del Carmen in January 2010.\nIn April 2010, it was announced that Rhythm Devils would tour in the summer of 2010 with a new line-up including Hart and Bill Kreutzmann (assorted percussion), Keller Williams (guitar, vocals), Sikiru Adepoju (talking drum), Davy Knowles (guitar, vocals), and Andy Hess (bass).\nThe Rhythm Devils did only one show in 2011, at the Gathering of the Vibes Music Festival in Bridgeport, Connecticut. This version of the band was Hart, Kreutzmann, Keller Williams, Sikiru, Steve Kimock and Reed Mathis of Tea Leaf Green on bass.\nIn 2011 Hart debuted a new version of the Mickey Hart Band. This lineup included Tim Hockenberry (vocals, keyboards, trombone, saxophone, other instruments), Crystal Monee Hall (vocals, guitar, hand percussion), Ben Yonas (keyboards), Gawain Mathews (guitar), Sikiru Adepoju (talking drum, djembe, shakers), Ian \"Inkx\" Herman (drums), Greg Ellis (percussion), Vir McCoy (bass). The band played a few shows in August 2011 on the east and west coasts of the United States. In November and December 2011, the Mickey Hart Band did a 17-date tour with a slightly modified lineup. McCoy and Ellis were not in this lineup, and Widespread Panic band member Dave Schools joined the band as their bass player for the tour.\nOn October 11, 2011, Smithsonian Folkways released \"The Mickey Hart Collection\". Comprising 25 albums, the series includes music from regions that span the globe, including the Sudan, Nigeria, Tibet, Indonesia, Latvia, and Brazil.\nIn August 2013, the Mickey Hart Band embarked upon a tour with the Tea Leaf Trio, which includes three members of the band Tea Leaf Green, in support of the band's album \"Superorganism\".\nOn September 29, 2013, the completed version of his and George Smoot's film \"Rhythms of the Universe\" premiered at the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C.\nIn the summer of 2015, the surviving members of the Grateful Dead (Bob Weir, Phil Lesh, Bill Kreutzmann and Mickey Hart), joined by Trey Anastasio, Bruce Hornsby and Jeff Chimenti, performed a series of concerts to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Grateful Dead. The performances took place at Santa Clara's Levi Stadium on June 27 and 28, 2015 and Chicago's Soldier Field on July 3, 4 and 5, 2015. These performances marked the first time Weir, Lesh, Kreutzmann and Hart performed together since the Dead's 2009 tour and was publicized as the final time the musicians will all perform together.\nAlso in 2015, Hart began touring with Dead &amp; Company, a band consisting of former Grateful Dead members Weir, Hart and Kreutzmann, along with John Mayer (guitar), Oteil Burbridge (bass), and Jeff Chimenti (keyboards). The band began touring in late 2015 and have conducted multiple tours since then. In 2017, he released \"RAMU\", which featured contributions from both his long-time collaborators Steve Kimock and Sikiru Adepoju as well as Avey Tare and Tank Ball, among others.\nInstruments played.\nHart plays, or has played, drum set, RAMU, gong, tubular bells, tambourine, timpani, bongos, timbales, maracas, bass drum, snare drum, triangle, g\u00fciro, djembe, castanets, didgeridoo, glockenspiel, cymbals, surdo, saron, beats, tar, berimbau, kalimba, cowbell, rattle, shekere, rainstick, agogo bells, bells, wood block, taragat, balafon, tarang, gourd, clacker, bombo, dumbek, tom-toms, caxixi, water gong, talking drum, blaster beam, theremin, and pan flute.\nPersonal life.\nHart has been married since 1990 to lawyer, environmental activist and former Sonoma County (California) Regional Parks Director Caryl Ohrbach Hart, with whom he has a daughter Reya. Hart also has a son Taro (born January 13, 1983) from his previous marriage to Mary Holloway. He had Taro's heartbeat recorded \"in utero\" and used as the basis for the album \"Music to Be Born By\". He lives in Occidental, California. Hart is the only Jewish member of the Grateful Dead.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20757", "revid": "41163249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20757", "title": "Miguel de Icaza", "text": "Mexican free software developer (born 1972)\nMiguel de Icaza (born November 23, 1972) is a Mexican-American programmer and activist, best known for starting the GNOME, Mono, and Xamarin projects.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nDe Icaza was born in Mexico City and studied Mathematics at the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), but dropped out before getting a degree to work in IT. He came from a family of scientists in which his father is a physicist and his mother a biologist. He started writing free software in 1992.\nEarly software career.\nOne of the earliest pieces of software he wrote for Linux was the Midnight Commander file manager in 1994, a text-mode file manager. He was also one of the early contributors to the Wine project.\nHe worked with David S. Miller on the Linux SPARC port and wrote several of the video and network drivers in the port, as well as the libc ports to the platform. They both later worked on extending Linux for MIPS to run on SGI's Indy computers and wrote the original X drivers for the system. With Ingo Moln\u00e1r he wrote the original software implementation of RAID-1 and RAID-5 drivers of the Linux kernel.\nIn summer of 1997, he was interviewed by Microsoft for a job in the Internet Explorer Unix team (to work on a SPARC port), but lacked the university degree required to obtain a work H-1B visa. He said in an interview that he tried to persuade his interviewers to free the IE code even before Netscape did so with their own browser.\nGNOME, Ximian, Xamarin and Mono.\nDe Icaza started the GNOME project with Federico Mena in August 1997 to create a completely free desktop environment and component model for Linux and other Unix-like operating systems. He also created the GNOME spreadsheet program, Gnumeric.\nIn 1999, de Icaza, along with Nat Friedman, co-founded Helix Code, a GNOME-oriented free software company that employed a large number of other GNOME hackers. In 2001, Helix Code, later renamed Ximian, announced the Mono Project, to be led by de Icaza, with the goal to implement Microsoft's new .NET development platform on Linux and Unix-like platforms. In August 2003, Ximian was acquired by Novell. There, de Icaza was Vice President of Developer Platform.\nIn May 2011, de Icaza started Xamarin to replace MonoTouch and Mono for Android after Novell was bought by Attachmate and the projects were abandoned. Shortly afterwards, Xamarin and Novell reached an agreement where Xamarin took over the development and sales of these products.\nIn February 2016, Xamarin announced being acquired by Microsoft. One month later at the Microsoft Build conference, it was announced that the Mono Project would be relicensed to MIT, Visual Studio would include Xamarin (even the free versions) without restrictions, and Xamarin SDKs would be opensourced.\nAdvocacy of Microsoft open technologies.\nDe Icaza endorsed Microsoft's Office Open XML (OOXML) document standard, disagreeing with a lot of the widespread criticism in the open source and free-software community.\nHe also developed Mono \u2013 a free and open-source alternative to Microsoft's .NET Framework \u2013 for GNOME. This has raised much disagreement due to the patents that Microsoft holds on the .NET Framework.\nDe Icaza was criticized by Richard Stallman on the Software Freedom Day 2009, who labeled him as \"Traitor to the Free Software Community\". Icaza responded on his blog to Stallman with the remark that he believes in a \"world of possibility\" and that he is open for discussions on ways to improve the pool of open source and free software.\nPreference for Mac over Linux.\nIn August 2012, de Icaza criticized the Linux desktop as \"killed by Apple\". De Icaza specifically criticized a generally developer-focused culture, lack of backward compatibility, and fragmentation among the various Linux distributions. In March 2013, de Icaza announced on his personal blog that he regularly used macOS instead of Linux for desktop computing.\n.NET Foundation director.\nIn 2014 he joined Anders Hejlsberg on stage during the announcements of the .NET Foundation and the open sourcing of Microsoft's C# Compiler. He went on to serve on the board of directors of the .NET Foundation.\nLeaving Microsoft.\nIn March 2022 he announced he was leaving Microsoft and taking some time off.\nAwards and recognition.\nMiguel de Icaza has received the Free Software Foundation 1999 Award for the Advancement of Free Software, the MIT Technology Review Innovator of the Year Award 1999, and was named one of \"Time\" magazine's 100 innovators for the new century in September 2000.\nIn early 2010 he received a Microsoft MVP Award.\nIn March 2010, he was named as the fifth in the \"Most Powerful Voices in Open Source\" by MindTouch.\nPersonal life.\nDe Icaza has had cameo appearances in the 2001 motion pictures \"Antitrust\" and \"The Code.\"\nHe married Maria Laura Soares da Silva (now Maria Laura de Icaza) in 2003. They have three children. He has been living in the state of Massachusetts for 20 years.\nDe Icaza and his wife are critical of the actions of the state of Israel towards the Palestinians in the Middle East and has blogged about the subject and visited the area of conflict as well.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20759", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20759", "title": "Major scale", "text": "Musical scale made of seven notes\nThe major scale (or Ionian mode) is one of the most commonly used musical scales, especially in Western music. It is one of the diatonic scales. Like many musical scales, it is made up of seven notes: the eighth duplicates the first at double its frequency so that it is called a higher octave of the same note (from Latin \"octavus\", the eighth).\nThe simplest major scale to write is C major, the only major scale not requiring sharps or flats:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe major scale has a central importance in Western music, particularly that of the common practice period and in popular music.\nIn Carnatic music, it is known as \"Sankarabharanam\". In Hindustani classical music, it is known as \"Bilaval\".\nStructure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The intervals from the tonic (keynote) in an upward direction to the second, to the third, to the sixth, and to the seventh scale degrees of a major scale are called major.\nA major scale is a diatonic scale. The sequence of intervals between the notes of a major scale is:\n whole, whole, half, whole, whole, whole, half\nwhere \"whole\" stands for a whole tone (a red u-shaped curve in the figure), and \"half\" stands for a semitone (a red angled line in the figure).\nWhole steps and half steps are explained mathematically in a related article, Twelfth root of two. Notably, in terms of the sound frequency ratio in equal temperament, a whole tone has twice the sound frequency ratio of a semitone and an octave has twelve half steps (semitones) spaced equally. The sound frequency doubles for corresponding notes from one octave to the next. The ratio is 3/2 = 1.5 for a perfect fifth, for example from C to G on a major scale, and 5/4 = 1.25 for a major third, for example from C to E.\nA major scale may be seen as two identical tetrachords separated by a whole tone. Each tetrachord consists of two whole tones followed by a semitone (i.e. whole, whole, half).\nThe major scale is maximally even.\nScale degrees.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe scale degrees are:\nTriad qualities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe triads built on each scale degree follow a distinct pattern. The roman numeral analysis is shown in parentheses.\nSeventh chord qualities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe seventh chords built on each scale degree follow a distinct pattern. The roman numeral analysis is shown in parentheses.\nRelationship to major keys.\nIf a piece of music (or part of a piece of music) is in a major key, then the notes in the corresponding major scale are considered \"diatonic\" notes, while the notes \"outside\" the major scale are considered \"chromatic\" notes. Moreover, the key signature of the piece of music (or section) will generally reflect the accidentals in the corresponding major scale.\nFor instance, if a piece of music is in E\u266d major, then the seven pitches in the E\u266d major scale (E\u266d, F, G, A\u266d, B\u266d, C and D) are considered diatonic pitches, and the other five pitches (E\u266e, F\u266f/G\u266d, A\u266e, B\u266e, and C\u266f/D\u266d) are considered chromatic pitches. In this case, the key signature will have three flats (B\u266d, E\u266d, and A\u266d).\nThe figure below shows all 12 relative major and minor keys, with major keys on the outside and minor keys on the inside arranged around the circle of fifths.\nThe numbers inside the circle show the number of sharps or flats in the key signature, with the sharp keys going clockwise, and the flat keys counterclockwise from C major (which has no sharps or flats.) The circular arrangement depends on enharmonic relationships in the circle, usually reckoned at six sharps or flats for the major keys of F\u266f = G\u266d and D\u266f = E\u266d for minor keys. Seven sharps or flats make major keys (C\u266f major or C\u266d major) that may be more conveniently spelled with five flats or sharps (as D\u266d major or B major).\nBroader sense.\nThe term \"major scale\" is also used in the names of some other scales whose first, third, and fifth degrees form a major triad.\nThe harmonic major scale has a minor sixth. It differs from the harmonic minor scale only by raising the third degree.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe melodic major scale is the combined scale that goes as Ionian ascending and as Aeolian dominant descending. It differs from melodic minor scale only by raising the third degree to a major third.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe double harmonic major scale has a minor second and a minor sixth. It is the fifth mode of the Hungarian minor scale.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther notations and usage.\n(As shown in this ), When expressing the names of major scale keys as abbreviations, the alphabet of the corresponding tonic note name can be written in upper case to indicate only the tonic note name. For example, when expressing the English notation of C major, It can be abbreviated as 'C'. Plus, when expressing the names of minor scale keys as abbreviations, the Roman alphabet of the corresponding tonic note is sometimes lower case to indicate only the tonic note name. For example, when expressing the English notation of A minor, It is abbreviated as 'a'.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20760", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20760", "title": "Montenegro", "text": "Country in Southeast Europe\nMontenegro is a country in Southeast Europe, on the Balkan Peninsula. Its 25 municipalities have a total population of 633,158 people in an area of 13,883\u00a0km2 (5,360 sq mi). It is bordered by Serbia to the northeast, Bosnia and Herzegovina to the northwest, Kosovo to the east, Albania to the southeast, and Croatia to the west, and has a coastline along the Adriatic Sea to the southwest. The capital and largest city is Podgorica, while Cetinje is the Old Royal Capital and cultural centre.\nBefore the arrival of the Slav peoples in the Balkans in the 6th and 7th centuries CE, the area now known as Montenegro was inhabited principally by people known as Illyrians.\nDuring the Early Medieval period, three principalities were located on the territory of modern-day Montenegro: Duklja, roughly corresponding to the southern half; Travunia, the west; and Rascia proper, the north. The Principality of Zeta emerged in the 14th and 15th centuries. From the late 14th century to the late 18th century, large parts of southern Montenegro were ruled by the Venetian Republic and incorporated into Venetian Albania. The name \"Montenegro\" was first used to refer to the country in the late 15th century. After falling under Ottoman Empire rule, Montenegro gained semi-autonomy in 1696 under the rule of the House of Petrovi\u0107-Njego\u0161, first as a theocracy and later as a secular principality. Montenegro's independence was recognised by the Great Powers at the Congress of Berlin in 1878. In 1910, the country became a kingdom. After World War I, the kingdom became part of Yugoslavia. Following the breakup of Yugoslavia, the republics of Serbia and Montenegro together proclaimed a federation. In June 2006 Montenegro declared its independence following a referendum.\nMontenegro has an upper-middle-income economy, mostly service-based, and is in late transition to a market economy. It is a member of the United Nations, NATO, the World Trade Organization, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, the Council of Europe, and the Central European Free Trade Agreement. Montenegro is also a founding member of the Union for the Mediterranean, and has been in the process of joining the European Union since 2012.\nEtymology.\nMontenegro's ( ; / ; ) English name derives from a Venetian calque of the Montenegrin phrase \"Crna Gora\", meaning literally \"Black Mountain\", deriving from the appearance of Mount Lov\u0107en, which was covered in dense evergreen forests. \"Crna Gora\" was mentioned for the first time in edicts issued by Stefan Uro\u0161 I to the Serbian Orthodox Zeta Episcopate seat at Vranjina island in Lake Skadar. It came to denote the majority of contemporary Montenegro in the 15th century.\nModern-day Montenegro was more and more known by that name in the historical period following the fall of the Serbian Despotate in 1459. Originally, it had referred to only a small strip of land under the rule of the Pa\u0161trovi\u0107i tribe, but the name eventually came to be used for the wider mountainous region after the Crnojevi\u0107 noble family took power in Upper Zeta. The aforementioned region became known as \"Stara Crna Gora\" 'Old Montenegro' by the 19th century to distinguish the independent region from the neighbouring Ottoman-occupied Montenegrin territory of \"Brda\" (the \"Highlands\"). Montenegro further increased its size several times by the 20th century, as the result of wars against the Ottoman Empire, which saw the annexation of Old Herzegovina and parts of Metohija and southern Ra\u0161ka. Its borders have changed little since then, losing Metohija and gaining the Bay of Kotor.\nAfter the second session of the AVNOJ during World War II in Yugoslavia, the contemporary modern state of Montenegro was founded as the \"Federal State of Montenegro\" (Montenegrin: \u0421\u0430\u0432\u0435\u0437\u043d\u0430 \u0434\u0440\u0436\u0430\u0432\u0430 \u0426\u0440\u043d\u0435 \u0413\u043e\u0440\u0435 / \"Savezna dr\u017eava Crne Gore\") on 15 November 1943 within the Yugoslav Federation by the ZAVNOCGB. After the war, Montenegro became a republic under its name, the People's Republic of Montenegro (Montenegrin: \u041d\u0430\u0440\u043e\u0434\u043d\u0430 \u0420\u0435\u043f\u0443\u0431\u043b\u0438\u043a\u0430 \u0426\u0440\u043d\u0430 \u0413\u043e\u0440\u0430 / \"Narodna Republika Crna Gora\") on 29 November 1945. In 1963, it was renamed to the Socialist Republic of Montenegro (Montenegrin: \u0421\u043e\u0446\u0438\u0458\u0430\u043b\u0438\u0441\u0442\u0438\u0447\u043a\u0430 \u0420\u0435\u043f\u0443\u0431\u043b\u0438\u043a\u0430 \u0426\u0440\u043d\u0430 \u0413\u043e\u0440\u0430 / \"Socijalisti\u010dka Republika Crna Gora\"). As the breakup of Yugoslavia occurred, the SRCG was renamed to the Republic of Montenegro (Montenegrin: \u0420\u0435\u043f\u0443\u0431\u043b\u0438\u043a\u0430 \u0426\u0440\u043d\u0430 \u0413\u043e\u0440\u0430 / \"Republika Crna Gora\") on 27 April 1992 within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by removing the adjective \"socialist\" from the republic's title. Since 22 October 2007, a year after its independence, the name of the country became simply known as Montenegro. The country is known as \"Mali i Zi\" (lit. black mountain) in Albanian, while it is known as \"Crna Gora\" in Montenegrin, Serbian, Bosnian, and Croatian.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nModern-day Montenegro was part of Illyria and populated by the Indo-European-speaking Illyrians. The Illyrian kingdom was conquered by the Roman Republic in the Illyro-Roman Wars and the region was incorporated into the province of Illyricum (later Dalmatia and Praevalitana).\nArrival of the Slavs.\nThree principalities were located on the territory: Duklja, roughly corresponding to the southern half, Travunia, the west, and Ra\u0161ka, the north. Duklja gained its independence from the Byzantine Roman Empire in 1042. Over the next few decades, it expanded its territory to neighbouring Rascia and Bosnia, and also became recognised as a kingdom. Its power started declining at the beginning of the 12th century. After King Bodin's death (in 1101 or 1108), civil wars ensued. Duklja reached its zenith under Vojislav's son, Mihailo (1046\u20131081), and his grandson Constantine Bodin (1081\u20131101).\nAs the nobility fought for the throne, the kingdom was weakened, and by 1186, the territory of modern-day Montenegro became part of the state ruled by Stefan Nemanja and was a part of various state formations ruled by the Nemanji\u0107 dynasty for the next two centuries. After the Serbian Empire collapsed in the second half of the 14th century, the most powerful Zetan family, the Bal\u0161i\u0107s, became sovereigns of Zeta.\nBy the 13th century, \"Zeta\" had replaced \"Duklja\" when referring to the realm. In the late 14th century, southern Montenegro (Zeta) came under the rule of the Bal\u0161i\u0107 noble family, then the Crnojevi\u0107 noble family, and by the 15th century, Zeta was more often referred to as \"Crna Gora\".\nIn 1421, Zeta was annexed to the Serbian Despotate, but after 1455, another noble family from Zeta, the Crnojevi\u0107s, became sovereign rulers of the country, making it the last free monarchy of the Balkans before it fell to the Ottomans in 1496, and got annexed to the \"sanjak\" of Shkod\u00ebr. For a short time, Montenegro existed as a separate autonomous \"sanjak\" in 1514\u20131528 (Sanjak of Montenegro). Also, Old Herzegovina region was part of Sanjak of Herzegovina.\nEarly modern period.\nFrom 1392, numerous parts of the territory were controlled by Republic of Venice, including the city of Budva, in that time known as \"Budua\". \nThe Venetian territory was centred on the Bay of Kotor, and the Republic introduced governors who meddled in Montenegrin politics. Venice controlled territories in present-day Montenegro until its fall in 1797.\nLarge portions fell under the control of the Ottoman Empire from 1496 to 1878. In the 16th century, Montenegro developed a unique form of autonomy within the Ottoman Empire that permitted Montenegrin clans freedom from certain restrictions. Nevertheless, the Montenegrins were disgruntled with Ottoman rule, and in the 17th century, repeatedly rebelled, which culminated in the defeat of the Ottomans in the Great Turkish War at the end of that century.\nMontenegrin territories were controlled by warlike clans. Most clans had a chieftain (\"knez\"), who was not permitted to assume the title unless he proved to be as worthy a leader as his predecessor. An assembly of Montenegrin clans (\"Zbor\") was held every year on 12 July in Cetinje, and any adult clansman could take part. In 1515, Montenegro became a theocracy led by the Metropolitanate of Montenegro and the Littoral, which flourished after the Petrovi\u0107-Njego\u0161 of Cetinje became the prince-bishop (whose title was \"Vladika of Montenegro\").\nPeople from Montenegro in this historical period were described as Orthodox Serbs.\nPrincipality and Kingdom of Montenegro.\nIn 1858, one of the major Montenegrin victories over the Ottomans occurred at the Battle of Grahovac. Grand Duke Mirko Petrovi\u0107, elder brother of Knjaz Danilo, led an army of 7,500 and defeated the numerically superior Ottomans with 15,000 troops at Grahovac on 1 May 1858. This forced the Great Powers to officially demarcate the borders between Montenegro and Ottoman Empire, \"de facto\" recognising Montenegro's independence.\nIn the Battle of Vu\u010dji Do Montenegrins inflicted a major defeat on the Ottoman Army under Grand Vizier Ahmed Muhtar Pasha. In the aftermath of the Russian victory against the Ottoman Empire in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877\u20131878, the major powers restructured the map of the Balkan region. The Ottoman Empire recognised the independence of Montenegro in the Treaty of Berlin in 1878.\nThe first Montenegrin constitution (also known as the Danilo Code) was proclaimed in 1855. Under Nicholas I (ruled 1860\u20131918), the principality was enlarged several times in the Montenegro-Turkish Wars and was recognised as independent in 1878. Nicholas I established diplomatic relations with the Ottoman Empire. Minor border skirmishes excepted, diplomacy ushered in about 30 years of peace between the two states until the deposition of Abdul Hamid II in 1909.\nThe political skills of Abdul Hamid II and Nicholas I played a major role in the mutually amicable relations. Modernization of the state followed, culminating with the draft of a Constitution in 1905. However, political rifts emerged between the reigning People's Party, who supported the process of democratisation and union with Serbia, and those of the True People's Party, who were monarchist.\nIn 1910, Montenegro became a kingdom, and as a result of the Balkan Wars of 1912\u20131913, a common border with Serbia was established, with Shkod\u00ebr being awarded to Albania, though the current capital city of Montenegro, Podgorica, was on the old border of Albania and Yugoslavia. Montenegro became one of the Allied Powers during World War I (1914\u20131918). In the Battle of Mojkovac fought in January 1916 between Austria-Hungary and the Kingdom of Montenegro, Montenegrins achieved a decisive victory even though they were outnumbered five to one. The Austro-Hungarians accepted military surrender on 25 January 1916. From 1916 to October 1918 Austria-Hungary occupied Montenegro. During the occupation, King Nicholas fled the country and established a government-in-exile in Bordeaux.\nKingdom of Yugoslavia.\nIn 1922, Montenegro formally became the Oblast of Cetinje in the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, with the addition of the coastal areas around Budva and Bay of Kotor. In a further restructuring in 1929, it became a part of a larger Zeta Banate of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia that reached the Neretva River.\nNicholas's grandson, the Serb King Alexander I, dominated the Yugoslav government. Zeta Banovina was one of nine banovinas that formed the kingdom; it consisted of the present-day Montenegro and parts of Serbia, Croatia, and Bosnia.\nWorld War II and Socialist Yugoslavia.\nIn April 1941, Nazi Germany, the Kingdom of Italy, and other Axis allies attacked and occupied the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Italian forces occupied Montenegro and established a puppet Kingdom of Montenegro.\nIn May, the Montenegrin branch of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia started preparations for an uprising planned for mid-July. The Communist Party and its Youth League organised 6,000 of its members into detachments prepared for guerrilla warfare. According to some historians, the first armed uprising in Nazi-occupied Europe happened on 13 July 1941 in Montenegro.\nUnexpectedly, the uprising took hold, and by 20 July, 32,000 men and women had joined the fight. Except for the coast and major towns (Podgorica, Cetinje, Pljevlja, and Nik\u0161i\u0107), which were besieged, Montenegro was mostly liberated. In a month of fighting, the Italian army suffered 5,000 dead, wounded, and captured. The uprising lasted until mid-August, when it was suppressed by a counter-offensive of 67,000 Italian troops brought in from Albania. Faced with new and overwhelming Italian forces, many of the fighters laid down their arms and returned home. Nevertheless, intense guerrilla fighting lasted until December.\nFighters who remained under arms fractured into two groups. Most of them went on to join the Yugoslav Partisans, consisting of communists and those inclined towards active resistance; these included Arso Jovanovi\u0107, Sava Kova\u010devi\u0107, Svetozar Vukmanovi\u0107-Tempo, Milovan \u0110ilas, Peko Dap\u010devi\u0107, Vlado Dap\u010devi\u0107, Veljko Vlahovi\u0107, and Bla\u017eo Jovanovi\u0107. Those loyal to the Kara\u0111or\u0111evi\u0107 dynasty and opposing communism went on to become Chetniks, and turned to collaboration with Italians against the Partisans.\nWar broke out between Partisans and Chetniks during the first half of 1942. Pressured by Italians and Chetniks, the core of the Montenegrin Partisans went to Serbia and Bosnia, where they joined with other Yugoslav Partisans. Fighting between Partisans and Chetniks continued through the war. Chetniks with Italian backing controlled most of the country from mid-1942 to April 1943. Montenegrin Chetniks received the status of \"anti-communist militia\" and received weapons, ammunition, food rations, and money from Italy. Most of them were moved to Mostar, where they fought in the Battle of Neretva against the Partisans, but were dealt a heavy defeat.\nDuring German operation Schwartz against the Partisans in May and June 1943, Germans disarmed many Chetniks without fighting, as they feared they would turn against them in case of an Allied invasion of the Balkans. After the capitulation of Italy in September 1943, Partisans managed to take hold of most of Montenegro for a brief time, but Montenegro was soon occupied by German forces, and fierce fighting continued during late 1943 and 1944. Montenegro was liberated by the Partisans in December 1944.\nMontenegro became one of the six constituent republics of the communist Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY). Its capital became Podgorica, renamed Titograd in honour of President Josip Broz Tito. After the war, the infrastructure of Yugoslavia was rebuilt, industrialization began, and the University of Montenegro was established. Greater autonomy was established until the Socialist Republic of Montenegro ratified a new constitution in 1974.\nMontenegro within FR Yugoslavia.\nAfter the formal dissolution of the SFRY in 1992, Montenegro remained part of a smaller Federal Republic of Yugoslavia along with Serbia. In the referendum on remaining in Yugoslavia in 1992, 96% of the votes cast were in favour of the federation with Serbia. The referendum was boycotted by opposition parties such as the Liberal Alliance of Montenegro, the Social Democratic and Socialist Parties, as well as minority parties such as the Democratic League in Montenegro, leading to a relatively low turnout of 66%.\nDuring the 1991\u20131995 Bosnian War and Croatian War, Montenegrin police and military forces, under orders of president Momir Bulatovic and Interior Minister Pavle Bulatovic joined Serbian troops in attacks on Dubrovnik, Croatia. These operations, aimed at acquiring more territory, were characterised by large-scale violations of human rights.\nMontenegrin General Pavle Strugar was convicted for his part in the bombing of Dubrovnik. Bosnian refugees were arrested by Montenegrin police and transported to Serb camps in Fo\u010da, where they were subjected to systematic torture and executed.\nIn 1996, Milo \u0110ukanovi\u0107's government severed ties between Montenegro and its partner Serbia, which was led by Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107. Montenegro formed its own economic policy and adopted the German Deutsche Mark as its currency and subsequently adopted the euro, although not part of the Eurozone. Subsequent governments pursued pro-independence policies, and political tensions with Serbia simmered despite political changes in Belgrade.\nTargets in Montenegro were bombed by NATO forces during Operation Allied Force in 1999, although the extent of these attacks was limited in both time and area affected.\nIn 2002, Serbia and Montenegro came to a new agreement for continued cooperation and entered into negotiations regarding the future status of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This resulted in the Belgrade Agreement, which saw the country's transformation into a more decentralised state union named Serbia and Montenegro in 2003. The Belgrade Agreement also contained a provision delaying any future referendum on the independence of Montenegro for at least three years.\nIndependence.\nThe status of the union between Montenegro and Serbia was decided by a referendum on Montenegrin independence on 21 May 2006. A total of 419,240 votes were cast, representing 86.5% of the electorate; 230,661 votes (55.5%) were for independence and 185,002 votes (44.5%) were against. This narrowly surpassed the 55% threshold needed to validate the referendum under the rules set by the European Union. According to the electoral commission, the 55% threshold was passed by only 2,300 votes. Serbia, the member-states of the European Union, and the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council all recognised Montenegro's independence.\nThe 2006 referendum was monitored by five international observer missions, headed by an OSCE/ODIHR team, and around 3,000 observers in total (including domestic observers from CDT (OSCE PA), the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe (CLRAE), and the European Parliament (EP) to form an International Referendum Observation Mission (IROM). The IROM\u2014in its preliminary report\u2014\"assessed compliance of the referendum process with OSCE commitments, Council of Europe commitments, other international standards for democratic electoral processes, and domestic legislation.\" Furthermore, the report stated that the competitive pre-referendum environment was marked by an active and generally peaceful campaign and that \"there were no reports of restrictions on fundamental civil and political rights\".\nOn 3 June 2006, the Montenegrin Parliament declared the independence of Montenegro, formally confirming the result of the referendum.\nOn 28 June 2006, Montenegro joined the United Nations as its 192nd member state.\nMontenegro has been dominated since the breakup of Yugoslavia by Milo \u0110ukanovi\u0107 (four-time prime minister and twice president), accused of having established an authoritarianism and clientelist regime, while maintaining close relations with organized crime. The massive privatizations of the \u0110ukanovi\u0107 era lead to the enrichment of him and oligarchs close to him. His brother Aleksandar, owner of Montenegro's first private bank, oversaw the privatizations, while his sister, Ana Kolarevic, has long controlled the judiciary. The clientelist networks of the ruling party dominated all segments of social life. A party card was required to start a business or obtain a position in the administration. This policy also contributed to the reinforcement of regional disparities and social inequalities. Unemployment climbs to 36.6 per cent in the northern part of the country, compared to 3.9 per cent in the coastal region, while a quarter of the population lives below the poverty line (2018).\nThe Law on the Status of the Descendants of the Petrovi\u0107 Njego\u0161 Dynasty was passed by the Parliament of Montenegro on 12 July 2011. It rehabilitated the Royal House of Montenegro and recognised limited symbolic roles within the constitutional framework of the republic.\nIn 2015, the investigative journalists' network OCCRP named Montenegro's long-time President and Prime Minister Milo \u0110ukanovi\u0107 \"Person of the Year in Organized Crime\". The extent of \u0110ukanovi\u0107's corruption led to street demonstrations and calls for his removal.\nIn October 2016, for the day of the parliamentary election, a coup d'\u00e9tat was prepared by a group of persons that included leaders of the Montenegrin opposition, Serbian nationals and Russian agents; the coup was prevented. In 2017, fourteen people, including two Russian nationals and two Montenegrin opposition leaders, Andrija Mandi\u0107 and Milan Kne\u017eevi\u0107, were indicted for their alleged roles in the coup attempt on charges such as \"preparing a conspiracy against the constitutional order and the security of Montenegro\" and an \"attempted terrorist act\".\nRecent history.\nMontenegro formally became a member of NATO in June 2017, despite attempts by Russia to sabotage it, an event that triggered a promise of retaliatory actions from Russia's government.\nMontenegro has been in negotiations with the EU since 2012. In 2018, the earlier goal of acceding by 2022 was revised to 2025. As of 2024, all 33 negotiation chapters had been opened, with three provisionally closed. Legislation is being passed bringing Montenegro law in line with EU membership requirements.\nIn April 2018, Milo Djukanovic, the leader of the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS), won Montenegro's presidential election. The veteran politician had served as Prime Minister six times and as president once before. He had dominated Montenegrin politics since 1991.\nAnti-corruption protests began in February 2019 against \u0110ukanovi\u0107 and the Prime Minister Du\u0161ko Markovi\u0107-led government of the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS), which had been in power since 1991.\nAs of late \u00a02019,[ [update]] the newly adopted Law on Religion, which de jure transferred the ownership of church buildings and estates built before 1918 from the Serbian Orthodox Church to the Montenegrin state, sparked large protests and road blockages. Seventeen opposition Democratic Front MPs were arrested prior to the voting for disrupting the vote. Demonstrations continued into March 2020 as peaceful protest walks, mostly organised by the Serbian Orthodox Church in the majority of Montenegrin municipalities.\nIn its political rights and civil liberties worldwide report in May 2020, Freedom House marked Montenegro as a hybrid regime rather than a democracy because of declining standards in governance, justice, elections, and media freedom. For the first time in three decades, in the 2020 parliamentary election, the opposition won more votes than \u0110ukanovi\u0107's ruling party. In February 2022, that very same government was voted out in the first successful vote of no-confidence in the country's history.\nIn September 2022, an investigation linked six Russian diplomats with twenty eight Russian citizens holding temporary visas for Montenegro and two local citizens in a spy investigation. The diplomats were expelled. The Russian citizens were later banned from Montenegro and the two locals, one an ex-diplomat, face charges of illegal weapons, organising a criminal organisation and espionage.\nIn March 2023, Jakov Milatovic, a pro-western candidate of the Europe Now movement, won the presidential election run-off over incumbent Milo Djukanovic to succeed him as the incumbent president of Montenegro. The Europe Now movement won the highest number of seats in the 2023 Montenegrin parliamentary election. On 31 October 2023, Milojko Spajic of the Europe Now Movement became Montenegro's new prime minister, leading a coalition of both pro-European and pro-Serb parties.\nThe Parliament of Montenegro in June 2024 adopted a resolution acknowledging the atrocities committed at the Jasenovac concentration camp during World War II. This decision, spearheaded by pro-Serbian factions, is viewed as a response to Montenegro's earlier support for a UN resolution on the Srebrenica genocide. Croatia has criticized the move, accusing Montenegro of politicizing historical events and warned that it could harm Montenegro's path to EU membership and bilateral relations between Croatia and Montenegro. The resolution has led to increased diplomatic tensions between the two nations.\nIn 2024, Montenegro was one of 22 countries with a Global Hunger Index score of less than 5.\nGeography.\nMontenegro features high peaks along its borders with Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, and Serbia. Its geography also includes a segment of the karst of the western Balkan Peninsula, to a narrow coastal plain that is only wide. The plain stops abruptly in the north, where Mount Lov\u0107en and Mount Orjen plunge into the inlet of the Bay of Kotor.\nMontenegro's large karst region lies generally at elevations of above sea level; some parts, however, rise to , such as Mount Orjen , the highest massif among the coastal limestone ranges. The Zeta River valley, at an elevation of , is the lowest segment.\nThe mountains of Montenegro include some of the most rugged terrains in Europe, averaging more than in elevation. One of the country's notable peaks is Bobotov Kuk in the Durmitor mountains, which reaches a height of and was previously thought to be the country's highest point. In 2018, new triangulation measurements showed that Zla Kolata in the Prokletije mountains, which reaches a height of . Owing to the hyperhumid climate on their western sides, the Montenegrin mountain ranges were among the most ice-eroded parts of the Balkan Peninsula during the last glacial period.\nInternationally, Montenegro borders Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Albania and Croatia. It lies between latitudes 41\u00b0 and 44\u00b0N, and longitudes 18\u00b0 and 21\u00b0E.\nMontenegro has many national parks, making it important for its biodiversity. The national parks include: the Durmitor National Park (1952), having an area of , is also a massif. Located in the Dinaric Alps, the Belgrade\u2013Bar railway crosses the mountains in it; the Biogradska Gora National Park (1952), spans to , being as well a forest, the park was recognised as one of the UNESCO World Network of Biosphere Reserves; the Lov\u0107en National Park (1952) is located in southwestern Montenegro, it is the inspiration behind the names of Montenegro and \"Crna Gora\", the area is ; the Lake Skadar National Park (1983) is a big lake lying on the Albania-Montenegro border, the national park measure approximately ; the Prokletije National Park (2009) is a mountain range including the second tallest mountain of Montenegro, the park have an area of .\nMontenegro is a member of the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River, as more than of the country's territory lie within the Danube catchment area.\nBiodiversity.\nThe diversity of the geological base, landscape, climate, and soil, and the position of Montenegro on the Balkan Peninsula and Adriatic Sea, created the conditions for high biological diversity, putting Montenegro among the \"hot-spots\" of European and world biodiversity. The number of species per area unit index in Montenegro is 0.837, the highest in any European country.\nBiological estimates suggest that over 1,200 species of freshwater algae, 300 species of marine algae, 589 species of moss, 7,000\u20138,000 species of vascular plants, 2,000 species of fungi, 16,000\u201320,000 species of insects, 407 species of marine fish, 56 species of reptile, 333 species of regularly visiting birds and a high species diversity of mammals are found in Montenegro.\nMontenegro can be divided into two main biogeographic regions, which include the Mediterranean Biogeographic Region and the Alpine Biogeographic Region. It is also home to three terrestrial ecoregions: Balkan mixed forests, Dinaric Mountains mixed forests, and Illyrian deciduous forests. It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.41/10, ranking it 73rd globally out of 172 countries.\nThe total share of protected areas in Montenegro is 9.05% of the country's area, which mainly comes from the five national parks of Montenegro.\nPolitics.\nMontenegro is a parliamentary representative democratic republic with a codified constitution established in 2007. The constitution describes Montenegro as a \"civic, democratic, ecological state of social justice, based on the reign of Law\". Montenegro is a multi-party system.\nThe President of Montenegro is the representative head of state, elected for a period of five years through direct election. The President promotes the country internationally through diplomatic engagements, promulgates laws by ordinance, calls elections for the Parliament, and ceremonially proposes candidates for Prime Minister, president and justices of the Constitutional Court to the Parliament. The President also ceremonially proposes the calling of a referendum to Parliament, grants amnesty for criminal offences proscribed by the national law, confers decoration and awards and performs other constitutional duties and is a member of the Supreme Defence Council. The official residence of the President is in Cetinje. The incumbent president is Jakov Milatovi\u0107 who has held the position since May 2023.\nThe Government of Montenegro is the executive branch of government authority of Montenegro and led by the Prime Minister. The role of Prime Minister is the most politically powerful office in Montenegro. All of Montenegro's governments since 2006 have been coalitions comprising a minimum of three political parties. The government is primarily based in Podgorica.\nThe Parliament of Montenegro is the country's unicameral legislature, located in Podgorica. The Parliament has power to appoint the government, pass legislation (parliamentary law) and scrutinise bills (proposed parliamentary law). It also appoints justices of all courts, approves the budget and performs other duties as established by the country's Constitution. Parliament can pass a motion of no confidence in the Government by simple majority vote. One member of the Montenegrin parliament, known as a Deputy, is elected per 6,000 voters. There are currently 81 deputies. Elections to the Parliament are conducted by the D'Hondt method, a form of proportional representation.\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Montenegro performs in the mid-range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in absence of corruption and judicial independence. In 2019, Montenegro was described as a hybrid regime (a political system which combines democratic and authoritarian features) according to the United States\u2013based Freedom House. The organisation cited state capture, abuse of power, and strongman tactics by Prime Minister Milo \u0110ukanovi\u0107 (2008\u20132010 and 2012\u20132016) as explanations for its description as such. \u0110ukanovi\u0107 held a number of senior government positions, including the Presidency, before and after the dissolution of the union between Serbia and Montenegro. Similarly the \"Economist Democracy Index\" (EDI) considers Montenegro to be a \"flawed democracy\": since it was first published, the EDI ranked Montenegro as a \u201cflawed democracy\u201d from 2006-2015, downgrading it to a \u201chybrid regime\u201d between 2016-2020, before reinstating it to \u201cflawed democracy in 2021 where, as of 2024, it remains.\n\u0110ukanovi\u0107's pro-European and pro-NATO Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) narrowly lost the 2020 parliamentary election which ended the party's 30-year rule and the pro-Serbia \"For the Future of Montenegro\" (ZBCG) parliamentary group, composed mainly of Serb nationalist parties, formed a government under Prime Minister Zdravko Krivokapic. Prime Minister Krivokapic's government was toppled in a no-confidence vote after just 14 months in power.\nIn April 2022, a new minority government, led by Prime Minister Dritan Abazovi\u0107, brought together moderate parties that are both pro-European and pro-Serb. However, his government lost a confidence vote after only 113 days. Since Montenegro had been unable to find a government which could command the confidence of the Parliament, Abazovi\u0107 remained in his post until the Spaji\u0107 Cabinet had been formed after the Parliamentary election which took place on 11 June 2023, where the Europe Now! party led by Milojko Spaji\u0107 won the most seats. In October 2023, a new minority government with confidence and supply support from ZBCG enabled Milojko Spaji\u0107 to become the new prime minister.\nAdministrative divisions.\nMontenegro is divided into twenty-five municipalities (\"op\u0161tina\"). Each municipality can contain multiple cities and towns. Historically, the territory of the country was divided into nahije and during the beginning of SR Montenegro was divided into counties (\"srez\").\nRegions of Montenegro\u2014designed for statistical purposes by the Statistical Office\u2014have no administrative function. Note that other organizations (i.e. Football Association of Montenegro) use different municipalities as a part of similar regions.\nForeign relations.\nThe Ministry of Foreign Affairs was given the task of defining the foreign policy priorities and activities needed for their implementation in cooperation with other state administration authorities, the President, the Speaker of the Parliament, and other relevant stakeholders.\nThe country joined NATO on 5 June 2017. Integration into the European Union remains a high-priority for Montenegro and has been the focus of Montenegrin foreign policy since its independence from Serbia. In June 2023, newly elected President Milatovi\u0107 stated that he expects Montenegro to join the European Union by 2027 or 2028.\nLaw.\nThe current Constitution of Montenegro was ratified and adopted by the Constitutional Parliament of Montenegro on 19 October 2007 in a session by achieving the required two-thirds supermajority of votes. It was officially proclaimed on 22 October 2007.\nThe Constitution defines Montenegro as a civic, democratic and environmentally friendly country with social justice, established by the sovereign rights of its government.\nThe judiciary in Montenegro is composed of several courts, with the Supreme Court being the highest judicial authority. It oversees the uniform application of laws. Administrative Courts handle disputes related to public administration. The judiciary also includes Basic Courts (for minor civil and criminal cases), High Courts (for more serious cases and appeals), and the Appellate Court for reviewing lower court decisions.\nThe Constitutional Court is a separate body, tasked with safeguarding the constitution by reviewing laws and acts of public authorities to ensure their compliance with the Constitution.\nJudges in Montenegro are appointed by the Judicial Council and serve until the age of 67. The President of Montenegro appoints judges upon the recommendation of the Judicial Council. Additionally, the Protector of Human Rights and Freedoms of Montenegro (Ombudsman) is appointed by the Parliament for a six-year term, ensuring the protection of human rights and social justice.\nMontenegro has a relatively low homicide rate, with the rate fluctuating around 1.5 to 2.0 murders per 100,000 people in recent years.\nAbortion in Montenegro is legal on request during the first ten weeks of pregnancy.\nDiscrimination on the basis of both sexual orientation and gender identity is banned in employment, the provision of goods and services, education and health services. Montenegro also possesses hate crime and hate speech laws which include sexual orientation and gender identity as grounds of non-discrimination.\nSince 15 July 2021, same-sex couples may register their relationship as a Life Partnership.\nLaw enforcement, security and emergency services.\nLaw enforcement in Montenegro is carried out by several agencies under the Ministry of Interior. \nCivil law enforcement in Montenegro is primarily the responsibility of the Police Directorate, the national police force. Municipal police, known as Communal Police, enforce local laws in their respective municipalities.\nLaw enforcement in Montenegro is carried out by several agencies under the Ministry of Interior. \nThe primary law enforcement body is the Montenegrin Police Directorate, responsible for crime investigation, maintaining public order, and general law enforcement. The Municipal Police assist with local law enforcement tasks, primarily focusing on traffic regulation and minor public order issues.\nPrivate security firms operate in Montenegro but have no legal authority to arrest or detain suspects.\nThe National Security Agency (ANB) is responsible for counterintelligence and internal security, while Interpol Montenegro collaborates with international agencies to counter transnational crime. Special units within the police, such as the Special Anti-Terrorist Unit (SAJ), handle organized crime, terrorism, and high-risk operations.\nAn agreement signed with the EU effective July 2023 permits EU Frontex border management personnel to operate in Montenegro in support of local border police operating on other, non EU, borders in Montenegro.\nEmergency services in Montenegro include medical services, firefighters, and search and rescue units, which are coordinated by the Directorate for Emergency Situations. Emergency medical services are operated by local health institutions but are overseen by the Ministry of Health.\nMilitary.\nThe military of Montenegro consist of three professional service branches: the Montenegrin Ground Army, the Montenegrin Navy and the Montenegrin Air Force. The armed forces of Montenegro are managed by the Ministry of Defence, and controlled by the Chief of the General Staff. The President of Montenegro is the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, to whom members of the forces swear an oath of allegiance. The Armed Forces are charged with protecting Montenegro, promoting the global security interests and supporting international peacekeeping efforts.\nMontenegro is a NATO member and a member of Adriatic Charter. The government planned to have the army participate in peacekeeping missions through the UN and NATO such as the International Security Assistance Force.\nMontenegro is the 35th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Montenegro is mostly service-based and is in late transition to a market economy. According to the International Monetary Fund, the nominal GDP of Montenegro was $5.424\u00a0billion in 2019. The GDP PPP for 2019 was $12.516\u00a0billion, or $20,083 per capita. According to Eurostat data, the Montenegrin GDP per capita stood at 48% of the EU average in 2018.\nMontenegro joined the Central European Free Trade Agreement in 2007 and has a free trade agreement with the European Free Trade Association since 2012. The Central Bank of Montenegro is not part of the euro system but the country is \"euroised\", using the euro unilaterally as its currency. Montenegro was ranked 64th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025, up from 75th in 2023.\nInfrastructure.\nThe Montenegrin road infrastructure is not at Western European standards. No roads meet full motorway standards. Construction of new motorways is considered a national priority, as they are important for uniform economic development and the development of Montenegro as an attractive tourist destination.\nThe European routes that pass through Montenegro are E65 and E80.\nThe backbone of the Montenegrin rail network is the Belgrade\u2013Bar railway, which provides international connection towards Serbia. A domestic branch line, the Nik\u0161i\u0107-Podgorica railway, operated as a freight-only line for decades, that opened for passenger traffic after reconstruction and electrification in 2012. The other branch line from Podgorica towards the Albanian border, the Podgorica\u2013Shkod\u00ebr railway, is not in use.\nMontenegro has two international airports, Podgorica Airport and Tivat Airport.\nThe Port of Bar is Montenegro's main seaport. Initially built in 1906, the port was almost completely destroyed during World War II. Reconstruction began in 1950. It is equipped to handle over five million tons of cargo annually, but has been operating at a loss and well below capacity. The reconstruction of the Belgrade-Bar railway and the proposed Belgrade-Bar motorway are expected to return operating levels to capacity.\nIn 2023 there is a plan to install an LNG terminal at Bar to receive gas imports.\nTourism.\nA total of 2.1\u00a0million visitors visited Montenegro in 2022 spending 12.4m nights there. The majority of foreign visitors to Montenegro come from the neighbouring countries of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, as well as Russia.\nThe Montenegrin Adriatic coast is long, with of beaches and many well-preserved ancient towns. Some of the most popular beaches include Jaz Beach, Mogren Beach, Be\u010di\u0107i Beach, Sveti Stefan Beach and Velika Pla\u017ea. Meanwhile, some of the most popular ancient towns include Herceg Novi, Perast, Kotor, Budva and Ulcinj.\n\"National Geographic Traveler\" (edited once a decade) ranks Montenegro among the \"50 Places of a Lifetime\". Montenegrin seaside town Sveti Stefan was once used as the cover for the magazine. The coast region of Montenegro was considered one of the great \"discoveries\" among world tourists. In January 2010, \"The New York Times\" ranked the Ulcinj South Coast region of Montenegro, including Velika Pla\u017ea, Ada Bojana, and the Hotel Mediteran of Ulcinj, among the \"Top 31 Places to Go in 2010\" as part of a worldwide ranking.\nDemographics.\nEthnic structure.\nThe 2023 census reported 623,633 citizens. Montenegro is a multiethnic state with no ethnic majority. Montenegrins make up 41.1% of the population, Serbs 32.9%, Bosniaks 9.45%, Albanians 4.99%, and Russians 2.01%. There is a significant number of other ethnic groups, including Romani people, Croats, Ukrainians, Belarusians, and Turks.\nLanguages.\nThe official language in Montenegro is Montenegrin. Serbian, Bosnian, Albanian, and Croatian are recognised in official usage. Montenegrin, Serbian, Bosnian, and Croatian are mutually intelligible as standard varieties of the Serbo-Croatian language. Serbian is the most spoken language in the country, as a plurality of the population at 43.18% consider it as their native language, while 34.52% speaks the Montenegrin language. There is also significant number of people speaking Bosnian (6.98%), Albanian (5.25%), and Russian (2.36%).\nReligion.\nMontenegro has historically stood at the crossroads of multiculturalism, and over centuries this has shaped its unique co-existence between its Christian and Muslim populations. Montenegrins have throughout history been Eastern Orthodox Christians that are members of the Serbian Orthodox Church, which is governed by the Metropolitanate of Montenegro and the Littoral and the Eparchy of Budimlja and Nik\u0161i\u0107. Eastern Orthodox Christianity is the predominant religion in Montenegro, with 71.1% of the population adhering to the religion. Meanwhile, the Serbian Orthodox Church is the largest and most popular church, with approximately 90% of Orthodox Christians in Montenegro following the church. A schismatic church called The Montenegrin Orthodox Church, which broke off from the Serbian Orthodox church in 1993, is followed by the remaining 10% of Orthodox Christians in the country. It also has not been officially recognised by the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople and is not in communion with any other canonical Orthodox Christian Church.\nDespite tensions between religious groups during the Bosnian War, Montenegro remained fairly stable, mainly due to its population's perspective on religious tolerance and faith diversity. Religious institutions have guaranteed rights and are separate from the state. The second largest religion is Islam, practiced by 19% of the population. Montenegro has one of the highest proportion of Muslims in Europe and the third highest proportion among Slavic countries, behind only Bosnia and Herzegovina and North Macedonia. A little more than one-fourth of the country's Albanians are Catholics (8,126 in the 2003 census) while the rest (22,267) are mainly Sunni Muslims; in 2012 a protocol recognised Islam as an official religion, which ensures that halal foods are served at military facilities, hospitals, dormitories and social facilities; and that Muslim women are permitted to wear headscarves in schools and at public institutions, as well as ensuring that Muslims have the right to take Fridays off for the Jumu'ah (Friday)-prayer. Since the time of Vojislavljevi\u0107 dynasty Catholicism is autochthonous in the Montenegrin area. A small Roman Catholic population, mostly Albanians with some Croats, is divided between the Archdiocese of Antivari headed by the Primate of Serbia and the Diocese of Kotor that is a part of the Catholic Church in Croatia.\nCulture.\nMontenegrin culture has been shaped most importantly by Orthodox, Ottoman (Turk), Slavic, Central European, and seafaring Adriatic cultures (notably parts of Italy, like the Republic of Venice).\nMontenegro has many significant cultural and historical sites, including heritage sites from the pre-Romanesque, Gothic and Baroque periods. The Montenegrin coastal region is known for its religious monuments, including the Cathedral of Saint Tryphon in Kotor (Cattaro under the Venetians), the basilica of St. Luke (over 800 years), Our Lady of the Rocks (\u0160krpjela), the Savina Monastery and others. Medieval monasteries contain many artistically important frescoes.\nOne cultural dimension is the ethical ideal of \"\u010cojstvo i Juna\u0161tvo\", \"Humaneness and Gallantry\". The traditional folk dance of the Montenegrins is the Oro, the \"eagle dance\" that involves dancing in circles with couples alternating in the centre, and is finished by forming a human pyramid of dancers standing on each other's shoulders.\nMedia.\nTelevision, magazines, and newspapers are operated by both state-owned and for-profit corporations that depend on advertising, subscription, and other sales-related revenues. The Constitution of Montenegro guarantees freedom of speech. Montenegro's media system is under transformation, along with the rest of the country. The privately owned media outlet Vijesti (\"News\") has been the most watched in Montenegro for many years, followed by the state-owned Radio and Television of Montenegro (\"Radio-televizija Crne Gore, RTCG\").https:// \"RTCG\" also provides radio and television broadcasts of daily news in the Albanian language.\nSport.\nSport in Montenegro revolves mostly around team sports, such as water polo, football, basketball, handball, and volleyball. Other sports involved are boxing, tennis, swimming, judo, karate, athletics, table tennis, and chess.\nWater polo is the most popular and is considered the national sport. Montenegro men's national water polo team is one of the world's top ranked teams, winning the gold medal at the 2008 Men's European Water Polo Championship in M\u00e1laga, Spain, and winning the gold medal at the 2009 FINA Men's Water Polo World League, held in Podgorica. The Montenegrin team PVK Primorac from Kotor became a champion of Europe at the LEN Euroleague 2009 in Rijeka, Croatia. Montenegro came fourth in the men's water polo in the 2016 Olympics.\nFootball is the second most popular sport. The Montenegro national football team, founded in 2006, played in playoffs for UEFA Euro 2012, its highest play appearance. The Montenegro national basketball team is known for good performances and won many medals as part of the Yugoslavia national basketball team. In 2006, the Basketball Federation of Montenegro along with this team joined the International Basketball Federation (FIBA) on its own, following the Independence. Montenegro participated in two EuroBaskets.\nAmong women sports, the national handball team is the most successful, winning the country's first Olympic medal, claiming silver at the 2012 Summer Olympics. This was followed by the 2012 European Championship which Montenegro won, becoming European champions. \u017dRK Budu\u0107nost Podgorica has twice won the EHF Champions League. Montenegro was one of the host countries for the 2022 European Women's Handball Championship and came third.\nCuisine.\nThe first major influences to Montenegrin cuisine came from the Levant and Turkey: sarma, musaka, pilav, pita, gibanica, burek, \u0107evapi, kebab, \u0111uve\u010d, and Turkish sweets such as baklava and tulumba. Hungarian cuisine influences stews and satara\u0161. Central European cuisine is evident in the prevalence of cr\u00eapes, doughnuts, jams, many types of biscuits and cakes, and various kinds of breads. Montenegrin cuisine also varies geographically; with the cuisine in the coastal area differing from that of the northern highland region. The coastal area is traditionally a representative of Mediterranean cuisine, with seafood being a common dish. The traditional dishes of Montenegro's Adriatic coast, unlike its heartland, have been significantly influenced by Italian cuisine.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBibliographies of Montenegro.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20761", "revid": "30699314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20761", "title": "MP5", "text": ""}
{"id": "20762", "revid": "96647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20762", "title": "Michael Crichton", "text": "American author and filmmaker (1942\u20132008)\nJohn Michael Crichton (; October 23, 1942 \u2013 November 4, 2008) was an American author, screenwriter and filmmaker. His books have sold over 200 million copies worldwide, and over a dozen have been adapted into films. His literary works heavily feature technology and are usually within the science fiction, techno-thriller, and medical fiction genres. Crichton's novels often explore human technological advancement and attempted dominance over nature, both with frequently catastrophic results; many of his works are cautionary tales, especially regarding themes of biotechnology. Several of his stories center on themes of genetic modification, hybridization, paleontology and/or zoology. Many feature medical or scientific underpinnings, reflective of his own medical training.\nCrichton received an MD from Harvard Medical School in 1969 but did not practice medicine, choosing to focus on his writing instead. Initially writing under a pseudonym, he eventually published 25 novels in his lifetime, including: \"The Andromeda Strain\" (1969), \"The Terminal Man\" (1972), \"The Great Train Robbery\" (1975), \"Congo\" (1980), \"Sphere\" (1987), \"Jurassic Park\" (1990), \"Rising Sun\" (1992), \"Disclosure\" (1994), \"The Lost World\" (1995), \"Airframe\" (1996), \"Timeline\" (1999), \"Prey\" (2002), \"State of Fear\" (2004), and \"Next\" (2006). Four more novels, in various states of completion, were published after his death in 2008.\nCrichton was also involved in the film and television industry. In 1973, he wrote and directed \"Westworld\", the first film to use 2D computer-generated imagery. He also directed \"Coma\" (1978), \"The First Great Train Robbery\" (1978), \"Looker\" (1981), and \"Runaway\" (1984). He was the creator of the television series \"ER\" (1994\u20132009), and several of his novels were adapted into films, most notably the \"Jurassic Park\" franchise.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLife.\nEarly life.\nJohn Michael Crichton was born on October 23, 1942, in Chicago, Illinois, to John Henderson Crichton, a journalist, and Zula Miller Crichton, a homemaker. He was raised on Long Island, in Roslyn, New York, and he showed a keen interest in writing from a young age; at 16, he had an article about a trip he took to Sunset Crater published in \"The New York Times\". Crichton later recalled, \"Roslyn was another world. Looking back, it's remarkable what wasn't going on. There was no terror. No fear of children being abused. No fear of random murder. No drug use we knew about. I walked to school. I rode my bike for miles and miles, to the movie on Main Street and piano lessons and the like. Kids had freedom. It wasn't such a dangerous world... We studied our butts off, and we got a tremendously good education there.\"\nCrichton had always planned on becoming a writer and began his studies at Harvard University in 1960 as an English major. During his freshman year, he conducted an experiment to expose a professor whom he believed was giving him abnormally low marks and criticizing his literary style. Informing another professor of his suspicions, Crichton submitted an essay by George Orwell under his own name. The paper was returned by his unwitting professor with a mark of \"B\u2212\". He later said, \"Now Orwell was a wonderful writer, and if a B-minus was all he could get, I thought I'd better drop English as my major.\" His differences with the English department and a desire to gain a more scientifically grounded education led Crichton to switch his major to biological anthropology. He graduated with a Bachelor of Arts \"summa cum laude\" in 1964, and was initiated into Phi Beta Kappa society.\nCrichton received a Henry Russell Shaw Traveling Fellowship from 1964 to 1965, which allowed him to serve as a visiting lecturer in anthropology at the University of Cambridge in the United Kingdom. Crichton later enrolled at Harvard Medical School. Crichton later said \"about two weeks into medical school I realized I hated it. This isn't unusual since everyone hates medical school \u2013 even happy, practicing physicians.\"\nPseudonymous novels (1965\u20131968).\nIn 1965, while at Harvard Medical School, Crichton wrote a novel, \"Odds On\". \"I wrote for furniture and groceries\", he said later. \"Odds On\" is a 215-page paperback novel which describes an attempted robbery at an isolated hotel on the Costa Brava in Spain. The robbery is planned scientifically with the help of a critical path analysis computer program, but unforeseen events get in the way. Crichton submitted it to Doubleday, where a reader liked it but felt it was not for the company. Doubleday passed it on to New American Library, which published it in 1966. Crichton used the pen name John Lange because he planned to become a doctor and did not want his patients to worry that he would use them for his plots. The name came from cultural anthropologist Andrew Lang. Crichton added an \"e\" to the surname and substituted his own real first name, John, for Andrew. The novel was successful enough to lead to a series of John Lange novels. Film rights were sold in 1969, but no movie resulted.\nThe second Lange novel, \"Scratch One\" (1967), relates the story of Roger Carr, a handsome, charming, privileged man who practices law, more as a means to support his playboy lifestyle than a career. Carr is sent to Nice, France, where he has notable political connections, but is mistaken for an assassin and finds his life in jeopardy. Crichton wrote the book while traveling through Europe on a travel fellowship. He visited the Cannes Film Festival and Monaco Grand Prix, and then decided, \"any idiot should be able to write a potboiler set in Cannes and Monaco\", and wrote it in eleven days. He later described the book as \"no good\". His third John Lange novel, \"Easy Go\" (1968), is the story of Harold Barnaby, a brilliant Egyptologist who discovers a concealed message while translating hieroglyphics informing him of an unnamed pharaoh whose tomb is yet to be discovered. Crichton said the book earned him $1,500 (). Crichton later said: \"My feeling about the Lange books is that my competition is in-flight movies. One can read the books in an hour and a half, and be more satisfactorily amused than watching Doris Day. I write them fast and the reader reads them fast and I get things off my back.\"\nCrichton's fourth novel was \"A Case of Need\" (1968), a medical thriller. The novel had a different tone from the Lange books; accordingly, Crichton used the pen name \"Jeffery Hudson\", based on Sir Jeffrey Hudson, a 17th-century dwarf in the court of queen consort Henrietta Maria of England. The novel would prove a turning point in Crichton's future novels, in which technology is important in the subject matter, although this novel was as much about medical practice. The novel earned him an Edgar Award in 1969. He intended to use the \"Jeffery Hudson\" pseudonym for other medical novels but ended up using it only once. The book was later adapted into the film \"The Carey Treatment\" (1972).\nEarly novels and screenplays (1969\u20131974).\nCrichton says after he finished his third year of medical school: \"I stopped believing that one day I'd love it and realized that what I loved was writing.\" He began publishing book reviews under his name. In 1969, Crichton wrote a review for \"The New Republic\" (as J. Michael Crichton), critiquing Kurt Vonnegut's recently published \"Slaughterhouse-Five\". He also continued to write Lange novels: \"Zero Cool\" (1969), dealt with an American radiologist on vacation in Spain who is caught in a murderous crossfire between rival gangs seeking a precious artifact. \"The Venom Business\" (1969) relates the story of a smuggler who uses his exceptional skill as a snake handler to his advantage by importing snakes to be used by drug companies and universities for medical research.\nThe first novel that was published under Crichton's name was \"The Andromeda Strain\" (1969), which proved to be the most important novel of his career and established him as a bestselling author. The novel documents the efforts of a team of scientists investigating an extraterrestrial microorganism that clots human blood, causing death within two minutes. Crichton was inspired to write it after reading \"The IPCRESS File\" by Len Deighton while studying in England. Crichton says he was \"terrifically impressed\" by the book \u2013 \"a lot of \"Andromeda\" is traceable to \"Ipcress\" in terms of trying to create an imaginary world using recognizable techniques and real people.\" He wrote the novel over three years. The novel became an instant hit, and film rights were sold for $250,000. It was adapted into a 1971 film by director Robert Wise.\nDuring his clinical rotations at the Boston City Hospital, Crichton grew disenchanted with the culture there, which appeared to emphasize the interests and reputations of doctors over the interests of patients. He graduated from Harvard, obtaining an MD in 1969, and undertook a post-doctoral fellowship study at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, California, from 1969 to 1970. He never obtained a license to practice medicine, devoting himself to his writing career instead. Reflecting on his career in medicine years later, Crichton concluded that patients too often shunned responsibility for their own health, relying on doctors as miracle workers rather than advisors. He experimented with astral projection, aura viewing, and clairvoyance, coming to believe that these included real phenomena that scientists had too eagerly dismissed as paranormal.\nThree more Crichton books under pseudonyms were published in 1970. Two were Lange novels, \"Drug of Choice\" and \"Grave Descend\". \"Grave Descend\" earned him an Edgar Award nomination the following year. There was also \"\" written with his younger brother Douglas Crichton. \"Dealing\" was written under the pen name \"Michael Douglas\", using their first names. Michael Crichton wrote it \"completely from beginning to end\". Then his brother rewrote it from beginning to end, and then Crichton rewrote it again. This novel was . Around this time Crichton also wrote and sold an original film script, \"Morton's Run\". He also wrote the screenplay \"Lucifer Harkness in Darkness\".\nAside from fiction, Crichton wrote several other books based on medical or scientific themes, often based upon his own observations in his field of expertise. In 1970, he published \"Five Patients\", which recounts his experiences of hospital practices in the late 1960s at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. The book follows each of five patients through their hospital experience and the context of their treatment, revealing inadequacies in the hospital institution at the time. The book relates the experiences of Ralph Orlando, a construction worker seriously injured in a scaffold collapse; John O'Connor, a middle-aged dispatcher suffering from fever that has reduced him to a delirious wreck; Peter Luchesi, a young man who severs his hand in an accident; Sylvia Thompson, an airline passenger who suffers chest pains; and Edith Murphy, a mother of three who is diagnosed with a life-threatening disease. In \"Five Patients\", Crichton examines a brief history of medicine up to 1969 to help place hospital culture and practice into context, and addresses the costs and politics of American healthcare. In 1974, he wrote a pilot script for a medical series, \"24 Hours\", based on his book \"Five Patients\", however, networks were not enthusiastic.\nAs a personal friend of the artist Jasper Johns, Crichton compiled many of Johns' works in a coffee table book, published as \"Jasper Johns\". It was originally published in 1970 by Harry N. Abrams, Inc. in association with the Whitney Museum of American Art and again in January 1977, with a second revised edition published in 1994. The psychiatrist Janet Ross owned a copy of the painting \"Numbers\" by Jasper Johns in Crichton's later novel \"The Terminal Man\". The technophobic antagonist of the story found it odd that a person would paint numbers as they were inorganic. In 1972, Crichton published his last novel as John Lange: \"Binary\", relates the story of a villainous middle-class businessman, who attempts to assassinate the President of the United States by stealing an army shipment of the two precursor chemicals that form a deadly nerve agent.\n\"The Terminal Man\" (1972), is about a psychomotor epileptic sufferer, Harry Benson, who regularly suffers seizures followed by blackouts, and conducts himself inappropriately during seizures, waking up hours later with no knowledge of what he has done. Believed to be psychotic, he is investigated and electrodes are implanted in his brain. The book continued the preoccupation in Crichton's novels with machine-human interaction and technology. The novel was adapted into a 1974 film directed by Mike Hodges and starring George Segal. Crichton was hired to adapt his novel \"The Terminal Man\" into a script by Warner Bros. The studio felt he had departed from the source material too much and had another writer adapt it for the 1974 film. ABC TV wanted to buy the film rights to Crichton's novel \"Binary\". The author agreed on the provision that he could direct the film. ABC agreed provided someone other than Crichton write the script. The result, \"Pursuit\" (1972) was a ratings success. Crichton then wrote and directed the 1973 low-budget science fiction western-thriller film \"Westworld\" about robots that run amok, which was his feature film directorial debut. It was the first feature film using 2D computer-generated imagery (CGI). The producer of \"Westworld\" hired Crichton to write an original script, which became the erotic thriller \"Extreme Close-Up\" (1973). Directed by Jeannot Szwarc, the movie disappointed Crichton.\nPeriod novels and directing (1975\u20131988).\nIn 1975, Crichton wrote \"The Great Train Robbery\", which would become a bestseller. The novel is a recreation of the Great Gold Robbery of 1855, a massive gold heist, which takes place on a train traveling through Victorian era England. A considerable portion of the book was set in London. Crichton had become aware of the story when lecturing at the University of Cambridge. He later read the transcripts of the court trial and started researching the historical period.\nIn 1976, Crichton published \"Eaters of the Dead\", a novel about a 10th-century Muslim who travels with a group of Vikings to their settlement. \"Eaters of the Dead\" is narrated as a scientific commentary on an old manuscript and was inspired by two sources. The first three chapters retell Ahmad ibn Fadlan's personal account of his journey north and his experiences in encountering the Rus', a Varangian tribe, whilst the remainder is based upon the story of Beowulf, culminating in battles with the 'mist-monsters', or 'wendol', a relict group of Neanderthals.\nCrichton wrote and directed the suspense film \"Coma\" (1978), adapted from the 1977 novel of the same name by Robin Cook, a friend of his. There are other similarities in terms of genre and the fact that both Cook and Crichton had medical degrees, were of similar age, and wrote about similar subjects. The film was a popular success. Crichton then wrote and directed an adaptation of his own book, \"The Great Train Robbery\" (1978), starring Sean Connery and Donald Sutherland. The film would go on to be nominated for Best Cinematography Award by the British Society of Cinematographers, also garnering an Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Motion Picture by the Mystery Writers Association of America.\nIn 1979, it was announced that Crichton would direct a movie version of his novel \"Eaters of the Dead\" for the newly formed Orion Pictures. This did not occur. Crichton pitched the idea of a modern day \"King Solomon's Mines\" to 20th Century Fox who paid him $1.5\u00a0million for the film rights to the novel, a screenplay and directorial fee for the movie, before a word had been written. He had never worked that way before, usually writing the book then selling it. He eventually managed to finish the book, titled \"Congo\", which became a best seller. Crichton did the screenplay for \"Congo\" after he wrote and directed \"Looker\" (1981). \"Looker\" was a financial disappointment. Crichton came close to directing a film of \"Congo\" with Sean Connery, but the film did not happen. Eventually, a film version was made in 1995 by Frank Marshall. In 1984, Telarium released a graphic adventure based on \"Congo\". Because Crichton had sold all adaptation rights to the novel, he set the game, named \"Amazon\", in South America, and Amy the gorilla became Paco the parrot. That year Crichton also wrote and directed \"Runaway\" (1984), a police thriller set in the near future which was a box office disappointment.\nCrichton had begun writing \"Sphere\" in 1967 as a companion piece to \"The Andromeda Strain\". His initial storyline began with American scientists discovering a 300-year-old spaceship underwater with stenciled markings in English. However, Crichton later realized that he \"didn't know where to go with it\" and put off completing the book until a later date. The novel was published in 1987. It relates the story of psychologist Norman Johnson, who is required by the U.S. Navy to join a team of scientists assembled by the U.S. Government to examine an enormous alien spacecraft discovered on the bed of the Pacific Ocean, and believed to have been there for over 300 years. The novel begins as a science fiction story, but rapidly changes into a psychological thriller, ultimately exploring the nature of the human imagination. The novel was adapted into the 1998 film directed by Barry Levinson and starring Dustin Hoffman.\nCrichton worked\u2014as a director only\u2014on \"Physical Evidence\" (1989), a thriller originally conceived as a sequel to \"Jagged Edge\". In 1988, Crichton was a visiting writer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A book of autobiographical writings, \"Travels\", was also published in 1988.\n\"Jurassic Park\" and subsequent works (1989\u20131999).\nIn 1990, Crichton published the novel \"Jurassic Park\". Crichton used the presentation of \"fiction as fact\", of his previous novels, \"Eaters of the Dead\" and \"The Andromeda Strain\". In addition, chaos theory and its philosophical implications are used to explain the collapse of an amusement park in a \"biological preserve\" on Isla Nublar, a fictional island to the west of Costa Rica. The novel had begun as a screenplay Crichton had written in 1983, about a graduate student who recreates a dinosaur. Reasoning that genetic research is expensive and that \"there is no pressing need to create a dinosaur\", Crichton concluded that it would emerge from a \"desire to entertain\", which led him to set the novel in a wildlife park of extinct animals. The story had originally been told from the point of view of a child, but Crichton changed it because everyone who read the draft felt it would be better if told by an adult.\nSteven Spielberg learned of the novel in October 1989 while he and Crichton were discussing a screenplay that would later be developed into the television series \"ER\". Before the book was published, Crichton demanded a non-negotiable fee of $1.5\u00a0million as well as a substantial percentage of the gross. Warner Bros. and Tim Burton, Sony Pictures Entertainment and Richard Donner, and 20th Century Fox and Joe Dante bid for the rights, but Universal eventually acquired the rights in May 1990 for Spielberg. Universal paid Crichton a further $500,000 to adapt his own novel, which he had completed by the time Spielberg was filming \"Hook\". Crichton noted that, because the book was \"fairly long\", his script only had about 10% to 20% of the novel's content. The film, directed by Spielberg, was released in 1993.\nIn 1992, Crichton published the novel \"Rising Sun\", an internationally bestselling crime thriller about a murder in the Los Angeles headquarters of Nakamoto, a fictional Japanese corporation. The book was adapted into the 1993 film directed by Philip Kaufman and starring Sean Connery and Wesley Snipes; it was released the same year as the adaptation of \"Jurassic Park\".\nThe theme of his next novel, \"Disclosure\", published in 1994, was sexual harassment\u2014a theme previously explored in his 1972 novel, \"Binary\". \"Disclosure\" centers on sexual politics in the workplace, emphasizing an array of paradoxes in traditional gender roles by featuring a male protagonist who is being sexually harassed by a female executive. As a result, the book has been criticized harshly by some feminist commentators and accused of being anti-feminist. Crichton, anticipating this response, offered a rebuttal at the close of the novel which states that a \"role-reversal\" story uncovers aspects of the subject that would not be seen as easily with a female protagonist. The novel was made into a film the same year, directed by Barry Levinson and starring Michael Douglas and Demi Moore.\nCrichton was the creator and an executive producer of the television drama \"ER\", based on his 1974 pilot script \"24 Hours\". Spielberg helped develop the show, serving as an executive producer for season one and offering advice (he insisted on Julianna Margulies becoming a regular, for example). It was also through Spielberg's Amblin Entertainment that John Wells was attached as the show's executive producer. In 1995, Crichton published \"The Lost World\" as a sequel to \"Jurassic Park\". The title was a reference to Arthur Conan Doyle's \"The Lost World\" (1912). It was made into the two years later, again directed by Spielberg. In March 1994, Crichton said there would probably be a sequel novel as well as a film adaptation, stating that he had an idea for the novel's story. In 1996, Crichton published \"Airframe\", an aero-techno-thriller. The book continued Crichton's overall theme of the failure of humans in human-machine interaction, given that the plane worked perfectly and the accident would not have occurred had the pilot reacted properly. He also wrote \"Twister\" (1996) with Anne-Marie Martin, his wife at the time.\nIn 1999, Crichton published \"Timeline\", a science-fiction novel in which experts time travel back to the medieval period. The novel, which continued Crichton's long history of combining technical details and action in his books, explores quantum physics and time travel directly; it was also warmly received by medieval scholars, who praised his depiction of the challenges involved in researching the Middle Ages. In 1999, Crichton founded Timeline Computer Entertainment with David Smith. Although he signed a multi-title publishing deal with Eidos Interactive, only one game, \"Timeline\", was ever published. Released by Eidos Interactive on November 10, 2000, for Windows, the game received negative reviews. A 2003 film based on the book was directed by Richard Donner and starring Paul Walker, Gerard Butler and Frances O'Connor. \"Eaters of the Dead\" was adapted into the 1999 film \"The 13th Warrior\" directed by John McTiernan, who was later removed, with Crichton himself taking over direction of reshoots.\nFinal novels and later life (2000\u20132008).\nIn 2002, Crichton published \"Prey\", about developments in science and technology, specifically nanotechnology. The novel explores relatively recent phenomena engendered by the work of the scientific community, such as: artificial life, emergence (and by extension, complexity), genetic algorithms, and agent-based computing. In 2004, Crichton published \"State of Fear\", a novel concerning eco-terrorists who attempt mass murder to support their views. The novel's central premise is that climate scientists exaggerate global warming. A review in \"Nature\" found the novel \"likely to mislead the unwary\". The novel had an initial print run of 1.5 million copies and reached the No. 1 bestseller position at Amazon.com and No. 2 on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list for one week in January 2005.\nThe last novel published during his lifetime was \"Next\" in 2006. The novel follows many characters, including transgenic animals, in a quest to survive in a world dominated by genetic research, corporate greed, and legal interventions, wherein government and private investors spend billions of dollars every year on genetic research. In 2006, Crichton clashed with journalist Michael Crowley, a senior editor of the magazine \"The New Republic\". In March 2006, Crowley wrote a strongly critical review of \"State of Fear\", focusing on Crichton's stance on global warming. In the same year, Crichton published the novel \"Next\", which contains a minor character named \"Mick Crowley\", who is a Yale graduate and a Washington, D.C.\u2013based political columnist. The character was portrayed as a child molester with a small penis. The real Crowley, also a Yale graduate, alleged that by including a similarly named character Crichton had libeled him.\nPosthumous works.\nSeveral novels that were in various states of completion upon Crichton's death have since been published. The first, \"Pirate Latitudes\", was found as a manuscript on one of his computers after his death. It centers on a fictional privateer who attempts to raid a Spanish galleon. It was published in November 2009 by HarperCollins. Additionally, Crichton had completed the outline for and was roughly a third of the way through a novel titled \"Micro\", a novel which centers on technology that shrinks humans to microscopic sizes. \"Micro\" was completed by Richard Preston using Crichton's notes and files, and was published in November 2011.\nOn July 28, 2016, Crichton's website and HarperCollins announced the publication of a third posthumous novel, titled \"Dragon Teeth\", which he had written in 1974. It is a historical novel set during the Bone Wars, and includes the real life characters of Othniel Charles Marsh and Edward Drinker Cope. The novel was released in May 2017. In addition, some of his published works are being continued by other authors. On February 26, 2019, Crichton's website and HarperCollins announced the publication of \"The Andromeda Evolution\", the sequel to \"The Andromeda Strain\", a collaboration with CrichtonSun LLC. and author Daniel H. Wilson. It was released on November 12, 2019.\nIn 2020, it was announced that his unpublished works will be adapted into TV series and films in collaboration with CrichtonSun and Range Media Partners. On December 15, 2022, it was announced that James Patterson would coauthor a novel about a mega-eruption of Hawaii's Mauna Loa volcano, based on an unfinished manuscript by Crichton. The novel, \"Eruption,\" was released on June 3, 2024.\nScientific and legal career.\nVideo games and computing.\nIn 1983, Crichton wrote \"Electronic Life\", a book that introduces BASIC programming to its readers. The book, written like a glossary, with entries such as: \"Afraid of Computers (everybody is),\" \"Buying a Computer\" and \"Computer Crime,\" was intended to introduce the idea of personal computers to a reader who might be faced with the challenge of using them at work or at home for the first time. It defined basic computer jargon and assured readers that they could master the machine when it inevitably arrived. In his words, being able to program a computer is liberation: \"In my experience, you assert control over a computer\u2014show it who's the boss\u2014by making it do something unique. That means programming it... If you devote a couple of hours to programming a new machine, you'll feel better about it ever afterward.\"\nIn the book, Crichton predicts a number of events in the history of computer development, that computer networks would increase in importance as a matter of convenience, including the sharing of information and pictures that we see online today, which the telephone never could. He also makes predictions for computer games, dismissing them as \"the hula hoops of the 80s,\" and saying \"already there are indications that the mania for twitch games may be fading.\" In a section of the book called \"Microprocessors, or how I flunked biostatistics at Harvard,\" Crichton again seeks his revenge on the teacher who had given him abnormally low grades in college. Within the book, Crichton included many self-written demonstrative Applesoft (for Apple II) and BASICA (for IBM PC compatibles) programs.\n\"Amazon\" is a graphical adventure game created by Crichton and produced by John Wells. Trillium released it in the United States in 1984 initially for the Apple II, Atari 8-bit computers, and Commodore 64. \"Amazon\" sold more than 100,000 copies, making it a significant commercial success at the time. It has plot elements similar to those previously used in \"Congo\". Crichton started a company selling a computer program he had originally written to help him create budgets for his movies. He often sought to utilize computing in films, such as \"Westworld\", which was the first film to employ computer-generated special effects. He also pushed Spielberg to include them in the \"Jurassic Park\" films. For his pioneering use of computer programs in film production he was awarded the Academy Award for Technical Achievement in 1995.\nIntellectual property cases.\nIn November 2006, at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., Crichton joked that he considered himself an expert in intellectual property law. He had been involved in several lawsuits with others claiming credit for his work. In 1985, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit heard \"Berkic v. Crichton\", 761 F.2d 1289 (1985). Plaintiff Ted Berkic wrote a screenplay called \"Reincarnation Inc.\", which he claims Crichton plagiarized for the movie \"Coma\". The court ruled in Crichton's favor, stating the works were not substantially similar. In the 1996 case, \"Williams v. Crichton\", 84 F.3d 581 (2d Cir. 1996), Geoffrey Williams claimed that \"Jurassic Park\" violated his copyright covering his dinosaur-themed children's stories published in the late 1980s. The court granted summary judgment in favor of Crichton. In 1998, A United States District Court in Missouri heard the case of \"Kessler v. Crichton\" that actually went all the way to a jury trial, unlike the other cases. Plaintiff Stephen Kessler claimed the movie \"Twister\" (1996) was based on his work \"Catch the Wind\". It took the jury about 45 minutes to reach a verdict in favor of Crichton. After the verdict, Crichton refused to shake Kessler's hand. Crichton later summarized his intellectual property legal cases: \"I always win.\"\nGlobal warming.\nCrichton became well known for attacking the science behind global warming. He testified on the subject before Congress in 2005. His views would be contested by a number of scientists and commentators. An example is meteorologist Jeffrey Masters's review of Crichton's 2004 novel \"State of Fear\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Flawed or misleading presentations of global warming science exist in the book, including those on Arctic sea ice thinning, correction of land-based temperature measurements for the urban heat island effect, and satellite vs. ground-based measurements of Earth's warming. I will spare the reader additional details. On the positive side, Crichton does emphasize the little-appreciated fact that while most of the world has been warming the past few decades, most of Antarctica has seen a cooling trend. The Antarctic ice sheet is actually expected to increase in mass over the next 100 years due to increased precipitation, according to the IPCC.\u2014\u200a\nPeter Doran, author of the paper in the January 2002 issue of \"Nature\", which reported the finding referred to above, stating that some areas of Antarctica had cooled between 1986 and 2000, wrote an opinion piece in \"The New York Times\" of July 27, 2006, in which he stated \"Our results have been misused as 'evidence' against global warming by Michael Crichton in his novel \"State of Fear.\"\" Al Gore said on March 21, 2007, before a U.S. House committee: \"The planet has a fever. If your baby has a fever, you go to the doctor... if your doctor tells you you need to intervene here, you don't say 'Well, I read a science fiction novel that tells me it's not a problem.'\" Several commentators have interpreted this as a reference to \"State of Fear\".\nLiterary technique and style.\nCrichton's novels, including \"Jurassic Park\", have been described by \"The Guardian\" as \"harking back to the fantasy adventure fiction of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Jules Verne, Edgar Rice Burroughs, and Edgar Wallace, but with a contemporary spin, assisted by cutting-edge technology references made accessible for the general reader.\" According to \"The Guardian\", \"Michael Crichton wasn't really interested in characters, but his innate talent for storytelling enabled him to breathe new life into the science fiction thriller.\" Like \"The Guardian\", \"The New York Times\" has also noted the boys adventure quality to his novels interfused with modern technology and science. According to \"The New York Times\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All the Crichton books depend to a certain extent on a little frisson of fear and suspense: that's what kept you turning the pages. But a deeper source of their appeal was the author's extravagant care in working out the clockwork mechanics of his experiments\u2014the DNA replication in \"Jurassic Park\", the time travel in \"Timeline\", the submarine technology in \"Sphere\". The novels have embedded in them little lectures or mini-seminars on, say, the Bernoulli principle, voice-recognition software or medieval jousting etiquette\u00a0...\nThe best of the Crichton novels have about them a boys' adventure quality. They owe something to the Saturday-afternoon movie serials that Mr. Crichton watched as a boy and to the adventure novels of Arthur Conan Doyle (from whom Mr. Crichton borrowed the title \"The Lost World\" and whose example showed that a novel could never have too many dinosaurs). These books thrive on yarn spinning, but they also take immense delight in the inner workings of things (as opposed to people, women especially), and they make the world\u2014or the made-up world, anyway\u2014seem boundlessly interesting. Readers come away entertained and also with the belief, not entirely illusory, that they have actually learned something\"\nCrichton's works were frequently cautionary, his plots often portrayed scientific advancements going awry, commonly resulting in worst-case scenarios. A notable recurring theme in Crichton's plots is the pathological failure of complex systems and their safeguards, whether biological (\"Jurassic Park\"), militaristic/organizational (\"The Andromeda Strain\"), technological (\"Airframe\"), or cybernetic (\"Westworld\"). This theme of the inevitable breakdown of \"perfect\" systems and the failure of \"fail-safe measures\" can be seen strongly in the poster for \"Westworld\", whose slogan was, \"Where nothing can possibly go worng\" [\"sic\"], and in the discussion of chaos theory in \"Jurassic Park\". His 1973 movie \"Westworld\" contains one of the earliest references to a computer virus and is the first mention of the concept of a computer virus in a movie. Crichton believed, however, that his view of technology had been misunderstood as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;being out there, doing bad things to us people, like we're inside the circle of covered wagons and technology is out there firing arrows at us. We're making the technology and it is a manifestation of how we think. To the extent that we think egotistically and irrationally and paranoically and foolishly, then we have technology that will give us nuclear winters or cars that won't brake. But that's because people didn't design them right.\nThe use of author surrogate was a feature of Crichton's writings from the beginning of his career. In \"A Case of Need\", one of his pseudonymous whodunit stories, Crichton used first-person narrative to portray the hero, a Bostonian pathologist, who is running against the clock to clear a friend's name from medical malpractice in a girl's death from a hack-job abortion. Crichton has used the literary technique known as the false document. \"Eaters of the Dead\" is a \"recreation\" of the Old English epic\" Beowulf\" presented as a scholarly translation of Ahmad ibn Fadlan's 10th century manuscript. \"The Andromeda Strain\" and\" Jurassic Park \"incorporate fictionalized scientific documents in the form of diagrams, computer output, DNA sequences, footnotes, and bibliography. \"The Terminal Man\" and \"State of Fear\" include authentic published scientific works that illustrate the premise point. Crichton often employs the premise of diverse experts or specialists assembled to tackle a unique problem requiring their individual talents and knowledge. The premise was used for \"The Andromeda Strain\", \"Sphere\", \"Jurassic Park\", and, to a lesser extent, \"Timeline\". Sometimes the individual characters in this dynamic work in the private sector and are suddenly called upon by the government to form an immediate response team once some incident or discovery triggers their mobilization. This premise or plot device has been imitated and used by other authors and screenwriters in several books, movies and television shows since.\nPersonal life.\nCrichton was tall (6\u00a0ft 9 in, or 206\u00a0cm). His height made him feel isolated as an adolescent. During the 1970s and 1980s, he consulted psychics and enlightenment gurus to make him feel more socially acceptable and to improve his positive karma. As a result of these experiences, Crichton practiced meditation throughout much of his life. While he is often regarded as a deist, he never publicly confirmed this. When asked in an online Q&amp;A if he were a spiritual person, Crichton responded with: \"Yes, but it is difficult to talk about.\"\nCrichton was a workaholic. When drafting a novel, which would typically take him six or seven weeks, Crichton withdrew completely to follow what he called \"a structured approach\" of ritualistic self-denial. As he neared writing the end of each book, he would rise increasingly early each day, meaning that he would sleep for less than four hours by going to bed at 10\u00a0p.m. and waking at 2\u00a0a.m.\nIn 1992, Crichton was ranked among \"People\" magazine's 50 most beautiful people. He married five times. Four of the marriages ended in divorce: Joan Radam (1965\u20131970); Kathleen St. Johns (1978\u20131980); Suzanna Childs (1981\u20131983); and actress Anne-Marie Martin (1987\u20132003), the mother of his daughter (born 1989). At the time of his death, Crichton was married to Sherri Alexander (married 2005), who was six months pregnant with their son, born on February 12, 2009.\nPolitics.\nFrom 1990 to 1995, Crichton donated $9,750 to Democratic candidates for office. According to Pat Choate, Crichton was a supporter of Reform candidate Ross Perot in the 1996 United States presidential election. Crichton's 1992 novel \"Rising Sun\" delved into the political and economic effect of Japan\u2013United States relations. The novel warns against foreign direct investment in the U.S. economy, with Crichton describing it in interviews as \"economic suicide\" for the United States. Crichton stated that his novel was written as a \"wakeup call\" to Americans.\nIn a 2003 speech, Crichton warned against partisanship in environmental legislation, arguing for an apolitical environmentalist movement. In 2005, Crichton reportedly met with Republican President George W. Bush to discuss Crichton's novel \"State of Fear\", of which Bush was a fan. According to Fred Barnes, Bush and Crichton \"talked for an hour and were in near-total agreement.\" In September 2005, Crichton testified on climate change before the U.S. Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works. Crichton opined that human activities are not significantly contributing to global warming, and encouraged U.S. lawmakers to more closely examine the methodology of climate science before voting on policy. His testimony received praise from Republican Senator Jim Inhofe, and criticism from Democratic Senator Hillary Clinton. Crichton's views on climate change are frequently criticized as pseudoscience.\nIllness and death.\nAccording to Crichton's brother Douglas, Crichton was diagnosed with lymphoma in early 2008. His cancer was not made public until his death. He was undergoing chemotherapy treatment at the time of his death, and Crichton's physicians and relatives had been expecting him to recover. He died at age 66 on November 4, 2008.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Michael's talent outscaled even his own dinosaurs of \"Jurassic Park\". He was the greatest at blending science with big theatrical concepts, which is what gave credibility to dinosaurs walking the earth again. In the early days, Michael had just sold \"The Andromeda Strain\" to Robert Wise at Universal and I had recently signed on as a contract TV director there. My first assignment was to show Michael Crichton around the Universal lot. We became friends and professionally \"Jurassic Park\", \"ER\", and \"Twister\" followed. Michael was a gentle soul who reserved his flamboyant side for his novels. There is no one in the wings that will ever take his place.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As a pop novelist, he was divine. A Crichton book was a headlong experience driven by a man who was both a natural storyteller and fiendishly clever when it came to verisimilitude; he made you believe that cloning dinosaurs wasn't just over the horizon but possible tomorrow. Maybe today.\u2014\u200a\nCrichton had an extensive collection of 20th-century American art, which Christie's auctioned in May 2010.\nReception.\nScience fiction novels.\nMost of Crichton's novels address issues emerging in scientific research fields. In a number of his novels (\"Jurassic Park\", \"The Lost World\", \"Next\", \"Congo\") genomics plays an important role. Usually, the drama revolves around the sudden eruption of a scientific crisis, revealing the disruptive impacts new forms of knowledge and technology may have, as is stated in \"The Andromeda Strain\", Crichton's first science fiction novel: \"This book recounts the five-day history of a major American scientific crisis\" (1969, p.\u00a03) or \"The Terminal Man\" where unexpected behaviors are realized when electrodes are implanted into a person's brain.\nSpeeches.\nCrichton was a popular public speaker. He delivered a number of speeches in his lifetime, particularly on the topic of global warming, for which he has been criticized as a proponent of pseudoscience.\n\"Intelligence Squared debate\".\nOn March 14, 2007, Intelligence Squared held a debate in New York City for which the motion was \"Global Warming Is Not a Crisis\", moderated by Brian Lehrer. Crichton was for the motion, along with Richard Lindzen and Philip Stott, versus Gavin Schmidt, Richard Somerville, and Brenda Ekwurze, who were against the motion. Before the debate, the audience had voted largely against the motion (57% to 30%, with 13% undecided). At the end of the debate, there was a greater shift in the audience vote for the motion (46% to 42%, with 12% undecided), resulting in Crichton's group winning the debate. Although Crichton inspired numerous blog responses and his contribution to the debate was considered one of his best rhetorical performances, reception of his message was mixed.\n\"Mediasaurus: The Decline of Conventional Media\".\nIn a speech delivered at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., on April 7, 1993, Crichton predicted the decline of mainstream media.\n\"Ritual Abuse, Hot Air, and Missed Opportunities: Science Views Media\".\nThe AAAS invited Crichton to address scientists concerns about how they are portrayed in the media, which was delivered to the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Anaheim, California on January 25, 1999.\n\"Environmentalism as Religion\".\nThis was not the first discussion of environmentalism as a religion, but it caught on and was widely quoted. Crichton explains his view that religious approaches to the environment are inappropriate and cause damage to the natural world they intend to protect. The speech was delivered to the Commonwealth Club in San Francisco, California on September 15, 2003.\n\"Science Policy in the 21st century\".\nCrichton outlined several issues before a joint meeting of liberal and conservative think tanks. The speech was delivered at AEI\u2013Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C., on January 25, 2005.\n\"The Case for Skepticism on Global Warming\".\nOn January 25, 2005, at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., Crichton presented a case against the scientific consensus on climate change, arguing that claims for catastrophic warming were doubtful and that reducing CO2 is vastly more difficult than is commonly presumed. He also opined that societies are morally unjustified in spending vast sums on global warming when people around the world are dying of starvation and disease. This presentation was later collected and republished in writing by the Science and Public Policy Institute, an organization which promotes climate change denial.\n\"Caltech Michelin Lecture\".\n\"Aliens Cause Global Warming\" January 17, 2003. In the spirit of his science fiction writing, Crichton details research on nuclear winter and SETI Drake equations relative to global warming science.\n\"Testimony before the United States Senate\".\nCrichton was invited to testify before the Senate in September 2005, as an \"expert witness on global warming.\" The speech was delivered to the Committee on Environment and Public Works in Washington, D.C.\n\"Complexity Theory and Environmental Management\".\nIn previous speeches, Crichton criticized environmental groups for failing to incorporate complexity theory. Here he explains in detail why complexity theory is essential to environmental management, using the history of Yellowstone Park as an example of what not to do. The speech was delivered to the Washington Center for Complexity and Public Policy in Washington, D.C., on November 6, 2005.\n\"Genetic Research and Legislative Needs\".\nWhile writing \"Next\", Crichton concluded that laws covering genetic research desperately needed to be revised, and spoke to congressional staff members about problems ahead. The speech was delivered to a group of legislative staffers in Washington, D.C., on September 14, 2006.\nGell-Mann amnesia effect.\nIn a speech in 2002, Crichton coined the term Gell-Mann amnesia effect to describe the phenomenon of experts reading articles within their fields of expertise and finding them to be error-ridden and full of misunderstanding, but seemingly forgetting those experiences when reading articles in the same publications written on topics outside of their fields of expertise, which they believe to be credible. He explained that he had chosen the name ironically, because he had once discussed the effect with physicist Murray Gell-Mann, \"and by dropping a famous name I imply greater importance to myself, and to the effect, than it would otherwise have.\"\nLegacy.\nIn 2002, a genus of ankylosaurid, \"Crichtonsaurus bohlini\", was named in his honor. This species was concluded to be dubious however, and some of the diagnostic fossil material was then transferred into the new binomial \"Crichtonpelta benxiensis\", also named in his honor. His literary works continue to be adapted into films, making him the 20th highest grossing story creator of all time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20765", "revid": "30292728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20765", "title": "Minor scale", "text": "Triad of scale patterns in music theory \nIn Western classical music theory, the minor scale refers to three scale patterns \u2013 the natural minor scale (or Aeolian mode), the harmonic minor scale, and the melodic minor scale (ascending or descending).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThese scales contain all three notes of a minor triad: the root, a minor third (rather than the major third, as in a major triad or major scale), and a perfect fifth (rather than the diminished fifth, as in a diminished scale or half diminished scale).\nMinor scale is also used to refer to other scales with this property, such as the Dorian mode or the minor pentatonic scale (see other minor scales below).\nNatural minor scale.\nRelationship to relative major.\nA natural minor scale (or Aeolian mode) is a diatonic scale that is built by starting on the sixth degree of its relative major scale. For instance, the A natural minor scale can be built by starting on the 6th degree of the C major scale:\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt; {\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n\\relative c' { \n \\clef treble \\time 7/4\n c4^\\markup { C major scale } d e f g\n\\override NoteHead.color = #red a \\override NoteHead.color = #black b c2 \\bar \"||\"\n \\time 9/4\n&lt;/score&gt;\nBecause of this, the key of A minor is called the \"relative minor\" of C major. Every major key has a relative minor, which starts on the 6th scale degree or step. For instance, since the 6th degree of F major is D, the relative minor of F major is D minor.\nRelationship to parallel major.\nA natural minor scale can also be constructed by altering a major scale with accidentals. In this way, a natural minor scale is represented by the following notation:\n 1, 2, \u266d3, 4, 5, \u266d6, \u266d7, 8\nThis notation is based on the major scale, and represents each degree (each note in the scale) by a number, starting with the tonic (the first, lowest note of the scale). By making use of flat symbols (\u266d) this notation thus represents notes by how they deviate from the notes in the major scale. Because of this, we say that a number without a flat represents a major (or perfect) interval, while a number with a flat represents a minor interval. In this example, the numbers mean:\nThus, for instance, the A natural minor scale can be built by lowering the third, sixth, and seventh degrees of the A major scale by one semitone:\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt; {\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n\\relative c' { \n \\clef treble \\time 7/4\n a4^\\markup { A major scale } b \\override NoteHead.color = #red cis \\override NoteHead.color = #black d e \\override NoteHead.color = #red fis gis \\override NoteHead.color = #black a2 \\bar \"||\"\n \\time 9/4\n&lt;/score&gt;\nBecause they share the same tonic note of A, the key of A minor is called the \"parallel minor\" of A major.\nIntervals.\nThe intervals between the notes of a natural minor scale follow the sequence below:\n whole, half, whole, whole, half, whole, whole\nwhere \"whole\" stands for a whole tone (a red u-shaped curve in the figure), and \"half\" stands for a semitone (a red angled line in the figure).\nThe natural minor scale is maximally even.\nHarmonic minor scale.\nConstruction.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\" override_midi=\"Schumann First Symphony harmonic minor example.mid\"&gt;\n\\relative c {\n \\clef bass \n \\time 2/2\n \\key g \\minor\n \\tempo \"Allegro\"\n g2 a bes4 c2 d4 es2 fis g1\n&lt;/score&gt; Theme in harmonic minor from the opening of Schumann's First Symphony (1841)The harmonic minor scale (or Aeolian \u266e7 scale) has the same notes as the natural minor scale except that the seventh degree is raised by one semitone, creating an augmented second between the sixth and seventh degrees.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt; {\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n\\relative c' { \n \\clef treble \\time 7/4\n&lt;/score&gt;\nThus, a harmonic minor scale is represented by the following notation:\n 1, 2, \u266d3, 4, 5, \u266d6, 7, 8\nA harmonic minor scale can be built by lowering the 3rd and 6th degrees of the parallel major scale by one semitone.\nBecause of this construction, the 7th degree of the harmonic minor scale functions as a leading tone to the tonic because it is a \"semitone\" lower than the tonic, rather than a \"whole tone\" lower than the tonic as it is in natural minor scales.\nIntervals.\nThe intervals between the notes of a harmonic minor scale follow the sequence below:\n whole, half, whole, whole, half, augmented second, half\nUses.\nWhile it evolved primarily as a basis for chords, the harmonic minor with its augmented second is sometimes used melodically. Instances can be found in Mozart, Beethoven (for example, the finale of his String Quartet No. 14), and Schubert (for example, in the first movement of the \"Death and the Maiden Quartet\"). In this role, it is used while descending far more often than while ascending. A familiar example of the descending scale is heard in a ring of bells. A ring of twelve is sometimes augmented with a 5\u266f and 6\u266d to make a 10 note harmonic minor scale from bell 2 to bell 11 (for example, Worcester Cathedral).\nThe Hungarian minor scale is similar to the harmonic minor scale but with a raised 4th degree. This scale is sometimes also referred to as \"Gypsy Run\", or alternatively \"Egyptian Minor Scale\", as mentioned by Miles Davis who describes it in his autobiography as \"something that I'd learned at Juilliard\".\nIn popular music, examples of songs in harmonic minor include Katy B's \"Easy Please Me\", Bobby Brown's \"My Prerogative\", and Jazmine Sullivan's \"Bust Your Windows\". The scale also had a notable influence on heavy metal, spawning a sub-genre known as neoclassical metal, with guitarists such as Chuck Schuldiner, Yngwie Malmsteen, Ritchie Blackmore, and Randy Rhoads employing it in their music.\nMelodic minor scale.\nConstruction.\nThe distinctive sound of the harmonic minor scale comes from the augmented second between its sixth and seventh scale degrees. While some composers have used this interval to advantage in melodic composition, others felt it to be an awkward leap, particularly in vocal music, and preferred a whole step between these scale degrees for smooth melody writing. To eliminate the augmented second, these composers either raised the sixth degree by a semitone or lowered the seventh by a semitone.\nThe melodic minor scale is formed by using \"both\" of these solutions. In particular, the raised sixth appears in the ascending form of the scale, while the lowered seventh appears in the descending form of the scale. Traditionally, these two forms are referred to as:\nThe ascending and descending forms of the A melodic minor scale are shown below:\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt; {\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\\relative c' {\n \\clef treble \\time 7/4 \\hide Staff.TimeSignature\n \\override Voice.TextScript.font-size = #-2\n a4^\\markup { Ascending melodic minor } b c d e fis gis\n&lt;/score&gt;\nThe ascending melodic minor scale can be notated as\n 1, 2, \u266d3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8\nwhile the descending melodic minor scale is\n 8, \u266d7, \u266d6, 5, 4, \u266d3, 2, 1\nUsing these notations, the two melodic minor scales can be built by altering the parallel major scale.\nIntervals.\nThe intervals between the notes of an ascending melodic minor scale follow the sequence below:\n whole, half, whole, whole, whole, whole, half\nThe intervals between the notes of a descending melodic minor scale are the same as those of a descending natural minor scale.\nUses.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n \\relative c {\n \\set Staff.midiInstrument = #\"violin\"\n \\set Score.tempoHideNote = ##t \\tempo 4 = 120\n \\key g \\dorian\n \\time 4/4\n g8^\\markup \\bold \"Allegro\"\n f16 es d c bes a g a bes c d e fis g\n fis8[ d]\n&lt;/score&gt; Theme in G melodic minor from the opening of the second concerto in Vivaldi's \"L'estro armonico\" (1711) Although the piece is in G minor, the key signature is for G Dorian (one flat). By convention, in modern notation (and for tonal music written since the common-practice period), key signatures are typically only based on a major (Ionian mode) or minor (natural minor or Aeolian mode) key, not on modes like the Dorian mode.\nComposers have not been consistent in using the two forms of the melodic minor scale. Composers frequently require the lowered 7th degree found in the natural minor in order to avoid the augmented triad (III+) that arises in the ascending form of the scale.\nExamples of the use of melodic minor in rock and popular music include Elton John's \"Sorry Seems to Be the Hardest Word\", which makes, \"a nod to the common practice... by the use of F\u266f [the leading tone in G minor] as the penultimate note of the final cadence.\" The Beatles' \"Yesterday\" also partly uses the melodic minor scale.\nOther minor scales.\nOther scales with a minor third and a perfect fifth (i.e. containing a minor triad) are also commonly referred to as minor scales.\nWithin the diatonic modes of the major scale, in addition to the Aeolian mode (which is the natural minor scale), the Dorian mode and the Phrygian mode also fall under this definition. Conversely, the Locrian mode has a minor third, but a \"diminished\" fifth (thus containing a diminished triad), and is therefore not commonly referred to as a minor scale.\nThe Hungarian minor scale is another heptatonic (7-note) scale referred to as minor.\nThe Jazz minor scale is a name for the melodic minor scale when only the \"ascending form\" is used.\nNon-heptatonic scales may also be called \"minor\", such as the minor pentatonic scale.\nLimits of terminology.\nWhile any other scale containing a minor triad could be defined as a \"minor scale\", the terminology is less commonly used for some scales, especially those further outside the Western classical tradition.\nThe hexatonic (6-note) blues scale is similar to the minor pentatonic scale and fits the above definition. However, the flat fifth is present as a passing tone along with the perfect fifth, and the scale is often played with microtonal mixing of the major and minor thirds \u2013 thus making it harder to classify as a \"major\" or \"minor\" scale.\nThe two Neapolitan scales are both \"minor scales\" following the above definition, but were historically referred to as the \"Neapolitan Major\" or \"Neapolitan Minor\" based rather on the quality of their \"sixth\" degree.\nKey signature.\nIn modern notation, the key signature for music in a minor key is typically based on the accidentals of the \"natural\" minor scale, not on those of the harmonic or melodic minor scales. For example, a piece in E minor will have one sharp in its key signature because the E natural minor scale has one sharp (F\u266f).\nMajor and minor keys that share the same key signature are \"relative\" to each other. For instance, F major is the relative major of D minor since both have key signatures with one flat. Since the natural minor scale is built on the 6th degree of the major scale, the tonic of the relative minor is a major sixth above the tonic of the major scale. For instance, B minor is the relative minor of D major because the note B is a major sixth above D. As a result, the key signatures of B minor and D major both have two sharps (F\u266f and C\u266f).\nOther notations and usage.\nWhen expressing the names of minor scale keys as abbreviations, the alphabet of the corresponding tonic note name can be written in lower case letters to indicate only the tonic note name. For example, when expressing the English notation of A minor, it can be abbreviated as 'a'. Plus, when expressing the names of major scale keys as abbreviations, the Roman alphabet of the corresponding tonic note is sometimes upper case to indicate only the tonic note name. For example, when expressing the English notation of C major, it is abbreviated as 'C'.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20767", "revid": "46115515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20767", "title": "Menachem Begin", "text": "Prime Minister of Israel from 1977 to 1983\nMenachem Begin (16 August 1913 \u2013 9 March 1992) was an Israeli politician who founded Herut and Likud and served as prime minister of Israel from 1977 to 1983.\nBefore the creation of the state of Israel, he was the leader of the Zionist militant group Irgun, the Revisionist breakaway from the larger Jewish paramilitary organization Haganah. He proclaimed a revolt, on 1 February 1944, against the British mandatory government, which was opposed by the Jewish Agency. As head of the Irgun, he targeted the British in Palestine, with a notable attack being the King David Hotel bombing. Later, the Irgun fought the Arabs during the 1947\u201348 civil war in Mandatory Palestine and, as its chief, Begin was described by the British government as the \"leader of the notorious terrorist organisation\". It declined him an entry visa to the United Kingdom between 1953 and 1955. However, Begin's overtures of friendship eventually paid off and he was granted a visa in 1972, five years prior to becoming prime minister.\nBegin was elected to the first Knesset, as head of Herut, the party he founded, and was at first on the political fringe, embodying the opposition to the Mapai-led government and Israeli establishment. He remained in opposition in the eight consecutive elections (except for a national unity government around the Six-Day War), but became more acceptable to the political center. His 1977 electoral victory and premiership ended three decades of Labor Party political dominance.\nBegin's most significant achievement as prime minister was the signing of a peace treaty with Egypt in 1979, for which he and Anwar Sadat shared the Nobel Peace Prize. In the wake of the Camp David Accords, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) withdrew from the Sinai Peninsula, which had been captured from Egypt in the Six-Day War. Later, Begin's government promoted the construction of Israeli settlements in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Begin authorized the bombing of the Osirak nuclear plant in Iraq and the invasion of Lebanon in 1982 to fight Palestine Liberation Organization strongholds there, igniting the 1982 Lebanon War. As Israeli military involvement in Lebanon deepened, and the Sabra and Shatila massacre, carried out by Christian Phalangist militia allies of the Israelis, shocked world public opinion, Begin grew increasingly isolated. As IDF forces remained mired in Lebanon and the economy suffered from hyperinflation, the public pressure on Begin mounted. Depressed by the death of his wife Aliza in November 1982, he gradually withdrew from public life, until his resignation in October 1983.\nBiography.\nMenachem Begin was born to Zeev Dov and Hassia Begun in Brest-Litovsk, Russian Empire (now Brest, Belarus). He was the youngest of three children. On his mother's side he was descended from distinguished rabbis. His father, a timber merchant, was a community leader, a passionate Zionist, and an admirer of Theodor Herzl. The midwife who attended his birth was the grandmother of Ariel Sharon.\nAfter a year of a traditional cheder education Begin started studying at a \"Tachkemoni\" school, associated with the religious Zionist movement. In his childhood, Begin, like most Jewish children in his town, was a member of the Zionist scouts movement Hashomer Hatzair. He was a member of Hashomer Hatzair until the age of 13, and at 16, he joined Betar. At 14, he was sent to a Polish government school, where he received a solid grounding in classical literature.\nBegin studied law at the University of Warsaw, where he learned the oratory and rhetoric skills that became his trademark as a politician, and viewed as demagogy by his critics.\nDuring his studies, he organized a self-defense group of Jewish students to counter harassment by anti-Semites on campus. He graduated in 1935, but never practiced law. At this time he became a disciple of Vladimir \"Ze'ev\" Jabotinsky, the founder of the nationalist Revisionist Zionism movement and its youth wing, Betar. His rise within Betar was rapid: at 22, he shared the dais with his mentor at the Betar World Congress in Krak\u00f3w. The pre-war Polish government actively supported Zionist youth and paramilitary movements. In 1937 he was the active head of Betar in Czechoslovakia and became head of the largest branch, that of Poland. As head of Betar's Polish branch, Begin traveled among regional branches to encourage supporters and recruit new members. To save money, he stayed at the homes of Betar members. During one such visit, he met his future wife Aliza Arnold, who was the daughter of his host. The couple married on 29 May 1939. They had three children: Binyamin, Leah and Hassia.\nLiving in Warsaw in Poland, Begin encouraged Betar to set up an organization to bring Polish Jews to Palestine. He unsuccessfully attempted to smuggle 1,500 Jews into Romania at the end of August 1939. Returning to Warsaw afterward, he left three days after the German 1939 invasion began, first to the southwest and then to Wilno.\nIn September 1939, after Germany invaded Poland, Begin, in common with a large part of Warsaw's Jewish leadership, escaped to Wilno (today Vilnius), then eastern Poland, to avoid inevitable arrest. The town was soon occupied by the Soviet Union, but from 28 October 1939, it was the capital of the Republic of Lithuania. Wilno was a predominately Polish and Jewish town; an estimated 40 percent of the population was Jewish, with the YIVO institute located there. As a prominent pre-war Zionist and reserve status officer-cadet, on 20 September 1940, Begin was arrested by the NKVD and detained in the Luki\u0161k\u0117s Prison. In later years he wrote about his experience of being tortured. He was accused of being an \"agent of British imperialism\" and sentenced to eight years in the Soviet gulag camps. On 1 June 1941 he was sent to the Pechora labor camps in Komi Republic, the northern part of European Russia. Much later in life, Begin recorded and reflected upon his experiences in the interrogations and life in the camp in his memoir \"White Nights\".\nIn July 1941, just after Germany attacked the Soviet Union, and following his release under the Sikorski\u2013Mayski agreement because he was a Polish national, Begin joined the Free Polish Anders' Army as a corporal officer cadet. He was later sent with the army to Palestine via the Persian Corridor, where he arrived in May 1942.\nUpon arriving in Palestine, Begin, like many other Polish Jewish soldiers of the Anders' Army, faced a choice between remaining with the Anders' Army to fight Nazi Germany in Europe, or staying in Palestine to fight for establishment of a Jewish state. While he initially wished to remain with the Polish army, he was eventually persuaded to change his mind by his contacts in the Irgun, as well as Polish officers sympathetic to the Zionist cause. Consequently, General Micha\u0142 Karaszewicz-Tokarzewski, the second-in-command of the Army, issued Begin with a \"leave of absence without an expiration\" which gave Begin official permission to stay in Palestine. In December 1942 he left Anders's Army and joined the Irgun.\nDuring the Holocaust, Begin's father was among the 5,000 Brest Jews rounded up by the Nazis at the end of June 1941. Instead of being sent to a forced labor camp, they were shot or drowned in the river. His mother and his elder brother Herzl also were murdered in the Holocaust.\nJewish underground.\nBegin quickly made a name for himself as a fierce critic of the dominant Zionist leadership for being too cooperative with the British, and argued that the only way to save the Jews of Europe, who were facing extermination, was to compel the British to leave so that a Jewish state could be established. In 1942 he joined the Irgun (\"Etzel\"), an underground Zionist paramilitary organization which had split from the main Jewish military organization, the Haganah, in 1931. Begin assumed the Irgun's leadership in 1944, determined to force the British government to remove its troops entirely from Palestine. The official Jewish leadership institutions in Palestine, the Jewish Agency and Jewish National Council (\"Vaad Leumi\"), backed up by their military arm, the Haganah, had refrained from directly challenging British authority. They were convinced that the British would establish a Jewish state after the war due to support for the Zionist cause among both the Conservative and Labour parties. Giving as reasons that the British had reneged on the promises given in the Balfour Declaration and that the White Paper of 1939 restricting Jewish immigration was an escalation of their pro-Arab policy, he decided to break with the official institutions and launch an armed rebellion against British rule, in cooperation with Lehi, another breakaway Zionist group.\nBegin had also carefully studied the tactics of the Indian independence movement. Even more importantly, during multiple meetings with Jewish Lord Mayor of Dublin and senior IRA veteran Robert Briscoe, who jokingly described himself as the \"Chair of Subversive Activity against England\", Begin had also carefully studied the highly successful use of guerrilla warfare tactics by Michael Collins during the Irish War of Independence. While planning the rebellion with Irgun commanders, Begin accordingly devised a highly similar strategy that he believed would force the British Empire out. He proposed a series of guerrilla warfare attacks that would humiliate the British Empire and damage their prestige; this would cause the British Cabinet, as they had with the Black and Tans and the Auxiliary Division in Ireland, to unleash indiscriminate total war tactics against the whole Jewish civilian population, which would completely alienate the Yishuv. Similarly to Michael Collins, Begin banked on the international media being attracted to the action, which he referred to as turning Palestine into a \"glass house\", as the whole world looked inside. He knew that British total war and civilian repression would create both global sympathy for the Irgun's cause and international diplomatic pressure on Britain. Ultimately, the British Cabinet would be forced to choose between further escalating the repression or complete withdrawal, and Begin was certain that in the end, the British would leave. Further, so as not to disturb the Allied war effort against Nazi Germany, only British civilian administration and Palestine Police Force targets would be attacked at first, while British armed forces personnel would only be attacked after Adolf Hitler had been defeated.\nOn 1 February 1944, the Irgun proclaimed a revolt. Twelve days later, it put its plan into action when Irgun teams bombed the empty offices of the British Mandate's Immigration Department in Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, and Haifa. The Irgun next bombed the Income Tax Offices in those three cities, followed by a series of attacks on police stations in which two Irgun fighters and six policemen were killed. Meanwhile, Lehi joined the revolt with a series of shooting attacks on policemen.\nThe Irgun and Lehi attacks intensified throughout 1944. These operations were financed by demanding money from Jewish merchants and engaging in insurance scams in the local diamond industry.\nIn 1944, after Lehi gunmen assassinated Lord Moyne, the British Resident Minister in the Middle East, the official Jewish authorities, fearing British retaliation, ordered the Haganah to undertake a campaign of collaboration with the British. Known as The Hunting Season, the campaign seriously crippled the Irgun for several months, while Lehi, having agreed to suspend their anti-British attacks, was spared. Begin, anxious to prevent a civil war, ordered his men not to retaliate or resist being taken captive, convinced that the Irgun could ride out the Season, and that the Jewish Agency would eventually side with the Irgun when it became apparent the British government had no intention of making concessions. Gradually, shamed at participating in what was viewed as a collaborationist campaign, the enthusiasm of the Haganah began to wane, and Begin's assumptions were proven correct. The Irgun's restraint also earned it much sympathy from the Yishuv, whereas previously it had been assumed by many that it had placed its own political interests before those of the Yishuv.\nIn the summer of 1945, as it became clear that the British were not planning on establishing a Jewish state and would not allow significant Jewish immigration to Palestine, Jewish public opinion shifted decisively against the British, and the Jewish authorities sent feelers to the Irgun and Lehi to discuss an alliance. The result was the Jewish Resistance Movement, a framework under which the Haganah, Irgun, and Lehi launched coordinated series of anti-British operations. For several months in 1945\u201346, the Irgun fought as part of the Jewish Resistance Movement. Following Operation Agatha, during which the British arrested many Jews, seized arms caches, and occupied the Jewish Agency building, from which many documents were removed, Begin ordered an attack on the British military and administrative headquarters at the King David Hotel following a request from the Haganah, although the Haganah's permission was later rescinded. The King David Hotel bombing resulted in the destruction of the building's southern wing, and 91 people, mostly British, Arabs, and Jews, were killed.\nThe fragile partnership collapsed following the bombing, partly because contrary to instructions, it was carried out during the busiest part of the day at the hotel. The Haganah, from then on, would rarely mount attacks against British forces and would focus mainly on the Aliyah Bet illegal immigration campaign, and while it occasionally took half-hearted measures against the Irgun, it never returned to full-scale collaboration with the British. The Irgun and Lehi continued waging a full-scale insurgency against the British, and together with the Haganah's illegal immigration campaign, this forced a large commitment of British forces to Palestine that was gradually sapping British financial resources. Three particular Irgun operations directly ordered by Begin: the Night of the Beatings, the Acre Prison break, and the Sergeants affair, were cited as particularly influencing the British to leave due to the great loss of British prestige and growing public opposition to Britain remaining in Palestine at home they generated. In September 1947, the British cabinet voted to leave Palestine, and in November of that year, the United Nations approved a resolution to partition the country between Arabs and Jews. The financial burden imposed on Britain by the Jewish insurgency, together with the tremendous public opposition to keeping troops in Palestine it generated among the British public was later cited by British officials as a major factor in Britain's decision to evacuate Palestine.\n1948 Palestine war.\nIn December 1947, immediately following the UN partition vote, the 1947\u20131948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine broke out between the Yishuv and Palestinian Arabs. The Irgun fought together with the Haganah and Lehi during that period. Notable operations in which they took part were the battle of Jaffa and the Jordanian siege on the Jewish Quarter in the Old City of Jerusalem. The Irgun's most controversial operation during this period, carried out alongside Lehi, was an assault on the Arab village of Deir Yassin in which more than a hundred villagers and four of the attackers were killed. The event later became known as the Deir Yassin massacre, though Irgun and Lehi sources would deny a massacre took place there. Begin also repeatedly threatened to declare independence if the Jewish Agency did not do so.\nThroughout the period of the rebellion against the British and the civil war against the Arabs, Begin lived openly under a series of assumed names, often while sporting a beard. Begin would not come out of hiding until April 1948, when the British, who still maintained nominal authority over Palestine, were almost totally gone. During the period of revolt, Begin was the most wanted man in Palestine, and MI5 placed a 'dead-or-alive' bounty of \u00a310,000 on his head. Begin had been forced into hiding immediately prior to the declaration of revolt, when Aliza noticed that their house was being watched. He initially lived in a room in the Savoy Hotel, a small hotel in Tel Aviv whose owner was sympathetic to the Irgun's cause, and his wife and son were smuggled in to join him after two months. He decided to grow a beard and live openly under an assumed name rather than go completely into hiding. He was aided by the fact that the British authorities possessed only two photographs of his likeness, of which one, which they believed to be his military identity card, bore only a slight resemblance to him, according to Begin, and were fed misinformation by Yaakov Meridor that he had had plastic surgery, and were thus confused over his appearance. Due to the British police conducting searches in the hotel's vicinity, he relocated to a Yemenite neighborhood in Petah Tikva, and after a month, moved to the Hasidof neighborhood near Kfar Sirkin, where he pretended to be a lawyer named Yisrael Halperin. After the British searched the area but missed the street where his house was located, Begin and his family moved to a new home on a Tel Aviv side street, where he assumed the name Yisrael Sassover and masqueraded as a rabbi. Following the King David Hotel bombing, when the British searched the entire city of Tel Aviv, Begin evaded capture by hiding in a secret compartment in his home. In 1947, he moved to the heart of Tel Aviv and took the identity of Dr. Yonah Koenigshoffer, the name he found on an abandoned passport in a library.\nIn the years following the establishment of the State of Israel, the Irgun's contribution to precipitating British withdrawal became a hotly contested debate as different factions vied for control over the emerging narrative of Israeli independence. Begin resented his portrayal as a belligerent dissident.\n\"Altalena Affair\".\nAfter the Israeli Declaration of Independence on 14 May 1948 and the start of the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, Irgun continued to fight alongside Haganah and Lehi. On 15 May 1948, Begin broadcast a speech on radio declaring that the Irgun was finally moving out of its underground status. On 3 June Begin signed an agreement with the provisional government headed by David Ben-Gurion, where the Irgun agreed to formally disband and to integrate its force with the newly formed Israel Defense Forces (IDF), but was not truthful of the armaments aboard the \"Altalena\" as it was scheduled to arrive during the cease-fire ordered by the United Nations and therefore would have put the State of Israel in peril as Britain was adamant the partition of Jewish and Arab Palestine would not occur. This delivery was the smoking gun Britain would need to urge the UN to end the partition action.\nIntense negotiations between representatives of the provisional government (headed by Ben-Gurion) and the Irgun (headed by Begin) followed the departure of \"Altalena\" from France. Among the issues discussed were logistics of the ship's landing and distribution of the cargo between the military organizations. Whilst there was agreement on the anchoring place of the \"Altalena\", there were differences of opinion about the allocation of the cargo. Ben-Gurion agreed to Begin's initial request that 20% of the weapons be dispatched to the Irgun's Jerusalem Battalion, which was still fighting independently. His second request, however, that the remainder be transferred to the IDF to equip the newly incorporated Irgun battalions, was rejected by the Government representatives, who interpreted the request as a demand to reinforce an \"army within an army.\"\nThe \"Altalena\" reached Kfar Vitkin in the late afternoon of Sunday, 20 June. Among the Irgun members waiting on the shore was Menachem Begin, who greeted the arrivals with great emotion. After the passengers had disembarked, members of the fishing village of Mikhmoret helped unload the cargo of military equipment. Concomitantly with the events at Kfar Vitkin, the government had convened in Tel Aviv for its weekly meeting. Ben-Gurion reported on the meetings which had preceded the arrival of the \"Altalena\", and was adamant in his demand that Begin surrender and hand over all of the weapons:\nWe must decide whether to hand over power to Begin or to order him to cease his separate activities. If he does not do so, we will open fire! Otherwise, we must decide to disperse our own army.\nThe debate ended in a resolution to empower the army to use force if necessary to overcome the Irgun and to confiscate the ship and its cargo. Implementation of this decision was assigned to the Alexandroni Brigade, commanded by Dan Even (Epstein), which the following day surrounded the Kfar Vitkin area. Dan Even issued the following ultimatum:\nTo: M. BeginBy special order from the Chief of the General Staff of the Israel Defense Forces, I am empowered to confiscate the weapons and military materials which have arrived on the Israeli coast in the area of my jurisdiction in the name of the Israel Government. I have been authorized to demand that you hand over the weapons to me for safekeeping and to inform you that you should establish contact with the supreme command. You are required to carry out this order immediately. If you do not agree to carry out this order, I shall use all the means at my disposal in order to implement the order and to requisition the weapons which have reached shore and transfer them from private possession into the possession of the Israel government. I wish to inform you that the entire area is surrounded by fully armed military units and armored cars, and all roads are blocked. I hold you fully responsible for any consequences in the event of your refusal to carry out this order. The immigrants \u2013 unarmed \u2013 will be permitted to travel to the camps in accordance with your arrangements. You have ten minutes to give me your answer.D.E., Brigade Commander\nThe ultimatum was made, according to Even, \"in order not to give the Irgun commander time for lengthy considerations and to gain the advantage of surprise.\" Begin refused to respond to the ultimatum, and all attempts at mediation failed. Begin's failure to respond was a blow to Even's prestige, and a clash was now inevitable. Fighting ensued and there were a number of casualties. In order to prevent further bloodshed, the Kfar Vitkin settlers initiated negotiations between Yaakov Meridor (Begin's deputy) and Dan Even, which ended in a general ceasefire and the transfer of the weapons on shore to the local IDF commander.\nBegin had meanwhile boarded the \"Altalena\", which was headed for Tel Aviv where the Irgun had more supporters. Many Irgun members, who joined the IDF earlier that month, left their bases and concentrated on the Tel Aviv beach. A confrontation between them and the IDF units started. In response, Ben-Gurion ordered Yigael Yadin (acting Chief of Staff) to concentrate large forces on the Tel Aviv beach and to take the ship by force. Heavy guns were transferred to the area and at four in the afternoon, Ben-Gurion ordered the shelling of the \"Altalena\". One of the shells hit the ship, which began to burn. Yigal Allon, commander of the troops on the shore, later claimed only five or six shells were fired, as warning shots, and the ship was hit by accident.\nThere was danger that the fire would spread to the holds which contained explosives, and Captain Monroe Fein ordered all aboard to abandon ship. People jumped into the water, whilst their comrades on shore set out to meet them on rafts. Although Captain Fein flew the white flag of surrender, automatic fire continued to be directed at the unarmed survivors swimming in the water. Begin, who was on deck, agreed to leave the ship only after the last of the wounded had been evacuated. Sixteen Irgun fighters were killed in the confrontation with the army (all but three were veteran members and not newcomers in the ship); six were killed in the Kfar Vitkin area and ten on Tel Aviv beach. Three IDF soldiers were killed: two at Kfar Vitkin and one in Tel Aviv.\nAfter the shelling of the \"Altalena\", more than 200 Irgun fighters were arrested. Most of them were released several weeks later, with the exception of five senior commanders (Moshe Hason, Eliyahu Lankin, Yaakov Meridor, Bezalel Amitzur, and Hillel Kook), who were detained for more than two months, until 27 August 1948. Begin agreed the Irgun soldiers would be fully integrated with the IDF and not kept in separate units.\nAbout a year later, \"Altalena\" was refloated, towed 15 miles out to sea and sunk.\nPolitical career.\nHerut opposition years.\nIn August 1948, Begin and members of the Irgun High Command emerged from the underground and formed the right-wing political party Herut (\"Freedom\") party. The move countered the weakening attraction for the earlier revisionist party, Hatzohar, founded by his late mentor Ze'ev Jabotinsky. Revisionist 'purists' alleged nonetheless that Begin was out to steal Jabotinsky's mantle and ran against him with the old party. The Herut party can be seen as the forerunner of today's Likud.\nIn November 1948, Begin visited the US on a campaigning trip. During his visit, signed by Albert Einstein, Sidney Hook, Hannah Arendt, and other prominent Americans and several rabbis was published which described Begin's Herut party as \"terrorist, right-wing chauvinist organization in Palestine,\" \"closely akin in its organization, methods, political philosophy and social appeal to the Nazi and Fascist parties\" and accused his group (along with the smaller, militant, Stern Gang) of preaching \"racial superiority\" and having \"inaugurated a reign of terror in the Palestine Jewish community\".\nIn the first elections in 1949, Herut, with 11.5 percent of the vote, won 14 seats, while Hatzohar failed to break the threshold and disbanded shortly thereafter. This provided Begin with legitimacy as the leader of the Revisionist stream of Zionism. During the 1950s, Begin was banned from entering the United Kingdom, as the British government regarded him as \"leader of the notorious terrorist organisation Irgun.\" Begin's disappointment at the result of the 1951 Israeli legislative election, in which Herut lost six of its 14 seats, led Begin to resign as Herut leader in August 1951, and naming Aryeh Ben-Eliezer as his successor. Despite sending the party his resignation letter and going abroad to Europe, the party's national council voted instead to make Ben-Eliezer deputy chairman and grant Begin a six-month leave of absence, while re-electing him as party chairman. Begin did not return to public life until January 1952, prompted to do so by the growing debate around the Reparations Agreement between Israel and the Federal Republic of Germany as well as by Ben-Eliezer being hospitalized due to a serious heart attack in December 1951.\nBetween 1948 and 1977, under Begin, Herut and the alliances it formed (Gahal in 1965 and Likud in 1973) formed the main opposition to the dominant Mapai and later the Alignment (the forerunners of today's Labor Party) in the Knesset; Herut adopted a radical nationalistic agenda committed to the irredentist idea of Greater Israel that usually included Jordan. During those years, Begin was systematically delegitimized by the ruling party, and was often personally derided by Ben-Gurion who refused to either speak to or refer to him by name. Ben-Gurion famously coined the phrase 'without Herut and Maki' (Maki was the communist party), referring to his refusal to consider them for coalition, effectively pushing both parties and their voters beyond the margins of political consensus.\nThe personal animosity between Ben-Gurion and Begin, going back to the hostilities over the \"Altalena\" Affair, underpinned the political dichotomy between Mapai and Herut. Begin was a keen critic of Mapai, accusing it of coercive Bolshevism and deep-rooted institutional corruption. Drawing on his training as a lawyer in Poland, he preferred wearing a formal suit and tie and evincing the dry demeanor of a legislator to the socialist informality of Mapai, as a means of accentuating their differences.\nOne of the fiercest confrontations between Begin and Ben-Gurion revolved around the Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany, signed in 1952. Begin vehemently opposed the agreement, claiming that it was tantamount to a pardon of Nazi crimes against the Jewish people. While the agreement was debated in the Knesset in January 1952, he led a demonstration in Jerusalem attended by some 15,000 people, and gave a passionate and dramatic speech in which he attacked the government and called for its violent overthrow. Referring to the Altalena Affair, Begin stated that \"when you fired at me with a cannon, I gave the order: 'No!' Today I will give the order, 'Yes!'\" Incited by his speech, the crowd marched towards the Knesset (then at the Frumin Building on King George Street) and threw stones at the windows, and at police as they intervened. After five hours of rioting, police managed to suppress the riots using water cannons and tear gas. Hundreds were arrested, while some 200 rioters, 140 police officers, and several Knesset members were injured. Many held Begin personally responsible for the violence, and he was consequently barred from the Knesset for several months. His behavior was strongly condemned in mainstream public discourse, reinforcing his image as a provocateur. The vehemence of Revisionist opposition was deep; in March 1952, during the ongoing reparations negotiations, a parcel bomb addressed to Konrad Adenauer, the sitting West German Chancellor, was intercepted at a German post office. While being defused, the bomb exploded, killing one sapper and injuring two others. Five Israelis, all former members of Irgun, were later arrested in Paris for their involvement in the plot. Chancellor Adenauer decided to keep secret the involvement of Israeli opposition party members in the plot, thus avoiding Israeli embarrassment and a likely backlash. The five Irgun conspirators were later extradited from both France and Germany, without charge, and sent back to Israel. Forty years after the assassination attempt, Begin was implicated as the organizer of the assassination attempt in a memoir written by one of the conspirators, Elieser Sudit.\nBegin's impassioned rhetoric, laden with pathos and evocations of the Holocaust, appealed to many, but was deemed inflammatory and demagoguery by others.\nGahal and unity government.\nIn the following years, Begin failed to gain electoral momentum, and Herut remained far behind Labor with a total of 17 seats until 1961. In the 1965 Israeli legislative election, Herut and the Liberal Party united to form the Gahal bloc under Begin's leadership, but the merger prompted several Liberal MKs to split and form the Independent Liberals and Gahal failed to gain seats in the election, or make up the seats it lost from the Independent Liberal defection. In 1966, during Herut's party convention, he was challenged by the young Ehud Olmert. The opposition group within Herut, however, sensed that Begin's leadership position was too strong to challenge directly and concentrated on winning control over the party organization. They won overwhelming victories in all votes for the composition of party institutions. Begin responded to these challenges by announcing his retirement as party chairman and suggesting he would also resign seat in the Knesset. Begin's move mobilized delegates in support of him, but the party convention ended without a party chairman being elected; the chair would be vacant for eight months. Internal opposition to Begin' leadership came to a head a month after the convention, when Haim Amsterdam, an assistant to one of the opposition leaders, Shmuel Tamir, published a devastating attack on Begin in \"Ha'aretz\"; this led to the suspension of Tamir's party membership. The leaders of the opposition then established a new party in the Knesset, the Free Center, with the loss of three seats for Herut. After this revolt, Begin reversed his decision to retire and returned as party chairman in February 1967.\nThe day the Six-Day War started in June 1967, Gahal joined the national unity government under Prime Minister Levi Eshkol of the Alignment, resulting in Begin serving in the cabinet for the first time, as a Minister without Portfolio. Rafi also joined the unity government at that time, with Moshe Dayan becoming Defense Minister. Gahal's arrangement lasted until August 1970, when Begin and Gahal quit the government, then led by Golda Meir due to disagreements over the Rogers Plan and its \"in place\" cease-fire with Egypt along the Suez Canal, Other sources, including William B. Quandt, note that the Labor party, by formally accepting UN 242 in mid-1970, had accepted \"peace for withdrawal\" on all fronts, and because of this Begin had left the unity government. On 5 August, Begin explained before the Knesset why he was resigning from the cabinet. He said, \"As far as we are concerned, what do the words 'withdrawal from territories administered since 1967 by Israel' mean other than Judea and Samaria. Not all the territories; but by all opinion, most of them.\"\nLikud chairmanship.\nIn 1973, Begin agreed to a plan by Ariel Sharon to form a larger bloc of opposition parties, made up from Gahal, the Free Centre, and other smaller groups. They came through with a tenuous alliance called the Likud (\"Consolidation\"). In the elections held later that year, two months after the Yom Kippur War, the Likud won a considerable share of the votes, though with 39 seats still remained in opposition.\nYet the aftermath of the Yom Kippur War saw ensuing public disenchantment with the Alignment. Voices of criticism about the government's misconduct of the war gave rise to growing public resentment. Personifying the antithesis to the Alignment's socialist ethos, Begin appealed to many Mizrahi Israelis, mostly first and second generation Jewish refugees from Arab countries, who felt they were continuously being treated by the establishment as second-class citizens. His open embrace of Judaism stood in stark contrast to the Alignment's secularism, which alienated Mizrahi voters and drew many of them to support Begin, becoming his burgeoning political base. In the years 1974\u201377 Yitzhak Rabin's government suffered from instability due to infighting within the labor party (Rabin and Shimon Peres) and the shift to the right by the National Religious Party, as well as numerous corruption scandals. All these weakened the labor camp and finally allowed Begin to capture the center stage of Israeli politics.\nIn 1977 Begin declared that \"between the [Mediterranean] Sea and the Jordan River there shall only be Israeli sovereignty\".\nPrime Minister of Israel.\n1977 electoral victory.\nOn 17 May 1977, the Likud, headed by Begin, won the Knesset elections by a landslide, becoming the biggest party in the Knesset. Popularly known as the \"Mahapakh\" (\"upheaval\"), the election results had seismic ramifications as for the first time in Israeli history a party other than the Alignment/Mapai could form a government, effectively ending the left's hitherto unrivalled domination over Israeli politics. Likud's electoral victory signified a fundamental restructuring of Israeli society in which the founding socialist Ashkenazi elite was being replaced by a coalition representing marginalized Mizrahi and Jewish-religious communities, promoting a socially conservative and economically liberal agenda.\nThe Likud campaign leading up to the election centered on Begin's personality. Demonized by the Alignment as totalitarian and extremist, his self-portrayal as a humble and pious leader struck a chord with many who felt abandoned by the ruling party's ideology. In the predominantly Mizrahi working class urban neighborhoods and peripheral towns, the Likud won overwhelming majorities, while disillusionment with the Alignment's corruption prompted many middle and upper class voters to support the newly founded centrist Democratic Movement for Change (\"Dash\") headed by Yigael Yadin. Dash won 15 seats out of 120, largely at the expense of the Alignment, which was led by Shimon Peres and had shrunk from 51 to 32 seats. Well aware of his momentous achievement and employing his trademark sense for drama, when speaking that night in the Likud headquarters Begin quoted from the Gettysburg Address and the Torah, referring to his victory as a 'turning point in the history of the Jewish people'.\nWith 43 seats, the Likud still required the support of other parties in order to reach a parliamentary majority that would enable it to form a government under Israel's proportionate representation parliamentary system. Though able to form a narrow coalition with smaller Jewish religious and ultra-orthodox parties, Begin also sought support from centrist elements in the Knesset to provide his government with greater public legitimacy. He controversially offered the foreign affairs portfolio to Moshe Dayan, a former IDF Chief of Staff and Defense Minister, and a prominent Alignment politician identified with the old establishment. Dash eventually joined his government several months later, thus providing it with the broad support of almost two thirds of the Knesset. While prime ministerial adviser, Yehuda Avner, served as Begin's speech writer.\nOn 19 June 1977, Likud signed a coalition agreement with the National Religious Party (which held twelve seats) and the Agudat Yisrael party. Without defections, the coalition of Likud and these two parties created the narrowest-possible majority in a full Knesset (61 seats). After eight hours of debate, Begin's government was officially approved in a Knesset vote on 21 June 1977, making him the new prime minister of Israel.\nSocioeconomic policies.\nAs Prime Minister, Begin presided over various reforms in the domestic field. Tuition fees for secondary education were eliminated and compulsory education was extended to the tenth grade, while new social programmes were introduced such as long-term care insurance and a national income support system. A ban on color television that had been imposed to enforce social equality was abolished, and the minimum age for a driver's license was lowered to 17.\nBegin's economic policies sought to liberalize Israel's socialist economy towards a more free-market approach, and he appointed Simha Erlich as Finance Minister. Erlich unveiled a new economic policy that became known as the \"economic transformation\". Under the new plan, the exchange rate would from then on be determined by market forces rather than the government, subsidies for many consumer products were cancelled, foreign exchange controls were eased, the VAT tax was raised while the travel tax was cancelled, and customs duties were lowered to encourage imports of more products. The plan generated some improvement; cheap and high-quality imported products began to fill consumer shelves, the business sector benefited greatly, and the stock market recorded rising share prices. However, the program did not improve the lives of the Israeli people as Begin had hoped. The combination of the increased VAT, the end of subsidies, and a rise in the U.S. dollar exchange rate set off a wave of inflation and price increases. In particular, the fact that government spending was not significantly reduced in tandem with the liberalization program triggered a massive bout of inflation. On 17 July 1978, the Israeli cabinet met to discuss rising inflation, but Begin, declaring that \"you cannot manage economics over the housewife's back\", halted all proposals. In the end, the government decided not to take any actions and allow inflation to ride its course. Begin and his other ministers did not internalize the full meaning of the liberalization plan. As a result, he blocked attempts by Erlich to lower government spending and government plans to privatize public-sector enterprises out of fear of harming the weaker sectors of society, allowing the privatization of only eighteen government companies during his six-year tenure. In 1983, shortly before Begin's resignation, a major financial crisis hit Israel after the stocks of the country's four largest banks collapsed and were subsequently nationalized by the state. Inflation would continue rapidly rising past Begin's tenure, and was only brought under control after the 1985 Israel Economic Stabilization Plan, which among other things greatly curbed government spending, was introduced. The years of rampant inflation devastated the economic power of the powerful Histadrut labor federation and the kibbutzim, which would help Israel's approach towards a free-market economy.\nBegin's government has been credited with starting a trend that would move Israel towards a capitalist economy that would see the rise of a consumer culture and a pursuit of wealth and higher living standards, replacing a culture that scorned capitalism and valued social, as well as government restrictions to enforce equality.\nIn terms of social justice, however, the legacy of the Begin Government was arguably a questionable one. In 1980, the state Social Security Institute estimated that from 1977 to 1980 the number of babies born in poverty doubled, while there had been a 300% increase in the number of families with four to five children below the poverty line. Additionally, the number of families with more than five children below the poverty line went up by 400,% while child poverty estimates suggested that from 1977 to 1981 the number of children living below the poverty line had risen from 3.8% to 8.4%, while officials at the National Institute of Insurance estimated that the incidence of poverty had doubled during Begin's five years in office.\nCamp David accords.\nIn 1978, Begin, aided by Foreign Minister Moshe Dayan and Defense Minister Ezer Weizman, came to Washington and Camp David to negotiate the Camp David Accords, leading to the 1979 Egypt\u2013Israel peace treaty with Egyptian President, Anwar Sadat. Before going to Washington to meet President Carter, Begin visited Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson for his advice. Under the terms of the treaty, brokered by US President Jimmy Carter, Israel was to hand over the Sinai Peninsula in its entirety to Egypt. The peace treaty with Egypt was a watershed moment in Middle Eastern history, as it was the first time an Arab state recognized Israel's legitimacy whereas Israel effectively accepted the land for peace principle as blueprint for resolving the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict. Given Egypt's prominent position within the Arab World, especially as Israel's biggest and most powerful enemy, the treaty had far reaching strategic and geopolitical implications.\nAlmost overnight, Begin's public image of an irresponsible nationalist radical was transformed into that of a statesman of historic proportions. This image was reinforced by international recognition which culminated with him being awarded, together with Sadat, the Nobel Peace Prize in 1978.\nYet while establishing Begin as a leader with broad public appeal, the peace treaty with Egypt was met with fierce criticism within his own Likud party. His devout followers found it difficult to reconcile Begin's history as a keen promoter of the Greater Israel agenda with his willingness to relinquish occupied territory. Agreeing to the removal of Israeli settlements from the Sinai was perceived by many as a clear departure from Likud's Revisionist ideology. Several prominent Likud members, most notably Yitzhak Shamir, objected to the treaty and abstained when it was ratified with an overwhelming majority in the Knesset, achieved only thanks to support from the opposition. A small group of hardliners within Likud, associated with Gush Emunim Jewish settlement movement, eventually decided to split and form the Tehiya party in 1979. They led the \"Movement for Stopping the Withdrawal from Sinai\", violently clashing with IDF soldiers during the forceful eviction of Yamit settlement in April 1982. Despite the traumatic scenes from Yamit, political support for the treaty did not diminish and the Sinai was handed over to Egypt in 1982.\nBegin was less resolute in implementing the section of the Camp David Accord calling for Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. He appointed Agriculture Minister Ariel Sharon to implement a large scale expansion of Jewish settlements in the Israeli-occupied territories, a policy intended to make future territorial concessions in these areas effectively impossible. Begin refocused Israeli settlement strategy from populating peripheral areas in accordance with the Allon Plan, to building Jewish settlements in areas of Biblical and historic significance. When the settlement of Elon Moreh was established on the outskirts of Nablus in 1979, following years of campaigning by Gush Emunim, Begin declared that there are \"many more Elon Morehs to come.\" During his term dozens of new settlements were built, and Jewish population in the West Bank and Gaza more than quadrupled.\nBombing Iraqi nuclear reactor.\nBegin took Saddam Hussein's anti-Zionist threats seriously and therefore took aim at Iraq, which was building a nuclear reactor named Osirak or Tammuz 1 with French and Italian assistance. When Begin took office, preparations were intensified. Begin authorized the construction of a full-scale model of the Iraqi reactor which Israeli pilots could practice bombing. Israel attempted to negotiate with France and Italy to cut off assistance and with the United States to obtain assurances that the program would be halted. The negotiations failed. Begin considered the diplomatic option fruitless, and worried that prolonging the attack would lead to a fatal inability to act in response to the perceived threat.\nThe decision to attack was hotly contested within Begin's government. However, in October 1980, the Mossad informed Begin that the reactor would be fueled and operational by June 1981. This assessment was aided by reconnaissance photos supplied by the United States, and the Israeli cabinet voted to approve an attack. In June 1981, Begin ordered the destruction of the reactor. On 7 June 1981, the Israeli Air Force destroyed the reactor in a successful long-range operation called \"Operation Opera\". Soon after, the government and Begin expounded on what came to be known as the Begin Doctrine: \"On no account shall we permit an enemy to develop weapons of mass destruction (WMD) against the people of Israel.\" Begin explicitly stated the strike was not an anomaly, but instead called the event \"a precedent for every future government in Israel\"; it remains a feature of Israeli security planning policy. Many foreign governments, including the United States, condemned the operation, and the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 487 condemning it. The Israeli left-wing opposition criticized it also at the time, but mainly for its timing relative to domestic elections only three weeks later, when Likud was reelected. The new government annexed the Golan Heights and banned the national airline from flying on Shabbat.\nLebanon invasion.\nOn 6 June 1982, Begin's government authorized the Israel Defense Forces invasion of Lebanon, in response to the attempted assassination of the Israeli ambassador to the United Kingdom, Shlomo Argov. The objective of Operation \"Peace for Galilee\" was to force the PLO out of rocket range of Israel's northern border. Begin was hoping for a short and limited Israeli involvement that would destroy the PLO's political and military infrastructure in southern Lebanon, effectively reshaping the balance of Lebanese power in favor of the Christian Militias who were allied with Israel. Nevertheless, fighting soon escalated into war with Palestinian and Lebanese militias, as well as the Syrian military, and the IDF progressed as far as Beirut, well beyond the 40\u00a0km limit initially authorized by the government. Israeli forces were successful in driving the PLO out of Lebanon and forcing its leadership to relocate to Tunisia, but the war ultimately failed to achieve its political goals of bringing security to Israel's northern border and creating stability in Lebanon. Begin referred to the invasion as an inevitable act of survival, often comparing Yasser Arafat to Hitler.\nSabra and Shatila massacre.\nPublic dissatisfaction reached a peak in September 1982, after the Sabra and Shatila Massacre. Hundreds of thousands gathered in Tel Aviv in what was one of the biggest public demonstrations in Israeli history. The Kahan Commission, appointed to investigate the events, issued its report on 9 February 1983, found the government indirectly responsible for the massacre but that Defense Minister Ariel Sharon \"bears personal responsibility.\" The commission recommended that Sharon be removed from office and never serve in any future Israeli government. Initially, Sharon attempted to remain in office and Begin refused to fire him. But Sharon resigned as Defense Minister after the death of Emil Grunzweig, who was killed by a grenade tossed into a crowd of demonstrators leaving a Peace Now organized march, which also injured ten others, including the son of an Israeli cabinet minister. Sharon remained in the cabinet as a minister without portfolio. Public pressure on Begin to resign increased.\nBegin's disoriented appearance on national television while visiting the Beaufort battle site raised concerns that he was being misinformed about the war's progress. Asking Sharon whether PLO fighters had 'machine guns', Begin seemed out of touch with the nature and scale of the military campaign he had authorized. Almost a decade later, \"Haaretz\" reporter Uzi Benziman published a series of articles accusing Sharon of intentionally deceiving Begin about the operation's initial objectives, and continuously misleading him as the war progressed. Sharon sued both the newspaper and Benziman for libel in 1991. The trial lasted 11 years, with one of the highlights being the deposition of Begin's son, Benny, in favor of the defendants. Sharon lost the case.\nArgentine journalist Hernan Dobry has alleged that during this time Begin also ordered an airlift of weapons to Argentina during the Falklands War, because he still hated the British decades after fighting them in the 1940s, and wanted to avenge the hanging of his friend Dov Gruner.\nResignation.\nAfter Begin's wife Aliza died in November 1982 while he was away on an official visit to Washington DC, he fell into a deep depression. Begin also became disappointed by the war in Lebanon because he had hoped to sign a peace treaty with the government of President Bashir Gemayel, who was assassinated. Instead, there were mounting Israeli casualties, and protesters outside his office maintained a constant vigil with a sign showing the number of Israeli soldiers killed in Lebanon, which was constantly updated. Begin also continued to be plagued by the ill health and occasional hospitalizations that he had endured for years. In October 1983, he resigned, telling his colleagues that \"I cannot go on any longer\", and handed over the reins of the office of Prime Minister to his old comrade-in-arms Yitzhak Shamir, who had been the leader of the Lehi resistance to the British.\nTertiated.\nBegin, in his first meeting with President Carter, used the word tertiated to describe how, during the \"Holocaust\" one in three Jews, of the worldwide Jewish population, were murdered. When Carter asked \"What was that word, Mr. Prime Minister?\" Begin compared it to the Roman army term \"Decimation\" and then added \"one in three \u2013 tertiated!\"\nBegin elaborated later on: \"When I use the word \"Tertiated\" I mean to say that we do not accept the known term of \"Decimation\". Avi Weiss highlighted: \"But the Holocaust is different\" and noted \"As Menachem Begin once said, during the Holocaust our people were not decimated, but \"tertiated\" \u2014 it was not one in ten, but one in three that were murdered.\"\nRetirement and seclusion.\nBegin subsequently retired to an apartment overlooking the Jerusalem Forest and spent the rest of his life in seclusion. According to Israeli psychologist Ofer Grosbard, he suffered from clinical depression. He would rarely leave his apartment, and then usually to visit his wife's grave-site to say the traditional Kaddish prayer for the departed. His seclusion was watched over by his children and his lifetime personal secretary Yechiel Kadishai, who monitored all official requests for meetings. Begin would meet almost no one other than close friends or family. After a year, he changed his telephone number due to journalists constantly calling him. He was cared for by his daughter, Leah, and a housekeeper. According to Kadishai, Begin spent most of his days reading and watching movies, and would start and finish a book almost every day. He also kept up with world events by continuing his lifelong habit of listening to the BBC every morning, which had begun during his underground days, and maintaining a subscription to several newspapers. Begin retained some clout in the Likud party, which he used to influence it behind the scenes.\nHe broke his hip in a fall in 1990 and underwent surgery at Shaare Zedek Medical Center. Afterwards, doctors recommended moving him to Ichilov Hospital at the Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center for rehabilitation. He was released from hospital in March 1991 and subsequently moved to an apartment in the Afeka neighborhood in Tel Aviv. The hospital stay and permanent move to Tel Aviv greatly improved his health and mood and his seclusion somewhat loosened. He gave a telephone interview on the eve of Passover in 1991, as part of a television broadcast marking fifty years since the death of Ze'ev Jabotinsky. He gave another telephone interview in July 1991, which would be the last interview of his life.\nDeath.\nOn 3 March 1992, Begin suffered a severe heart attack in his apartment, and was rushed to Ichilov Hospital, where he was put in the intensive care unit. Begin arrived there unconscious and paralyzed on the left side of his body. His condition slightly improved following treatment, and he regained consciousness after 20 hours. For the next six days, Begin remained in serious condition. A pacemaker was implanted in his chest to stabilize his heartbeat on 5 March. Begin was too frail to overcome the effects of the heart attack, and his condition began to rapidly deteriorate on 9 March at about 3:15 AM. An emergency team of doctors and nurses attempted to resuscitate his failing heart. His children were notified of his condition and immediately rushed to his side. Begin died at 3:30 AM. His death was announced an hour and a half later. Shortly before 6:00 AM, the hospital rabbi arrived at his bedside to say the Kaddish prayer.\nBegin's funeral took place in Jerusalem that afternoon. His coffin was carried four kilometers from the Sanhedria Funeral Parlor to Mount of Olives in a funeral procession attended by thousands of people. In accordance with his wishes, Begin was given a simple Jewish burial ceremony rather than a state funeral and buried on the Mount of Olives in the Jewish Cemetery there. He had asked to be buried there instead of Mount Herzl, where most Israeli leaders are laid to rest, because he wanted to be buried beside his wife Aliza, as well as Meir Feinstein of Irgun and Moshe Barazani of Lehi, who committed suicide together in jail while awaiting execution by the British. An estimated 75,000 mourners were present at the funeral. Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, President Chaim Herzog, all cabinet ministers present in Israel, Supreme Court justices, Knesset members from most parties and a number of foreign ambassadors attended the funeral. Former members of the Irgun High Command served as pallbearers.\nOverview of offices held.\nBegin served as prime minister (Israel's head of government) from 21 June 1977 through 10 October 1983, leading the 18th government during the 9th Knesset and the 19th government during the first portion of the 10th Knesset.\nBegin was a member of the Knesset from 1949 through until he resigned in 1983. Begin was twice the Knesset's opposition leader (at the time an unofficial and honorary role). He was first opposition leader from November 1955 through June 1967, holding the role during the entirety of the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and the first portion of the 6th Knessets, during the second premiership of David Ben-Gurion and the premiership of Levi Eshkol] He again served as opposition leader from August 1970 through June 1977, during the last portion of the 7th Knesset and entirety of the 8th Knesset, during which period Golda Meir and Yitzhak Rabin served as prime minister.\nBegin was the founding leader of Herut, and served as the party's leader until 1983. He was also made leader of the Likud coalition at its founding in 1973, and also held that position until 1983.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
