{"id": "25096", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25096", "title": "Peripheral nervous system", "text": "Part of the nervous system excluding the brain and spinal cord\nThe peripheral nervous system (PNS) is one of two components that make up the nervous system of bilateral animals, with the other part being the central nervous system (CNS). The PNS consists of nerves and ganglia, which lie outside the brain and the spinal cord. The main function of the PNS is to connect the CNS to the limbs and organs, essentially serving as a relay between the brain and spinal cord and the rest of the body. Unlike the CNS, the PNS is not protected by the vertebral column and skull, or by the blood\u2013brain barrier, which leaves it exposed to toxins.\nThe peripheral nervous system can be divided into a somatic division and an autonomic division. Each of these can further be differentiated into a sensory and a motor sector. In the somatic nervous system, the cranial nerves are part of the PNS with the exceptions of the olfactory nerve and epithelia and the optic nerve (cranial nerve II) along with the retina, which are considered parts of the central nervous system based on developmental origin. The second cranial nerve is not a true peripheral nerve but a tract of the diencephalon. Cranial nerve ganglia, as with all ganglia, are part of the PNS. The autonomic nervous system exerts involuntary control over smooth muscle and glands.\nStructure.\nThe peripheral nervous system can be divided into a somatic and an autonomic division, which are part of the somatic nervous system and the autonomic nervous system, respectively. The somatic nervous system is under voluntary control, and transmits signals from the brain to end organs such as muscles. The sensory nervous system is part of the somatic nervous system and transmits signals from senses such as taste and touch (including fine touch and gross touch) to the spinal cord and brain. The autonomic nervous system is a \"self-regulating\" system which influences the function of organs outside voluntary control, such as the heart rate, or the functions of the digestive system.\nSomatic nervous system.\nThe somatic nervous system includes the sensory nervous system (ex. the somatosensory system) and consists of sensory nerves and somatic nerves, and many nerves which hold both functions.\nIn the head and neck, cranial nerves carry somatosensory data. There are twelve cranial nerves, ten of which originate from the brainstem, and mainly control the functions of the anatomic structures of the head with some exceptions. One unique cranial nerve is the vagus nerve, which receives sensory information from organs in the thorax and abdomen. The other unique cranial nerve is the accessory nerve which is responsible for innervating the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles, neither of which are located exclusively in the head.\nFor the rest of the body, spinal nerves are responsible for somatosensory information. These arise from the spinal cord. Usually these arise as a web (\"plexus\") of interconnected nerves roots that arrange to form single nerves. These nerves control the functions of the rest of the body. In humans, there are 31 pairs of spinal nerves: 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and 1 coccygeal. These nerve roots are named according to the spinal vertebrata which they are adjacent to. In the cervical region, the spinal nerve roots come out \"above\" the corresponding vertebrae (i.e., nerve root between the skull and 1st cervical vertebrae is called spinal nerve C1). From the thoracic region to the coccygeal region, the spinal nerve roots come out \"below\" the corresponding vertebrae. This method creates a problem when naming the spinal nerve root between C7 and T1 (so it is called spinal nerve root C8). In the lumbar and sacral region, the spinal nerve roots travel within the dural sac and they travel below the level of L2 as the cauda equina.\nCervical spinal nerves (C1\u2013C4).\nThe first 4 cervical spinal nerves, C1 through C4, split and recombine to produce a variety of nerves that serve the neck and back of head.\nSpinal nerve C1 is called the suboccipital nerve, which provides motor innervation to muscles at the base of the skull.\nC2 and C3 form many of the nerves of the neck, providing both sensory and motor control. These include the greater occipital nerve, which provides sensation to the back of the head, the lesser occipital nerve, which provides sensation to the area behind the ears, the greater auricular nerve and the lesser auricular nerve.\nThe phrenic nerve is a nerve essential for our survival which arises from nerve roots C3, C4 and C5. It supplies the thoracic diaphragm, enabling breathing. If the spinal cord is transected above C3, then spontaneous breathing is not possible.\nBrachial plexus (C5\u2013T1).\nThe last four cervical spinal nerves, C5 through C8, and the first thoracic spinal nerve, T1, combine to form the brachial plexus, or plexus brachialis, a tangled array of nerves, splitting, combining and recombining, to form the nerves that subserve the upper-limb and upper back. Although the brachial plexus may appear tangled, it is highly organized and predictable, with little variation between people. See brachial plexus injuries.\nLumbosacral plexus (L1\u2013Co1).\nThe anterior divisions of the lumbar nerves, sacral nerves, and coccygeal nerve form the lumbosacral plexus, the first lumbar nerve being frequently joined by a branch from the twelfth thoracic. For descriptive purposes this plexus is usually divided into three parts:\nAutonomic nervous system.\nThe autonomic nervous system (ANS) controls involuntary responses to regulate physiological functions. The brain and spinal cord of the central nervous system are connected with organs that have smooth muscle or cardiac muscle, such as the heart, bladder, and other cardiac, exocrine, and endocrine related organs, by ganglionic neurons. The most notable physiological effects from autonomic activity are pupil constriction and dilation, and salivation of saliva. The autonomic nervous system is always activated, but is either in the sympathetic or parasympathetic state. Depending on the situation, one state can overshadow the other, resulting in a release of different kinds of neurotransmitters.\nSympathetic nervous system.\nThe sympathetic system is activated during a \"fight or flight\" situation in which mental stress or physical danger is encountered. Neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine, and epinephrine are released, which increases heart rate and blood flow in certain areas like muscle, while simultaneously decreasing activities of non-critical functions for survival, like digestion. The systems are independent to each other, which allows activation of certain parts of the body, while others remain rested.\nParasympathetic nervous system.\nPrimarily using the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) as a mediator, the parasympathetic system allows the body to function in a \"rest and digest\" state. Consequently, when the parasympathetic system dominates the body, there are increases in salivation and activities in digestion, while heart rate and other sympathetic response decrease. Unlike the sympathetic system, humans have some voluntary controls in the parasympathetic system. The most prominent examples of this control are urination and defecation.\nEnteric nervous system.\nThere is a lesser known division of the autonomic nervous system known as the enteric nervous system. Located only around the digestive tract, this system allows for local control without input from the sympathetic or the parasympathetic branches, though it can still receive and respond to signals from the rest of the body. The enteric system is responsible for various functions related to gastrointestinal system.\nDisease.\nDiseases of the peripheral nervous system can be specific to one or more nerves, or affect the system as a whole.\nAny peripheral nerve or nerve root can be damaged, called a mononeuropathy. Such injuries can be because of injury or trauma, or compression. Compression of nerves can occur because of a tumour mass or injury. Alternatively, if a nerve is in an area with a fixed size it may be trapped if the other components increase in size, such as carpal tunnel syndrome and tarsal tunnel syndrome. Common symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome include pain and numbness in the thumb, index and middle finger. In peripheral neuropathy, the function one or more nerves are damaged through a variety of means. Toxic damage may occur because of diabetes (diabetic neuropathy), alcohol, heavy metals or other toxins; some infections; autoimmune and inflammatory conditions such as amyloidosis and sarcoidosis. Peripheral neuropathy is associated with a sensory loss in a \"glove and stocking\" distribution that begins at the peripheral and slowly progresses upwards, and may also be associated with acute and chronic pain. Peripheral neuropathy is not just limited to the somatosensory nerves, but the autonomic nervous system too (autonomic neuropathy).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25097", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25097", "title": "PEI", "text": ""}
{"id": "25098", "revid": "31339567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25098", "title": "Phase velocity", "text": "Rate at which the phase of the wave propagates in space\nThe phase velocity of a wave is the speed of any wavefront, a surface of constant phase. This is the velocity at which the phase of any constant-frequency component of the wave travels. For such a spectral component, any given phase of the wave (for example, the crest) will appear to travel at the phase velocity. The phase velocity of light waves is not a physically meaningful quantity and is not related to information transfer.\nSinusoidal or plane waves.\nFor a simple sinusoidal wave the phase velocity is given in terms of the wavelength \u03bb (lambda) and time period T as\nformula_1\nEquivalently, in terms of the wave's angular frequency \u03c9, which specifies angular change per unit of time, and wavenumber (or angular wave number) k, which represent the angular change per unit of space,\nformula_2\nBeats.\nThe previous definition of phase velocity has been demonstrated for an isolated wave. However, such a definition can be extended to a beat of waves, or to a signal composed of multiple waves. For this it is necessary to mathematically write the beat or signal as a low frequency envelope multiplying a carrier. Thus the phase velocity of the carrier determines the phase velocity of the wave set.\nDispersion.\nIn the context of electromagnetics and optics, the frequency is some function \"\u03c9\"(\"k\") of the wave number, so in general, the phase velocity and the group velocity depend on specific medium and frequency. The ratio between the speed of light \"c\" and the phase velocity \"v\"\"p\" is known as the refractive index, \"n\" \n \"c\" / \"v\"\"p\" \n \"ck\" / \"\u03c9\".\nIn this way, we can obtain another form for group velocity for electromagnetics. Writing \"n\" \n \"n\"(\u03c9), a quick way to derive this form is to observe\nformula_3\nWe can then rearrange the above to obtain \nformula_4\nFrom this formula, we see that the group velocity is equal to the phase velocity only when the refractive index is independent of frequency formula_5. When this occurs, the medium is called non-dispersive, as opposed to dispersive, where various properties of the medium depend on the frequency \u03c9. The relation formula_6 is known as the dispersion relation of the medium.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25100", "revid": "1280162830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25100", "title": "Pitot tube", "text": "Device which measures fluid flow velocity, typically around an aircraft or boat\nA pitot tube ( ; also pitot probe) measures fluid flow velocity. It was invented by French engineer Henri Pitot during his work with aqueducts and published in 1732, and modified to its modern form in 1858 by Henry Darcy. It is widely used to determine the airspeed of aircraft; the water speed of boats; and the flow velocity of liquids, air, and gases in industry.\nTheory of operation.\nThe basic pitot tube consists of a tube pointing directly into the oncoming fluid flow. Pressure in the tube can be measured as the moving fluid cannot escape and stagnates. This pressure is the stagnation pressure of the fluid, also known as the total pressure or (particularly in aviation) the pitot pressure.\nThe measured stagnation pressure cannot just by itself be used to determine the fluid flow velocity (airspeed in aviation) directly. However, with a measured static pressure as well it can be determined by the use of Bernoulli's equation which states:\nStagnation pressure = static pressure + dynamic pressure\nWhich can also be written\nformula_1\nSolving that for flow velocity gives\nformula_2\nwhere\nThis equation applies only to fluids that can be treated as incompressible. Liquids are treated as incompressible under almost all conditions. Gases under certain conditions can be approximated as incompressible. See Compressibility.\nThe dynamic pressure is the difference between the stagnation pressure and the static pressure. The dynamic pressure is then determined using a diaphragm inside an enclosed container. If the air on one side of the diaphragm is at the static pressure, and the other at the stagnation pressure, then the deflection of the diaphragm is proportional to the dynamic pressure.\nIn aircraft, the static pressure can be measured using static ports on the side of the fuselage. The dynamic pressure measured can be used to determine the indicated airspeed of the aircraft. The diaphragm arrangement described above can be contained within the airspeed indicator, which can convert the dynamic pressure to an airspeed reading by means of mechanical levers.\nInstead of separate pitot and static ports, a pitot-static tube (also called a Prandtl tube) may be employed, which has a second tube coaxial with the pitot tube with holes on the sides, outside the direct airflow, to measure the static pressure.\nIf a liquid column manometer is used to measure the pressure difference formula_7, \nformula_8\nwhere\nTherefore,\nformula_11\nAircraft and accidents.\nA pitot-static system is a system of pressure-sensitive instruments that is most often used in aviation to determine an aircraft's airspeed, Mach number, altitude, and altitude trend. A pitot-static system generally consists of a pitot tube, a static port, and the pitot-static instruments. Errors in pitot-static system readings can be extremely dangerous as the information obtained from the pitot static system, such as airspeed, is potentially safety-critical.\nSeveral commercial airline incidents and accidents have been traced to a failure of the pitot-static system. Examples include Austral L\u00edneas A\u00e9reas Flight 2553, Northwest Airlines Flight 6231, Birgenair Flight 301 and one of the two X-31s. The French air safety authority BEA said that pitot tube icing was a contributing factor in the crash of Air France Flight 447 into the Atlantic Ocean. In 2008 Air Cara\u00efbes reported two incidents of pitot tube icing malfunctions on its A330s.\nBirgenair Flight 301 had a fatal pitot tube failure which investigators suspected was due to insects creating a nest inside the pitot tube; the prime suspect is the black and yellow mud dauber wasp.\nAeroper\u00fa Flight 603 had a fatal pitot-static system failure due to the cleaning crew leaving the static port blocked with tape.\nOther applications.\nIn industry, the flow velocities being measured are often those flowing in ducts and tubing where measurements by an anemometer would be difficult to obtain. In these kinds of measurements, the most practical instrument to use is the pitot tube. The pitot tube can be inserted through a small hole in the duct with the pitot connected to a U-tube water gauge or some other differential pressure gauge for determining the flow velocity inside the ducted wind tunnel. One use of this technique is to determine the volume of air that is being delivered to a conditioned space.\nThe fluid flow rate in a duct can then be estimated from:\nVolume\u00a0flow\u00a0rate\u00a0(cubic\u00a0feet\u00a0per\u00a0minute) =\u00a0duct\u00a0area\u00a0(square\u00a0feet)\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0flow velocity\u00a0(feet\u00a0per\u00a0minute)\nVolume\u00a0flow\u00a0rate\u00a0(cubic\u00a0meters\u00a0per\u00a0second) =\u00a0duct\u00a0area\u00a0(square\u00a0meters)\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0flow velocity\u00a0(meters\u00a0per\u00a0second)\nIn aviation, airspeed is typically measured in knots.\nIn weather stations with high wind speeds, the pitot tube is modified to create a special type of anemometer called pitot tube static anemometer.\nIn many modern carburetors a Pitot tube at the intake is fed to the fuel float chamber as an alternative to feeding ambient air pressure there to better control air/fuel ratio.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25101", "revid": "50943538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25101", "title": "Pittsburgh", "text": "Second-most populous city in Pennsylvania, U.S.\nPittsburgh ( ) is a city in Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, United States, and its county seat. Located in southwestern Pennsylvania where the Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers meet to form the Ohio River, it had a population of 302,971 at the 2020 census, making it the second-most populous city in Pennsylvania. The Pittsburgh metropolitan area has over 2.43 million people, making it the largest in the Ohio Valley and Appalachia, the second-largest in Pennsylvania, and the 28th-largest in the U.S. The greater Pittsburgh\u2013Weirton\u2013Steubenville combined statistical area includes parts of Ohio and West Virginia.\nPittsburgh is known as \"the Steel City\" for its dominant role in the history of the U.S. steel industry. It developed as a vital link of the Atlantic coast and Midwest, as the mineral-rich Allegheny Mountains led to the region being contested by the French and British empires, Virginians, Whiskey Rebels, and Civil War raiders. For part of the 20th century, Pittsburgh was behind only New York City and Chicago in corporate headquarters employment; it had the most U.S. stockholders per capita. Deindustrialization in the late 20th century resulted in massive layoffs among blue-collar workers as steel and other heavy industries declined, coinciding with several Pittsburgh-based corporations moving out of the city. However, the city divested from steel and, since the 1990s, Pittsburgh has focused its energies on the healthcare, education, and technology industries.\nPittsburgh is home to large medical providers, including the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center and Allegheny Health Network, as well as 68 colleges and universities, including Carnegie Mellon University and the University of Pittsburgh. The area has served as the federal agency headquarters for cyber defense, software engineering, robotics, energy research, and the nuclear navy. The city is home to ten Fortune 500 companies and seven of the largest 300 U.S. law firms.\nPittsburgh is sometimes called the \"City of Bridges\" for its 446 bridges. Its rich industrial history left the area with renowned cultural institutions, including the Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh Zoo &amp; Aquarium, Phipps Conservatory and Botanical Gardens, the National Aviary, and a diverse cultural district. The city's major league professional sports teams include the Pittsburgh Steelers, Pittsburgh Penguins, and Pittsburgh Pirates. Pittsburgh is additionally where Jehovah's Witnesses traces its earliest origins, and was the host of the 2009 G20 Pittsburgh summit.\nEtymology.\nPittsburgh was named in 1758, by Scottish General John Forbes, in honor of British statesman William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham. As Forbes was a Scotsman, he probably pronounced the name (similar to Edinburgh).\nPittsburgh was incorporated as a borough on April 22, 1794, with the following Act:\n\"Be it enacted by the Pennsylvania State Senate and Pennsylvania House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania ... by the authority of the same, that the said town of Pittsburgh shall be ... erected into a borough, which shall be called the borough of Pittsburgh for ever.\"\nFrom 1891 to 1911, the city's name was federally recognized as \"Pittsburg\", though use of the final \"h\" was retained during this period by the city government and other local organizations. After a public campaign, the federal decision to drop the \"h\" was reversed. The \"Pittsburg Press\" continued spelling the city without an \"h\" until 1921.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical claims\n Kingdom of France 1690s\u20131763 1681\u20131781 1776\u2013present\nNative Americans.\nThe area of the Ohio headwaters was long inhabited by the Shawnee and several other settled groups of Native Americans. The Seneca people called the confluence of the rivers \"Diondega\" or \"Ja\u00f6deog\u00eb\u2019\". Shannopin's Town was an 18th-century Lenape (Delaware) town located roughly from where Penn Avenue is today, below the mouth of Two Mile Run, from 30th Street to 39th Street. According to George Croghan, the town was situated on the south bank of the Allegheny, nearly opposite what is now known as Washington's Landing, formerly Herr's Island, in what is now the Lawrenceville neighborhood.\n18th century.\nThe first known European to enter the region was the French explorer Robert de La Salle from Quebec during his 1669 expedition down the Ohio River. European pioneers, primarily Dutch, followed in the early 18th century. Michael Bezallion was the first to describe the forks of the Ohio in a 1717 manuscript, and later that year European fur traders established area posts and settlements.\nIn 1749, French soldiers from Quebec launched an expedition to the forks to unite Canada with French Louisiana via the rivers. During 1753\u20131754, the British hastily built Fort Prince George before a larger French force drove them off. The French built Fort Duquesne based on LaSalle's 1669 claims. The French and Indian War, the North American front of the Seven Years' War, began with the future Pittsburgh as its center. British General Edward Braddock was dispatched with Major George Washington as his aide to take Fort Duquesne. The British and colonial force were defeated at Braddock's Field. General John Forbes finally took the forks in 1758. He began construction on Fort Pitt, named after William Pitt the Elder, while the settlement was named \"Pittsborough\".\nDuring Pontiac's War, a loose confederation of Native American tribes laid siege to Fort Pitt in 1763; the siege was eventually lifted after Colonel Henry Bouquet defeated a portion of the besieging force at the Battle of Bushy Run. Bouquet strengthened the defenses of Fort Pitt the next year.\nDuring this period, the powerful nations of the Iroquois Confederacy, based in New York, had maintained control of much of the Ohio Valley as hunting grounds by right of conquest after defeating other tribes. By the terms of the 1768 Treaty of Fort Stanwix, the Penns were allowed to purchase the modern region from the Iroquois. A 1769 survey referenced the future city as the \"Manor of Pittsburgh\". Both the Colony of Virginia and the Province of Pennsylvania claimed the region under their colonial charters until 1780, when they agreed under a federal initiative to extend the Mason\u2013Dixon line westward, placing Pittsburgh in Pennsylvania. On March 8, 1771, Bedford County, Pennsylvania was created to govern the frontier.\nOn April 16, 1771, the city's first civilian local government was created as Pitt Township. William Teagarden was the first constable, and William Troop was the first clerk.\nFollowing the American Revolution, the village of Pittsburgh continued to grow. One of its earliest industries was boat building for settlers of the Ohio Country. In 1784, Thomas Vickroy completed a town plan which was approved by the Penn family attorney. Pittsburgh became a possession of Pennsylvania in 1785. The following year, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette was started, and in 1787, the Pittsburgh Academy was chartered. Unrest during the Whiskey Rebellion of 1794 resulted in federal troops being sent to the area. By 1797, glass manufacture began, while the population grew to around 1,400. Settlers arrived after crossing the Appalachian Mountains or through the Great Lakes. Fort Pitt (now Pittsburgh) at the source of the Ohio River became the main base for settlers moving into the Northwest Territory.\n19th century.\nThe federal government recognizes Pittsburgh as the starting point for the Lewis and Clark Expedition. Preparations began in Pittsburgh in 1803 when Meriwether Lewis purchased a keelboat that would later be used to ascend the Missouri River.\nThe War of 1812 cut off the supply of British goods, stimulating American industry. By 1815, Pittsburgh was producing significant quantities of iron, brass, tin, and glass. On March 18, 1816, the 46-year-old local government became a city. It was served by numerous river steamboats that increased trading traffic on the rivers.\nIn the 1830s, many Welsh people from the Merthyr steelworks immigrated to the city following the aftermath of the Merthyr Rising. By the 1840s, Pittsburgh was one of the largest cities west of the Allegheny Mountains. The Great Fire of Pittsburgh destroyed over a thousand buildings in 1845. The city rebuilt with the aid of Irish immigrants who came to escape the Great Famine. By 1857, Pittsburgh's 1,000 factories were consuming 22\u00a0million coal bushels yearly. Coal mining and iron manufacturing attracted waves of European immigrants to the area, with the most coming from Germany.\nBecause Pennsylvania had been established as a free state after the Revolution, enslaved African Americans sought freedom here through escape as refugees from the South, or occasionally fleeing from travelers they were serving who stayed in the city. There were active stations of the Underground Railroad in the city, and numerous refugees were documented as getting help from station agents and African-American workers in city hotels. The Drennen Slave Girl walked out of the Monongahela House in 1850, apparently to freedom. The Merchant's Hotel was also a place where African-American workers would advise slaves the state was free and aid them in getting to nearby stations of the Underground Railroad. \nSometimes refugee slaves from the South stayed in Pittsburgh, but other times they continued North, including into Canada. Many slaves left the city and county for Canada after Congress passed the 1850 Fugitive Slave Act, as it required cooperation from law enforcement even in free states and increased penalties. From 1850 to 1860, the black population in Allegheny County dropped from 3,431 to 2,725 as people headed to safety in Canada.\nThe American Civil War boosted the city's economy with increased iron and armament demand by the Union. Andrew Carnegie began steel production in 1875 at the Edgar Thomson Steel Works in North Braddock, Pennsylvania, which evolved into the Carnegie Steel Company. He adopted the Bessemer process to increase production. Manufacturing was key to the growth of Pittsburgh and the surrounding region. Railroad lines were built into the city along both rivers, increasing transportation access to important markets.\n20th century.\nIn 1901, J. P. Morgan and attorney Elbert H. Gary merged Carnegie Steel Company and several other companies into U.S. Steel. By 1910, Pittsburgh was the nation's eighth-largest city, accounting for between one-third and one-half of national steel output.\nThe Pittsburgh Agreement was a memorandum of understanding completed on 31 May 1918 between members of Czech and Slovak expatriate communities in the U.S. It replaced the Cleveland Agreement of 22 October 1915.. It concerned the future foundation of Czechoslovakia as envisioned by T. G. Masaryk.\nThe city suffered severe flooding in March 1936.\nThe city's population swelled to more than a half million, attracting numerous European immigrants to its industrial jobs. By 1940, non-Hispanic whites were 90.6% of the city's population. Pittsburgh also became a main destination of the African-American Great Migration from the rural South during the first half of the 20th century. Limited initially by discrimination, some 95% percent of the men became unskilled steel workers.\nDuring World War II, demand for steel increased and area mills operated 24 hours a day to produce 95\u00a0million tons of steel for the war effort. This resulted in the highest levels of air pollution in the city's almost century of industry. The city's reputation as the \"arsenal of democracy\" was being overshadowed by James Parton's 1868 observation of Pittsburgh being \"hell with the lid off.\"\nFollowing World War II, the city launched a clean air and civic revitalization project known as the \"Renaissance,\" cleaning up the air and the rivers. The \"Renaissance II\" project followed in 1977, focused on cultural and neighborhood development. The industrial base continued to expand through the 1970s, but beginning in the early 1980s both the area's steel and electronics industries imploded during national industrial restructuring. There were massive layoffs from mill and plant closures.\nIn the later 20th century, the area shifted its economic base to education, tourism, and services, largely based on healthcare/medicine, finance, and high technology such as robotics. Although Pittsburgh successfully shifted its economy and remained viable, the city's population has never rebounded to its industrial-era highs. While 680,000 people lived in the city proper in 1950, a combination of suburbanization and economic turbulence resulted in a decrease in city population, even as the metropolitan area population increased again.\n21st century.\nDuring the late 2000s recession, Pittsburgh was economically strong, adding jobs when most cities were losing them. It was one of the few cities in the United States to see housing property values rise. Between 2006 and 2011, the Pittsburgh metropolitan statistical area (MSA) experienced over 10% appreciation in housing prices, the highest appreciation of the largest 25 metropolitan statistical areas in the United States, with 22 of the largest 25 metropolitan statistical areas experiencing depreciations in housing values.\nIn September 2009, the 2009 G20 Pittsburgh summit was held in Pittsburgh.\nGeography.\nPittsburgh has an area of , of which is land and , or 4.75%, is water. The 80th meridian west passes directly through the city's downtown.\nThe city is located on the Allegheny Plateau, within the ecoregion of the Western Allegheny Plateau. The Downtown area (also known as the Golden Triangle) sits where the Allegheny River flows from the northeast and the Monongahela River from the southeast to form the Ohio River. The convergence is at Point State Park and is referred to as \"the Point.\" The city extends east to include the Oakland and Shadyside sections, which are home to the University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University, Chatham University, Carnegie Museum and Library, and many other educational, medical, and cultural institutions. The southern, western, and northern areas of the city are primarily residential.\nMany Pittsburgh neighborhoods are steeply sloped with two-lane roads. More than a quarter of neighborhood names make reference to \"hills,\" \"heights,\" or similar features.\nThe steps of Pittsburgh consist of 800 sets of outdoor public stairways with 44,645 treads and 24,090 vertical feet. They include hundreds of streets composed entirely of stairs, and many other steep streets with stairs for sidewalks. Many provide vistas of the Pittsburgh area while attracting hikers and fitness walkers.\nBike and walking trails have been built to border many of the city's rivers and hollows. The Great Allegheny Passage and Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Towpath connect the city directly to downtown Washington, D.C. (some away) with a continuous bike/running trail.\nCityscape.\nThe city consists of the Downtown area, called the Golden Triangle, and four main areas surrounding it\u2014Central, North Side/North Hills, South Side/South Hills, East End, and West End. These areas are further divided into 90 neighborhoods.\nDowntown Pittsburgh has 30 skyscrapers, nine over , with the U.S. Steel Tower being the tallest at . The Cultural District spans 14 blocks along the Allegheny River and is home to theaters, arts venues, and a growing residential community. The Firstside portion of Downtown borders the Monongahela River, the historic Mon Wharf and hosts the distinctive PPG Place Gothic-style glass skyscraper complex. Downtown is served by the Port Authority's light rail system and multiple bridges leading north and south. It is also home to Point Park University and Duquesne University which borders Uptown.\nThe North Side, originally the independent Allegheny City until being annexed in 1907, is a primarily residential area with well-preserved 19th-century homes. It hosts attractions like Acrisure Stadium, PNC Park, the Andy Warhol Museum, and the National Aviary, among others.\nThe South Side, once home to railyards and mill workers, has seen revitalization with improvements to East Carson Street and new retail. It is now a vibrant neighborhood with diverse shopping and nightlife. In the 1990s, the Urban Redevelopment Authority of Pittsburgh purchased the South Side Works steel mill property and redeveloped it into the SouthSide Works mixed-use development.\nThe East End includes key institutions including the University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University, Carnegie Museums of Art and Natural History, and Phipps Conservatory. It features many parks, including Mellon Park, Westinghouse Park, Schenley Park, Frick Park, The Frick Pittsburgh, Bakery Square, and the Pittsburgh Zoo, and vibrant neighborhoods like Shadyside. Squirrel Hill is also known as the hub of Jewish life in Pittsburgh, home to approximately 20 synagogues. Oakland is home to several universities and the Petersen Events Center. The Strip District to the west along the Allegheny River is an open-air marketplace by day and a clubbing destination by night. Bloomfield is Pittsburgh's Little Italy and is known for its Italian restaurants and grocers. Lawrenceville is a revitalizing rowhouse neighborhood popular with artists and designers. The Hill District was home to photographer Charles Harris as well as various African-American jazz clubs.\nThe West End includes Mt. Washington, with its famous view of the downtown skyline, and numerous other residential neighborhoods such as Sheraden and Elliott.\nRegional identity.\nPittsburgh falls within the borders of the Northeastern United States as defined by multiple US Government agencies. Pittsburgh is the principal city of the Pittsburgh Combined Statistical Area, a combined statistical area defined by the U.S. Census Bureau.\nPittsburgh falls within the borders of Appalachia as defined by the Appalachian Regional Commission, and has long been characterized as the \"northern urban industrial anchor of Appalachia.\" In its post-industrial state, Pittsburgh has been characterized as the \"Paris of Appalachia\", recognizing the city's cultural, educational, healthcare, and technological resources, and is the largest city in Appalachia.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Pittsburgh falls within either a hot-summer humid continental climate (\"Dfa\") if the isotherm is used or a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") if the isotherm is used. Summers are hot and winters are moderately cold with wide variations in temperature. Despite this, it has one of the most pleasant summer climates between medium and large cities in the U.S. The city lies in the USDA plant hardiness zone 6b except along the rivers where the zone is 7a. The area has four distinct seasons: winters are cold and snowy, springs and falls are mild with moderate levels of sunshine, and summers are warm. As measured by percent possible sunshine, summer is by far the sunniest season, though annual sunshine is low among major US cities at well under 50%.\nThe warmest month of the year in Pittsburgh is July, with a 24-hour average of . Conditions are often humid, and combined with highs reaching on an average 9.5 days a year, a considerable heat index arises. The coolest month is January, when the 24-hour average is , and lows of or below can be expected on an average 2.6 nights per year. Officially, record temperatures range from , on January 19, 1994 to , which occurred three times, most recently on July 16, 1988; the record cold daily maximum is , which occurred three times, most recently the day of the all-time record low, while, conversely, the record warm daily minimum is on July 1, 1901. Due to elevation and location on the windward side of the Appalachian Mountains, + readings are very rare, and were last seen on July 15, 1995.\nAverage annual precipitation is and precipitation is greatest in May while least in October; annual precipitation has historically ranged from in 1930 to in 2018. On average, December and January have the greatest number of precipitation days. Snowfall averages per season, but has historically ranged from in 1918\u201319 to in 1950\u201351. There is an average of 59 clear days and 103 partly cloudy days per year, while 203 days are cloudy. In terms of annual percent-average possible sunshine received, Pittsburgh (45%) is similar to Seattle (49%).\nAir quality.\nUnited States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) data from 2021 to 2024 shows that Pittsburgh's air quality was generally good or moderate.\nDespite improvements, studies suggest Pittsburgh's air quality still impacts health. A 2014 to 2016 study found that children near pollution sources like industrial sites had asthma rates nearly three times the national average. It also revealed that 38% of students lived in areas exceeding EPA's particle pollution standards, and 70% in areas surpassing the WHO's standards. Most affected communities were minority populations, leading some residents to believe that the continuing effects of air pollution are a case of environmental racism.\nAs of 2005, Pittsburgh had 31,000 trees along 900 miles of streets. A 2011 analysis valued the annual benefits of the city's urban forest between $10 and $13 million, based on contributions to aesthetics, energy use, and air quality. The city invests $850,000 annually in tree planting and maintenance.\nWater quality.\nLocal rivers in Pittsburgh continue to exceed EPA pollution limits, primarily due to frequently overflowing untreated sewage from the city's outdated infrastructure. Pittsburgh's combined sewer system, built in the early 1900s, carries both stormwater and wastewater, with the treatment plant constructed in 1959. Insufficient upgrades have led to public health concerns, as even a tenth of an inch of rain causes runoff to flow into rivers. Nine billion gallons of untreated waste and stormwater flow into rivers per year, leading to health hazards and Clean Water Act violations. The Allegheny County Sanitary Authority (ALCOSAN) is under a Consent Decree from the EPA and proposed a $2 billion system upgrade in 2017, approved by the EPA in 2019.\nThe Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority (PWSA), responsible for replacing pipes and setting water rates, has faced criticism for alleged mismanagement and for high lead levels in the city's drinking water, particularly in 2016. While lead levels have risen for years, many residents blame PWSA's administrative changes for the spike. In response, PWSA began adding orthophosphate to the water. PWSA has also been working to replace lead pipes, and continuing to test water for lead.\nThere remains concern among residents over the long-term effects of this lead, particularly for children. Some people also believe that the high levels of lead reflect environmental racism, as black and Hispanic children in Pittsburgh experience elevated blood-lead levels at 4 times the rate of white children.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAt the 2010 census, there were 305,704 people residing in Pittsburgh, a decrease of 8.6% since 2000; 66.0% of the population was White, 25.8% Black or African American, 0.2% American Indian and Alaska Native, 4.4% Asian, 0.3% Other, and 2.3% mixed; in 2020, 2.3% of Pittsburgh's population was of Hispanic or Latino American origin of any race. Non-Hispanic whites were 64.8% of the population in 2010, compared to 78.7% in 1970. By the 2020 census, the population slightly declined further to 302,971. Its racial and ethnic makeup in 2020 was 64.7% non-Hispanic white, 23.0% Black or African American, 5.8% Asian, and 3.2% Hispanic or Latino American of any race.\nSince the beginning of the 21st century, the five largest European ethnic groups in Pittsburgh were German (19.7%), Irish (15.8%), Italian (11.8%), Polish (8.4%), and English (4.6%), while the metropolitan area is approximately 22% German-American, 15.4% Italian American and 11.6% Irish American. Pittsburgh has one of the largest Italian-American communities in the nation, and the fifth-largest Ukrainian community per the 1990 census. \nPittsburgh has one of the most extensive Croatian communities in the United States. Overall, the Pittsburgh metro area has one of the largest populations of Slavic Americans in the country.\nPittsburgh has a sizable Black and African American population, concentrated in various neighborhoods especially in the East End. There is also a small Asian community consisting of Indian immigrants, and a small Hispanic community consisting of Mexicans and Puerto Ricans.\nIn 2010, there were 143,739 households, out of which 21.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 31.2% were married couples living together, 16.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 48.4% were non-families. 39.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.17 and the average family size was 2.95. In the city, the population was spread out, with 19.9% under the age of 18, 14.8% from 18 to 24, 28.6% from 25 to 44, 20.3% from 45 to 64, and 16.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.8 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $28,588, and the median income for a family was $38,795. Males had a median income of $32,128 versus $25,500 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,816. About 15.0% of families and 20.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 27.5% of those under the age of 18 and 13.5% ages 65 or older. By the 2019 American Community Survey, the median income for a household increased to $53,799. Families had a median income of $68,922; married-couple families had a median income of $93,500; and non-family households had a median income of $34,448. Pittsburgh's wealthiest suburbs within city limits are Squirrel Hill and Point Breeze, the only two areas of the city which have average household incomes over $100,000 a year.\nAs of 2018, much of Pittsburgh's population density was concentrated in the central, southern, and eastern areas. The city limits itself have a population density of 5,513 people per square mile; its most densely populated parts are North Oakland (at 21,200 per square mile) and Uptown Pittsburgh (at 19,869 per square mile). Outside of the city limits, Dormont and Mount Oliver were Pittsburgh's most densely populated neighborhoods, with 11,167 and 9,902 people per square mile respectively.\nMost of Pittsburgh's immigrants are from China, India, Korea and Italy.\nDemographic changes.\nSince the 1940s, city initiatives for redevelopment have driven demographic changes in Pittsburgh. In the 1950s, the Lower Hill District underwent significant upheaval when 1,551 mostly Black residents and 413 businesses were displaced for the construction of the Civic Arena, which opened in 1961. This project, part of Pittsburgh's revitalization efforts, led to the neighborhood's population dropping to an estimated 12,000 today.\nIn the 1960s, the Urban Redevelopment Authority of Pittsburgh (URA) aimed to revitalize East Liberty, resulting in the construction of Penn Center Mall and the displacement of about 3,800 people. By the early 2000s, private developers catering to a wealthier demographic introduced businesses like Home Depot, Whole Foods, and Google. This redevelopment, supported by the URA, transformed East Liberty into a desirable area for millennials.\nThese changes have sparked criticism, with some residents arguing that the government's actions were part of a strategy to disperse Black and low-income populations or facilitate gentrification of neighborhoods. The demolition of housing units like the East Mall public housing complex in 2009, replaced by businesses like Target, is cited as evidence of this process.\nReligion.\nAccording to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center, 78% of the population of the city identified themselves as Christians, with 42% professing attendance at a variety of churches that could be considered Protestant, and 32% professing Catholic beliefs. 18% claimed no religious affiliation. The same study said that other religions (including Judaism, Buddhism, Islam, and Hinduism) collectively made up about 4% of the population.\nAccording to a 2010 Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) study, residents included 773,341 \"Catholics\"; 326,125 \"Mainline Protestants\"; 174,119 \"Evangelical Protestants;\" 20,976 \"Black Protestants;\" and 16,405 \"Orthodox Christians,\" with 996,826 listed as \"unclaimed\" and 16,405 as \"other\" in the metro area. A 2017 study by the Cohen Center for Modern Jewish Studies at Brandeis University estimated the Jewish population of Greater Pittsburgh was 49,200.\nPittsburgh is also cited as the location where the earliest precursor to Jehovah's Witnesses was founded by Charles Taze Russell; today the denomination makes up approximately 1% of the population based on data from the Pew Research Center.\nEconomy.\nPittsburgh has adapted since the collapse of its century-long steel and electronics industries. The region has shifted to high technology, robotics, health care, nuclear engineering, tourism, biomedical technology, finance, education, and services. Annual payroll of the region's technology industries, when taken in aggregate, exceeded $10.8\u00a0billion in 2007, and in 2010 there were 1,600 technology companies. A National Bureau of Economic Research 2014 report named Pittsburgh the second-best U.S. city for intergenerational economic mobility or the American Dream. Reflecting the citywide shift from industry to technology, former factories have been renovated as modern office space. Google has research and technology offices in a refurbished 1918\u20131998 Nabisco factory, a complex known as Bakery Square. Some of the factory's original equipment, such as a large dough mixer, were left standing in homage to the site's industrial roots. Pittsburgh's transition from its industrial heritage has earned it praise as \"the poster child for managing industrial transition\". Other major cities in the northeast and mid-west have increasingly borrowed from Pittsburgh's model in order to renew their industries and economic base.\nThe largest employer in the city is the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, with 48,000 employees. All hospitals, outpatient clinics, and doctor's office positions combine for 116,000 jobs, approximately 10% of the jobs in the region. An analyst recently observed of the city's medical sector: \"That's both more jobs and a higher share of the region's total employment than the steel industry represented in the 1970s.\"\n Education is a major economic driver in the region. The largest single employer in education is the University of Pittsburgh, with 10,700 employees.\nTen Fortune 500 companies call the Pittsburgh area home. They are (in alphabetical order): Alcoa Corporation (NYSE: AA), Arconic Corporation (NYSE: ARNC), Dick's Sporting Goods (NYSE: DKS), The Kraft Heinz Company (NASDAQ: KHC), PNC Financial Services (NYSE: PNC), PPG Industries (NYSE: PPG), U.S. Steel Corporation (NYSE: X), Viatris (NASDAQ: VRTS), Wabtec Corporation (NYSE: WAB), and WESCO International (WYSE: WCC).\nThe region is home to Aurora, Allegheny Technologies, American Eagle Outfitters, Duolingo, EQT Corporation, CONSOL Energy, Howmet Aerospace, Kennametal and II-VI headquarters. Other major employers include BNY Mellon, GlaxoSmithKline, Thermo Fisher Scientific, and Lanxess. The Northeast U.S. regional headquarters for Chevron Corporation, Nova Chemicals, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, FedEx Ground, Ariba, and the RAND Corporation call the area home. 84 Lumber, Giant Eagle, Highmark, Rue 21, General Nutrition Center (GNC), CNX Gas (CXG), and Genco Supply Chain Solutions are major non-public companies headquartered in the region. The global impact of Pittsburgh technology and business was recently demonstrated in several key components of the Boeing 787 Dreamliner being manufactured and supplied by area companies. Area retail is anchored by over 35 shopping malls and a healthy downtown retail sector, as well as boutique shops along Walnut Street, in Squirrel Hill, Lawrenceville and Station Square.\nThe nonprofit arts and cultural industry in Allegheny County generates $341 million in economic activity that supports over 10,000 full-time equivalent jobs with nearly $34\u00a0million in local and state taxes raised.\nA leader in environmental design, the city is home to 60 total and 10 of the world's first green buildings while billions have been invested in the area's Marcellus natural gas fields. A renaissance of Pittsburgh's 116-year-old film industry\u2014that boasts the world's first movie theater\u2014has grown from the long-running Three Rivers Film Festival to an influx of major television and movie productions. including Disney and Paramount offices with the largest sound stage outside Los Angeles and New York City.\nPittsburgh has hosted many conventions, including INPEX, the world's largest invention trade show, since 1984; Tekko, a four-day anime convention, since 2003; Anthrocon, a furry convention, since 2006; and the DUG East energy trade show since 2009.\nArts and culture.\nEntertainment.\nPittsburgh boasts a rich arts and culture scene, with a history dating back to 19th-century industrialists who commissioned and donated public works including Heinz Hall for the Performing Arts and the Benedum Center, home to the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra and Pittsburgh Opera. Other prominent groups include the River City Brass Band and Pittsburgh Youth Symphony Orchestra. The city also hosts a variety of smaller arts organizations, such as Pittsburgh Irish and Classical Theatre, Quantum Theatre, the Renaissance and Baroque Society of Pittsburgh, and Chatham Baroque, an early music ensemble. University choirs include the Pitt Men's Glee Club and Heinz Chapel Choir.\nThe Pittsburgh Ballet Theatre and Pittsburgh Dance Council offer diverse dance events, while polka, folk, square, and round dancing are celebrated by the Duquesne University Tamburitzans, a multicultural academy dedicated to folk traditions. Pittsburgh is also a popular filming location, with major productions like \"The Dark Knight Rises\" filmed in Downtown, Oakland, and the North Shore. The city is also recognized as the birthplace of the modern zombie film genre after George A. Romero's 1968 film \"Night of the Living Dead\".\nMajor art museums include the Andy Warhol Museum, the Carnegie Museum of Art, The Frick Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh Center for the Arts, the Mattress Factory, and the Carnegie Museum of Natural History, which holds extensive dinosaur, mineral, and Egyptian collections. The Kamin Science Center and associated SportsWorks offer interactive technology and science exhibits. The Heinz History Center, a Smithsonian affiliate, provides regional history in the Strip District, while the Fort Pitt Museum is located in Point State Park. The Soldiers and Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum houses military exhibits, and the Children's Museum of Pittsburgh features interactive exhibits for kids. The eclectic Bayernhof Music Museum is located six miles (9km) from downtown, while The Clemente Museum is in Lawrenceville. The Cathedral of Learning's Nationality Rooms showcase pre-19th-century learning environments, and architectural tours are available in many neighborhoods. Downtown's cultural district hosts quarterly Gallery Crawls and the annual Three Rivers Arts Festival. Pittsburgh also has art galleries such as the Miller Gallery at Carnegie Mellon University, University Art Gallery of the University of Pittsburgh, the American Jewish Museum, and the Wood Street Galleries.\nPittsburgh is home to the Pittsburgh Zoo &amp; Aquarium, Phipps Conservatory and Botanical Gardens, and the National Aviary, all over a century old. Kennywood, a classic amusement park, is located in West Mifflin, and the Rivers Casino is on the North Shore along the Ohio River, just west of Kamin Science Center and Acrisure Stadium.\nPittsburgh hosts Anthrocon, one of the world's largest furry conventions, which has been held annually at the David L. Lawrence Convention Center since 2006. In 2024, the event attracted over 17,000 visitors and has generated a cumulative economic impact of $53 million over 11 years. Additionally, the reality show Dance Moms is filmed at Pittsburgh's Abby Lee Dance Company.\nMusic.\nPittsburgh has a long tradition of jazz, blues, and bluegrass music. The National Negro Opera Company was founded in the city as the first all-African American opera company in the U.S., helping launch the careers of African-American opera stars like Leontyne Price. Pittsburgh also shaped 20th-century music with influential figures like Billy Strayhorn, who grew up in the city, and pianist-composer Mary Lou Williams, who honored her hometown with a 1966 album featuring Leon Thomas.\nRecent artists like Wiz Khalifa have continued Pittsburgh's musical legacy, with his hit \"Black and Yellow\" reaching number one on the Billboard Hot 100 in 2011. Other notable artists from the area include Perry Como, Christina Aguilera, and the band Rusted Root, which was formed in Pittsburgh. Rusted Root's Liz Berlin owns Mr. Smalls, a popular venue for national touring acts. Hip hop artist Mac Miller, also from Pittsburgh, named his debut album \"Blue Slide Park\" after the local Frick Park.\nPittsburgh has emerged as a leading city in the United States' heavy metal music scene. Many punk rock and Hardcore punk acts, such as Aus Rotten and Anti-Flag, originated in Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh has also seen many metal bands gain prominence in recent years, most notably Code Orange, who were nominated for a Grammy. The city was also home to the highly influential math rock band Don Caballero.\nPittsburgh also had an influential electronic music subculture in the 1990s, with origins similar to internet chatroom-based movements across the United States. Pittsburgh promoters and DJs organized raves in warehouses, ice rinks, barns, and fields which eventually attracted thousands of attendees. DJs Adam Beyer and Richie Hawtin played at local raves. One notable figure, drum and bass DJ Dieselboy, emerged from this scene. Since 2012, the Hot Mass after-hours electronic music dance party has been a key part of Pittsburgh's electronic music scene, noted for its European nightclub vibe. Electronic artist Yaeji has credited Hot Mass as a formative influence during her time at Carnegie Mellon University.\nHellbender Vinyl, a vinyl record manufacturing company, is located in Pittsburgh.\nTheatre.\nThe city's first play was produced at the old courthouse in 1803 and the first theater built in 1812. Collegiate companies include the University of Pittsburgh's Repertory Theatre and Kuntu Repertory Theatre, Point Park University's resident companies at its Pittsburgh Playhouse, and Carnegie Mellon University's School of Drama productions and Scotch'n'Soda organization. The Duquesne University Red Masquers, founded in 1912, are the oldest, continuously producing theater company in Pennsylvania. The city's longest-running theater show, Friday Nite Improvs, is an improv jam that has been performed in the Cathedral of Learning and other locations for 20 years. The Pittsburgh New Works Festival utilizes local theater companies to stage productions of original one-act plays by playwrights from all parts of the country. Similarly, Future Ten showcases new ten-minute plays. Saint Vincent Summer Theatre, Off the Wall Productions, Mountain Playhouse, The Theatre Factory, and Stage Right! in nearby Latrobe, Carnegie, Jennerstown, Trafford, and Greensburg, respectively, employ Pittsburgh actors and contribute to the culture of the region.\nPittsburgh is well known for being home to the late playwright August Wilson. The August Wilson House now remains in Pittsburgh to celebrate the life and work of August Wilson, continue to produce his plays, and serve as an arts center for the Hill District, where Wilson was from.\nLiterature.\nPittsburgh is the birthplace of notable writers such as Gertrude Stein and Rachel Carson, a Chatham University graduate from the suburb of Springdale, Pennsylvania. Modern writers include Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright August Wilson, as well as Michael Chabon, who writes about student and college life in Pittsburgh. Two-time Pulitzer winner and recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom, David McCullough, was born and raised in Pittsburgh. Pulitzer Prize-winning author Annie Dillard, whose memoir \"An American Childhood\" takes place in post-World War II Pittsburgh, also hails from the city.\nAward-winning author John Edgar Wideman, who grew up in Pittsburgh, has based several books in the city, including \"Brothers and Keepers\". Poet Terrance Hayes, winner of the 2010 National Book Award and a 2014 MacArthur Foundation Fellow, earned his MFA at the University of Pittsburgh and was a faculty member there. Other local poets include Michael Simms, founder of Autumn House Press, and Samuel John Hazo, Pennsylvania's first poet laureate. Contemporary writers like Kathleen Tessaro, author of novels such as \"Elegance\", \"The Perfume Collector\", and \"Rare Objects\", and new authors including Chris Kuzneski and Brian Celio, who captures Pittsburgh's \"Yinzer\" dialect, contribute to the city's vibrant literary tradition. Pittsburgh's unique literary style extends to playwrights, as well as local graffiti and hip hop artists.\nPittsburgh's position as the birthplace for community-owned television and networked commercial television helped spawn the modern children's show genres exemplified by \"Mister Rogers' Neighborhood\", \"Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?\", \"Happy's Party\", \"Cappelli &amp; Company\", and \"The Children's Corner\", all nationally broadcast.\nThe \"Pittsburgh Dad\" series has showcased the Pittsburghese genre to a global YouTube audience since 2011.\nThe modern fantasy, macabre and science fiction genre was popularized by director George A. Romero, television's Bill Cardille and his \"Chiller Theatre\", director and writer Rusty Cundieff and makeup effects guru Tom Savini. The genre continues today with the PARSEC science fiction organization, The It's Alive Show, the annual \"Zombie Fest\", and several writer's workshops including Write or Die, Pittsburgh SouthWrites, and Pittsburgh Worldwrights with Barton Paul Levenson, Kenneth Chiacchia and Elizabeth Humphreys Penrose.\nFood.\nPittsburgh is known for several culinary specialties including pierogies, kielbasa, chipped chopped ham sandwiches, and Klondike bars. The San Francisco marketing agency AF and Co named Pittsburgh the top American food city of 2019, favorably mentioning many area restaurants including Superior Motors in Braddock, Driftwood Oven in Lawrenceville, Spork in Bloomfield, Fish nor Fowl in Garfield, Bitter Ends Garden &amp; Luncheonette in Bloomfield, and Rolling Pepperoni in Lawrenceville.\nPittsburgh is home to the annual pickle-themed festival Picklesburgh.\nLocal dialect.\nThe Pittsburgh English dialect, commonly called \"Pittsburghese\", was influenced by Scots-Irish, German, and Eastern European immigrants and African Americans. Locals who speak the dialect are sometimes referred to as \"Yinzers\" (from the local word \"yinz\" [var. \"yunz\"], a blended form of \"you ones\", similar to \"y'all\" and \"you all\" in the South). Common Pittsburghese terms are: \"slippy\" (slippery), \"redd up\" (clean up), \"jagger bush\" (thorn bush), and \"gum bands\" (rubber bands). The dialect is also notable for dropping the verb \"to be\". In Pittsburghese one would say \"the car needs washed\" instead of \"needs to be washed\", \"needs washing\", or \"needs a wash.\" The dialect has some tonal similarities to other nearby regional dialects of Erie and Baltimore but is noted for its somewhat staccato rhythms. The staccato qualities of the dialect are thought to originate either from Welsh or other European languages. The many local peculiarities have prompted \"The New York Times\" to describe Pittsburgh as \"the Galapagos Islands of American dialect\". The lexicon itself contains notable loans from Polish and other European languages; examples include \"babushka\", \"pierogi\", and \"halu\u0161ky\".\nLivability.\nPittsburgh has five city parks and several parks managed by the Nature Conservancy. The largest, Frick Park, provides of woodland park with extensive hiking and biking trails throughout steep valleys and wooded slopes. Birding enthusiasts visit the Clayton Hill area of Frick Park, where over 100 species of birds have been recorded.\nResidents living in extremely low-lying areas near the rivers or one of the 1,400 creeks and streams may have occasional floods, such as those caused when the remnants of Hurricane Ivan hit rainfall records in 2004. River flooding is relatively rare due to federal flood control efforts extensively managing locks, dams, and reservoirs. Residents living near smaller tributary streams are less protected from occasional flooding. The cost of a comprehensive flood control program for the region has been estimated at a prohibitive $50\u00a0billion.\nPittsburgh has the greatest number of bars per capita in the nation.\nSports.\nPittsburgh hosted the first professional football game and the first World Series. College sports also have large followings with the University of Pittsburgh in football and sharing Division I basketball fans with Robert Morris and Duquesne.\nPittsburgh has a long history with its major professional sports teams\u2014the Steelers of the National Football League, the Penguins of the National Hockey League, and the Pirates of Major League Baseball\u2014which all share the same team colors, the official city colors of black and gold. Pittsburgh is the only city in the United States where this practice of sharing colors across all city teams takes place. The black-and-gold color scheme has since become widely associated with the city and personified in its famous Terrible Towel. Further, the Pittsburgh Riverhounds professional soccer team of the USL Championship division wear black and gold colors.\nThe \"Rails to Trails\" program has converted miles of former rail tracks to recreational trails, including a Pittsburgh-Washington D.C. bike/walking trail. Several mountain biking trails are within the city and suburbs, Frick Park has biking trails and Hartwood Acres Park has many miles of single track trails.\nProfessional.\nMajor league\nMinor league/other\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCollege.\nPower 5\nOther\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBaseball.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[t]his is the perfect blend of location, history, design, comfort and baseball ... The best stadium in baseball is in Pittsburgh.\nESPN\nThe Pittsburgh Pirates baseball team, often referred to as the Bucs or the Buccos (derived from buccaneer), is the city's oldest professional sports franchise, having been founded in 1881, and plays in the Central Division of the National League. The Pirates are nine-time Pennant winners and five-time World Series Champions, were in the first World Series (1903) and claim two pre-World Series titles in 1901 and 1902. The Pirates play in PNC Park.\nPittsburgh also has a rich Negro league history, with the former Pittsburgh Crawfords and the Homestead Grays credited with as many as 14 league titles and 11 Hall of Famers between them in the 1930s and 1940s, while the Keystones fielded teams in the 1920s. In addition, in 1971 the Pirates were the first Major League team to field an all-minority lineup. One sportswriter claimed, \"No city is more synonymous with black baseball than Pittsburgh.\"\nSince the late 20th century, the Pirates had three consecutive National League Championship Series appearances (1990\u201392) (going 6, 7 and 7 games each), followed by setting the MLB record for most consecutive losing seasons, with 20 from 1993 until 2012. This era was followed by three consecutive postseason appearances: the 2013 National League Division Series and the 2014\u20132015 Wild Card games. Their September pennant race in 1997 featured the franchises' last no-hitter and last award for Sporting News' Executive of the Year.\nFootball.\nThe city's professional team, the NFL's Pittsburgh Steelers, is named after the distribution company the Pittsburgh Steeling company, established in 1927. News of the team has preempted news of elections and other events and are important to the region and its diaspora. The Steelers have been owned by the Rooney family since the team's founding in 1933, are noted for consistency in coaching (the team has had only three head coaches since the 1960s, all with the same basic philosophy) and have been called one of sports' most respectable franchises. The Steelers have a long waiting list for season tickets, and have sold out every home game since 1972. The team won four Super Bowls in a six-year span in the 1970s, a fifth Super Bowl in 2006, and a league record sixth Super Bowl in 2009.\nCollege football in the city dates to 1889 with the Division I (FBS) Panthers of the University of Pittsburgh posting nine national championships, qualifying 37 total bowl games, appearing in the 2018 ACC Championship Game, and winning the 2021 ACC Championship Game which was the program's first conference title since leaving the Big East for the ACC between the 2012 and 2013 seasons. Local universities Duquesne and Robert Morris have loyal fan bases that follow their lower (FCS) teams.\nAcrisure Stadium serves as home for the Steelers, Panthers, and both the suburban and city high school championships. Playoff franchises Pittsburgh Power and Pittsburgh Gladiators competed in the Arena Football League in the 1980s and 2010s respectively. The Gladiators hosted ArenaBowl I in the city, competing in two, but losing both before moving to Tampa, Florida and becoming the Storm. The Pittsburgh Passion has been the city's professional women's football team since 2002 and plays its home games at Highmark Stadium. The Ed Debartolo owned Pittsburgh Maulers featured a Heisman Trophy winner in the mid-1980s, former superstar University of Nebraska running back Mike Rozier.\nHockey.\nThe NHL's Pittsburgh Penguins have played in Pittsburgh since the team's founding in 1967. The team has won 6 Eastern Conference titles (1991, 1992, 2008, 2009, 2016 and 2017) and 5 Stanley Cup championships (1991, 1992, 2009, 2016 and 2017). Since 1999, Hall of Famer and back-to-back playoff MVP Mario Lemieux has served as Penguins owner. Until moving into the PPG Paints Arena in 2010 (when it was known as Consol Energy Center), the team played their home games at the world's first retractable domed stadium, the Civic Arena, or in local parlance \"The Igloo\".\nIce hockey has had a regional fan base since the 1890s semi-pro Keystones. The city's first ice rink dates back to 1889, when there was an ice rink at the Casino in Schenley Park. From 1896 to 1956, the Exposition Building on the Allegheny River near The Point and Duquesne Gardens in Oakland offered indoor skating.\nThe NHL awarded one of its first franchises to the city in 1924 on the strength of the back-to-back USAHA championship-winning Pittsburgh Yellow Jackets. The NHL's Pittsburgh Pirates made several Stanley Cup playoff runs before folding from Great Depression financial pressures. Hockey survived with the Pittsburgh Hornets farm team (1936\u20131967) and their seven finals appearances and three championships in 18 playoff seasons.\nRobert Morris University fields a Division I college hockey team at the https://. Pittsburgh has semi-pro and amateur teams such as the Pittsburgh Penguins Elite. Pro-grade ice rinks in the region include the Rostraver Ice Garden and Iceoplex at Southpointe.\nBasketball.\nProfessional basketball in Pittsburgh dates to the 1910s with teams \"Monticello\" and \"Loendi\" winning five national titles, the Pirates (1937\u201345 in the NBL), the Pittsburgh Ironmen (1947\u201348 NBA inaugural season), the Pittsburgh Rens (1961\u201363), the Pittsburgh Pipers (first American Basketball Association championship in 1968) led by Connie Hawkins (team then moved); the Pittsburgh Condors (ABA returned in 1970\u201372), the Pittsburgh Piranhas (CBA Finals in 1995), the Pittsburgh Xplosion (2004\u201308) and Phantoms (2009\u201310) both of the ABA.\nThree Pittsburgh universities, the University of Pittsburgh, Duquesne University, and Robert Morris University, compete in NCAA Division I basketball. Pitt and Duquesne are the traditional basketball powers in the city, but all three universities have made multiple appearances in the National Invitation Tournament and NCAA tournament. Pitt won two pre-NCAA tournament National Championships in 1928 and 1930 while Duquesne won the NIT title in 1955, its second straight trip to the NIT title game. Both Pitt and Duquesne have reached the NCAA tournament Final Four once, Duquesne in 1940 and Pitt in 1941.\nPittsburgh Panthers women's basketball has qualified for 14 post season tournaments (including 4 NCAA tournaments) and boasts of 5 All-Americans selected 6 times with 3 WNBA players. Pitt women began play in 1914 before being reintroduced in 1970. Both Duquesne and Robert Morris also have competitive Division I women's basketball programs.\nSoccer.\nThe Riverhounds, an American professional soccer team, were founded in 1998. Like the major league teams in the city, the Riverhounds wear black and gold kits. The club plays in the Eastern Conference of the USL Championship, the second tier of the American soccer pyramid. The Riverhounds play their home games at Highmark Stadium, a soccer-specific stadium located in Station Square.\nGolf.\nGolf has deep roots in the area. Foxburg Country Club, the oldest U.S. course in continuous use (dating from 1887) calls the region home. Suburban Oakmont Country Club holds the record for most times as host for the U.S. Open at nine; it has also hosted the U.S. Women's Open, PGA Championships, and U.S. Amateurs.\nGolf legends Arnold Palmer, Jim Furyk, and Rocco Mediate learned the game and began their careers on Pittsburgh area courses. Suburban courses such as Laurel Valley Golf Club and the Fox Chapel Golf Club have hosted PGA Championships (1937, 1965), the Ryder Cup (1975), LPGA Championships (1957\u201358), Senior Players Championships (2012\u201314), and the Senior PGA Championship (2005).\nLocal courses have sponsored annual major tournaments for 40 years:\nProfessional wrestling.\nMany notable professional wrestlers and promoters have hailed from the city or started their careers in Pittsburgh, including Bruno Sammartino, Kurt Angle, Shane Douglas, Corey Graves, Dominic DeNucci, Elias, Britt Baker and many more.\nThe Fineview section of Pittsburgh served as the base of the televised show Studio Wrestling during the 1960s. The Keystone State Wrestling Alliance (KSWA) is a professional wrestling promotion which was founded in Pittsburgh in 2000. It is the only promotion based in Pittsburgh. It operates in the city's Lawrenceville neighborhood. The KSWA performs Monthly on Saturdays at its main venue on 51st Street.\nAnnual sporting events.\nPittsburgh hosts several annual major sporting events initiated in the late 20th century, including the:\nThe city's vibrant rivers have attracted annual world-title fishing competitions of the Forrest Wood Cup in 2009 and the Bassmaster Classic in 2005.\nAnnual events continue during the winter months at area ski resorts such as Boyce Park, Seven Springs, Hidden Valley Resort, Laurel Mountain, and Wisp. Ice skating rinks are enjoyed at PPG Place and North Park.\nGovernment and politics.\nGovernment.\nThe Government of Pittsburgh is composed of the Mayor of Pittsburgh, the Pittsburgh City Council, and various boards and commissions. The mayor and the nine-member council each serve four-year terms. Since the 1950s the Mayor's Chief of Staff has assumed a large role in advising, long term planning, and as a \"gatekeeper\" to the mayor. City council members are chosen by plurality elections in each of nine districts. The government's official offices are in the Pittsburgh City-County Building.\nThe Pennsylvania Supreme Court holds sessions in Pittsburgh, as well as Harrisburg and Philadelphia. Pittsburgh is represented in the Pennsylvania General Assembly by three Senate Districts and nine House Districts. Federally, Pittsburgh is part of Pennsylvania's 12th congressional district.\nPolitics.\nIn 2006, Council President Luke Ravenstahl was sworn in as mayor at age 26, becoming the youngest mayor in the history of any major American city. His successor, Bill Peduto, was sworn in on January 6, 2014. In November 2021, Pittsburgh elected its first African-American mayor, Ed Gainey.\nPrior to the American Civil War, Pittsburgh was strongly abolitionist. It is considered the birthplace of the national Republican Party, as the party held its first convention here in February 1856. From the Civil War to the 1930s, Pittsburgh was a Republican stronghold. The effects of the Great Depression, combined with entrenched local GOP scandals, resulted in a shift among voters to the Democratic Party. With the exceptions of the 1973 and 1977 elections (where lifelong Democrats ran off the party ticket), Democrats have been elected consecutively to the mayor's office since the 1933 election. The city's ratio of party registration is 5 to 1 Democrat.\nPittsburgh is represented in the Pennsylvania General Assembly by three Senate Districts (Lindsey Williams (D)-38, Wayne D. Fontana (D)-42, and Jay Costa (D)-43) and nine House Districts (Aerion Abney-19, Emily Kinkead-20, Lindsay Powell-21, Dan Frankel-23, La'Tasha Mayes-24, Dan Deasy-27, Abigail Salisbury-34, Jessica Benham-36, and John Inglis-38).\nFederally, Pittsburgh is part of Pennsylvania's 12th congressional district, represented by Democrat Summer Lee since 2023.\nLaw enforcement.\nThe area's largest law enforcement agency is the Pittsburgh Bureau of Police, with close to 850 sworn officers. The city also has separate housing and school police departments. Other agencies also provide police protection within the city because of overlapping jurisdictional boundaries. The Allegheny County Sheriff focuses on jail and courthouse security. The Allegheny County Police primarily patrols county-owned parks and airports, while providing detective/investigatory functions for smaller suburbs and the Port Authority police patrols rapid transit. Pennsylvania State Police Troop B provides patrols for the city and immediate suburbs.\nThe county's lead law enforcement officer is Allegheny County District Attorney Stephen Zappala while the Allegheny County Medical Examiner heads forensics. Crimes of a federal nature are covered by the U.S. Attorney for Western Pennsylvania.\nCrime.\nPittsburgh annually ranks as one of America's safest big cities, in 2013 being named the 3rd \"most secure\" big city by Farmers Insurance. Among crime rates of the 60 largest U.S. cities, 43 had more instances of property crime while 16 had less when compared to Pittsburgh. More instances of violent crime were reported in 21 of the largest cities while 37 had less. The FBI recommends against using data for ranking.\nPer 100,000 persons stats (2012):\nAt the end of 2019, the Pittsburgh Bureau of Police reported 37 murders in the city that year.\nIn Pittsburgh, the homicide rate for African Americans is seven times the national average. Some people believe that over-reliance on law enforcement exacerbates homicide rates. There is also concern regarding the effectiveness of law enforcement in solving these cases, as 97% of unsolved cases involved a black victim. This has led certain residents to believe law enforcement to be ineffective or apathetic. This is despite an increasing police budget. In 2023, members of the Pittsburgh City Council approved an increase to the police budget by $6 million. About 6% of this money is expected to go to the Stop the Violence trust fund. This fund goes to improving parks and recreation, various non-profits, and to the office of Community Health and Safety, in effort to holistically improve the social pressures supposedly causing violence in Pittsburgh.\nSome people do not believe these efforts to be adequate. In 2023, a study conducted by Police Scorecard rated the Pittsburgh Police Department at 37% quality (with 100% being the best). It rated Pittsburgh below the 50th percentile in 10 out of 15 categories studied: \"Police Budget Cost per Person,\" \"Fines/Forfeitures,\" \"Police Presence/Over-Policing (Officers per Population),\" \"Force Used per Arrest,\" \"Racial Disparities in Deadly Force,\" \"Excessive Force Complaints Upheld,\" \"Discrimination Complaints Upheld,\" \"Criminal Misconduct Complaints Upheld,\" \"Arrest Rate for Low Level Offenses,\" and \"Racial Disparities in Drug Arrests\".\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nPittsburgh is home to many colleges, universities and research facilities, the most well-known of which are Carnegie Mellon University, the University of Pittsburgh, and Duquesne University. Also in the city are Carlow University, Chatham University, Point Park University, the Community College of Allegheny County, Pittsburgh Theological Seminary, Reformed Presbyterian Theological Seminary, and the Pittsburgh Institute of Mortuary Science.\nThe campuses of Carlow, Carnegie Mellon, and the University of Pittsburgh are near each other in the Oakland neighborhood that is the city's traditional cultural center. Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) is a private research university founded by Andrew Carnegie and Andrew Mellon. CMU contains the Mellon College of Science, School of Computer Science, College of Engineering, School of Business, Heinz College, College of Fine Arts, writing, Social and Decision Sciences, information systems, statistics, and psychology programs.\nThe University of Pittsburgh, established in 1787 and popularly referred to as \"Pitt\", is a state-related school with one of the nation's largest research programs. Pitt is known for the Kenneth P. Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences, University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public and International Affairs, University of Pittsburgh School of Information Sciences, Swanson School of Engineering, University of Pittsburgh College of Business Administration, University of Pittsburgh School of Law, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Social Work, and other biomedical and health-related sciences.\nDuquesne University, a private Catholic university in the Bluff neighborhood and is noted for its song and dance troupe, the Duquesne University Tamburitzans, as well as graduate programs in law, medicine, pharmacy, nursing, engineering, health sciences, business, music, and education. Carlow University is a small private Catholic university that while coeducational, has traditionally educated women. Chatham University, a liberal arts college that was founded as a woman's college but became fully coeducational in 2015, is in the Shadyside neighborhood, but also maintains a Eden Hall Farm campus in the North Hills. Point Park University was founded in 1961 and is well known for its Conservatory of Performing Arts and its Pittsburgh Playhouse.\nPrimary education.\nPittsburgh Public Schools teachers are paid well relative to their peers, ranking 17th in 2000 among the 100 largest cities by population for the highest minimum salary. In 2018, the starting teacher salary offered to teachers with a BA was $46,920. The maximum annual salary for a teacher with a master's degree was $95,254.\nLocal public schools include many charter and magnet schools, including City Charter High School (computer and technology focused), Pittsburgh Montessori School (formerly Homewood Montessori), Pittsburgh Gifted Center, Barack Obama Academy of International Studies 6-12, Pittsburgh Creative and Performing Arts 6\u201312, Pittsburgh Science and Technology Academy, the Western Pennsylvania School for Blind Children, and the Western Pennsylvania School for the Deaf.\nPrivate schools in Pittsburgh include Bishop Canevin High School, Central Catholic High School, Oakland Catholic High School, Winchester Thurston School, St. Edmund's Academy, Hillel Academy of Pittsburgh, Yeshiva Schools and The Ellis School. Shady Side Academy maintains a PK\u20135 primary school campus in the Point Breeze neighborhood, in addition to its 6\u201312 middle and upper school campuses in nearby suburban Fox Chapel. Other private institutions outside of Pittsburgh's limits include North Catholic High School and Seton-La Salle Catholic High School.\nThe city also has an extensive library system, both public and university. Most notable are the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh and the University of Pittsburgh's University Library System, which rank as the ninth-largest public and 18th-largest academic libraries in the nation, respectively.\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\nThere are two major daily newspapers in Pittsburgh: the \"Pittsburgh Post-Gazette\" and the \"Pittsburgh Tribune-Review\" (online only). Weekly papers in the region include the \"Pittsburgh Business Times\", \"Pittsburgh City Paper\", \"Pittsburgh Catholic\", \"Pittsburgh Jewish Chronicle\", \"The New People\", and the \"New Pittsburgh Courier\". Independent student-written university-based newspapers include \"The Pitt News\" of the University of Pittsburgh, \"The Tartan\" of Carnegie Mellon University, \"The Duquesne Duke\" of Duquesne University, and \"The Globe\" of Point Park University. The University of Pittsburgh School of Law is also home to JURIST, the world's only university-based legal news service.\nTelevision.\nThe Pittsburgh metro area is served by multiple local television and radio stations. The Pittsburgh designated market area (DMA) is the 22nd-largest in the U.S. with 1,163,150 homes (1.045% of the total U.S.). The major network television stations include KDKA-TV 2 (CBS), WTAE 4 (ABC), WPXI 11 (NBC), WINP-TV 16 (Ion), WPKD-TV 19 (Independent), WPNT 22 (The CW/MyNetworkTV), WPCB 40 (Cornerstone), and WPGH-TV 53 (Fox). KDKA-TV, WINP-TV, and WPCB are owned-and-operated by their respective networks.\nWQED 13 is the local PBS member station in Pittsburgh. It was established on April 1, 1954, and was the first community-sponsored television station and the fifth public station in the United States. The station has produced much original content for PBS, including \"Mr. Rogers' Neighborhood\", several National Geographic specials, and \"Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?\"\nRadio.\nA wide variety of radio stations serve the Pittsburgh market. The first was KDKA 1020 AM, also the world's first commercially licensed radio station, which began airing on November 2, 1920. Other stations include KQV 1410 AM (news), WBGG 970 AM (sports), KDKA-FM 93.7 FM (sports), WKST-FM 96.1 FM (Top 40), WAMO-AM 660 AM and 107.3 FM (urban contemporary) WBZZ 100.7 FM (adult contemporary), WDVE 102.5 FM (album rock), WPGB 104.7 FM (Country), and WXDX 105.9 FM (modern rock). There are also three public radio stations in the area: WESA 90.5 FM (National Public Radio affiliate), WQED 89.3 FM (classical), and WYEP 91.3 FM (adult alternative). Three non-commercial stations are run by Carnegie Mellon University (WRCT 88.3 FM), the University of Pittsburgh (WPTS 92.1 FM), and Point Park University (WPPJ 670 AM).\nFilm.\nPittsburgh's 116-year-old film industry accelerated after the 2006 passage of the Pennsylvania Film Production Tax Credit. According to the Pittsburgh Film Office, over 124 major motion pictures have been filmed, in whole or in part, in Pittsburgh, including \"The Mothman Prophecies\", \"Wonder Boys\", \"Dogma\", \"Hoffa\", \"The Silence of the Lambs\", \"Sudden Death\", \"Flashdance\", \"Southpaw\", \"Striking Distance\", \"Mrs. Soffel\", \"Jack Reacher\", \"Inspector Gadget\", \"The Next Three Days\", \"The Perks of Being a Wallflower\", \"Zack and Miri Make a Porno\", and \"Fences\". Pittsburgh became \"Gotham City\" in 2011 during filming of \"The Dark Knight Rises\". George A. Romero shot nearly all his films in the area, including his \"Living Dead\" series. From 2017 to 2023, Pittsburgh welcomed a series of major film and television productions like \"Fences\", \"Mindhunter\", \"Ma Rainey's Black Bottom\", \"Sweet Girl\", and \"I'm Your Woman\", significantly contributing to the local economy.\nFilm production in Pittsburgh has notably impacted the region's economy and job creation, largely due to the 25% tax credit incentive established in 2007. The Pittsburgh Film Office states that the film and television industry provides employment to over 10,000 people and pays over $500 million in wages in southwestern Pennsylvania. Furthermore, the industry supports over 345,000 local businesses and contributes over $41 billion to them.\nPittsburgh is home to several film festivals, film schools, and organizations that encourage and promote independent and diverse filmmakers. Notable film festivals include the Three Rivers Film Festival, the Pittsburgh Shorts Film Festival, the JFilm Festival, the ReelAbilities Film Festival, and the Black Bottom Film Festival. The local film schools include Pittsburgh Filmmakers, Point Park University - Cinema &amp; Digital Arts, and University of Pittsburgh - Film Studies.\nPittsburgh's film studio infrastructure includes several sound stages and production facilities available for hire. Prominent film studios in Pittsburgh are 3 Rivers Studios, Cinelease Studios, Post Script Films, Deeplocal, and The Videohouse. There are also plans in the pipeline to develop a new film studio complex at the Carrie Furnace site in Rankin and Swissvale.\nUtilities.\nThe city is served by Duquesne Light, one of the original 1912 power companies founded by George Westinghouse. Water service is provided by the Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority and Pennsylvania American Water. Natural gas is provided by Equitable Gas, Columbia Gas, Dominion Resources, Direct Energy, and Novec.\nHealth care.\nThe two largest area health care providers are the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC) (since 1893) and Allegheny Health Network (since 1882).\nThe first military hospital in U.S. history and the first west of the Atlantic Plain\u2014General Edward Hand Hospital\u2014served the area from 1777 to 1845. Since 1847, Pittsburgh has hosted the world's first \"Mercy Hospital\". This was followed by West Penn hospital in 1848, Passavant Hospital in 1849, the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine in 1883, Children's Hospital in 1887, and Magee Womens Hospital in 1911. In 1954, Allegheny General (AGH) was among the first to administer Cobalt therapy.\nIn 1980, UPMC announced a $250\u00a0million ($ today) expansion and also hired transplant pioneer Thomas Starzl. In 1984, Allegheny General surgeons pioneered modern brain surgery. Starzl arranged the 1985 liver transplant of 5-year-old Amie Garrison as a UPMC surgery team flew to Baylor University, starting its transplant program. Also in 1985, UPMC surgeons Drs. Griffith, Hardesty, and Trento revealed a new device after a heart-lung transplant. In 1986, UPMC announced a $230\u00a0million ($ today) modernization. In 1996, UPMC's planned Sicily ISMETT branch was approved by the Italian government as transplant surgeons to supervise and deliver the world's third (both earlier ones done at UPMC)--and first public\u2014cross species marrow transplant at University of California, San Francisco. UPMC's Thomas Detre founded the International Society for Bipolar Disorders at a world medical conference in Pittsburgh in 1999.\nThe $80\u00a0million ($ today) UPMC Sports Performance Complex for the Pittsburgh Panthers &amp; Pittsburgh Steelers opened in 2000. In 2002, AGH opened its $30\u00a0million ($ today), 5-floor, 100,000 sq. ft., cancer center. The $130\u00a0million ($ today) 350,000 sq. ft. Hillman Cancer Center opened in 2003 as UPMC entered into an 8-year, $420\u00a0million ($ today) agreement with IBM to upgrade medical technologies &amp; health information systems.\nIn 2009, the $600\u00a0million ($ today) UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh opened. The campus was featured in world news in 2012 for several unique approaches to patient care. UPMC officially adopted in Erie, Pennsylvania's Hamot Medical Center in 2010. The Pittsburgh Penguins announced a state of the art training facility with UPMC in 2012. UPMC announced in 2013 it had partnered with Nazarbayev University to help found its medical school.\nHealth discoveries.\nWhile he was a professor at the University of Pittsburgh, American virologist Jonas Salk developed one of the first successful polio vaccines, which came into use in 1955.\nUPMC has pioneered several world firsts including the first known cystic fibrosis heart-lung transplant (1983), the world's first simultaneous liver and heart transplant operation on a child (6-year-old Stormie Jones in 1984), the youngest heart-lung transplant (9 years old in 1985), the world's first heart-liver-kidney transplant (1989), the world's first heart-liver transplant on an infant (1997), the first pediatric heart-double lung-liver transplant (1998), the nation's first double hand transplant (2009), and the first total forearm and hand transplant (2010), as well as the state's first heart transplant (1968).\n\"The Lancet\" published a 2012 UPMC study of two 9-year quadriplegics being able to move a robotic arm by thought, to pick up objects, shake hands, and even eat. Wiring the brain around spine damage to restore arm and leg muscle function was successful using robotic arms controlled via an embedded computer to translate signals near a small group of neurons with 200 needles.\nTransportation.\nPittsburgh is a city of bridges. With 446, it has three bridges more than Venice, Italy, which has historically held the title \"City of Bridges\". Around 40 bridges cross the three rivers near the city. The Smithfield Street Bridge was the world's first lenticular truss bridge. The city's Three Sisters Bridges offer a picturesque view of the city from the North. The southwestern \"entrance\" to Downtown for travelers coming in from Interstate 79 and the Pittsburgh International Airport is through the Fort Pitt Tunnel and over the Fort Pitt Bridge. The Fort Duquesne Bridge carrying Interstate 279 is the main gateway from Downtown to both PNC Park, Acrisure Stadium and the Rivers Casino. The Panhandle Bridge carries Pittsburgh Regional Transit's Blue/Red/Silver subway lines across the Monongahela River. The renovated J&amp;L Steel Company bridge has been a key traffic/running-biking trail conduit connecting the Southside Works and Pittsburgh Technology Center. Over 2,000 bridges span the landscape of Allegheny County.\nPublic transportation statistics.\nPittsburgh is served by Pittsburgh Regional Transit, the 26th-largest transit agency in the country prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. The average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Pittsburgh, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 73 minutes, while 23% of public transit riders ride for more than two hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 17 minutes, while 33% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is , while 11% travel for over in a single direction.\nExpressways and highways.\nLocals refer to the interstates fanning out from downtown Pittsburgh as the \"parkways.\" Interstate 376 is both the \"parkway east\" connecting to Interstate 76 (Pennsylvania Turnpike) and the \"parkway west\" connecting to Interstate 79, the Pittsburgh International Airport, the Ohio end of the Turnpike and Interstate 80. The \"parkway north\" is Interstate 279 connecting to I-79. The \"crosstown\" is Interstate 579 allowing access to the heart of downtown, the Liberty Tunnels and the PPG Paints Arena. The 45-mile-long and 70-mile-long expressway sections of Pennsylvania Route 28 and U.S. Route 22 also carry traffic from downtown to the northeast and western suburbs, respectively. Interstate 70, 79 and 76 (the Turnpike) roughly form a triangular-shaped \"beltway\" with Interstate 68 and 80 within the media market's northern and southern limits. Turnpike spurs such as the Mon\u2013Fayette Expressway, Pennsylvania Route 576 and Route 66 also help traffic flow. The non-expressway Pittsburgh/Allegheny County Belt System serves navigation in the region.\nAirports.\nPittsburgh International Airport provides commercial passenger service from over 15 airlines to the Pittsburgh metropolitan area. Arnold Palmer Regional Airport also provides limited commercial passenger service and is east of Pittsburgh.\nOther airports that have or have had scheduled commercial service include Morgantown Municipal Airport ( south of Pittsburgh), Youngstown\u2013Warren Regional Airport ( northwest of Pittsburgh), Akron\u2013Canton Airport ( northwest of Pittsburgh), Johnstown\u2013Cambria County Airport ( east of Pittsburgh) and Erie International Airport ( north of Pittsburgh).\nIntercity passenger rail and bus.\nAmtrak provides intercity rail service to Pittsburgh Union Station, via the \"Capitol Limited\" between Chicago and Washington, D.C., and the \"Pennsylvanian\" to New York City.\nMegabus, Greyhound Lines, and Fullington Trailways connect Pittsburgh with distant cities by bus; Greyhound and Fullington Trailways buses stop at the Grant Street Transportation Center intercity bus terminal. Popular destinations include Philadelphia, New York City, and Washington, D.C.\nUntil declines in passenger travel in the 1950s and 1960s, several stations served Pittsburgh: Baltimore &amp; Ohio Station, Pittsburgh &amp; Lake Erie Railroad Station, Wabash Pittsburgh Terminal and Pittsburgh Union Station.\nRegional mass transit.\nPittsburgh Regional Transit, formerly known as the Port Authority of Allegheny County, is the region's mass transit system. While serving only a portion of the Pittsburgh area, the nation's 20th-largest metropolitan area, it is the 11th-largest transit agency in the United States. Pittsburgh Regional Transit runs a network of intracity and intercity bus routes, the Monongahela Incline Funicular railway (more commonly known as an \"incline\") on Mount Washington, a light rail system that runs mostly above-ground in the suburbs and underground as a subway in the city, and one of the nation's largest busway systems. Pittsburgh Regional Transit owns the Duquesne Incline but it is operated by a non-profit preservation trust, but accepts Pittsburgh Regional Transit passes and charges PRT fares.\nThe Bus System lines are labeled by number and letter. These are the largest portion of Pittsburgh Regional Transit and serve on streets and designated busways. Buses serve most of the county, extending as far as Pittsburgh International Airport, Monroeville, McCandless, and the borders of Westmoreland County and Beaver County, Pennsylvania. Meanwhile, the light rail system (commonly known as the \"T\") runs along both new tracks and those refurbished from the streetcar era. The light rail runs from Acrisure Stadium to South Hills Village and Library, taking commuters through one of two routes: one which serves Castle Shannon, Mt. Lebanon, and Beechview, and the other is an express line using railways through Overbrook.\nFreight rail.\nPittsburgh's rail industry dates to 1851 when the Pennsylvania Railroad first opened service between the Pittsburgh and Philadelphia. The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad entered the city in 1871. In 1865, Andrew Carnegie opened the Pittsburgh Locomotive and Car Works, which manufactured for the industry until 1919. Carnegie also founded the Union Railroad in 1894 for heavy freight services and it still serves the area's steel industry, while George Westinghouse's Wabtec has been a leader in rail engines and switching since 1869.\nPittsburgh is home to one of Norfolk Southern Railway's busiest freight corridors, the Pittsburgh Line, and operates up to 70 trains per day through the city. The suburban Conway Rail Yard, built in 1889, was the largest freight rail center in the world from 1956 until 1980 and is today the nation's second-largest. CSX, the other major freight railroad in the eastern U.S., also has major operations around Pittsburgh.\nPort.\nThe Port of Pittsburgh ranks as the 20th-largest port in the United States with almost 34\u00a0million short tons of river cargo for 2011. The port ranked ninth-largest in the U.S. when measured in domestic trade.\nSister cities.\nPittsburgh's sister cities are:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25102", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25102", "title": "Psychohistory", "text": "Academic discipline\nPsychohistory is a transdisciplinary field of knowledge that represents an amalgam of psychology, history, psychoanalysis, political psychology, anthropology, ethnology, and related social sciences, art, and humanities. Psychohistorians examine the \"why's\" of history, utilizing the bottom-up approach rather than starting with psychological theories. They combine the insights of psychodynamic psychology, especially psychoanalysis, with the research methodology of the social sciences and humanities, to understand the emotional origin of the behavior of individuals, groups and nations, past and present. Psychohistorians are interested in examining one's childhood, personality, family dynamics, as well as dreams, overcoming adversity, creativity, group and political affiliations.\nDescription.\nPsychohistorians claim to derive many of its concepts from areas that are perceived to be ignored by conventional historians and anthropologists as shaping factors of human history, in particular, the effects of parenting practice and child abuse. According to conventional historians \"the science of culture is independent of the laws of biology and psychology\" and \"the determining cause of a social fact should be sought among social facts preceding and not among the states of individual consciousness\".\nPsychohistorians, on the other hand, suggest that social behavior such as crime and war may be a self-destructive re-enactment of earlier abuse and neglect; that unconscious flashbacks to early fears and destructive parenting could dominate individual and social behavior.\nPsychohistory relies heavily on historical biography. Notable examples of psychobiographies are those of Lewis Namier, who wrote about the British House of Commons, and Fawn Brodie, who wrote about Thomas Jefferson.\nAreas of study.\nThere are three inter-related areas of psychohistorical study.\n1. The history of childhood \u2013 which looks at such questions as:\n*How have children been raised throughout history\n*How has the family been constituted\n*How and why have practices changed over time\n*The changing place and value of children in society over time\n*How and why our views of child abuse and neglect have changed\n2. Psychobiography \u2013 which seeks to understand individual historical people and their motivations in history.\n3. Group psychohistory \u2013 which seeks to understand the motivations of large groups, including nations, in history and current affairs. In doing so, psychohistory advances the use of group-fantasy analysis of political speeches, political cartoons and media headlines since the loaded terms, metaphors and repetitive words therein offer clues to unconscious thinking and behaviors.\nIndependence as a discipline.\nPsychohistorians have argued that psychohistory is a separate field of scholarly inquiry with its own particular methods, objectives and theories, which set it apart from conventional historical analysis and anthropology. Some historians, social scientists and anthropologists have, however, argued that their disciplines already describe psychological motivation and that psychohistory is not, therefore, a separate subject. Others regard it as an undisciplined field of study, due to its emphasis given to speculation on the psychological motivations of people in history. Doubt has also been cast on the viability of the application of post-mortem psychoanalysis by Freud's followers.\nPsychohistorians maintain that the difference is one of emphasis and that, in conventional study, narrative and description are central, while psychological motivation is hardly touched upon. Psychohistorians accuse most anthropologists and ethnologists of being apologists for incest, infanticide, cannibalism and child sacrifice. They maintain that what constitutes child abuse is a matter of objective fact, and that some of the practices which mainstream anthropologists apologize for (e.g., sacrificial rituals) may result in psychosis, dissociation and magical thinking.\nPsychogenic mode.\nLloyd deMause has described a system of psychogenic modes (see below) which describe the range of styles of parenting he has observed historically and across cultures.\nPsychohistorians have written much about changes in the human psyche through history; changes that they believe were produced by parents, and especially the mothers' increasing capacity to empathize with their children. Due to these changes in the course of history, different \"psychoclasses\" (or \"psychogenic modes\") emerged. A psychoclass is a type of mentality that results from, and is associated with, a particular childrearing style, and in its turn influences the method of childrearing of the next generations. According to psychohistory theory, regardless of the changes in the environment, it is only when changes in childhood occur and new psychoclasses evolve that societies begin to progress.\nThe major psychogenic modes described by deMause are:\nPsychohistorians maintain that the five modes of abusive childrearing (excluding the \"helping mode\") are related to psychiatric disorders from psychoses to neuroses.\nThe chart below shows the dates at which these modes are believed to have evolved in the most advanced nations, based on contemporary accounts from historical records. A black-and-white version of the chart appears in \"Foundations of Psychohistory\".\nThe y-axis on the above chart serves as an indicator of the new stage and not a measurement of the stage's size or relation to the x-axis.\nThe timeline does not apply to hunter-gatherer societies. It does not apply either to the Greek and Roman world, where there was a wide variation in childrearing practices. The arrival of the \"Ambivalent\" mode of child-rearing preceded the start of the Renaissance (mid 14th century) by only one or two generations, and the arrival of the \"Socializing\" mode coincided with the Age of Enlightenment, which began in the late 18th century.\nEarlier forms of childrearing coexist with later modes, even in the most advanced countries. An example of this are reports of selective abortion (and sometimes exposure of baby girls) especially in China, Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia, India, Pakistan, New Guinea, and many other developing countries in Asia and North Africa, regions in which millions of women are \"missing\". The conflict of new and old psychoclasses is also highlighted in psychohistorians' thought. This is reflected in political contrasts \u2013 for instance, in the clash between Blue State and Red State voters in the contemporary United States \u2013 and in civil wars.\nAnother key psychohistorical concept is that of \"group fantasy\", which deMause regards as a mediating force between a psychoclass's collective childhood experiences (and the psychic conflicts emerging therefrom), and the psychoclass's behavior in politics, religion and other aspects of social life.\nA psychoclass for postmodern times.\nAccording to the psychogenic theory, since Neanderthal man most tribes and families practiced infanticide, child mutilation, incest and beating of their children throughout prehistory and history. Presently the Western socializing mode of childrearing is considered much less abusive in the field, though this mode is not yet entirely free of abuse. In the opening paragraph of his seminal essay \"The Evolution of Childhood\" (first article in \"The History of Childhood\"), DeMause states:\nThe history of childhood is a nightmare from which we have only recently begun to awaken. The further back in history one goes, the lower the level of childcare, and the more likely children are to be killed, abandoned, beaten, terrorized and sexually abused.\nThere is notwithstanding an optimistic trait in the field. In a world of \"helping mode\" parents, deMause believes, violence of any other sort will disappear as well, along with magical thinking, mental disorders, wars and other inhumanities of man against man. Although, the criticism has been made that this itself is a form of magical thinking.\nCriticisms.\nThere are no departments dedicated to \"psychohistory\" in any institution of higher learning, although some history departments have run courses in it. Psychohistory remains a controversial field of study, facing criticism in the academic community, with critics referring to it as a pseudoscience. Psychohistory uses a plurality of methodologies, and it is difficult to determine which is appropriate to use in each circumstance. Yet this \"plurality\" is quite circumscribed.\nIn 1973, historian Hugh A. Trevor-Roper dismissed the field of psychohistory entirely in response to the publication of Walter Langer's \"The Mind of Adolf Hitler.\" He contended that psychohistory's methodology rested \"on a defective philosophy\" and was \"vitiated by a defective method.\" Instead of using historical evidence to derive historical interpretations, Trevor-Roper contended that \"psycho-historians move in the opposite direction. They deduce their facts from their theories; and this means, in effect, that facts are at the mercy of theory, selected and valued according to their consistence with theory, even invented to support theory.\"\nDeMause has received criticism on several levels. His formulations have been criticized for being insufficiently supported by credible research. He has also received criticism for being a strong proponent of the \"black legend\" view of childhood history (i.e. that the history of childhood was above all a history of progress, with children being far more often badly mistreated in the past). Similarly, his work has been called a history of child abuse, not childhood. The grim perspective of childhood history is known from other sources, e.g. Edward Shorter's \"The Making of the Modern Family\" and Lawrence Stone's \"The Family, Sex and Marriage in England 1500-1800\". However, deMause received criticism for his repeated, detailed descriptions on childhood atrocities:\nThe reader is doubtless already familiar with examples of these psychohistorical \"abuses.\" There is a significant difference, however, between the well-meaning and serious, if perhaps simplistic and reductionistic, attempt to understand the psychological in history and the psychohistorical expose that can at times verge on historical pornography. For examples of the more frivolous and distasteful sort of psychohistory, see \"Journal of Psychohistory\". For more serious and scholarly attempts to understand the psychological dimension of the past, see \"The Psychohistory Review\".\nRecent psychohistory has also been criticized for being overly-entangled with DeMause, whose theories are not representative of the entire field.\nOrganizations.\nBoston University offers a Psychohistory course at the undergraduate level and has published course details.\nThe Association for Psychohistory was founded by Lloyd deMause. It has 19 branches around the globe and has for over 30 years published the \"Journal of Psychohistory\". The International Psychohistorical Association was also founded by deMause and others in 1977 as a professional organization for the field of psychohistory. It publishes \"Psychohistory News\" and has a psychohistorical mail order lending library. The association hosts an annual convention.\nThe Psychohistory Forum publishes the quarterly journal \"Clio's Psyche\". It was founded in 1983 by historian and psychoanalyst Paul H. Elovitz. This organization of academics, therapists, and laypeople holds regular scholarly meetings in New York City and at international conventions. It also sponsors an online discussion group.\nIn Germany, scientists taking an interest in psychohistory have met annually since 1987. In 1992, the \"Gesellschaft f\u00fcr Psychohistorie und politische Psychologie e.V.\" (\u201cSociety for Psychohistory and Political Psychology\u201d) was founded. This society issues the \"Jahrbuch f\u00fcr Psychohistorische Forschung\" (\u201cAnnual of Psychohistorical Research\u201d)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25103", "revid": "50790843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25103", "title": "Patricia Soltysik", "text": "American criminal (1950\u20131974)\nPatricia Monique Soltysik (May 17, 1950 \u2013 May 17, 1974) was an American woman who was best known as a co-founder and activist in the Symbionese Liberation Army, a far-left militant group based in Berkeley and Oakland, California. She participated in the group's violent activities, including armed bank robbery. \nShe was one of six SLA members who died in Los Angeles in May 1974, during a shootout with the Los Angeles Police Department. The house where the members had gone to ground accidentally caught fire. Donald DeFreeze committed suicide by gunshot before the fire engulfed him. Camilla Hall and Nancy Ling Perry were fatally shot by police while leaving the house and brandishing pistols. \nAccording to later testimony by Patty Hearst, who had been kidnapped by the SLA in 1974 and later joined them, Soltysik was responsible for killing Marcus Foster, the Black Superintendent of Oakland Public Schools, in November 1973. \nEarly life and education.\nPatricia's father was a pharmacist. She had two older brothers and was the third of seven children, and the eldest of five girls. She grew up in Goleta, California. Soltysik graduated from Dos Pueblos High School in 1968 in the top 10 percent of her class, where she was elected student body treasurer.\nIn 1968 she gained a state scholarship and enrolled in the University of California, Berkeley. While at Berkeley she became embittered by the \"Bloody Thursday\" incident in 1971 in which police killed a protester. Drifting into leftist groups, she became a radical feminist and self-avowed revolutionary. \nIn 1971 Soltysik attached herself to the radical ex-convict group United Prisoners Union and dropped out of college. She and her neighbor, Camilla Hall, a former social worker and painter, became lovers in what was Hall's first lesbian relationship. Hall nicknamed Soltysik as \"Mizmoon.\"\nFounding of SLA.\nOn March 5, 1973, Donald DeFreeze escaped from Soledad prison. He sought refuge in Oakland with white friends from the Black Cultural Association (BCA), whom he had met earlier while incarcerated at Vacaville Prison. Russ Little and Willie Wolfe took him to Soltysik's house in Oakland. She had not been part of the prisoner outreach program conducted at Vacaville by UC Berkeley volunteers, so they thought that law enforcement would not look there for DeFreeze. DeFreeze lived with Soltysik for several months, and the two became lovers. \nSoltysik and DeFreeze are thought to have co-written the first SLA literature. Soltysik and Nancy Ling Perry, another white woman, are considered by some analysts and reporters to have been the main theorists and drivers of the SLA. As noted, Soltysik and DeFreeze co-wrote SLA literature. DeFreeze has been described as a simple man, and may have been a figurehead. \nResearchers have strongly suggested that he started working as an informant for the Los Angeles Police Department in 1967. They believe this is why his probation was extended, although he had been picked up on weapons charges well before he was sentenced to Vacaville prison for 5 years to life. He was later transferred to Soledad for good behavior. Evidence suggests that DeFreeze acted as an agent provocateur for the LAPD, and had been encouraged to join or catalyze radical activists in the Berkeley area. While living in Oakland, he seemed to have ready access to illegal weapons and explosives, and would sell them to radical groups.\nMost of the early SLA members were drawn from a group that encountered DeFreeze at Vacaville, where they first met as Berkeley volunteers to the Black Cultural Association. Most of the SLA members were white, but Joe Remiro was Chicano, and Thero Wheeler was Black and a former member of the Black Panthers. The relationships were complex, as DeFreeze was sexually involved with three of the women. Wheeler left the group as he disagreed with its plans to embrace violent tactics.\nOn November 6, 1973, in Oakland, California, three SLA \"soldiers\" fatally shot Dr. Marcus Foster, Superintendent of Public Schools, and badly wounded his deputy Robert Blackburn. The men were attacked as they left an Oakland school board meeting. Mistakenly believing that Foster supported the introduction of identification cards into Oakland schools, the SLA condemned him as \"fascist\", but he had opposed this measure and gotten agreement from the school board not to do it. \nPatty Hearst, who joined the group after being kidnapped by them in early 1974, testified later that Soltysik and Emily Harris, another white woman who had joined the SLA and became sexually involved with DeFreeze, were the two assailants who had shot Foster and Blackburn. Another account says that DeFreeze shot and wounded Blackburn.\nJoe Remiro and Russ Little were arrested in January 1974 after an armed confrontation with police in Concord, California, near where other members were staying at a house rented under a false name by Nancy Ling Perry. They were convicted and sentenced to prison on charges related to the Foster killing.\nL.A. shootout and death.\nSoltysik was one of the six SLA members killed in Los Angeles in a shootout with the Los Angeles Police Department on May 17, 1974. It was her 24th birthday. In the armed confrontation the house was accidentally set on fire. The SLA members initially took shelter beneath the floor of the house in a crawl space. She died from smoke inhalation, burn injuries, and several LAPD gunshot wounds as the house burned down around her.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25107", "revid": "39747830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25107", "title": "Polio", "text": "Infectious disease caused by poliovirus\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPoliomyelitis ( ), commonly shortened to polio, is an infectious disease caused by the poliovirus. Approximately 75% of cases are asymptomatic; mild symptoms which can occur include sore throat and fever; in a proportion of cases more severe symptoms develop such as headache, neck stiffness, and paresthesia. These symptoms usually pass within one or two weeks. A less common symptom is permanent paralysis, and possible death in extreme cases. Years after recovery, post-polio syndrome may occur, with a slow development of muscle weakness similar to what the person had during the initial infection.\nPolio occurs naturally only in humans. It is highly infectious, and is spread from person to person either through fecal\u2013oral transmission (e.g. poor hygiene, or by ingestion of food or water contaminated by human feces), or via the oral\u2013oral route. Those who are infected may spread the disease for up to six weeks even if no symptoms are present. The disease may be diagnosed by finding the virus in the feces or detecting antibodies against it in the blood.\nPoliomyelitis has existed for thousands of years, with depictions of the disease in ancient art. The disease was first recognized as a distinct condition by the English physician Michael Underwood in 1789, and the virus that causes it was first identified in 1909 by the Austrian immunologist Karl Landsteiner. Major outbreaks started to occur in the late 19th century in Europe and the United States, and in the 20th century, it became one of the most worrying childhood diseases. Following the introduction of polio vaccines in the 1950s, polio incidence declined rapidly. As of October\u00a02023[ [update]], only Pakistan and Afghanistan remain endemic for wild poliovirus (WPV). \nOnce infected, there is no specific treatment. The disease can be prevented by the polio vaccine, with multiple doses required for lifelong protection. There are two broad types of polio vaccine; an injected polio vaccine (IPV) using inactivated poliovirus and an oral polio vaccine (OPV) containing attenuated (weakened) live virus. Through the use of both types of vaccine, incidence of wild polio has decreased from an estimated 350,000 cases in 1988 to 30 confirmed cases in 2022, confined to just three countries. In rare cases, the traditional OPV was able to revert to a virulent form. An improved oral vaccine with greater genetic stability (nOPV2) was developed and granted full licensure and prequalification by the World Health Organization in December 2023.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe term \"poliomyelitis\" is used to identify the disease caused by any of the three serotypes of poliovirus. Two basic patterns of polio infection are described: a minor illness that does not involve the central nervous system (CNS), sometimes called abortive poliomyelitis, and a major illness involving the CNS, which may be paralytic or nonparalytic. Adults are more likely to develop symptoms, including severe symptoms, than children.\nIn most people with a normal immune system, a poliovirus infection is asymptomatic. In about 25% of cases, the infection produces minor symptoms which may include sore throat and low fever. These symptoms are temporary and full recovery occurs within one or two weeks.\nIn about 1 percent of infections the virus can migrate from the gastrointestinal tract into the central nervous system (CNS). Most patients with CNS involvement develop nonparalytic aseptic meningitis, with symptoms of headache, neck, back, abdominal and extremity pain, fever, vomiting, stomach pain, lethargy, and irritability. About one to five in 1,000 cases progress to paralytic disease, in which the muscles become weak, floppy and poorly controlled, and, finally, completely paralyzed; this condition is known as acute flaccid paralysis. The weakness most often involves the legs, but may less commonly involve the muscles of the head, neck, and diaphragm. Depending on the site of paralysis, paralytic poliomyelitis is classified as spinal, bulbar, or bulbospinal. In those who develop paralysis, between 2 and 10 percent die as the paralysis affects the breathing muscles.\nEncephalitis, an infection of the brain tissue itself, can occur in rare cases, and is usually restricted to infants. It is characterized by confusion, changes in mental status, headaches, fever, and, less commonly, seizures and spastic paralysis.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"poliomyelitis\" derives from the Ancient Greek (), meaning \"grey\", ( \"marrow\"), referring to the grey matter of the spinal cord, and the suffix \"-itis\", which denotes inflammation, i.e., inflammation of the spinal cord's grey matter. The word was first used in 1874 and is attributed to the German physician Adolf Kussmaul. The first recorded use of the abbreviated version \"polio\" was in the \"Indianapolis Star\" in 1911.\nCause.\nPoliomyelitis does not affect any species other than humans. The disease is caused by infection with a member of the genus \"Enterovirus\" known as poliovirus (PV). This group of RNA viruses colonize the gastrointestinal tract\u00a0\u2013 specifically the oropharynx and the intestine. Its structure is quite simple, composed of a single (+) sense RNA genome enclosed in a protein shell called a capsid. In addition to protecting the virus' genetic material, the capsid proteins enable poliovirus to infect certain types of cells. Three serotypes of poliovirus have been identified\u00a0\u2013 wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1), type 2 (WPV2), and type 3 (WPV3)\u00a0\u2013 each with a slightly different capsid protein. All three are extremely virulent and produce the same disease symptoms. WPV1 is the most commonly encountered form, and the one most closely associated with paralysis. WPV2 was certified as eradicated in 2015 and WPV3 certified as eradicated in 2019.\nThe incubation period (from exposure to the first signs and symptoms) ranges from three to six days for nonparalytic polio. If the disease progresses to cause paralysis, this occurs within 7 to 21 days.\nIndividuals who are exposed to the virus, either through infection or by immunization via polio vaccine, develop immunity. In immune individuals, IgA antibodies against poliovirus are present in the tonsils and gastrointestinal tract and able to block virus replication; IgG and IgM antibodies against PV can prevent the spread of the virus to motor neurons of the central nervous system. Infection or vaccination with one serotype of poliovirus does not provide immunity against the other serotypes, and full immunity requires exposure to each serotype.\nA rare condition with a similar presentation, nonpoliovirus poliomyelitis, may result from infections with enteroviruses other than poliovirus.\nThe oral polio vaccine, which has been in use since 1961, contains weakened viruses that can replicate. On rare occasions, these may be transmitted from the vaccinated person to other people; in communities with good vaccine coverage, transmission is limited, and the virus dies out. In communities with low vaccine coverage, this weakened virus may continue to circulate and, over time may mutate and revert to a virulent form. Polio arising from this cause is referred to as \"circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus\" (cVDPV) or \"variant poliovirus\" in order to distinguish it from the natural or \"wild\" poliovirus (WPV).\nTransmission.\nPoliomyelitis is highly contagious. The disease is transmitted primarily via the fecal\u2013oral route, by ingesting contaminated food or water. It is occasionally transmitted via the oral\u2013oral route. It is seasonal in temperate climates, with peak transmission occurring in summer and autumn. These seasonal differences are far less pronounced in tropical areas. Polio is most infectious between 7 and 10 days before and after the appearance of symptoms, but transmission is possible as long as the virus remains in the saliva or feces. Virus particles can be excreted in the feces for up to six weeks.\nFactors that increase the risk of polio infection include pregnancy, being very old or very young, immune deficiency, and malnutrition. Although the virus can cross the maternal-fetal barrier during pregnancy, the fetus does not appear to be affected by either maternal infection or polio vaccination. Maternal antibodies also cross the placenta, providing passive immunity that protects the infant from polio infection during the first few months of life.\nPathophysiology.\nPoliovirus enters the body through the mouth, infecting the first cells with which it comes in contact\u00a0\u2013 the pharynx and intestinal mucosa. It gains entry by binding to an immunoglobulin-like receptor, known as the poliovirus receptor or CD155, on the cell membrane. The virus then hijacks the host cell's own machinery, and begins to replicate. Poliovirus divides within gastrointestinal cells for about a week, from where it spreads to the tonsils (specifically the follicular dendritic cells residing within the tonsilar germinal centers), the intestinal lymphoid tissue including the M cells of Peyer's patches, and the deep cervical and mesenteric lymph nodes, where it multiplies abundantly. The virus is subsequently absorbed into the bloodstream.\nKnown as viremia, the presence of a virus in the bloodstream enables it to be widely distributed throughout the body. Poliovirus can survive and multiply within the blood and lymphatics for long periods of time, sometimes as long as 17 weeks. In a small percentage of cases, it can spread and replicate in other sites, such as brown fat, the reticuloendothelial tissues, and muscle. This sustained replication causes a major viremia, and leads to the development of minor influenza-like symptoms. Rarely, this may progress and the virus may invade the central nervous system, provoking a local inflammatory response. In most cases, this causes a self-limiting inflammation of the meninges, the layers of tissue surrounding the brain, which is known as nonparalytic aseptic meningitis. Penetration of the CNS provides no known benefit to the virus, and is quite possibly an incidental deviation of a normal gastrointestinal infection. The mechanisms by which poliovirus spreads to the CNS are poorly understood, but it appears to be primarily a chance event\u00a0\u2013 largely independent of the age, gender, or socioeconomic position of the individual.\nParalytic polio.\nIn around one percent of infections, poliovirus spreads along certain nerve fiber pathways, preferentially replicating in and destroying motor neurons within the spinal cord, brain stem, or motor cortex. This leads to the development of paralytic poliomyelitis, the various forms of which (spinal, bulbar, and bulbospinal) vary only with the amount of neuronal damage and inflammation that occurs, and the region of the CNS affected.\nThe destruction of neuronal cells produces lesions within the spinal ganglia; these may also occur in the reticular formation, vestibular nuclei, cerebellar vermis, and deep cerebellar nuclei. Inflammation associated with nerve cell destruction often alters the color and appearance of the gray matter in the spinal column, causing it to appear reddish and swollen. Other destructive changes associated with paralytic disease occur in the forebrain region, specifically the hypothalamus and thalamus.\nEarly symptoms of paralytic polio include high fever, headache, stiffness in the back and neck, asymmetrical weakness of various muscles, sensitivity to touch, difficulty swallowing, muscle pain, loss of superficial and deep reflexes, paresthesia (pins and needles), irritability, constipation, or difficulty urinating. Paralysis generally develops one to ten days after early symptoms begin, progresses for two to three days, and is usually complete by the time the fever breaks.\nThe likelihood of developing paralytic polio increases with age, as does the extent of paralysis. In children, nonparalytic meningitis is the most likely consequence of CNS involvement, and paralysis occurs in only one in 1000 cases. In adults, paralysis occurs in one in 75 cases. In children under five years of age, paralysis of one leg is most common; in adults, extensive paralysis of the chest and abdomen also affecting all four limbs\u00a0\u2013 quadriplegia\u00a0\u2013 is more likely. Paralysis rates also vary depending on the serotype of the infecting poliovirus; the highest rates of paralysis (one in 200) are associated with poliovirus type 1, the lowest rates (one in 2,000) are associated with type 2.\nSpinal polio.\nSpinal polio, the most common form of paralytic poliomyelitis, results from viral invasion of the motor neurons of the anterior horn cells, or the ventral (front) grey matter section in the spinal column, which are responsible for movement of the muscles, including those of the trunk, limbs, and the intercostal muscles. Virus invasion causes inflammation of the nerve cells, leading to damage or destruction of motor neuron ganglia. When spinal neurons die, Wallerian degeneration takes place, leading to weakness of those muscles formerly innervated by the now-dead neurons. With the destruction of nerve cells, the muscles no longer receive signals from the brain or spinal cord; without nerve stimulation, the muscles atrophy, becoming weak, floppy and poorly controlled, and finally completely paralyzed. Maximum paralysis progresses rapidly (two to four days), and usually involves fever and muscle pain. Deep tendon reflexes are also affected, and are typically absent or diminished; sensation (the ability to feel) in the paralyzed limbs, however, is not affected.\nThe extent of spinal paralysis depends on the region of the cord affected, which may be cervical, thoracic, or lumbar. The virus may affect muscles on both sides of the body, but more often the paralysis is asymmetrical. Any limb or combination of limbs may be affected\u00a0\u2013 one leg, one arm, or both legs and both arms. Paralysis is often more severe proximally (where the limb joins the body) than distally (the fingertips and toes).\nBulbar polio.\nMaking up about two percent of cases of paralytic polio, bulbar polio occurs when poliovirus invades and destroys nerves within the bulbar region of the brain stem. The bulbar region is a white matter pathway that connects the cerebral cortex to the brain stem. The destruction of these nerves weakens the muscles supplied by the cranial nerves, producing symptoms of encephalitis, and causes difficulty breathing, speaking and swallowing. Critical nerves affected are the glossopharyngeal nerve (which partially controls swallowing and functions in the throat, tongue movement, and taste), the vagus nerve (which sends signals to the heart, intestines, and lungs), and the accessory nerve (which controls upper neck movement). Due to the effect on swallowing, secretions of mucus may build up in the airway, causing suffocation. Other signs and symptoms include facial weakness (caused by destruction of the trigeminal nerve and facial nerve, which innervate the cheeks, tear ducts, gums, and muscles of the face, among other structures), double vision, difficulty in chewing, and abnormal respiratory rate, depth, and rhythm (which may lead to respiratory arrest). Pulmonary edema and shock are also possible and may be fatal.\nBulbospinal polio.\nApproximately 19 percent of all paralytic polio cases have both bulbar and spinal symptoms; this subtype is called respiratory or bulbospinal polio. Here, the virus affects the upper part of the cervical spinal cord (cervical vertebrae C3 through C5), and paralysis of the diaphragm occurs. The critical nerves affected are the phrenic nerve (which drives the diaphragm to inflate the lungs) and those that drive the muscles needed for swallowing. By destroying these nerves, this form of polio affects breathing, making it difficult or impossible for the patient to breathe without the support of a ventilator. It can lead to paralysis of the arms and legs and may also affect swallowing and heart functions.\nDiagnosis.\nParalytic poliomyelitis may be clinically suspected in individuals experiencing acute onset of flaccid paralysis in one or more limbs with decreased or absent tendon reflexes in the affected limbs that cannot be attributed to another apparent cause, and without sensory or cognitive loss.\nA laboratory diagnosis is usually made based on the recovery of poliovirus from a stool sample or a swab of the pharynx. Rarely, it may be possible to identify poliovirus in the blood or in the cerebrospinal fluid. Poliovirus samples are further analysed using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) or genomic sequencing to determine the serotype (i.e., 1, 2, or 3), and whether the virus is a wild or vaccine-derived strain.\nPrevention.\nPassive immunization.\nIn 1950, William Hammon at the University of Pittsburgh purified the gamma globulin component of the blood plasma of polio survivors. Hammon proposed the gamma globulin, which contained antibodies to poliovirus, could be used to halt poliovirus infection, prevent disease, and reduce the severity of disease in other patients who had contracted polio. The results of a large clinical trial were promising; the gamma globulin was shown to be about 80 percent effective in preventing the development of paralytic poliomyelitis. It was also shown to reduce the severity of the disease in patients who developed polio. Due to the limited supply of blood plasma gamma globulin was later deemed impractical for widespread use and the medical community focused on the development of a polio vaccine.\nVaccine.\nTwo types of vaccine are used throughout the world to combat polio: an inactivated poliovirus given by injection, and a weakened poliovirus given by mouth. Both types induce immunity to polio and are effective in protecting individuals from disease.\nThe inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) was developed in 1952 by Jonas Salk at the University of Pittsburgh, and announced to the world on 12 April 1955. The Salk vaccine is based on poliovirus grown in a type of monkey kidney tissue culture (vero cell line), which is chemically inactivated with formalin. After two doses of IPV (given by injection), 90 percent or more of individuals develop protective antibody to all three serotypes of poliovirus, and at least 99 percent are immune to poliovirus following three doses.\nSubsequently, Albert Sabin developed a polio vaccine that can be administered orally (oral polio vaccine - OPV), comprising a live, attenuated virus. It was produced by the repeated passage of the virus through nonhuman cells at subphysiological temperatures. The attenuated poliovirus in the Sabin vaccine replicates very efficiently in the gut, the primary site of wild poliovirus infection and replication, but the vaccine strain is unable to replicate efficiently within nervous system tissue. A single dose of Sabin's trivalent OPV produces immunity to all three poliovirus serotypes in about 50 percent of recipients. Three doses of OPV produce protective antibody to all three poliovirus types in more than 95 percent of recipients. Human trials of Sabin's vaccine began in 1957, and in 1958, it was selected, in competition with the live attenuated vaccines of Koprowski and other researchers, by the US National Institutes of Health. Licensed in 1962, it rapidly became the only oral polio vaccine used worldwide.\nOPV efficiently blocks person-to-person transmission of wild poliovirus by oral\u2013oral and fecal\u2013oral routes, thereby protecting both individual vaccine recipients and the wider community. The live attenuated virus may be transmitted from vaccinees to their unvaccinated contacts, resulting in wider community immunity. IPV confers good immunity but is less effective at preventing spread of wild poliovirus by the fecal\u2013oral route.\nBecause the oral polio vaccine is inexpensive, easy to administer, and produces excellent immunity in the intestine (which helps prevent infection with wild virus in areas where it is endemic), it has been the vaccine of choice for controlling poliomyelitis in many countries. On very rare occasions, the attenuated virus in the Sabin OPV can revert into a form that can paralyze. In 2017, cases caused by vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV) outnumbered wild poliovirus cases for the first time, due to wild polio cases hitting record lows. Most industrialized countries have switched to inactivated polio vaccine, which cannot revert, either as the sole vaccine against poliomyelitis or in combination with oral polio vaccine.\nAn improved oral vaccine (Novel oral polio vaccine type 2 - nOPV2) began development in 2011 and was granted emergency licensing in 2021, and subsequently full licensure in December 2023. This has greater genetic stability than the traditional oral vaccine and is less likely to revert to a virulent form.\nTreatment.\nThere is no cure for polio, but there are treatments. The focus of modern treatment has been on providing relief of symptoms, speeding recovery and preventing complications. Supportive measures include antibiotics to prevent infections in weakened muscles, analgesics for pain, moderate exercise and a nutritious diet. Treatment of polio often requires long-term rehabilitation, including occupational therapy, physical therapy, braces, corrective shoes and, in some cases, orthopedic surgery.\nPortable ventilators may be required to support breathing. Historically, a noninvasive, negative-pressure ventilator, more commonly called an iron lung, was used to artificially maintain respiration during an acute polio infection until a person could breathe independently (generally about one to two weeks). The use of iron lungs is largely obsolete in modern medicine as more modern breathing therapies have been developed and due to the eradication of polio in most of the world.\nOther historical treatments for polio include hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, massage and passive motion exercises, and surgical treatments, such as tendon lengthening and nerve grafting.\nPrognosis.\nPatients with abortive polio infections recover completely. In those who develop only aseptic meningitis, the symptoms can be expected to persist for two to ten days, followed by complete recovery. In cases of spinal polio, if the affected nerve cells are completely destroyed, paralysis will be permanent; cells that are not destroyed, but lose function temporarily, may recover within four to six weeks after onset. Half the patients with spinal polio recover fully; one-quarter recover with mild disability, and the remaining quarter are left with severe disability. The degree of both acute paralysis and residual paralysis is likely to be proportional to the degree of viremia, and inversely proportional to the degree of immunity. Spinal polio is rarely fatal.\nWithout respiratory support, consequences of poliomyelitis with respiratory involvement include suffocation or pneumonia from aspiration of secretions. Overall, 5 to 10 percent of patients with paralytic polio die due to the paralysis of muscles used for breathing. The case fatality rate (CFR) varies by age: 2 to 5 percent of children and up to 15 to 30 percent of adults die. Bulbar polio often causes death if respiratory support is not provided; with support, its CFR ranges from 25 to 75 percent, depending on the age of the patient. When intermittent positive pressure ventilation is available, the fatalities can be reduced to 15 percent.\nRecovery.\nMany cases of poliomyelitis result in only temporary paralysis. Generally in these cases, nerve impulses return to the paralyzed muscle within a month, and recovery is complete in six to eight months. The neurophysiological processes involved in recovery following acute paralytic poliomyelitis are quite effective; muscles are able to retain normal strength even if half the original motor neurons have been lost. Paralysis remaining after one year is likely to be permanent, although some recovery of muscle strength is possible up to 18 months after infection.\nOne mechanism involved in recovery is nerve terminal sprouting, in which remaining brainstem and spinal cord motor neurons develop new branches, or axonal sprouts. These sprouts can reinnervate orphaned muscle fibers that have been denervated by acute polio infection, restoring the fibers' capacity to contract and improving strength. Terminal sprouting may generate a few significantly enlarged motor neurons doing work previously performed by as many as four or five units: a single motor neuron that once controlled 200 muscle cells might control 800 to 1000 cells. Other mechanisms that occur during the rehabilitation phase, and contribute to muscle strength restoration, include myofiber hypertrophy\u00a0\u2013 enlargement of muscle fibers through exercise and activity\u00a0\u2013 and transformation of type II muscle fibers to type I muscle fibers.\nIn addition to these physiological processes, the body can compensate for residual paralysis in other ways. Weaker muscles can be used at a higher than usual intensity relative to the muscle's maximal capacity, little-used muscles can be developed, and ligaments can enable stability and mobility.\nComplications.\nResidual complications of paralytic polio often occur following the initial recovery process. Muscle paresis and paralysis can sometimes result in skeletal deformities, tightening of the joints, and movement disability. Once the muscles in the limb become flaccid, they may interfere with the function of other muscles. A typical manifestation of this problem is equinus foot (similar to club foot). This deformity develops when the muscles that pull the toes downward are working, but those that pull it upward are not, and the foot naturally tends to drop toward the ground. If the problem is left untreated, the Achilles tendons at the back of the foot retract and the foot cannot take on a normal position. People with polio that develop equinus foot cannot walk properly because they cannot put their heels on the ground. A similar situation can develop if the arms become paralyzed.\nIn some cases the growth of an affected leg is slowed by polio, while the other leg continues to grow normally. The result is that one leg is shorter than the other and the person limps and leans to one side, in turn leading to deformities of the spine (such as scoliosis). Osteoporosis and increased likelihood of bone fractures may occur. An intervention to prevent or lessen length disparity can be to perform an epiphysiodesis on the distal femoral and proximal tibial/fibular condyles, so that limb's growth is artificially stunted, and by the time of epiphyseal (growth) plate closure, the legs are more equal in length. Alternatively, a person can be fitted with custom-made footwear which corrects the difference in leg lengths. Other surgery to re-balance muscular agonist/antagonist imbalances may also be helpful. Extended use of braces or wheelchairs may cause compression neuropathy, as well as a loss of proper function of the veins in the legs, due to pooling of blood in paralyzed lower limbs. Complications from prolonged immobility involving the lungs, kidneys and heart include pulmonary edema, aspiration pneumonia, urinary tract infections, kidney stones, paralytic ileus, myocarditis and cor pulmonale.\nPost-polio syndrome.\nBetween 25 percent and 50 percent of individuals who have recovered from paralytic polio in childhood can develop additional symptoms decades after recovering from the acute infection, notably new muscle weakness and extreme fatigue. This condition is known as post-polio syndrome (PPS) or post-polio sequelae. The symptoms of PPS are thought to involve a failure of the oversized motor units created during the recovery phase of the paralytic disease. Contributing factors that increase the risk of PPS include aging with loss of neuron units, the presence of a permanent residual impairment after recovery from the acute illness, and both overuse and disuse of neurons. PPS is a slow, progressive disease, and there is no specific treatment for it. Post-polio syndrome is not an infectious process, and persons experiencing the syndrome do not shed poliovirus.\nOrthotics.\nParalysis, length differences and deformations of the lower extremities can lead to a hindrance when walking with compensation mechanisms that lead to a severe impairment of the gait pattern. In order to be able to stand and walk safely and to improve the gait pattern, orthotics can be included in the therapy concept. Today, modern materials and functional elements enable the orthosis to be specifically adapted to the requirements resulting from the patient's gait. Mechanical stance phase control knee joints may secure the knee joint in the early stance phases and release again for knee flexion when the swing phase is initiated. With the help of an orthotic treatment with a stance phase control knee joint, a natural gait pattern can be achieved despite mechanical protection against unwanted knee flexion. In these cases, locked knee joints are often used, which have a good safety function, but do not allow knee flexion when walking during swing phase. With such joints, the knee joint remains mechanically blocked during the swing phase. Patients with locked knee joints must swing the leg forward with the knee extended even during the swing phase. This only works if the patient develops compensatory mechanisms, e.g. by raising the body's center of gravity in the swing phase (Duchenne limping) or by swinging the orthotic leg to the side (circumduction).\nEpidemiology.\nMajor polio epidemics were unknown before the 20th century; up until that time, polio was an endemic disease worldwide. Mothers who had survived polio infection passed on temporary immunity to their babies in the womb and through breast milk. As a result, an infant who encountered a polio infection generally suffered only mild symptoms and acquired a long-term immunity to the disease. With improvements in sanitation and hygiene during the 19th century, the general level of herd immunity in the population declined; this provided circumstances where epidemics of polio became frequent. It is estimated that epidemic polio killed or paralysed over half a million people every year.\nFollowing the widespread use of poliovirus vaccine in the mid-1950s, new cases of poliomyelitis declined dramatically in many industrialized countries. Efforts to completely eradicate the disease started in 1988 and are ongoing.\nCirculating vaccine-derived polioviruses.\nThe oral polio vaccine, while highly effective, has the disadvantage that it contains a live virus which has been attenuated so that it cannot cause severe illness. The vaccine virus is excreted in the stool, and in under-immunized communities it can spread from person to person. This is known as circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV) or more simply as variant poliovirus.\nWith prolonged transmission of this kind, the weakened virus can mutate and revert to a form that causes illness and paralysis. Cases of cVDPV now exceed wild-type cases, making it desirable to discontinue the use of the oral polio vaccine as soon as safely possible and instead use other types of polio vaccines.\nEradication.\nA global effort to eradicate polio \u2013 the Global Polio Eradication Initiative \u2013 began in 1988, led by the World Health Organization, UNICEF, and The Rotary Foundation. Polio is one of only two diseases currently the subject of a global eradication program, the other being Guinea worm disease. So far, the only diseases completely eradicated by humankind are smallpox, declared eradicated in 1980, and rinderpest, declared eradicated in 2011. In April 2012, the World Health Assembly declared that the failure to completely eradicate polio would be a programmatic emergency for global public health, and that it \"must not happen\".\nThese efforts have hugely reduced the number of cases; from an estimated 350,000 cases in 1988 to a low of 483 cases in 2001, after which it remained at a level of about 1,000\u20132000 cases per year for a number of years.\nBy 2015, polio was believed to remain naturally spreading in only two countries, Pakistan and Afghanistan, although it continued to cause outbreaks in other nearby countries due to hidden or re-established transmission.\nGlobal surveillance for polio takes two forms. Cases of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) are tested for the presence and type of poliovirus. In addition, environmental and wastewater samples are tested for the presence of poliovirus - this is an effective method of detecting circulating virus which has not given rise to severe symptoms. Here is a summary of both wild polio (WPV) and variant polio (cVDPV) prevalence over the years shown:\nAfghanistan and Pakistan.\nThe last remaining region with wild polio cases are the South Asian countries Afghanistan and Pakistan.\nDuring 2011, the CIA ran a fake hepatitis vaccination clinic in Abbottabad, Pakistan, in an attempt to locate Osama bin Laden. This destroyed trust in vaccination programs in the region. There were attacks and deaths among vaccination workers; 66 vaccinators were killed in 2013 and 2014. In Afghanistan, the Taliban banned house-to-house polio vaccination between 2018 and 2021. These factors have set back efforts to eliminate polio by means of vaccination in these countries.\nIn Afghanistan, 80 cases of polio were reported from 35 districts during 2011. Incidence over the subsequent 10 years has declined to just 4 cases in 2 districts during 2021.\nIn Pakistan, cases dropped by 97 percent from 2014 to 2018; reasons include 440\u00a0million dirham support from the United Arab Emirates to vaccinate more than ten million children, changes in the military situation, and arrests of some of those who attacked polio workers.\nAmericas.\nThe Americas were declared polio-free in 1994. The last known case was a boy in Peru in 1991. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends polio vaccination boosters for travelers and those who live in countries where the disease is endemic.\nIn July 2022, the US state of New York reported a polio case for the first time in almost a decade in the country; this was attributed to a vaccine-derived strain of the virus.\nWestern Pacific.\nIn 2000, polio was declared to have been officially eliminated in 37 Western Pacific countries, including China and Australia.\nDespite eradication ten years earlier, an outbreak was confirmed in China in September 2011, involving a strain common in Pakistan.\nIn September 2019, the Department of Health of the Philippines declared a polio outbreak in the country after a single case in a 3-year-old girl. In December 2019, acute poliomyelitis was confirmed in an infant in Sabah state, Borneo, Malaysia. Subsequently, a further three polio cases were reported, with the last case reported in January 2020. Both outbreaks were found to be linked instances of vaccine-derived poliomyelitis.\nEurope.\nEurope was declared polio-free in 2002.\nSoutheast Asia.\nOn 27 March 2014, the WHO announced the eradication of poliomyelitis in the South-East Asia Region, which includes eleven countries: Bangladesh, Bhutan, North Korea, India, Indonesia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Timor-Leste. With the addition of this region, 80 per cent of the world population was considered to be living in polio-free regions.\nMiddle East.\nAs of January\u00a02023[ [update]], Syria is considered a polio-free country, but it remains at high risk for imported outbreaks. Difficulties in executing immunization programs in the ongoing civil war led to a return of wild polio in 2012\u20132013 15 cases were confirmed among children in Syria between October and November 2013 in Deir Ezzor. Later, two more cases, one each in rural Damascus and Aleppo, were identified. A vaccination campaign in Syria operated under gunfire and led to the deaths of several vaccinators, but returned vaccination coverage to pre-war levels. Another outbreak in 2017 was caused by circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2). Both outbreaks were successfully contained through intensive vaccination campaigns and surveillance efforts. \nIn 2022, prior to the Israel-Hamas conflict, routine immunization coverage of eligible children exceeded 99%, but fell to less than 90% by the first quarter of 2024, according to the WHO. In 2024, the Gaza Health Ministry reported that several children have shown symptoms consistent with polio, with laboratory tests confirming that a 10-month-old child is infected with the virus. United Nations Secretary-General Ant\u00f3nio Guterres urged for a weeklong cease-fire in Gaza to facilitate vaccinations and prevent a potential polio outbreak, emphasizing the risk faced by many children.\nAfrica.\nIn 2003, in northern Nigeria\u00a0\u2013 a country that at that time was considered provisionally polio free\u00a0\u2013 a fatwa was issued declaring that the polio vaccine was designed to render children sterile. Subsequently, polio reappeared in Nigeria and spread from there to several other countries. In 2013, nine health workers administering polio vaccine were targeted and killed by gunmen on motorcycles in Kano, but this was the only attack. Local traditional and religious leaders and polio survivors worked to revive the campaign, and Nigeria was removed from the polio-endemic list in September 2015 after more than a year without any cases, only to be restored to the list in 2016 when two cases were detected.\nAfrica was declared free of wild polio in August 2020, although cases of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 continue to appear in several countries.\nA single case of wild polio that was detected in Malawi in February 2022, and another in Mozambique in May 2022 were both of a strain imported from Pakistan and do not affect the African region's wild poliovirus-free certification status.\nHistory.\nThe effects of polio have been known since prehistory; Egyptian paintings and carvings depict otherwise healthy people with withered limbs, and young children walking with canes. The earliest known case of polio is indicated by the remains of a teenage girl discovered in a 4000-year-old burial site in the United Arab Emirates, exhibiting characteristic symptoms of the condition.\nThe first clinical description was provided by the English physician Michael Underwood in 1789, where he refers to polio as \"a debility of the lower extremities\". The work of physicians Jakob Heine in 1840 and Karl Oskar Medin in 1890 led to it being known as \"Heine\u2013Medin disease\". The disease was later called \"infantile paralysis\", based on its propensity to affect children.\nBefore the 20th century, polio infections were rarely seen in infants before six months of age, most cases occurring in children six months to four years of age. Poorer sanitation of the time resulted in constant exposure to the virus, which enhanced a natural immunity within the population. In developed countries during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, improvements were made in community sanitation, including better sewage disposal and clean water supplies. These changes drastically increased the proportion of children and adults at risk of paralytic polio infection, by reducing childhood exposure and immunity to the disease.\nSmall localized paralytic polio epidemics began to appear in Europe and the United States around 1900. Outbreaks reached pandemic proportions in Europe, North America, Australia, and New Zealand during the first half of the 20th century. By 1950, the peak age incidence of paralytic poliomyelitis in the United States had shifted from infants to children aged five to nine years, when the risk of paralysis is greater; about one-third of the cases were reported in persons over 15 years of age. Accordingly, the rate of paralysis and death due to polio infection also increased during this time. In the United States, the 1952 polio epidemic became the worst outbreak in the nation's history. Of the nearly 58,000 cases reported that year, 3,145 died and 21,269 were left with mild to disabling paralysis. Intensive care medicine has its origin in the fight against polio. Most hospitals in the 1950s had limited access to iron lungs for patients unable to breathe without mechanical assistance. Respiratory centers designed to assist the most severe polio patients, first established in 1952 at the Blegdam Hospital of Copenhagen by Danish anesthesiologist Bj\u00f8rn Ibsen, were the precursors of modern intensive care units (ICU). (A year later, Ibsen would establish the world's first dedicated ICU.)\nThe polio epidemics not only altered the lives of those who survived them, but also brought profound cultural changes, spurring grassroots fund-raising campaigns that would revolutionize medical philanthropy, and giving rise to the modern field of rehabilitation therapy. As one of the largest disabled groups in the world, polio survivors also helped to advance the modern disability rights movement through campaigns for the social and civil rights of the disabled. The World Health Organization estimates that there are 10 to 20\u00a0million polio survivors worldwide. In 1977, there were 254,000 persons living in the United States who had been paralyzed by polio. According to doctors and local polio support groups, some 40,000 polio survivors with varying degrees of paralysis were living in Germany, 30,000 in Japan, 24,000 in France, 16,000 in Australia, 12,000 in Canada and 12,000 in the United Kingdom in 2001. Many notable individuals have survived polio and often credit the prolonged immobility and residual paralysis associated with polio as a driving force in their lives and careers.\nThe disease was very well publicized during the polio epidemics of the 1950s, with extensive media coverage of any scientific advancements that might lead to a cure. Thus, the scientists working on polio became some of the most famous of the century. Fifteen scientists and two laymen who made important contributions to the knowledge and treatment of poliomyelitis are honored by the Polio Hall of Fame, which was dedicated in 1957 at the Roosevelt Warm Springs Institute for Rehabilitation in Warm Springs, Georgia, US. In 2008 four organizations (Rotary International, the World Health Organization, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and UNICEF) were added to the Hall of Fame.\nWorld Polio Day (24 October) as an annual day of awareness was established by Rotary International to commemorate the birth of Jonas Salk, who led the first team to develop a vaccine against poliomyelitis.\nA global effort to eradicate polio \u2013 the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) \u2013 began in 1988, led by the World Health Organization, UNICEF, and The Rotary Foundation. Since then, international cooperation led by GPEI has reduced polio worldwide by 99 percent, and the campaign is ongoing.\nIn 2010, wild poliovirus was discovered through importation in 13 different countries. They were Chad, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Republic of Congo, Kazakhstan, Liberia, Mali, Nepal, Niger, the Russian Federation, Senegal, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uganda.\nIn 2021, Types 2 and 3 were fully eradicated from every country; however, type 1 cases still remain in Pakistan and Afghanistan. A majority of countries have successfully eradicated polio, with Pakistan and Afghanistan being the last countries with endemic cases of poliovirus. The following countries have been considered polio-free, but not confirmed as of April 2024: Somalia, Djibouti, Sudan, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Morocco, Palestine, Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, Oman, Yemen, the UAE, Iraq, Kuwait, and Iran.\nResearch.\nSince 2018, Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) has coordinated efforts both to eliminate polio and to research means of improving surveillance and prevention. At the peak of its work, the programme directly employed 4000 people across 75 countries and managed a budget of nearly U.S. $1\u00a0billion.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], the GPEI had raised 18\u00a0billion dollars in funding, with annual contributions around 800 million to 1\u00a0billion dollars. Around 30% of the funding came from the Gates Foundation 30% from developed governments, 27% from countries at risk of polio, and the rest was made up of donations from nonprofits, private funders, and other foundations.\nThe GPEI has identified six directions for continuing research:\nEven if polio can be eliminated from the world population, vaccination programs should continue for at least ten years. The retention of live poliovirus samples in laboratories and vaccine manufacturing facilities (which carry a risk of escape of the virus) should progressively be reduced. To support these two objectives, vaccines are under development which either utilise a virus-like particle, or which derive from a modified virus which cannot reproduce in a human host.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25109", "revid": "110426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25109", "title": "Public limited company", "text": "Publicly traded limited liability company\nA public limited company (legally abbreviated to PLC or plc) is a type of public company under United Kingdom company law, some Commonwealth jurisdictions, and Ireland. It is a limited liability company whose shares may be freely sold and traded to the public (although a PLC may also be privately held, often by another PLC), with a minimum share capital of \u00a350,000 and usually with the letters PLC after its name. Similar companies in the United States are called \"publicly traded companies\".\nA PLC can be either an unlisted or listed company on the stock exchanges. In the United Kingdom, a public limited company usually must include the words \"public limited company\" or the abbreviation \"PLC\" or \"plc\" at the end and as part of the legal company name. Welsh companies may instead choose to end their names with , an abbreviation for \"\". However, some public limited companies (mostly nationalised concerns) incorporated under special legislation are exempted from bearing any of the identifying suffixes. The term \"public limited company\" and the \"PLC\"/\"plc\" suffix were introduced in 1981; prior to this, all limited companies bore the suffix \"Limited\" (\"Ltd.\"), which is still used by private limited companies.\nRegistration.\nWhen a new company incorporates in England and Wales or in Scotland, it must register with Companies House, an executive agency of the Department for Business and Trade. Prior to October 2009, companies in Northern Ireland were registered with the Northern Ireland Executive's Department of Enterprise, Trade and Investment, but since then Northern Irish company registrations, as with those of the rest of the United Kingdom, have been handled by Companies House.\nCompany directors.\nFormation of a public limited company requires a minimum of two directors and one secretary (differing from country to country: in India three directors are required). In general terms anyone can be a company director, provided they are not disqualified on one of the following grounds:\nShare capital.\nThe members must agree to take some, or all, of the shares when the company is registered. The memorandum of association must show the names of the people who have agreed to take shares and the number of shares each will take. These people are called the subscribers.\nThere is a minimum share capital for public limited companies: before it can start business, it must have allotted shares to the value of at least \u00a350,000. A quarter of them, \u00a312,500, must be paid up. Each allotted share must be paid up to at least one quarter of its nominal value together with the whole of any premium.\nA company can increase its authorised share capital by passing an ordinary resolution (unless its articles of association require a special or extraordinary resolution). A copy of the resolution \u2013 and notice of the increase on Form 123 \u2013 must reach Companies House within 15 days of being passed. No fee is payable to Companies House.\nA company can decrease its authorised share capital by passing an ordinary resolution to cancel shares which have not been taken or agreed to be taken by any person. Notice of the cancellation, on Form 122, must reach Companies House within one month. No fee is payable to Companies House.\nShare types.\nA company may have as many different types of shares as it wishes, all with different conditions attached to them. Generally, share types are divided into the following categories:\nBearer shares are no longer possible, as they were abolished in the UK by the Small Business, Enterprise and Employment Act 2015. Any existing bearer shares had to be converted to registered shares before February 2016, or face cancellation.\nA PLC has access to capital markets and can offer its shares for sale to the public through a recognised stock exchange. It can also issue advertisements offering any of its securities for sale to the public. In contrast, a private company may not offer to the public any shares in itself.\nCompany formation.\nPaper process.\nThe following documents, together with the registration fee are sent to the Registrar of Companies:\nElectronic process.\nThe key difference with the paper process is that there is no Form 12 and requirement for a statutory declaration. This significantly speeds the process: the record at Companies House for the formation of an Electronic Company is 23 minutes.\nBecause the electronic process requires compatible software that works with Companies House eFiling service, companies are usually formed through a Company Formation Agent.\nAnnual returns.\nEvery company must deliver an annual return to Companies House at least once every twelve months. It has 28 days from the date to which the return is made up to do this. Failure to file a return is a criminal offence, for which the officers of the company may be fined.\nThere is an annual document-processing fee of \u00a340 if filed by paper (or \u00a313 for users of the Electronic Filing or WebFilings services), which must be sent to Companies House with the annual return.\nConversion.\nPrivate limited company to a public limited company.\nBoth a private company limited by shares and an unlimited company with a share capital may re-register as a plc, but a company without a share capital cannot do so.\nA private company must pass a special resolution that it be so re-registered and deliver a copy of the resolution together with an application form to the Registrar. The resolution must also:\nIf it does not already have sufficient share capital, the company must issue \u00a350,000 in shares a minimum of 25% part paid.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25112", "revid": "39999417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25112", "title": "Prozac", "text": ""}
{"id": "25113", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25113", "title": "Paxil", "text": ""}
{"id": "25114", "revid": "20081525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25114", "title": "Posada, Sardinia", "text": "Posada (, ), also previously known as \"Feronia\" or \"Pausata\", is a \"comune\" (municipality) in the Province of Nuoro in the Italian region Sardinia. The city sits on the coast of the Tyrrhenian Sea. As of 31 December 2004, it had a population of 2,394 and an area of .\nPosada borders the following municipalities: Budoni, Siniscola and Torp\u00e8. It is one of I Borghi pi\u00f9 belli d'Italia (\"The most beautiful villages of Italy\").\nHistory.\nWithin Posada's territory was the ancient city of Feronia or Pheronia, the foundation of which is ascribed to the Faliscans, which contained a now lost temple to the Etruscan goddess Feronia.\nDuring the Roman period, the town's importance declined with the foundation of nearby Portus Luguidonis.\nIn the Middle Ages, Posada was main town of an historical district called \"Baronia di Posada\" or \"Baronia Alta\" (to be distinguished from Baronia Bassa or Baronia di Orosei/Galtell\u00ec), on the Tyrrhenian coast of the island.\nThe ancient part of the town is in a spectacular position on the top of a hill, where it preserves a particular medieval historical center, with ruins of a castle (Castello della Fava) and a square panoramic tower of the 13th century.\nThe castle has been the equivalent of a holiday residence for the \"Giudichessa\" Eleanor of Arborea, and was object of alternate possession by the Giudicato d'Arborea and the Aragon, during the long fight before the Spanish conquest.\nThe castle became then the seat of the Baron of Posada, a title and a fief created in 1431 for Don Nicol\u00f2 Carroz and formally ended in 1856, when it was finally bought by the kingdom of Sardinia (the last one of all Sardinian fiefs).\nEconomy.\nTourism in Posada is the main economic activity."}
{"id": "25116", "revid": "9855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25116", "title": "Xiphoporus maculatus", "text": ""}
{"id": "25117", "revid": "29913457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25117", "title": "Puget Sound Naval Shipyard", "text": "US Navy shipyard in Bremerton, Washington\nPuget Sound Naval Shipyard, officially Puget Sound Naval Shipyard and Intermediate Maintenance Facility (PSNS &amp; IMF), is a United States Navy shipyard covering 179 acres (0.7\u00a0km2) on Puget Sound at Bremerton, Washington in uninterrupted use since its establishment in 1891; it has also been known as Navy Yard Puget Sound, Bremerton Navy Yard, and the Bremerton Naval Complex.\nIt is bordered on the south by Sinclair Inlet, on the west by the Bremerton Annex of Naval Base Kitsap, and on the north and east by the city of Bremerton, Washington. It is the Pacific Northwest's largest naval shore facility and one of Washington state's largest industrial installations. PSNS &amp; IMF provides the Navy with maintenance, modernization, and technical and logistics support, and employs 15,000 people which makes it the largest public shipyard in terms of personnel assigned.\nHistory.\nPuget Sound Naval Shipyard was established in 1891 as a Naval Station and was designated Navy Yard Puget Sound in 1901. During World War I, the Navy Yard constructed ships, including 25 subchasers, seven submarines, two minesweepers, seven seagoing tugs, and two ammunition ships, as well as 1,700 small boats. During World War II, the shipyard's primary effort was the repair of battle damage to ships of the U.S. fleet and those of its allies.\nFollowing World War II, Navy Yard Puget Sound was designated Puget Sound Naval Shipyard. It engaged in an extensive program of modernizing carriers, including converting conventional flight decks to angle decks. During the Korean War, the shipyard was engaged in the activation of ships. In the late 1950s, it entered an era of new construction with the building of a new class of guided missile frigates. In 1965, USS \"Sculpin\" (SSN 590) became the first nuclear-powered submarine to be maintained at PSNS. The shipyard was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1992. The historic district includes 22 contributing buildings and 42 contributing structures, as well as 49 non-contributing buildings, structures, and objects.\nInstallations.\nPerhaps the most visible feature of the shipyard is its green hammerhead crane, built in 1933. The PSNS hammerhead crane is tall and wide with a lifting capacity of 250 tons.\nHistoric districts.\nThe Puget Sound Naval Shipyard contains five historic districts:\nThese five units are a comprehensive representation of the historic features of the naval shipyard.\nOperations.\nShip-Submarine Recycling Program.\nIn 1990 the Navy authorized the Ship-Submarine Recycling Program (SRP) to recycle nuclear-powered ships at PSNS. Approximately 25% of the shipyard's workload involves inactivation, reactor compartment disposal, and recycling of ships. It has pioneered an environmentally safe method of deactivating and recycling nuclear-powered ships. This process places the U.S. Navy in the role of being the world's only organization to design, build, operate, and recycle nuclear-powered ships. On 15 May 2003 PSNS and IMF were consolidated into what is now known as PSNS &amp; IMF.\nPSNS is the only U.S. facility certified to recycle nuclear ships. During all this period Puget Sound Naval Shipyard has scrapped more than 125 submarines and some cruisers.\nReserve fleet.\nThe shipyard contains a portion of the United States Navy reserve fleet, a large collection of inactive U.S. Navy vessels. The aircraft carrier was mothballed there until May 2022 when it was removed for scrapping.\nEnvironmental issues.\nGorst Creek Ravine near Port Orchard, Washington was a hazardous waste dump for the Navy's shipyard waste between 1969 and 1970, when the site was not permitted by local authorities to take waste. After several collapses since 1997 the landfill could blow out Highway 3. The landfill is an \"ongoing source of pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls and metals flowing downstream with the potential to affect groundwater wells, sport fisheries and the Suquamish Tribe's fish hatchery. In October 2014, the US EPA ordered the Navy to fix the problems.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25119", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25119", "title": "Poeciliidae", "text": "Family of ray-finned fishes\nPoeciliidae are a family of freshwater ray-finned fishes of the order Cyprinodontiformes, the tooth-carps, and include well-known live-bearing aquarium fish, such as the guppy, molly, platy, and swordtail. The original distribution of the family was the Southeastern United States to north of R\u00edo de la Plata, Argentina. Due to release of aquarium specimens and the widespread use of species of the genera \"Poecilia\" and \"Gambusia\" for mosquito control, though, introduced poeciliids can today be found in all tropical and subtropical areas of the world. In addition, \"Poecilia\" and \"Gambusia\" specimens have been identified in hot springs pools as far north as Banff, Alberta.\nLive-bearing.\nAll species in the Poecilidae are live-bearers. Differences are seen in the mode and degree of support the female gives the developing larvae. Many members of the family Poeciliidae are considered to be lecithotrophic (the mother provisions the oocyte with all the resources it needs prior to fertilization, so the egg is independent of the mother), but others are matrotrophic (literally \"mother feeding\": the mother provides the majority of resources to the developing offspring after fertilization). Lecithotrophy and matrotrophy are not discrete traits. Most scientific studies quantify matrotrophy using a matrotrophy index (MI), which is the dry mass of fully developed offspring divided by the dry mass of a fertilized egg.\nMembers of the genus \"Poeciliopsis\", for example, show variable reproductive life history adaptations. \"Poeciliopsis monacha\", \"P. lucida\", and \"P. prolifica\" form part of the same clade within that genus. However, their modes of maternal provisioning vary greatly. \"P. monacha\" can be considered to be lecithotrophic because it does not really provide any resources for its offspring after fertilization - the pregnant female is basically a swimming egg sac. \"P. lucida\" shows an intermediate level of matrotrophy, meaning that to a certain extent the offspring's metabolism can actually affect the mother's metabolism, allowing for increased nutrient exchange. \"P. prolifica\" is considered to be highly matrotrophic, and almost all of the nutrients and materials needed for fetal development are supplied to the oocyte after it has been fertilized. This level of matrotrophy allows \"Poeciliopsis\" to carry several broods at different stages of development, a phenomenon known as superfetation. Because the space for developing embryos is limited, viviparity reduces brood size. Superfetation can compensate for this loss by keeping embryos at various stages and sizes during development.\n\"P. elongata\", \"P. turneri\", and \"P. presidionis\" form another clade that could be considered an outgroup to the \"P. monacha\", \"P.lucida\", and \"P. prolifica\" clade. These three species are very highly matrotrophic - so much so that in 1947, C. L. Turner described the follicular cells of \"P. turneri\" as \"pseudo-placenta, pseudo-chorion, and pseudo-allantois\". The greater degree of matrotrophy in a species is linked with a higher degree of placentation, including \"a thicker maternal follicle, higher degree of vascularization, and greater number of villi in the placenta\".\nThe reason for placental evolution in Poeciliids is controversial, and involves two major groups of hypotheses, adaptive and conflict hypotheses. Adaptive hypotheses, including the locomotor hypothesis, Trexler-DeAngelis Model (reproductive allotment), and life-history facilitation, broadly suggest that the placenta evolved to facilitate the evolution of another advantageous trait in the fish's environment. The conflict hypothesis suggests the placenta is a nonadaptive byproduct of genetic \"tug-o-war\" between the mother and the offspring for resources. \nTaxonomy.\nUntil recently, the egg-laying African killifish (genera now placed in Procatopodidae and Pantanodontidae) were also placed in the Poecilidae. This treatment led to hypotheses that the Poecilidae are an ancient clade that antedate the breakup of Gondwana (the split between Africa and South America) 100 million years ago, and that live-bearing subsequently evolved in South America. However, more recent studies have found this taxonomic treatment to be paraphyletic, and have placed these families outside the Poecilidae. These new taxonomic treatments support that the Poecilidae are much younger than previously thought, are entirely a live-bearing group, and are only native to the Americas.\nPoeciliids colonized North America through the Antilles, while they were connected 44 million years ago. Poeciliids then moved to Central America by the Aves land bridge on the Caribbean Plate. When South America connected to Central America three million years ago, some further dispersal southward occurred, but South American species did not move into Central America.\nGenera.\nThe family is divided into subfamilies and tribes as follows:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25120", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25120", "title": "Polar coordinate system", "text": "Coordinates comprising a distance and an angle\nIn mathematics, the polar coordinate system specifies a given point in a plane by using a distance and an angle as its two coordinates. These are\nThe distance from the pole is called the \"radial coordinate\", \"radial distance\" or simply \"radius\", and the angle is called the \"angular coordinate\", \"polar angle\", or \"azimuth\". The pole is analogous to the origin in a Cartesian coordinate system.\nPolar coordinates are most appropriate in any context where the phenomenon being considered is inherently tied to direction and length from a center point in a plane, such as spirals. Planar physical systems with bodies moving around a central point, or phenomena originating from a central point, are often simpler and more intuitive to model using polar coordinates.\nThe polar coordinate system is extended to three dimensions in two ways: the cylindrical coordinate system adds a second distance coordinate, and the spherical coordinate system adds a second angular coordinate.\nGr\u00e9goire de Saint-Vincent and Bonaventura Cavalieri independently introduced the system's concepts in the mid-17th century, though the actual term \"polar coordinates\" has been attributed to Gregorio Fontana in the 18th century. The initial motivation for introducing the polar system was the study of circular and orbital motion.\nHistory.\nThe concepts of angle and radius were already used by ancient peoples of the first millennium BC. The Greek astronomer Hipparchus (190\u2013120 BC) created a table of chord functions giving the length of the chord for each angle, and there are references to his using polar coordinates in establishing stellar positions. In \"On Spirals\", Greek mathematician Archimedes describes his spiral, a function whose radius depends on the angle. The Greek work, however, did not extend to a full coordinate system.\nFrom the 8th century AD onward, astronomers developed methods for approximating and calculating the direction to Mecca (qibla)\u2014and its distance\u2014from any location on the Earth. From the 9th century onward they were using spherical trigonometry and map projection methods to determine these quantities accurately. The calculation is essentially the conversion of the equatorial polar coordinates of Mecca (i.e. its longitude and latitude) to its polar coordinates (i.e. its qibla and distance) relative to a system whose reference meridian is the great circle through the given location and the Earth's poles and whose polar axis is the line through the location and its antipodal point.\nThere are various accounts of the introduction of polar coordinates as part of a formal coordinate system. The full history of the subject is described in Harvard professor Julian Lowell Coolidge's \"Origin of Polar Coordinates.\" Mathematicians from Jesuit, Gr\u00e9goire de Saint-Vincent, and Italian Bonaventura Cavalieri independently introduced the concepts in the mid-seventeenth century. Saint-Vincent wrote about them privately in 1625 and published his work in 1647, while Cavalieri published his in 1635, with a corrected version appearing in 1653. Cavalieri first used polar coordinates to solve a problem relating to the area within an Archimedean spiral. French mathematician Blaise Pascal subsequently used polar coordinates to calculate the length of parabolic arcs.\nIn \"Method of Fluxions\" (written 1671, published 1736), English mathematician Sir Isaac Newton examined the transformations between polar coordinates, which he referred to as the \"Seventh Manner; For Spirals\", and nine other coordinate systems. He is credited with originating the polar coordinate system in its analytic form and for originating bipolar coordinates in a strict sense. In the journal \"Acta Eruditorum\" (1691), Swiss mathematician Jacob Bernoulli used a system with a point on a line, called the \"pole\" and \"polar axis\" respectively. Coordinates were specified by the distance from the pole and the angle from the \"polar axis\". Bernoulli's work extended to the calculation of the radius of curvature of curves expressed in these coordinates.\nThe term \"polar coordinates\" was attributed to Gregorio Fontana and used by 18th-century Italian writers. The term appeared in English in George Peacock's 1816 translation of Lacroix's \"Differential and Integral Calculus\". Alexis Clairaut was the first to think of polar coordinates in three dimensions, and Leonhard Euler was the first to actually develop them.\nConventions.\nThe radial coordinate is often denoted by formula_1 or formula_2 (rho). The angular coordinate is denoted by formula_3 (phi), specified by ISO standard 31-11 (now 80000-2:2019), or formula_4 (theta) in mathematical literature oftentimes.\nAngles in polar notation are generally expressed in either degrees or radians (2\u03c0 rad being equal to 360\u00b0). Degrees are traditionally used in navigation, surveying, and many applied disciplines, while radians are more common in mathematics and mathematical physics.\nThe angle formula_3 is defined to start at 0\u00b0 from a \"reference direction\", and to increase for rotations in either clockwise (\u21bb) or counterclockwise (\u21ba) orientation. For example, in mathematics, the reference direction is usually drawn as a ray from the pole horizontally to the right, and the polar angle increases to positive angles for ccw rotations, whereas in navigation (bearing, heading) the 0\u00b0-heading is drawn vertically upwards and the angle increases for cw rotations. The polar angles decrease towards negative values for rotations in the respective opposite orientations.\nUniqueness of polar coordinates.\nAdding any number of full turns (360\u00b0) to the angular coordinate does not change the corresponding direction. Similarly, any polar coordinate is identical to the coordinate with the negative radial component and the opposite direction (adding 180\u00b0 to the polar angle). Therefore, the same point formula_6 can be expressed with an infinite number of different polar coordinates formula_7 and formula_8, where formula_9 is an arbitrary integer. Moreover, the pole itself can be expressed as formula_10 for any angle formula_3.\nWhere a unique representation is needed for any point besides the pole, it is usual to limit formula_1 to positive numbers (formula_13) and formula_3 to either the interval formula_15 or the interval formula_16, which in radians are formula_17 or formula_18. Another convention, in reference to the usual codomain of the arctan function, is to allow for arbitrary nonzero real values of the radial component and restrict the polar angle to formula_19. In all cases, a unique azimuth for the pole formula_20 must be chosen, e.g., formula_21.\nConverting between polar and Cartesian coordinates.\nThe polar coordinates formula_1 and formula_3 can be converted to the Cartesian coordinates formula_24 and formula_25 by using the trigonometric functions of sine and cosine, respectively:\nformula_26\nThe Cartesian coordinates formula_24 and formula_25 can be converted to polar coordinates formula_1 and formula_3, with formula_31 and formula_3 in the interval formula_18 by:\nformula_34\nwhere atan2 is a common variation on the arctangent function defined as\nformula_35\nIf \"r\" is calculated first as above, then this formula for \"\u03c6\" may be stated more simply using the arccosine function:\nformula_36\nComplex numbers.\nA complex number consists of real numbers formula_24 and formula_25, as well as an imaginary number formula_39, which can be written as formula_40. Every complex number represents a point in the complex plane, thereby expressible by specifying either the point's Cartesian coordinates (called rectangular or Cartesian form) or the point's polar coordinates (called polar form).\nIn polar form, the distance formula_1 and angle coordinate formula_3 are often referred to as the number's magnitude of modulus and argument, respectively. This can be obtained from a complex number formula_40, represented in rectangular form as, into a polar form, by substituting formula_44 and formula_45:\nformula_46\nThe last expression is derived from Euler's formula, where formula_47 is Euler's number approximately 2.718, and formula_3\u2014expressed in radians\u2014is the principal value of the complex number function arg applied to formula_40. To convert between the rectangular and polar forms of a complex number, the conversion formulae given above can be used. Equivalent are the cis\u2014a function denotes formula_50\u2014and angle notations:\nformula_51\nFor the operations of multiplication, division, exponentiation, and root extraction of complex numbers, it is generally much simpler to work with complex numbers expressed in polar form rather than rectangular form. From the laws of exponentiation:\nPolar equation of a curve.\nThe equation defining a plane curve expressed in polar coordinates is known as a \"polar equation\". In many cases, such an equation can simply be specified by defining \"r\" as a function of \"\u03c6\". The resulting curve then consists of points of the form (\"r\"(\"\u03c6\"),\u00a0\"\u03c6\") and can be regarded as the graph of the polar function \"r\". Note that, in contrast to Cartesian coordinates, the independent variable \"\u03c6\" is the \"second\" entry in the ordered pair.\nDifferent forms of symmetry can be deduced from the equation of a polar function \"r\":\nBecause of the circular nature of the polar coordinate system, many curves can be described by a rather simple polar equation, whereas their Cartesian form is much more intricate. Among the best known of these curves are the polar rose, Archimedean spiral, lemniscate, lima\u00e7on, and cardioid.\nFor the circle, line, and polar rose below, it is understood that there are no restrictions on the domain and range of the curve.\nCircle.\nThe general equation for a circle with a center at formula_56 and radius \"a\" is\nformula_57\nThis can be simplified in various ways, to conform to more specific cases, such as the equation\nformula_58\nfor a circle with a center at the pole and radius \"a\".\nWhen \"r\"0 = \"a\" or the origin lies on the circle, the equation becomes\nformula_59\nIn the general case, the equation can be solved for \"r\", giving\nformula_60\nThe solution with a minus sign in front of the square root gives the same curve.\nConic sections.\nA conic section with one focus on the pole and the other somewhere on the 0\u00b0 ray (so that the conic's major axis lies along the polar axis) is given by:\nformula_61\nwhere formula_62 is the eccentricity and formula_63 is the semi-latus rectum (the perpendicular distance at a focus from the major axis to the curve). If formula_64, this equation defines a hyperbola; if formula_65, it defines a parabola; and if formula_66, it defines an ellipse. The special case formula_67 of the latter results in a circle of the radius formula_63.\nLine.\n\"Radial\" lines (those running through the pole) are represented by the equation\nformula_69\nwhere formula_70 is the angle of elevation of the line; that is, formula_71, where formula_72 is the slope of the line in the Cartesian coordinate system. The non-radial line that crosses the radial line formula_73 perpendicularly at the point formula_56 has the equation\nformula_75\nOtherwise stated formula_56 is the point in which the tangent intersects the imaginary circle of radius formula_77\nPolar rose.\nA polar rose is a mathematical curve that looks like a petaled flower, and that can be expressed as two different simple polar equations:\nformula_78\nIf \"k\" is an integer, these equations will produce a \"k\"-petaled rose if \"k\" is odd, or a 2\"k\"-petaled rose if \"k\" is even. If \"k\" is rational, but not an integer, a rose-like shape may form, but with overlapping petals. Note that these equations never define a rose with 2, 6, 10, 14, etc. petals. The variable \"a\" directly represents the length or amplitude of the petals of the rose, while \"k\" relates to their spatial frequency.\nArchimedean spiral.\nThe Archimedean spiral is a spiral discovered by Archimedes, which can also be expressed as a simple polar equation. It is represented by the equation\nformula_79\nChanging the parameter \"a\" will turn the spiral, while \"b\" controls the distance between the arms, which for a given spiral is always constant. The Archimedean spiral has two arms, one for \"\u03c6\" &gt; 0 and one for \"\u03c6\" &lt; 0. The two arms are smoothly connected at the pole. If \"a\" = 0, taking the mirror image of one arm across the 90\u00b0/270\u00b0 line will yield the other arm. This curve is notable as one of the first curves, after the conic sections, to be described in a mathematical treatise, and as a prime example of a curve best defined by a polar equation.\nQuadratrix.\nA quadratrix in the first quadrant formula_80 is a curve with formula_81 equal to the fraction of the quarter circle with radius formula_1 determined by the radius through the curve point. Since this fraction is: formula_83, the curve is given by formula_84\nIntersection of two polar curves.\nThe graphs of two polar functions formula_85 and formula_86 have possible intersections of three types:\nCalculus.\nCalculus can be applied to equations expressed in polar coordinates.\nThe angular coordinate \"\u03c6\" is expressed in radians throughout this section, which is the conventional choice when doing calculus.\nDifferential calculus.\nUsing \"x\" = \"r\" cos \"\u03c6\" and \"y\" = \"r\" sin \"\u03c6\", one can derive a relationship between derivatives in Cartesian and polar coordinates. For a given function, \"u\"(\"x\",\"y\"), it follows that (by computing its total derivatives)\nor\nformula_97\nHence, we have the following formula:\nformula_98\nUsing the inverse coordinates transformation, an analogous reciprocal relationship can be derived between the derivatives. Given a function \"u\"(\"r\",\"\u03c6\"), it follows that\nformula_99\nor\nformula_100\nHence, we have the following formulae:\nformula_101\nTo find the Cartesian slope of the tangent line to a polar curve \"r\"(\"\u03c6\") at any given point, the curve is first expressed as a system of parametric equations.\nformula_102\nDifferentiating both equations with respect to \"\u03c6\" yields\nformula_103\nDividing the second equation by the first yields the Cartesian slope of the tangent line to the curve at the point formula_104:formula_105\nFor other useful formulas including divergence, gradient, and Laplacian in polar coordinates, see curvilinear coordinates.\nIntegral calculus (arc length).\nThe arc length (length of a line segment) defined by a polar function is found by the integration over the curve \"r\"(\"\u03c6\"). Let \"L\" denote this length along the curve starting from points \"A\" through to point \"B\", where these points correspond to \"\u03c6\" = \"a\" and \"\u03c6\" = \"b\" such that 0 &lt; \"b\" \u2212 \"a\" &lt; 2\"\u03c0\". The length of \"L\" is given by the following integral\nformula_106\nIntegral calculus (area).\nLet \"R\" denote the region enclosed by a curve \"r\"(\"\u03c6\") and the rays \"\u03c6\" = \"a\" and \"\u03c6\" = \"b\", where 0 &lt; \"b\" \u2212 \"a\" \u2264 2\u03c0. Then, the area of \"R\" is\nformula_107\nThis result can be found as follows. First, the interval [\"a\", \"b\"] is divided into \"n\" subintervals, where \"n\" is some positive integer. Thus \u0394\"\u03c6\", the angle measure of each subinterval, is equal to \"b\" \u2212 \"a\" (the total angle measure of the interval), divided by \"n\", the number of subintervals. For each subinterval \"i\" = 1, 2, ..., \"n\", let \"\u03c6\"\"i\" be the midpoint of the subinterval, and construct a sector with the center at the pole, radius \"r\"(\"\u03c6\"\"i\"), central angle \u0394\"\u03c6\" and arc length \"r\"(\"\u03c6\"\"i\")\u0394\"\u03c6\". The area of each constructed sector is therefore equal to\nformula_108\nHence, the total area of all of the sectors is\nformula_109\nAs the number of subintervals \"n\" is increased, the approximation of the area improves. Taking \"n\" \u2192 \u221e, the sum becomes the Riemann sum for the above integral.\nA mechanical device that computes area integrals is the planimeter, which measures the area of plane figures by tracing them out: this replicates integration in polar coordinates by adding a joint so that the 2-element linkage effects Green's theorem, converting the quadratic polar integral to a linear integral.\nGeneralization.\nUsing Cartesian coordinates, an infinitesimal area element can be calculated as \"dA\" = \"dx\" \"dy\". The substitution rule for multiple integrals states that, when using other coordinates, the Jacobian determinant of the coordinate conversion formula has to be considered:\nformula_110\nHence, an area element in polar coordinates can be written as\nformula_111\nNow, a function, that is given in polar coordinates, can be integrated as follows:\nformula_112\nHere, \"R\" is the same region as above, namely, the region enclosed by a curve \"r\"(\"\u03c6\") and the rays \"\u03c6\" = \"a\" and \"\u03c6\" = \"b\". The formula for the area of \"R\" is retrieved by taking \"f\" identically equal to 1.\nA more surprising application of this result yields the Gaussian integral:\nformula_113\nVector calculus.\nVector calculus can also be applied to polar coordinates. For a planar motion, let formula_114 be the position vector (\"r\" cos(\"\u03c6\"), \"r\" sin(\"\u03c6\")), with \"r\" and \"\u03c6\" depending on time \"t\".\nWe define an orthonormal basis with three unit vectors: \"radial, transverse, and normal directions\".\nThe \"radial direction\" is defined by normalizing formula_114:\nformula_116\nRadial and velocity directions span the \"plane of the motion\", whose normal direction is denoted formula_117:\nformula_118\nThe \"transverse direction\" is perpendicular to both radial and normal directions:\nformula_119\nThen \nformula_120\nThis equation can be obtained by taking the derivative of the function and derivatives of the unit basis vectors.\nFor a curve in 2D where the parameter is formula_121 the previous equations simplify to: \nformula_122\nCentrifugal and Coriolis terms.\nThe term formula_123 is sometimes referred to as the \"centripetal acceleration\", and the term formula_124 as the \"Coriolis acceleration\". For example, see Shankar. These terms, which appear when acceleration is expressed in polar coordinates, are a mathematical consequence of differentiation; they appear whenever polar coordinates are used. In planar particle dynamics, these accelerations appear when setting up Newton's second law of motion in a rotating frame of reference. Here, these extra terms are often called fictitious forces; fictitious because they are simply a result of a change in coordinate frame. That does not mean they do not exist; rather, they exist only in the rotating frame.\nCo-rotating frame.\nFor a particle in planar motion, one approach to attaching physical significance to these terms is based on the concept of an instantaneous \"co-rotating frame of reference\". To define a co-rotating frame, first an origin is selected from which the distance \"r\"(\"t\") to the particle is defined. An axis of rotation is set up that is perpendicular to the plane of motion of the particle, and passing through this origin. Then, at the selected moment \"t\", the rate of rotation of the co-rotating frame \u03a9 is made to match the rate of rotation of the particle about this axis, \"d\u03c6\"/\"dt\". Next, the terms in the acceleration in the inertial frame are related to those in the co-rotating frame. Let the location of the particle in the inertial frame be (\"r\"(\"t\"), \"\u03c6\"(\"t\")), and in the co-rotating frame be (\"r\"\u2032(t), \"\u03c6\"\u2032(t)). Because the co-rotating frame rotates at the same rate as the particle, \"d\u03c6\"\u2032/\"dt\" = 0. The fictitious centrifugal force in the co-rotating frame is \"mr\"\u03a92, radially outward. The velocity of the particle in the co-rotating frame also is radially outward, because \"d\u03c6\"\u2032/\"dt\" = 0. The \"fictitious Coriolis force\" therefore has a value \u22122\"m\"(\"dr\"/\"dt\")\u03a9, pointed in the direction of increasing \"\u03c6\" only. Thus, using these forces in Newton's second law we find:\nformula_125\nwhere over dots represent derivatives with respect to time, and F is the net real force (as opposed to the fictitious forces). In terms of components, this vector equation becomes:\nformula_126\nwhich can be compared to the equations for the inertial frame:\nformula_127\nThis comparison, plus the recognition that by the definition of the co-rotating frame at time \"t\" it has a rate of rotation \u03a9 = \"d\u03c6\"/\"dt\", shows that we can interpret the terms in the acceleration (multiplied by the mass of the particle) as found in the inertial frame as the negative of the centrifugal and Coriolis forces that would be seen in the instantaneous, non-inertial co-rotating frame.\nFor general motion of a particle (as opposed to simple circular motion), the centrifugal and Coriolis forces in a particle's frame of reference commonly are referred to the instantaneous osculating circle of its motion, not to a fixed center of polar coordinates. For more detail, see centripetal force.\nDifferential geometry.\nIn the modern terminology of differential geometry, polar coordinates provide coordinate charts for the differentiable manifold R2 \\ {(0,0)}, the plane minus the origin. In these coordinates, the Euclidean metric tensor is given byformula_128This can be seen via the change of variables formula for the metric tensor, or by computing the differential forms \"dx\", \"dy\" via the exterior derivative of the 0-forms \"x\" = \"r\" cos(\"\u03b8\"), \"y\" = \"r\" sin(\"\u03b8\") and substituting them in the Euclidean metric tensor \"ds\"2 = \"dx\"2 + \"dy\"2.\nAn orthonormal frame with respect to this metric is given byformula_129with dual coframeformula_130The connection form relative to this frame and the Levi-Civita connection is given by the skew-symmetric matrix of 1-formsformula_131and hence the curvature form \u03a9 = \"d\u03c9\" + \"\u03c9\"\u2227\"\u03c9\" vanishes. Therefore, as expected, the punctured plane is a flat manifold.\nExtensions in three-dimensional space.\nThe polar coordinate system is extended into three dimensions with two different coordinate systems, the cylindrical and spherical coordinate systems, both of which include two-dimensional or planar polar coordinates as a subset. In essence, the cylindrical coordinate system extends polar coordinates by adding an additional distance coordinate, while the spherical system instead adds an additional angular coordinate.\nCylindrical coordinates.\nThe cylindrical coordinate system is a coordinate system that essentially extends the two-dimensional polar coordinate system by adding a third coordinate measuring the height of a point above the plane, similar to the way in which the Cartesian coordinate system is extended into three dimensions. The third coordinate is denoted formula_132, making the three cylindrical coordinates formula_133. Thus, the three cylindrical coordinates can be converted to Cartesian coordinates by\nformula_134\nSpherical coordinates.\nPolar coordinates can also be extended into three dimensions using the coordinates (\u03c1, \u03c6, \u03b8), where \u03c1 is the distance from the pole, \u03c6 is the angle from the z-axis (called the colatitude or zenith and measured from 0 to 180\u00b0), and \u03b8 is the angle from the x-axis (as in the polar coordinates). This coordinate system, called the spherical coordinate system, is similar to the latitude and longitude system used for Earth, with the latitude \u03b4 being the complement of \u03c6, determined by \u03b4 = 90\u00b0 \u2212 \u03c6, and the longitude \"l\" being measured by \"l\" = \u03b8 \u2212 180\u00b0. \nThe three spherical coordinates are converted to Cartesian coordinates by\nformula_135\nApplications.\nPolar coordinates are two-dimensional and thus they can be used only where point positions lie on a single two-dimensional plane. They are most appropriate in any context where the phenomenon being considered is inherently tied to direction and length from a center point. For instance, the examples above show how elementary polar equations suffice to define curves\u2014such as the Archimedean spiral\u2014whose equation in the Cartesian coordinate system would be much more intricate. Moreover, many physical systems\u2014such as those concerned with bodies moving around a central point or with phenomena originating from a central point\u2014are simpler and more intuitive to model using polar coordinates. The initial motivation for the introduction of the polar system was the study of circular and orbital motion.\nPosition and navigation.\nPolar coordinates are used often in navigation as the destination or direction of travel can be given as an angle and distance from the object being considered. For instance, aircraft use a slightly modified version of the polar coordinates for navigation. In this system, the one generally used for any sort of navigation, the 0\u00b0 ray is generally called heading 360, and the angles continue in a clockwise direction, rather than counterclockwise, as in the mathematical system. Heading 360 corresponds to magnetic north, while headings 90, 180, and 270 correspond to magnetic east, south, and west, respectively. Thus, an aircraft traveling 5 nautical miles due east will be traveling 5 units at heading 90 (read zero-niner-zero by air traffic control).\nModeling.\nSystems displaying radial symmetry provide natural settings for the polar coordinate system, with the central point acting as the pole. A prime example of this usage is the groundwater flow equation when applied to radially symmetric wells. Systems with a radial force are also good candidates for the use of the polar coordinate system. These systems include gravitational fields, which obey the inverse-square law, as well as systems with point sources, such as radio antennas.\nRadially asymmetric systems may also be modeled with polar coordinates. For example, a microphone's pickup pattern illustrates its proportional response to an incoming sound from a given direction, and these patterns can be represented as polar curves. The curve for a standard cardioid microphone, the most common unidirectional microphone, can be represented as \"r\" \n 0.5 + 0.5sin(\"\u03d5\") at its target design frequency. The pattern shifts toward omnidirectionality at lower frequencies."}
{"id": "25121", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25121", "title": "Polymath", "text": "Gifted person with broad knowledge\nA polymath or polyhistor is an individual whose knowledge spans many different subjects, known to draw on complex bodies of knowledge to solve specific problems. Polymaths often prefer a specific context in which to explain their knowledge, but some are gifted at explaining abstractly and creatively.\nEmbodying a basic tenet of Renaissance humanism that humans are limitless in their capacity for development, the concept led to the notion that people should embrace all knowledge and develop their capacities as fully as possible. This is expressed in the term Renaissance man, often applied to the gifted people of that age who sought to develop their abilities in all areas of accomplishment: intellectual, artistic, social, physical, and spiritual.\nEtymology.\nThe word polymath derives from the Greek roots \"poly-\", which means \"much\" or \"many,\" and \"manthanein\", which means \"to learn.\" Plutarch wrote that the Ancient Greek muse Polyhymnia was sometimes known as Polymatheia, describing her as responsible for \"that faculty of the soul which inclines to attain and keep knowledge.\"\nIn Western Europe, the first work to use the term polymathy in its title, (A Treatise on Polymathy: The Complete Work on the Studies of the Ancients), was published in 1603 by Johann von Wowern, a Hamburg philosopher. Von Wowern defined polymathy as \"knowledge of various matters, drawn from all kinds of studies\u00a0... ranging freely through all the fields of the disciplines, as far as the human mind, with unwearied industry, is able to pursue them\". Von Wowern lists erudition, literature, philology, philomathy, and polyhistory as synonyms.\nThe earliest recorded use of the term in the English language is from 1624, in the second edition of \"The Anatomy of Melancholy\" by Robert Burton; the form \"polymathist\" is slightly older, first appearing in the \"Diatribae upon the first part of the late History of Tithes\" of Richard Montagu in 1621. Use in English of the similar term \"polyhistor\" dates from the late 16th century.\nRenaissance man.\nThe term \"Renaissance man\" was first recorded in written English in the early 20th century. It is used to refer to great thinkers living before, during, or after the Renaissance. Leonardo da Vinci has often been described as the archetype of the Renaissance man, a man of \"unquenchable curiosity\" and \"feverishly inventive imagination\". Many notable polymaths lived during the Renaissance period, a cultural movement that spanned roughly the 14th through to the 17th century that began in Italy in the Late Middle Ages and later spread to the rest of Europe. These polymaths had a rounded approach to education that reflected the ideals of the humanists of the time. A gentleman or courtier of that era was expected to speak several languages, play a musical instrument, write poetry, and so on; thus fulfilling the Renaissance ideal.\nThe idea of a universal education was essential to achieving polymath ability, hence the word university was used to describe a seat of learning. However, the original Latin word refers in general to \"a number of persons associated into one body, a society, company, community, guild, corporation, etc\". At this time, universities did not specialize in specific areas, but rather trained students in a broad array of science, philosophy, and theology. This universal education gave them a grounding from which they could continue into apprenticeship toward becoming a master of a specific field.\nWhen someone is called a \"Renaissance man\" today, it is meant that rather than simply having broad interests or superficial knowledge in several fields, the individual possesses a more profound knowledge and a proficiency, or even an expertise, in at least some of those fields. Some dictionaries use the term \"Renaissance man\" to describe someone with many interests or talents, while others give a meaning restricted to the Renaissance and more closely related to Renaissance ideals.\nIn academia.\nRobert Root-Bernstein and colleagues.\nRobert Root-Bernstein is considered the principal responsible for rekindling interest in polymathy in the scientific community. His works emphasize the contrast between the polymath and two other types: the specialist and the dilettante. The specialist demonstrates depth but lacks breadth of knowledge. The dilettante demonstrates superficial breadth but tends to acquire skills merely \"for their own sake without regard to understanding the broader applications or implications and without integrating it\". Conversely, the polymath is a person with a level of expertise that is able to \"put a significant amount of time and effort into their avocations and find ways to use their multiple interests to inform their vocations\".\nA key point in the work of Root-Bernstein and colleagues is the argument in favor of the universality of the creative process. That is, although creative products, such as a painting, a mathematical model or a poem, can be domain-specific, at the level of the creative process, the mental tools that lead to the generation of creative ideas are the same, be it in the arts or science. These mental tools are sometimes called intuitive tools of thinking. It is therefore not surprising that many of the most innovative scientists have serious hobbies or interests in artistic activities, and that some of the most innovative artists have an interest or hobbies in the sciences.\nRoot-Bernstein and colleagues' research is an important counterpoint to the claim by some psychologists that creativity is a domain-specific phenomenon. Through their research, Root-Bernstein and colleagues conclude that there are certain comprehensive thinking skills and tools that cross the barrier of different domains and can foster creative thinking: \"[creativity researchers] who discuss integrating ideas from diverse fields as the basis of creative giftedness ask not 'who is creative?' but 'what is the basis of creative thinking?' From the polymathy perspective, giftedness is the ability to combine disparate (or even apparently contradictory) ideas, sets of problems, skills, talents, and knowledge in novel and useful ways. Polymathy is therefore the main source of any individual's creative potential\". In \"Life Stages of Creativity\", Robert and Mich\u00e8le Root-Bernstein suggest six typologies of creative life stages. These typologies are based on real creative production records first published by Root-Bernstein, Bernstein, and Garnier (1993).\nFinally, his studies suggest that understanding polymathy and learning from polymathic exemplars can help structure a new model of education that better promotes creativity and innovation: \"we must focus education on principles, methods, and skills that will serve them [students] in learning and creating across many disciplines, multiple careers, and succeeding life stages\".\nPeter Burke.\nPeter Burke, Professor Emeritus of Cultural History and Fellow of Emmanuel College at Cambridge, discussed the theme of polymathy in some of his works. He has presented a comprehensive historical overview of the ascension and decline of the polymath as, what he calls, an \"intellectual species\".\nHe observes that in ancient and medieval times, scholars did not have to specialize. However, from the 17th century on, the rapid rise of new knowledge in the Western world\u2014both from the systematic investigation of the natural world and from the flow of information coming from other parts of the world\u2014was making it increasingly difficult for individual scholars to master as many disciplines as before. Thus, an intellectual retreat of the polymath species occurred: \"from knowledge in every [academic] field to knowledge in several fields, and from making original contributions in many fields to a more passive consumption of what has been contributed by others\".\nGiven this change in the intellectual climate, it has since then been more common to find \"passive polymaths\", who consume knowledge in various domains but make their reputation in one single discipline, than \"proper polymaths\", who\u2014through a feat of \"intellectual heroism\"\u2014manage to make serious contributions to several disciplines. However, Burke warns that in the age of specialization, polymathic people are more necessary than ever, both for synthesis\u2014to paint the big picture\u2014and for analysis. He says: \"It takes a polymath to 'mind the gap' and draw attention to the knowledges that may otherwise disappear into the spaces between disciplines, as they are currently defined and organized\".\nBharath Sriraman.\nBharath Sriraman, of the University of Montana, also investigated the role of polymathy in education. He poses that an ideal education should nurture talent in the classroom and enable individuals to pursue multiple fields of research and appreciate both the aesthetic and structural/scientific connections between mathematics, arts and the sciences.\nIn 2009, Sriraman published a paper reporting a 3-year study with 120 pre-service mathematics teachers and derived several implications for mathematics pre-service education as well as interdisciplinary education. He utilized a hermeneutic-phenomenological approach to recreate the emotions, voices and struggles of students as they tried to unravel Russell's paradox presented in its linguistic form. They found that those more engaged in solving the paradox also displayed more polymathic thinking traits. He concludes by suggesting that fostering polymathy in the classroom may help students change beliefs, discover structures and open new avenues for interdisciplinary pedagogy.\nKaufman, Beghetto and colleagues.\nJames C. Kaufman, from the Neag School of Education at the University of Connecticut, and Ronald A. Beghetto, from the same university, investigated the possibility that everyone could have the potential for polymathy as well as the issue of the domain-generality or domain-specificity of creativity.\nBased on their earlier four-c model of creativity, Beghetto and Kaufman proposed a typology of polymathy, ranging from the ubiquitous mini-c polymathy to the eminent but rare Big-C polymathy, as well as a model with some requirements for a person (polymath or not) to be able to reach the highest levels of creative accomplishment. They account for three general requirements\u2014intelligence, motivation to be creative, and an environment that allows creative expression\u2014that are needed for any attempt at creativity to succeed. Then, depending on the domain of choice, more specific abilities will be required. The more that one's abilities and interests match the requirements of a domain, the better. While some will develop their specific skills and motivations for specific domains, polymathic people will display intrinsic motivation (and the ability) to pursue a variety of subject matters across different domains.\nRegarding the interplay of polymathy and education, they suggest that rather than asking whether every student has multicreative potential, educators might more actively nurture the multicreative potential of their students. As an example, the authors cite that teachers should encourage students to make connections across disciplines, use different forms of media to express their reasoning/understanding (e.g., drawings, movies, and other forms of visual media).\nWaqas Ahmed.\nIn his 2018 book \"The Polymath\", British author Waqas Ahmed defines polymaths as those who have made significant contributions to at least three different fields. Rather than seeing polymaths as exceptionally gifted, he argues that every human being has the potential to become one: that people naturally have multiple interests and talents. He contrasts this polymathic nature against what he calls \"the cult of specialisation\". For example, education systems stifle this nature by forcing learners to specialise in narrow topics. The book argues that specialisation encouraged by the production lines of the Industrial Revolution is counter-productive both to the individual and wider society. It suggests that the complex problems of the 21st century need the versatility, creativity, and broad perspectives characteristic of polymaths.\nFor individuals, Ahmed says, specialisation is dehumanising and stifles their full range of expression whereas polymathy \"is a powerful means to social and intellectual emancipation\" which enables a more fulfilling life. In terms of social progress, he argues that answers to specific problems often come from combining knowledge and skills from multiple areas, and that many important problems are multi-dimensional in nature and cannot be fully understood through one specialism. Rather than interpreting polymathy as a mix of occupations or of intellectual interests, Ahmed urges a breaking of the \"thinker\"/\"doer\" dichotomy and the art/science dichotomy. He argues that an orientation towards action and towards thinking support each other, and that human beings flourish by pursuing a diversity of experiences as well as a diversity of knowledge. He observes that successful people in many fields have cited hobbies and other \"peripheral\" activities as supplying skills or insights that helped them succeed.\nAhmed examines evidence suggesting that developing multiple talents and perspectives is helpful for success in a highly specialised field. He cites a study of Nobel Prize-winning scientists which found them 25 times more likely to sing, dance, or act than average scientists. Another study found that children scored higher in IQ tests after having drum lessons, and he uses such research to argue that diversity of domains can enhance a person's general intelligence.\nAhmed cites many historical claims for the advantages of polymathy. Some of these are about general intellectual abilities that polymaths apply across multiple domains. For example, Aristotle wrote that full understanding of a topic requires, in addition to subject knowledge, a general critical thinking ability that can assess how that knowledge was arrived at. Another advantage of a polymathic mindset is in the application of multiple approaches to understanding a single issue. Ahmed cites biologist E. O. Wilson's view that reality is approached not by a single academic discipline but via a consilience between them. One argument for studying multiple approaches is that it leads to open-mindedness. Within any one perspective, a question may seem to have a straightforward, settled answer. Someone aware of different, contrasting answers will be more open-minded and aware of the limitations of their own knowledge. The importance of recognising these limitations is a theme that Ahmed finds in many thinkers, including Confucius, Ali ibn Abi Talib, and Nicolas of Cusa. He calls it \"the essential mark of the polymath.\" A further argument for multiple approaches is that a polymath does not see diverse approaches as diverse, because they see connections where other people see differences. For example da Vinci advanced multiple fields by applying mathematical principles to each.\nExamples.\nPolymaths include the scholars and thinkers of the Renaissance and Enlightenment, who excelled at several fields in science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and the arts. In the Italian Renaissance, the idea of the polymath was allegedly expressed by Leon Battista Alberti (1404\u20131472), a polymath himself, in the statement that \"a man can do all things if he will\". Leonardo da Vinci is often used as the archetypal example of a polymath. \nMany polymaths did not identify as such, since the term was first coined in the 17th century; they were instead described as polymaths by later historians. This includes several philosophers of Ancient Greece and the Islamic Golden Age. Whether or not a person is a polymath is often a subject of debate because of the term's broad definition by nature.\nWell-known polymaths include:\nRelated terms.\nAside from \"Renaissance man\", similar terms in use are (Latin) and (Italian), which translate to 'universal man'. The related term \"generalist\"\u2014contrasted with a \"specialist\"\u2014is used to describe a person with a general approach to knowledge.\nThe term \"universal genius\" or \"versatile genius\" is also used, with Leonardo da Vinci as the prime example again. The term is used especially for people who made lasting contributions in at least one of the fields in which they were actively involved and when they took a universality of approach.\nWhen a person is described as having encyclopedic knowledge, they exhibit a vast scope of knowledge. However, this designation may be anachronistic in the case of persons such as Eratosthenes, whose reputation for having encyclopedic knowledge predates the existence of any encyclopedic object.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25122", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25122", "title": "PowerBook", "text": "Series of Apple laptops based on PowerPC and Motorola 68000\nThe PowerBook (known as Macintosh PowerBook before 1997) is a family of Macintosh-type laptop computers designed, manufactured and sold by Apple Computer from 1991 to 2006. It was targeted at the professional market; in 1999, the line was supplemented by the home and education-focused iBook family.\nDuring its lifetime, the PowerBook went through several major revisions and redesigns, often being the first to incorporate features that would later become standard in competing laptops. The PowerBook was replaced by the MacBook Pro in 2006 as part of the Mac transition to Intel processors.\n680x0-based models.\nPowerBook 100 series.\nIn October 1991, Apple released the first three PowerBooks: the low-end PowerBook 100, the more powerful PowerBook 140, and the high end PowerBook 170, the only one with an active matrix display. These machines caused a stir in the industry with their compact dark grey cases, built-in trackball, and the innovative positioning of the keyboard that left room for palmrests on either side of the pointing device. Portable PC computers at the time were still oriented toward DOS, and tended to have the keyboard forward towards the user, with empty space behind it that was often used for function key reference cards. In the early days of Microsoft Windows, many notebook computers came with a clip on trackball that fit on the edge of the keyboard molding. As usage of DOS gave way to the graphical user interface, the PowerBook's arrangement became the standard layout all future notebooks would follow.\nThe PowerBook 140 and 170 were the original PowerBook designs, while the PowerBook 100 was the result of Apple having sent the schematics of the Mac Portable to Sony, who miniaturized the components. Hence the PowerBook 100's design does not match those of the rest of the series, as it was actually designed after the 140 and 170 and further benefited from improvements learned during their development. The PowerBook 100, however, did not sell well until Apple dropped the price substantially.\nThe 100 series PowerBooks were intended to tie into the rest of the Apple desktop products utilizing the corporate Snow White design language incorporated into all product designs since 1986. Unlike the Macintosh Portable, however, which was essentially a battery-powered desktop in weight and size, the light colors and decorative recessed lines did not seem appropriate for the scaled-down designs. In addition to adopting the darker grey colour scheme that coordinated with the official corporate look, they also adopted a raised series of ridges mimicking the indented lines on the desktops. The innovative look not only unified their entire product line, but set Apple apart in the marketplace. These early series would be the last to utilize the aging Snow White look, with the 190 adopting a new look along with the introduction of the 500 series.\nThe first series of PowerBooks were hugely successful, capturing 40% of all laptop sales. Despite this, the original team left to work at Compaq, setting back updated versions for some time. When attempting to increase processing power, Apple was hampered by the overheating problems of the 68040; this resulted in the 100-series PowerBook being stuck with the aging 68030, which could not compete with newer-generation Intel 80486-based PC laptops introduced in 1994. For several years, new PowerBook and PowerBook Duo computers were introduced that featured incremental improvements, including color screens, but by mid-decade, most other companies had copied the majority of the PowerBook's features. Apple was unable to ship a 68040-equipped PowerBook until the PowerBook 500 series in 1994.\nThe original PowerBook 100, 140, and 170 were replaced by the 145 (updated to the 145B in 1993), 160, and 180 in 1992. The 160 and 180 have video output, allowing them to drive an external monitor. In addition, the PowerBook 180 had a superb-for-the-time active-matrix grayscale display, making it popular with the Mac press. In 1993, the PowerBook 165c was the first PowerBook with a color screen, later followed by the 180c. In 1994, the last true member of the 100-series form factor introduced was the PowerBook 150, targeted at value-minded consumers and students. The PowerBook 190, released in 1995, bears no resemblance to the rest of the PowerBook 100 series, and is in fact simply a Motorola 68LC040-based version of the PowerBook 5300 (and the last Macintosh model to utilize a Motorola 68k-family processor). Like the 190, however, the 150 also used the 5300 IDE-based logic-board architecture. From the 100's 68000 processor, to the 190's 68LC040 processor, the 100 series PowerBooks span the entire Apple 68K line, with the 190 even upgradable to a PowerPC processor.\nPowerBook Duo.\nIn 1992, Apple released a hybrid portable/desktop computer, the PowerBook Duo, continuing to streamline the subnotebook features introduced with the PowerBook 100. The Duos were a series of very thin and lightweight laptops with a minimum of features, which could be inserted into a docking station to provide the system with extra video memory, storage space, connectors, and could be connected to a monitor.\nPowerBook 500 series.\n1994 saw the introduction of the Motorola 68LC040-based PowerBook 500 series, code-named Blackbird. These models of PowerBooks were much sleeker and faster than the 100 series, which they replaced as the mid and high-end models. The 500 series featured DSTN (520) or active-matrix LCD displays (540 and 550), stereo speakers, and was the first computer to use a trackpad (although a similar technology had been included on the pioneering Gavilan SC 11 years earlier); it was also the first portable computer to offer built-in Ethernet networking. The PowerBook 500 series was the mainstay of the product line until the PowerBook 5300. The 500 series was the first PowerBook to feature PCMCIA slots, although this was an optional feature that required the user to sacrifice one of the two available battery slots to house the PCMCIA expansion cage.\nThe PowerBook 500 series was released as Apple was already moving its desktop machines to the PowerPC processor range, and a future upgrade was promised from the start. This came in 1995, as an Apple Motherboard containing a 100\u00a0MHz 603e processor and 8\u00a0MB of RAM (which snapped into a slot containing the previous 25 or 33\u00a0MHz 68040 processor and the 4\u00a0MB of RAM on the previous daughterboard). At the same time Newer Technology offered an Apple-authorized 117\u00a0MHz Motherboard, which was more popular than the Apple product, and optionally came without any RAM. The company later offered 167\u00a0MHz and 183\u00a0MHz upgrades containing more memory and onboard cache memory to improve performance. Nonetheless, the internal architecture of the 500 series meant that the speed increase provided by the 100 and 117\u00a0MHz upgrades was, for most users, relatively small.\nThe 500 series was completely discontinued upon the introduction of its replacement the PPC-based PowerBook 5300, with the PowerBook 190 replacing the 500 as the only 68LC040 PowerBook Apple offered.\nPowerPC-based models.\nThe PowerBook 5300, while highly anticipated as one of the first PowerPC-based PowerBooks (along with the PowerBook Duo 2300c, both released on the same day), had numerous problems. In its 5300ce incarnation with a TFT of 800\u00d7600 pixels, Apple offered a 117\u00a0MHz PPC, 32 MB of onboard RAM, and a hot-swappable drive bay. With all of these features, though, the 5300ce was quite ahead of other laptop models at the time. Multiple problems with reliability, stability and safety (by some, the model was referred as the \"HindenBook\" because the lithium ion batteries used actually burst into flame in Apple tests, necessitating a recall and downgrade to nickel metal hydride batteries) were present in the early 5300s. After Apple offered an Extended Repair Program, the series turned into a remarkably attractive machine, but never lost its bad reputation. The bad publicity of 5300 series added to the woes of \"beleaguered Apple\" during the mid-1990s.\nApple recovered from the 5300 debacle in 1996 and 1997 by introducing three new PowerBooks: the PowerBook 1400, intended to replace the 5300 as a general-purpose PowerBook; the PowerBook 2400, intended as a slim, sleek sub-notebook to replace the PowerBook Duo; and the luxury model PowerBook 3400. The PowerBook 1400 and 3400 were the first PowerBooks ever to include an internal CD drive. Late in 1997, the PowerBook 3400 was adapted into the first PowerBook G3, codenamed the Kanga. This series was the last PowerBook model to employ a \"real\" keyboard with 1\u00a0cm high keys; all later models have flat keys.\nPowerBook G3.\nThe first PowerBook G3 Series (completely redesigned from the Kanga) was released in 1998, although it was still an Old World ROM Mac.\nThese new PowerBooks took design cues from the 500 series PowerBook, sporting dramatic curves and a jet-black plastic case. They were so fashionable that various G3 models became the personal computer of Carrie Bradshaw in the long-running \"Sex and the City\" television show. Debuting at roughly the same time as the G3 iMac, the \"WallStreet/Mainstreet\" series composed of models with varying features, such as different processing speeds (from 233 to 300\u00a0MHz) and the choice of 12-, 13-, or 14-inch screens. They all included dual drive bays capable of accommodating floppy drives, CD-ROM/DVD-ROM drives, hard drives, or even extra batteries. A second PowerBook G3 Series code-named \"PDQ\" was introduced later in 1998, with minor changes in configuration options, notably the inclusion of L2 cache in even the lowest-priced 233\u00a0MHz model, which helped overall performance.\nApple introduced two later G3 PowerBook models, similar in appearance (curved, black plastic case with black rubberized sections) but thinner, lighter and with revised internal systems. The \"Lombard\" appeared in 1999, (AKA: Bronze Keyboard) a thinner, lighter, and faster (333 or 400\u00a0MHz) PowerBook with a longer battery life and had both USB and SCSI built in and was a New World ROM Mac, and then the \"Pismo\" in 2000, which replaced the single SCSI port with two FireWire ports, updated the PowerBook line to AGP graphics, a 100\u00a0MHz bus speed, and DVD-ROM optical drives standard, in addition to dropping the \"G3\" from the PowerBook name. The Pismo revision also brought AirPort wireless networking capability (802.11b), which had debuted in Apple's iBook in July 1999. CPU upgrade cards are available for both Lombard and Pismo models.\nPowerBook G4.\nInterim CEO Steve Jobs turned his eye to the redesign of the PowerBook series in 2000. The result, introduced in January 2001, was a completely re-designed New World PowerBook with a titanium skin and a 15.2-inch wide-aspect screen suitable for watching widescreen movies. Built with the PowerPC G4 processor, it was billed as \"the first supercomputer you can actually take with you on an airplane.\" It was lighter than most PC based laptops, and due to the low power consumption of the PowerPC it outlasted them by hours.\nThe \"TiBooks\", as they were nicknamed, became a fashion item. They were especially popular in the entertainment business, where they adorned many desks in Hollywood motion pictures. Because of their large screens and high performance, Titanium Powerbooks were the first laptops to be widely deployed as desktop replacement computers.\nThe industrial design of the notebooks quickly became a standard that others in the industry would follow, creating a new wave of wide-screened notebook computers.\nThe Titanium PowerBooks were released in configurations of 400\u00a0MHz, 500\u00a0MHz, 550\u00a0MHz, 667\u00a0MHz, 800\u00a0MHz, 867\u00a0MHz, and 1\u00a0GHz. They are the last PowerBooks able to boot Mac OS 9 natively.\nIn 2003, Apple Computer launched both the largest-screen laptop in the world and Apple's smallest full-featured notebook computer. Both machines were made of anodized aluminum (coining the new nickname \"AlBook\"), featured DVD-burning capabilities, AirPort Extreme networking, Bluetooth, and 12.1-inch or 17-inch LCD displays. The 17-inch model included a fiber optic-illuminated keyboard, which eventually became standard on all 15-inch and 17-inch PowerBooks. Two ambient light sensors, located under each speaker grille, adjusted the brightness of the backlit keyboard and the display according to the light level.\nThe 12-inch PowerBook's screen did not use the same panel as that used on the 12-inch iBook, while the 17-inch PowerBook used the same screen as that used on the 17-inch flat-panel iMac, but with a thinner backlight.\nLater in 2003, the 15-inch PowerBooks were redesigned and featured the same aluminum body style as their smaller and larger siblings, and with the same feature set as the 17-inch model (including the backlit keyboard). This basic design would carry through the transition to the Intel-based MacBook Pro, lasting until late 2008.\nIn April 2004, the aluminum PowerBooks were upgraded. The SuperDrive was upgraded to 4\u00d7 burning speed for DVDs, the fastest processor available was upgraded to 1.5\u00a0GHz, and the graphics cards were replaced with newer models, offering up to 128\u00a0MB of video memory. A third built-in speaker was added to the 12-inch model for improved midrange sound. In addition, AirPort Extreme cards became standard for all PowerBooks instead of being offered as an add-on option.\nIn January 2005, the specifications of the aluminum PowerBooks were revised once more to accompany a price decrease. Processor speeds were increased to a maximum of 1.67\u00a0GHz on the higher specification 15-inch and all 17-inch versions, while the lower specification 15-inch model and the 12-inch unit saw an increase in speed to 1.5\u00a0GHz. Optical audio output was added to the 17-inch version. Memory and hard drive defaults were increased to 512\u00a0MB and 5400 rpm, respectively, with a new storage maximum of 100\u00a0GB on the 17-inch model. Each model also received an enhanced trackpad with scrolling capabilities, a revised Bluetooth module supporting BT 2.0+EDR, and a new feature that parks the drive heads when sudden motion is detected by an internal sensor. Support for the 30-inch Apple Cinema display was also introduced in the new 17-inch model and was optional in the 15-inch model via a build-to-order upgrade to the computer's video hardware. The SuperDrive now included DVD+R capability.\nIn October 2005, the two higher-end PowerBooks were upgraded once again, with higher-resolution displays (1440 \u00d7 960 pixels on the 15-inch model, and 1680 \u00d7 1050 pixels on the 17-inch model) and faster 533\u00a0MHz DDR2 (PC2-4200) memory. The SuperDrive became standard equipment and included support for dual-layer DVDs on the 15- and 17-inch models. The 17-inch model was updated with a 120\u00a0GB standard hard drive, as well as a 7200\u00a0rpm, 100\u00a0GB build-to-order option. These drives were also options on the 15-inch PowerBook. The 12-inch model with SuperDrive remained unchanged in this respect, although each new PowerBook boasted a longer battery life.\nBattery recall.\nOn May 20, 2005, Apple and the Consumer Product Safety Commission announced the recall of some Apple PowerBook G4 batteries. These batteries were manufactured by Sony; Dell, Toshiba, Lenovo, HP, Fujitsu and Acer laptops were also affected by the defective batteries. The joint Apple/CPSC press release stated that an internal short could cause the battery cells to overheat, posing a fire hazard. Approximately 128,000 defective units were sold. Though the problems first appeared to be solved, they continued for many users. In early August 2006, Engadget reported that a PowerBook had \"violently exploded\" because of faulty battery. On August 24, 2006, Apple and the CPSC announced an additional recall of more batteries for the same PowerBook models. About 1.1 million battery packs in the United States were recalled; an additional 700,000 were sold outside the U.S.\nDiscontinuation.\nAt the 2006 Macworld Conference &amp; Expo, the MacBook Pro was introduced. The new notebooks, however, only came in 15.4-inch models and the 12-inch and 17-inch PowerBooks remained available for sale at Apple stores and retailers, as well as the 15-inch model, which was sold until supplies ran out. On April 24, 2006, the 17-inch PowerBook G4 was replaced by a 17-inch MacBook Pro variant. The 12-inch PowerBook G4 remained available until May 16, 2006, when the MacBook was introduced as a replacement for the iBook. Because of its availability in highly powerful configurations, it was also considered a replacement for the 12-inch PowerBook, ending the nearly 15-year production of PowerBook-branded computers. An indirect successor, the 13-inch MacBook Pro, was introduced in mid 2009.\nLegacy.\nTraditionally, the portable line trailed the desktops in the utilization of the latest processors, with the notable exception of the PowerBook G3, which was released simultaneously with the desktop Power Macintosh G3. PowerBooks would continue to trail behind the desktop Macs, however, never even adopting the G5 processor. This was due primarily to the extreme heat caused by most of the full-sized processors available and unacceptable power consumption. With the introduction of the Intel-based Macs, once again, the MacBook Pro joined the iMac in sharing the new technology simultaneously.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25123", "revid": "2241258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25123", "title": "Phil Ochs", "text": "American singer and songwriter (1940\u20131976)\nPhilip David Ochs (; December 19, 1940 \u2013 April 9, 1976) was an American songwriter, protest singer (or, as he preferred, \"topical singer\"), and political activist. Ochs was known for his sharp wit, sardonic humor, and political commentary. He wrote about 200 songs in the 1960s and 1970s and released eight albums.\nOchs performed at many political events, including the 1968 Democratic National Convention, mass demonstrations sponsored by the National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam, civil rights rallies, student events, and organized labor events. He performed at some benefits for free. Ochs initially described himself as a \"left social democrat\" but grew more radical after the police riots at the 1968 Democratic National Convention.\nAfter years of prolific writing in the 1960s, Ochs' mental stability declined in the 1970s. His mental health problems included depression, bipolar disorder, and alcoholism. He died by suicide on April 9, 1976.\nOchs's influences included Woody Guthrie, Pete Seeger, Buddy Holly, Elvis Presley, Bob Gibson, Faron Young, and Merle Haggard. His best-known songs include \"I Ain't Marching Anymore\", \"When I'm Gone\", \"Changes\", \"Crucifixion\", \"Draft Dodger Rag\", \"Love Me, I'm a Liberal\", \"Outside of a Small Circle of Friends\", \"Power and the Glory\", \"There but for Fortune\", and \"The War Is Over\".\nEarly life.\nPhilip David Ochs was born on December 19, 1940, in El Paso, Texas, to Jacob \"Jack\" Ochs (August 11, 1909 \u2013 April 30, 1963), a physician who was born in New York to Polish-Jewish parents, and Gertrude Ochs (n\u00e9e Phin; February 26, 1912 \u2013 March 9, 1994), who was born in Scotland to Jewish parents. His parents met and married in Edinburgh where Jack was attending medical school, and afterwards moved to the United States. Ochs grew up with an older sister, Sonia (known as Sonny, born April 12, 1937), and a younger brother, Michael (February 27, 1943 \u2013 July 23, 2025).\nAfter being drafted into the army, Jack was sent overseas near the end of World War II and treated soldiers at the Battle of the Bulge. His war experiences, however, affected his mental health and he received an honorable medical discharge in November 1945. Upon arriving home, Jack was hospitalized for bipolar disorder and depression, and was distant from his wife and children. He was also unable to establish a successful medical practice and instead worked at a series of hospitals around the country. As a result, Ochs and his family moved frequently: first to Far Rockaway, New York, when Ochs was a teenager; then to Perrysburg in western New York, where he first studied music; and then to Columbus, Ohio.\nAs a teen, Phil Ochs was recognized as a talented clarinet player; in an evaluation, one music instructor wrote: \"You have exceptional musical feeling and the ability to transfer it on your instrument is abundant.\" His musical skills allowed him to play clarinet with the orchestra at the Capital University Conservatory of Music in Ohio, where he rose to the status of principal soloist before he was 16. Although Ochs played classical music, he soon became interested in other music sounds he heard on the radio, such as early rock icons (Buddy Holly and Elvis Presley) and country artists (Merle Haggard, Faron Young, Ernest Tubb, Hank Williams, and Johnny Cash).\nOchs also spent a lot of time at the movies while living in Far Rockaway, as there were three theaters in town. Because his mother did not want to hire a babysitter, she instead gave her sons money and the brothers saw five to six films each week. He especially liked big screen heroes (John Wayne and Audie Murphy) and later developed an interest in movie rebels (Marlon Brando and James Dean).\nEducation and journalism: 1956\u20131961.\nFrom 1956 to 1958, Ochs was a student at the Staunton Military Academy in rural Virginia. After graduating, he returned to Columbus and enrolled at Ohio State University. Unhappy after his first quarter, 18-year-old Ochs took a leave of absence and traveled to Florida, where he was jailed for two weeks for sleeping on a park bench in Miami, an incident he would later recall:\nSomewhere during the course of those fifteen days I decided to become a writer. My primary thought was journalism ... so in a flash, I decided\u2014I'll be a writer and a major in journalism.\nOchs returned to Ohio State to study journalism and developed an interest in politics, with a particular interest in the Cuban Revolution of 1959. At Ohio State, he met Jim Glover, a fellow student who was a devotee of folk music and whose father was a socialist. Glover introduced Ochs to the music of Pete Seeger, Woody Guthrie, and the Weavers. Glover taught Ochs how to play guitar, and they debated politics. Ochs began writing newspaper articles, often on radical themes. When the student paper refused to publish some of his more radical articles, he started his own underground newspaper called \"The Word\", as well as writing for the satire magazine, \"The Sundial\", with classmate R. L. Stine. His two main interests, politics and music, soon merged, and Ochs began writing topical political songs. Ochs and Glover formed a duet called \"The Singing Socialists\", later renamed \"The Sundowners\", but the duo broke up before their first professional performance and Glover went to New York City to become a folksinger.\nOchs's parents and younger brother had moved from Columbus to Cleveland, and Ochs started to spend more time there, performing professionally at a local folk club called Farragher's Back Room. He was the opening act for a number of musicians in the summer of 1961, including the Smothers Brothers. Ochs met folk singer Bob Gibson that summer as well, and according to Dave Van Ronk, Gibson became \"\"the\" seminal influence\" on Ochs' writing. Ochs continued at Ohio State into his senior year, but was bitterly disappointed at not being appointed editor-in-chief of the college newspaper, and dropped out in his last quarter without graduating. He left for New York, as Glover had, to become a folksinger.\nCareer.\nNew York City: 1962\u20131966.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the early 1960s, there was a folk music rebirth in this country with the likes of Peter, Paul and Mary, Joan Baez, Pete Seeger and Bob Dylan. Although his fame was probably limited, Ochs became an integral part of that crowd. His songs \"Draft Dodger Rag\" and \"I Ain't Marching Anymore\" became a rallying cry for the peace movement much the way that Dylan's did. \nLeba Hertz, \"'Phil Ochs' Review: A Voice Made for Marching\", \"San Francisco Chronicle\", March 18, 2011 \nOchs arrived in New York City in 1962 and began performing in numerous small folk nightclubs, eventually becoming an integral part of the Greenwich Village folk music scene. He emerged as an unpolished but passionate vocalist who wrote pointed songs about current events: war, civil rights, labor struggles and other topics. While others described his music as \"protest songs\", Ochs preferred the term \"topical songs\".\nHowever, in order to get by, in November 1962, Ochs accepted $50 to record a children's album, a collection of traditional popular campfire songs, titled \"Camp Favorites\" (1963). In 1963, Cameo Records released this budget LP. Ochs requested his name not be used and it wasn't until well after his death that its existence became known. The Campers consists of Ochs (who is not credited on the record), an unknown female vocalist and a group of children.\nOchs described himself as a \"singing journalist\", saying he built his songs from stories he read in \"Newsweek\". By the summer of 1963, he was sufficiently well known in folk circles to be invited to sing at the Newport Folk Festival, where he performed \"Too Many Martyrs\" (co-written with Bob Gibson), \"Talking Birmingham Jam\", and \"Power and the Glory\"\u2014his patriotic Guthrie-esque anthem that brought the audience to its feet. Other performers at the 1963 folk festival included Peter, Paul and Mary, Joan Baez, Bob Dylan, and Tom Paxton. Ochs' return appearance at Newport in 1964, where he performed \"Draft Dodger Rag,\" \"Talking Vietnam Blues,\" and other songs, was widely praised. However, he was not invited to appear in 1965, the festival when Dylan famously performed \"Maggie's Farm\" with an electric guitar. Although many in the folk world decried Dylan's choice, Ochs admired Dylan's courage in defying the folk establishment, and publicly defended him.\nIn 1963, Ochs performed at New York's Carnegie Hall and Town Hall in hootenannies. He made his first solo appearance at Carnegie Hall in 1966. Throughout his career, Ochs would perform at a wide range of venues, including civil rights rallies, anti-war demonstrations, and concert halls.\nOchs contributed many songs and articles to the influential \"Broadside Magazine\". He recorded his first three albums for Elektra Records: \"All the News That's Fit to Sing\" (1964), \"I Ain't Marching Anymore\" (1965), and \"Phil Ochs in Concert\" (1966). Critics wrote that each album was better than its predecessors, and fans seemed to agree; record sales increased with each new release.\nOn these records, Ochs was accompanied only by an acoustic guitar. The albums contain many of Ochs's topical songs, such as \"Too Many Martyrs\", \"I Ain't Marching Anymore\", and \"Draft Dodger Rag\"; and some musical reinterpretation of older poetry, such as \"The Highwayman\" (poem by Alfred Noyes) and \"The Bells\" (poem by Edgar Allan Poe). \"Phil Ochs in Concert\" includes some more introspective songs, such as \"Changes\" and \"When I'm Gone\".\nDuring the early period of his career, Ochs and Bob Dylan had a friendly rivalry. Dylan said of Ochs, \"I just can't keep up with Phil\u2014and he's gettin' better and better\". On another occasion, when Ochs criticized either \"One of Us Must Know (Sooner or Later)\" or \"Can You Please Crawl Out Your Window?\" (sources differ), Dylan threw him out of his limousine, saying, \"You're not a folk singer. You're a journalist.\"\nIn 1962, Ochs married Alice Skinner, who was pregnant with their daughter Meegan, in a ceremony at City Hall with Jim Glover as best man and Jean Ray as bridesmaid, and witnessed by Dylan's girlfriend at the time, Suze Rotolo. Phil and Alice separated in 1965, but they never divorced.\nLike many people of his generation, Ochs deeply admired President John F. Kennedy, even though he disagreed with him on issues such as the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Cuban Missile Crisis, and the growing involvement of the United States in the Vietnamese civil war. When Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963, Ochs wept. He told his wife that he thought he was going to die that night. It was the only time she ever saw Ochs cry.\nOchs's managers during this part of his career were Albert Grossman (who also managed Bob Dylan, Peter, Paul, and Mary and Gordon Lightfoot) followed by Arthur Gorson. Gorson had close ties with such groups as Americans For Democratic Action, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, and Students for a Democratic Society.\nOchs was writing songs at a fast pace. Some of the songs he wrote during this period were held back and recorded on his later albums.\nCalifornia: 1967\u20131969.\nIn 1967, Ochs\u2014now managed by his brother Michael\u2014left Elektra Records for A&amp;M Records and moved to Los Angeles, California. He recorded four studio albums for A&amp;M: \"Pleasures of the Harbor\" (1967), \"Tape from California\" (1968), \"Rehearsals for Retirement\" (1969), and the ironically titled \"Greatest Hits\" (1970; which actually consisted of all new material). For his A&amp;M albums, Ochs moved away from simply produced solo acoustic guitar performances and experimented with ensemble and even orchestral instrumentation, \"baroque-folk\", in the hopes of producing a pop-folk hybrid that would be a hit.\nCritic Robert Christgau, writing in \"Esquire\" of \"Pleasures of the Harbor\" in May 1968, did not consider this new direction a good turn. While describing Ochs as \"unquestionably a nice guy\", he went on to say, \"too bad his voice shows an effective range of about half an octave [and] his guitar playing would not suffer much if his right hand were webbed.\" \"Pleasures of the Harbor\", Christgau continued, \"epitomizes the decadence that has infected pop since \"Sgt. Pepper\". [The] gaudy musical settings ... inspire nostalgia for the three-chord strum.\"\nWith an ironic sense of humor, Ochs included Christgau's \"webbed hand\" comment in his 1968 songbook \"The War is Over\" on a page titled \"The Critics Raved\", opposite a full-page picture of Ochs standing in a large metal garbage can. Despite his sense of humor, Ochs was unhappy that his work was not receiving the critical acclaim and popular success he had hoped to achieve. Still, Ochs would joke on the back cover of \"Greatest Hits\" that there were 50 Phil Ochs fans (\"50 fans can't be wrong!\"), a sarcastic reference to an Elvis Presley album that bragged of 50\u00a0million Elvis fans.\nNone of Ochs's songs became hits, although \"Outside of a Small Circle of Friends\" received a good deal of airplay. It reached No. 119 on \"Billboard\"'s national \"Hot Prospect\" listing before being pulled from some radio stations because of its lyrics, which included \"smoking marijuana is more fun than drinking beer\". It was the closest Ochs ever came to the Top 40. Joan Baez, however, did have a Top Ten hit in the U.K. in August 1965, reaching No. 8 with her recording of Ochs's song \"There but for Fortune\", which was also nominated for a Grammy Award for \"Best Folk Recording\". In the U.S. it peaked at No. 50 on the \"Billboard\" charts\u2014a good showing, but not a hit.\nAlthough he was trying new things musically, Ochs did not abandon his protest roots. He was profoundly concerned with the escalation of the Vietnam War, performing tirelessly at anti-war rallies across the country. In 1967, he organized two rallies to declare that \"The War Is Over\"\u2014\"Is everybody sick of this stinking war? In that case, friends, do what I and thousands of other Americans have done\u2014declare the war over.\"\u2014one in Los Angeles in June, the other in New York in November. He continued to write and record anti-war songs, such as \"The War Is Over\" and \"White Boots Marching in a Yellow Land\". Other topical songs of this period include \"Outside of a Small Circle of Friends\", inspired by the murder of Kitty Genovese, who was stabbed to death outside of her New York City apartment building while dozens of her neighbors reportedly ignored her cries for help, and \"William Butler Yeats Visits Lincoln Park and Escapes Unscathed\", about the despair he felt in the aftermath of the Chicago 1968 Democratic National Convention police riot.\nOchs was writing more personal songs as well, such as \"Crucifixion\", in which he compared the deaths of Jesus Christ and assassinated President John F. Kennedy as part of a \"cycle of sacrifice\" in which people build up heroes and then celebrate their destruction; \"Chords of Fame\", a warning against the dangers and corruption of fame; \"Pleasures of the Harbor\", a lyrical portrait of a lonely sailor seeking human connection far from home; and \"Boy in Ohio\", a plaintive look back at Ochs's childhood in Columbus.\nA lifelong movie fan, Ochs worked the narratives of justice and rebellion that he had seen in films into his music, describing some of his songs as \"cinematic\". He was disappointed and bitter when his onetime hero John Wayne embraced the Vietnam War with what Ochs saw as the blind patriotism of Wayne's 1968 film, \"The Green Berets\":\n[H]ere we have John Wayne, who was a major artistic and psychological figure on the American scene, ... who at one point used to make movies of soldiers who had a certain validity, ... a certain sense of honor [about] what the soldier was doing. ... Even if it was a cavalry movie doing a historically dishonorable thing to the Indians, even as there was a feeling of what it meant to be a man, what it meant to have some sense of duty. ... Now today we have the same actor making his new war movie in a war so hopelessly corrupt that, without seeing the movie, I'm sure it is perfectly safe to say that it will be an almost technically-robot-view of soldiery, just by definition of how the whole country has deteriorated. And I think it would make a very interesting double feature to show a good old Wayne movie like, say, \"She Wore a Yellow Ribbon\" with \"The Green Berets\". Because that would make a very striking comment on what has happened to America in general.\nOchs was involved in the creation of the Youth International Party, known as the Yippies, along with Jerry Rubin, Abbie Hoffman, Stew Albert, and Paul Krassner. At the same time, Ochs actively supported Eugene McCarthy's more mainstream bid for the 1968 Democratic nomination for President, a position at odds with the more radical Yippie point of view. Still, Ochs helped plan the Yippies' \"Festival of Life\" which was to take place at the 1968 Democratic National Convention along with demonstrations by other anti-war groups including the National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam.\nDespite warnings that there might be trouble, Ochs went to Chicago both as a guest of the McCarthy campaign and to participate in the demonstrations. He performed in Lincoln Park, Grant Park, and at the Chicago Coliseum, witnessed the violence perpetrated by the Chicago police against the protesters, and was arrested at one point. Ochs also purchased the young boar who became known as the Yippie 1968 Presidential candidate \"Pigasus the Immortal\" from a farm in Illinois.\nThe events of 1968\u00a0\u2013 the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. and of Robert F. Kennedy weeks later, the , and the election of Richard Nixon\u00a0\u2013 left Ochs feeling disillusioned and depressed. The cover of his 1969 album \"Rehearsals for Retirement\" portrayed a tombstone with the words:\nPHIL OCHS(AMERICAN)BORN: EL PASO, TEXAS, 1940DIED: CHICAGO, ILLINOIS, 1968\nAt the trial of the Chicago Seven in December 1969, Ochs testified for the defense. His testimony included his recitation of the lyrics to his song \"I Ain't Marching Anymore\". On his way out of the courthouse, Ochs sang the song for the press corps; to Ochs's amusement, his singing was broadcast that evening by Walter Cronkite on the \"CBS Evening News\".\n\"Greatest Hits\": 1970.\nAfter the riot in Chicago and the subsequent trial, Ochs changed direction again. The events of 1968 convinced him that the average American was not listening to topical songs or responding to Yippie tactics. Ochs thought that by playing the sort of music that had moved him as a teenager he could speak more directly to the American public.\nOchs turned to his musical roots in country music and early rock and roll. He decided he needed to be \"part Elvis Presley and part Che Guevara\", so he commissioned a gold lam\u00e9 suit from Elvis Presley's costumer Nudie Cohn. Ochs wore the gold suit on the cover of his 1970 album, \"Greatest Hits\", which consisted of new songs largely in rock and country styles.\nOchs went on tour wearing the gold suit, backed by a rock band, singing his own material along with medleys of songs by Buddy Holly, Elvis, and Merle Haggard. His fans did not know how to respond. This new Phil Ochs drew a hostile reaction from his audience. Ochs's March 27, 1970, concerts at Carnegie Hall were the most successful, and by the end of that night's second show, Ochs had won over many in the crowd. The show was recorded and released as \"Gunfight at Carnegie Hall\".\nDuring this period, Ochs was taking drugs to get through performances. He had been taking Valium for years to help control his nerves, and he was also drinking heavily. Pianist Lincoln Mayorga said of that period, \"He was physically abusing himself very badly on that tour. He was drinking a lot of wine and taking uppers. The wine was pulling him one way and the uppers were pulling him another way, and he was kind of a mess. There were so many pharmaceuticals around \u2013 so many pills. I'd never seen anything like that.\" Ochs tried to cut back on the pills, but alcohol remained his drug of choice for the rest of his life.\nDepressed by his lack of widespread appreciation and suffering from writer's block, Ochs did not record any further albums. He slipped deeper into depression and alcoholism. His personal problems notwithstanding, Ochs performed at the inaugural benefit for Greenpeace on October 16, 1970, at the Pacific Coliseum in Vancouver, British Columbia. A recording of his performance, along with performances by Joni Mitchell and James Taylor, was released by Greenpeace in 2009.\nTraveling: 1971\u20131975.\nIn August 1971, Ochs went to Chile, where Salvador Allende, a Marxist, had been democratically elected in the 1970 election. There he met Chilean folksinger V\u00edctor Jara, an Allende supporter, and the two became friends. In October, Ochs left Chile to visit Argentina. Later that month, after singing at a political rally in Uruguay, he and his American traveling companion David Ifshin were arrested and detained overnight. When the two returned to Argentina, they were arrested as they left the airplane. After a brief stay in an Argentinian prison, Ochs and Ifshin were sent to Bolivia via a commercial airliner where authorities were to detain them.\nIfshin had previously been warned by Argentinian leftist friends that when the authorities sent dissidents to Bolivia, they would disappear forever. When the airliner arrived in Bolivia, the American captain of the Braniff International Airways aircraft allowed Ochs and Ifshin to stay on the aircraft and barred Bolivian authorities from entering. The aircraft then flew to Peru where the two disembarked and they were not detained. Fearful that Peruvian authorities might arrest him, Ochs returned to the United States a few days later.\nOchs was having difficulties writing new songs during this period, but he had occasional breakthroughs. He updated his sarcastic song \"Here's to the State of Mississippi\" as \"Here's to the State of Richard Nixon\", with cutting lines such as \"the speeches of the Spiro are the ravings of a clown\", a reference to Nixon's vitriolic vice president, Spiro Agnew\u2014sung as \"the speeches of the President are the ravings of a clown\" after Agnew's resignation.\nOchs was personally invited by John Lennon to sing at a large benefit at the University of Michigan in December 1971 on behalf of John Sinclair, an activist poet who had been arrested on minor drug charges and given a severe sentence. Ochs performed at the John Sinclair Freedom Rally along with Stevie Wonder, Allen Ginsberg, David Peel, Abbie Hoffman, and many others. The rally culminated with Lennon and Yoko Ono, who were making their first public performance in the United States since the breakup of the Beatles.\nAlthough the 1968 election had left him deeply disillusioned, Ochs continued to work for the election campaigns of anti-war candidates, such as George McGovern's unsuccessful Presidential bid in 1972.\nIn 1972, Ochs was asked to write the theme song for the film \"Kansas City Bomber\". The task proved difficult, as he struggled to overcome his writer's block. Although his song was not used in the soundtrack, it was released as a single.\nIn mid-1972, Ochs traveled to Australia and New Zealand and then to Africa the following year, where he visited Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, and South Africa. While visiting Tanzania one night, he was attacked and choked by robbers in Dar es Salaam, which damaged his vocal cords, causing a loss of the top three notes in his vocal range. The attack also exacerbated his growing mental problems, and he became increasingly paranoid. Ochs believed the attack may have been arranged by US government agents, perhaps the CIA. Still, he continued his trip, even recording a single in Kenya, \"Bwatue\".\nOn September 11, 1973, the Allende government of Chile was overthrown in a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\". The court set up by the Chilean military claimed that Allende committed suicide during the bombing of the presidential palace, and singer Victor Jara was rounded up with other professors and students, tortured and murdered. When Ochs heard about the manner in which his friend had been killed, he was outraged and decided to organize a benefit concert to bring to public attention the situation in Chile, and raise funds for the people of Chile. The concert, \"An Evening with Salvador Allende\", was held on May 9, 1974, at New York City's Felt Forum, included films of Allende; singers such as Pete Seeger, Arlo Guthrie, Dave Van Ronk, and Bob Dylan; and political activists such as former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark. Dylan had agreed to perform at the last minute when he heard that the concert had sold so few tickets that it was in danger of being canceled. Once his participation was announced, the event quickly sold out.\nAfter the Chile benefit, Ochs and Dylan discussed the possibility of a joint concert tour, playing small nightclubs. Nothing came of the Dylan-Ochs plans, but the idea eventually evolved into Dylan's Rolling Thunder Revue.\nThe Vietnam War ended on April 30, 1975. Ochs planned a final \"War Is Over\" rally, which was held in New York's Central Park on May 11. More than 100,000 people came to hear Ochs, joined by Harry Belafonte, Odetta, Pete Seeger, Paul Simon and others. Ochs and Joan Baez sang a duet of \"There but for Fortune\" and he closed with his song \"The War Is Over\".\nDecline and death.\nOchs's drinking became more and more of a problem, and his behavior became increasingly erratic. He frightened his friends both with his drunken rants about the FBI and CIA and about his claiming to want to have Elvis Presley's manager Colonel Tom Parker or Kentucky Fried Chicken's Colonel Sanders manage his career.\nIn mid-1975, Ochs took on the identity of John Butler Train. He told people that Train had murdered Ochs and that he, John Butler Train, had replaced him. Ochs was convinced that someone was trying to kill him, so he carried a weapon at all times: a hammer, a knife, or a lead pipe.\nHis brother, Michael, attempted to have him committed to a psychiatric hospital. Friends pleaded with him to get help voluntarily. They feared for his safety because he was getting into fights with bar patrons. Unable to pay his rent, he began living on the streets.\nAfter several months, the Train persona faded and Ochs returned, but his talk of suicide disturbed his friends and family. They hoped it was a passing phase, but Ochs was determined. One of his biographers explains Ochs' motivation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By Phil's thinking, he had died a long time ago: he had died politically in Chicago in 1968 in the violence of the Democratic National Convention; he had died professionally in Africa a few years later when he had been strangled and felt that he could no longer sing; he had died spiritually when Chile had been overthrown and his friend Victor Jara had been brutally murdered; and, finally, he had died psychologically at the hands of John Train.\nOn Christmas Eve 1975, Ochs visited the apartment of Larry Sloman and Dave Peller, which he had done semi-frequently near the end of 1975. On this particular evening, Peller recorded Ochs singing ten songs, five of them new and intended for an album that \"would be an unflinching narrative of his psychosis over the past year\" which went by the working title of \"Duels in the Sun\". Five other songs were also at some level of completion by this time. A second tape, possibly recorded before Christmas Eve, features additional songs intended for this project. This album would never come to fruition beyond these two recordings.\nIn January 1976, Ochs moved to Far Rockaway, New York, to live with his sister Sonny. He was lethargic; his only activities were watching television and playing cards with his nephews. Ochs saw a psychiatrist, who diagnosed him with bipolar disorder. He was prescribed medication, and he told his sister he was taking it. On April 9, 1976, Ochs committed suicide by hanging himself in Sonny's home.\nYears after his death, it was revealed that the FBI had a file of nearly 500 pages on Ochs. Much of the information in those files relates to his association with counterculture figures, protest organizers, musicians, and other people described by the FBI as \"subversive\". The FBI was often sloppy in collecting information about Ochs: his name was frequently misspelled \"Oakes\" in their files, and they continued to consider him \"potentially dangerous\" after his death.\nCongresswoman Bella Abzug (Democrat from New York), an outspoken anti-war activist who had appeared at the 1975 \"War is Over\" rally, entered this statement into the \"Congressional Record\" on April 29, 1976:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago, a young folksinger whose music personified the protest mood of the 1960s took his own life. Phil Ochs \u2013 whose original compositions were compelling moral statements against the war in Southeast Asia \u2013 apparently felt that he had run out of words.\nWhile his tragic action was undoubtedly motivated by terrible personal despair, his death is a political as well as an artistic tragedy. I believe it is indicative of the despair many of the activists of the 1960s are experiencing as they perceive a government that continues the distortion of national priorities that is exemplified in the military budget we have before us.\nPhil Ochs's poetic pronouncements were part of a larger effort to galvanize his generation into taking action to prevent war, racism, and poverty. He left us a legacy of important songs that continue to be relevant in 1976\u2014even though \"the war is over\".\nJust one year ago\u2014during this week of the anniversary of the end of the Vietnam War\u2014Phil recruited entertainers to appear at the \"War is Over\" celebration in Central Park, at which I spoke.\nIt seems particularly appropriate that this week we should commemorate the contributions of this extraordinary young man.\nRobert Christgau, who had been so critical of \"Pleasures of the Harbor\" and Ochs's guitar skills eight years earlier, wrote warmly of Ochs in his obituary in \"The Village Voice\". \"I came around to liking Phil Ochs's music, guitar included,\" Christgau wrote. \"My affection [for Ochs] no doubt prejudiced me, so it is worth [noting] that many observers who care more for folk music than I do remember both his compositions and his vibrato tenor as close to the peak of the genre.\"\n1976 memorial concert.\nOn May 28, 1976, at New York City's Felt Forum, a memorial concert was held for Ochs. Spearheaded by Michael and Sonny Ochs, the over six hour concert consisted of performances of Ochs's best known material by many of his peers and influences, including Dave Van Ronk, Pete Seeger, Jim Glover, Jean Ray, Melanie, Bob Gibson, Allen Ginsberg, and Peter Yarrow, with spoken Ed Sanders written tributes delivered by Jerry Rubin and Ramsey Clark.\nLegacy.\nAlmost fifty years after his death, Ochs's songs remain relevant. His work continues to influence singers and fans worldwide, most of whom never saw him perform live. There are mailing lists and online discussion groups dedicated to Ochs and his music; websites that have music samples, photographs, and other links; and articles and books continue to be written and published about him.\nHis sister, Sonny Ochs (Tanzman), runs a series of \"Phil Ochs Song Nights\" with a rotating group of performers who keep Ochs's music and legacy alive by singing his songs in cities across the U.S. His brother Michael Ochs was a photographic archivist of 20th-century music and entertainment personalities; he died in July 2025. Gary Stewart at Rhino Records worked with his daughter Meegan Lee Ochs and Michael to produce a box set of Ochs's music titled \"Farewells &amp; Fantasies\", the title of which was taken from Ochs's sign-off on the \"postcard\" on the back of \"Tape from California\": \"Farewells &amp; Fantasies, Folks, P. Ochs\". Meegan has a son named Caiden Finn Potter, Ochs's only grandchild. Alice Skinner Ochs was a photographer; she died in November 2010.\nIn February 2009, the North American Folk Music and Dance Alliance gave the 2009 Elaine Weissman Lifetime Achievement Award to Ochs.\nIn September 2014, Meegan Lee Ochs announced that she was donating her father's archives to the Woody Guthrie Center in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Included are many of his notebooks, journals, videotapes of his performances, the gold lam\u00e9 suit, photographs, and other documents and memorabilia that Phil's brother Michael had preserved since his death.\nCovers and updates of Ochs songs.\nOchs's songs have been covered by scores of performers, including Joan Baez, Bastro, Cher, Judy Collins, Henry Cow, John Denver, Ani DiFranco, Jad Fair, Ronnie Gilbert, John Wesley Harding, Jason &amp; the Scorchers, Jim and Jean, Daniel Johnston, Jeannie Lewis, Gordon Lightfoot, Melanie, Christy Moore, Morrissey, Pete Seeger, The Shrubs, They Might Be Giants, Eddie Vedder, and the Weakerthans. Wyclef Jean performed \"Here's to the State of Mississippi\" in the 2009 documentary \"Soundtrack for a Revolution\".\nIn 1998, Sliced Bread Records released \"\", a two-CD set of twenty-eight Ochs songs by singers such as Billy Bragg, John Gorka, Nanci Griffith, Arlo Guthrie, Magpie, Tom Paxton, and Peter Yarrow. The liner notes indicate that all record company profits from the sale of the set were to be divided between the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation of Southern California (ACLU SoCal) and \"Sing Out!\" magazine; Ochs had performed at the ACLU SoCal Bill of Rights Awards in 1971 and his daughter Meegan worked at ACLU SoCal producing that awards event for 32 years ending in 2025. \nWood Records released an indie rock/experimental rock tribute album titled \" in 2003.\nIn 2005, Kind Of Like Spitting released an album, \", consisting of covers of nine songs written by Ochs, to pay tribute to his music and raise awareness of the artist, whom they felt had been overlooked.\nJello Biafra and Mojo Nixon, on their album \"Prairie Home Invasion\", recorded a version of \"Love Me, I'm a Liberal\" with lyrics updated to the Clinton era. Evan Greer, part of the Riot-Folk collective, later updated the song for the George W. Bush era. Ryan Harvey, also part of Riot-Folk, remade \"Cops Of The World\" with updated lyrics. The Clash used some of the lyrics to \"United Fruit\" in their song \"Up in Heaven (Not Only Here)\", which appeared on their 1980 album \"Sandinista!\". During their performance on \"VH1 Storytellers\", Pearl Jam covered \"Here's to the State of Mississippi\" with updated lyrics to include Jerry Falwell, Dick Cheney, John Roberts, Alberto Gonzales, and George W. Bush. In 2002, with the agreement of Ochs's sister Sonny, Richard Thompson added an extra verse to \"I Ain't Marching Anymore\" to reflect recent American foreign policy. Jefferson Starship recorded \"I Ain't Marching Anymore\" with additional lyrics by band member Cathy Richardson for their 2008 release \"Jefferson's Tree of Liberty\".\nNeil Young has cited Ochs as a major influence on his music. In a 1969 interview, Young said, \"I really think Phil Ochs is a genius ... he's written fantastic, incredible songs \u2013 he's on the same level with Dylan in my eyes.\" In 2013, Young performed \"Changes\" at Farm Aid and included it in his 2014 tour set; it also is the lead track on \"A Letter Home\", his 2014 album of covers.\nAt the 2016 Democratic Convention, Lady Gaga sang the Ochs song \"The War Is Over\" at Camden Rising Concert.\nAlso in 2016, Richard Barone released his album \"Sorrows &amp; Promises: Greenwich Village in the 1960s\", which includes \"When I'm Gone\". Barone said of the project: \"My favorite artist on the album is Phil Ochs. I grew up with Phil Ochs songs. I love his topical songs\u2013and I also like his songs that are not political. He was always really good no matter what he was doing.\" On tour, Barone also performed \"Changes\".\nIn 2020, Welsh singer-songwriter Martyn Joseph released \"Days of Decision: A Tribute to Phil Ochs\" containing 14 Ochs covers, as well as liner notes by Ochs' sister, Sonny.\nIn 2024 Phil Odgers and John Kettle released an album of 11 Ochs covers called \"Far Rockaway\".\nTributes.\nOn learning of Ochs' death, Tom Paxton wrote a song titled \"Phil\", which he recorded for his 1978 album \"Heroes\". Ochs is also the subject of \"I Dreamed I Saw Phil Ochs Last Night\", by Billy Bragg, from his 1990 album \"The Internationale\", which was based on the Alfred Hayes/Earl Robinson song \"Joe Hill\" which Ochs helped popularize. Ochs also had his own, different song (\"Joe Hill\") about the early 20th-century union activist/songwriter. \"Thin Wild Mercury,\" by Peter Cooper and Todd Snider, is about Ochs's infamous clash with Dylan and getting thrown out of Dylan's limo.\nOchs is mentioned in the Dar Williams song \"All My Heroes Are Dead\", the Will Oldham song \"Gezundheit\", the Chumbawamba song \"Love Me\", and the They Might Be Giants song \"The Day\". The Josh Joplin Group recorded a tribute to Ochs on their album \"Useful Music\". Schooner Fare recorded \"Don't Stop To Rest (Song for Phil Ochs)\" on their 1981 album \"Closer to the Wind\". Latin Quarter memorialized him in the song \"Phil Ochs\" on their album \"Long Pig\" (1993).\nJohn Wesley Harding recorded a song titled \"Phil Ochs, Bob Dylan, Steve Goodman, David Blue and Me\", the title a reference to the Ochs song \"Bach, Beethoven, Mozart and Me\". Singer-songwriter Nanci Griffith wrote a song about Phil entitled \"Radio Fragile\", included in her album \"Storms\". English folk/punk songwriter Al Baker recorded a song about Ochs entitled \"All The News That's Fit To Sing\", a reference to the title of Ochs's first album. Cajun musician Vic Sadot wrote a song about Ochs entitled \"Broadside Balladeer\". Singer-songwriter Jen Cass's \"Standing In Your Memory\", and Harry Chapin's \"The Parade's Still Passing By\" are tributes to Ochs. Leslie Fish recorded \"Chickasaw Mountain\", which is dedicated to Ochs, on her 1986 album of that name.\nThe punk band Squirrel Bait cited Ochs as a major creative influence in the liner notes of their 1986 album \"Skag Heaven\", and cover his \"Tape From California\". The American hardcore punk supergroup Hesitation Wounds wrote a song called \"P. Ochs (The Death of a Rebel)\", which appeared on their self-titled debut EP in 2013. The song's lyrics reference the folk singer's life and suicide. Ochs has also influenced Greek folk-rock songwriters; Dimitris Panagopoulos' \"Astathis Isoropia\" (\"Unstable Equilibrium\") (1987) was dedicated to his memory. On the 2005 Kind Of Like Spitting album \"In the Red\", songwriter Ben Barnett included his song \"Sheriff Ochs\", which was inspired by reading a biography of Ochs. On April 9, 2009, Ochs' friend Jim Glover performed a tribute to Ochs at Mother's Musical Bakery in Sarasota, Florida.\nOchs is also mentioned in songs by other artists including \"The Day\" from the 1986 self-titled \"They Might Be Giants\" and David Bowie's 2013 song \"(You Will) Set the World on Fire\" on \"The Next Day\" album.\nPopular culture.\nAmong Ochs's many admirers were the short story writer Breece D'J Pancake and actor Sean Penn. Meegan Lee Ochs, who worked as Sean Penn's personal assistant from 1983 to 1985, wrote in her foreword to \"Farewells &amp; Fantasies\" that she and Penn discussed \"over many years\" the possibility of making a movie about her father; the plan has not yet come to fruition, although Penn expressed an interest in the project as recently as February 2009.\nSinger Harry Chapin's song \"The Parade's Still Passing By\" from his 1976 album \"On the Road to Kingdom Come\" is dedicated to Ochs and is a response to his dissatisfaction with his lack of chart success and suicide. Author Jim Carroll's autobiography, \"The Basketball Diaries\" (1978), was dedicated in memory of Phil Ochs.\nMedia professors Paul Levinson and Joshua Meyrowitz conducted a live \"radio documentary\" conversation about Ochs, \"Life and Death of a 20th Century Troubadour,\" on WFDU Radio, 7 May 1977.\nOchs is mentioned in the Stephen King novels \"The Tommyknockers\" (1987) and \"Hearts in Atlantis\" (1999). In the 2019 novel \"Revolutionaries\" by Joshua Furst, based on the life of Abbie Hoffman, Ochs appears as a character under his own name.\nFilms.\nMichael Korolenko directed the 1984 biographical film \"Chords of Fame\", which featured Bill Burnett as Ochs. The film included interviews with people who had known Ochs, including Yippies Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin, manager Harold Leventhal, and Mike Porco, the owner of Gerde's Folk City. \"Chords of Fame\" also included performances of Ochs songs by folk musicians who knew him, including Bob Gibson, Pete Seeger, Tom Paxton, Dave Van Ronk, and Eric Andersen.\nFilmmaker Ken Bowser directed the documentary film \"\", which premiered at the 2010 Woodstock Film Festival in Woodstock, New York. Its theatrical run began on January 5, 2011, at the IFC Theater in Greenwich Village, New York City, opening in cities around the US and Canada thereafter. The film features extensive archival footage of Ochs and many pivotal events from the 1960s civil rights and peace movements, as well as interviews with friends, family and colleagues who knew Ochs through music and politics. The PBS \"American Masters\" series opened its 2012 season with an edited version of the film.\nExperimental filmmaker Phil Solomon named his 2007 experimental film \"Rehearsals for Retirement\" after Ochs' 1969 song of the same name.\nIn the 2011 film \"The Chicago 8\" the role of Phil Ochs was played by the actor Steven Schub (lead singer of The Fenwicks and HaSkaLA.)\nThe 1994 film \"Spanking the Monkey\" makes reference to Ochs and his suicide.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums and live recordings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25125", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25125", "title": "Prayer wheel", "text": "Devotional tool in Buddhism\nA prayer wheel, or mani wheel, is a cylindrical wheel (Tibetan: \u0f60\u0f41\u0f7c\u0f62\u0f0b\u0f63\u0f7c\u0f0d, Wylie: \"'khor lo\", ) for Buddhist recitation. The wheel is installed on a spindle made from metal, wood, stone, leather, or coarse cotton. Prayer wheels are common in Tibet and areas where Tibetan culture is predominant.\nTraditionally, a mantra is written in Ranjana script or Tibetan script, on the outside of the wheel. The mantra Om mani padme hum is most commonly used, but other mantras can also be used.\nPrayer wheels sometimes depict dakinis and the eight auspicious symbols (\"ashtamangala\"). At the core of the cylinder, as the axle of the wheel, is a \"life tree\" made of wood or metal with mantras written on or wrapped around it.\nAccording to the Tibetan Buddhist and Bon tradition, spinning such a wheel will have much the same meritorious effect as orally reciting the prayers.\nNomenclature and etymology.\nThe Tibetan term is a contraction: \"\" itself is a contraction of Sanskrit \"cintamani\"; \"\" is Tibetan for \"dharma\"; and \" or \" means \"chakrano\".\nThe common term, \u201cprayer wheel\u201d is a double misnomer. A long strip of rolled-up paper bearing printed or inscribed mantras rather than prayers, per se, is inside the cylinder. The term \u201cmantra mill\u201d, in contrast to \u201cprayer wheel\u201d, is perhaps a better translation of the Tibetan , since a \"mill\" refers to a turning process that generates a particular output, in this case generating merit.\nOrigins and history.\nThe first prayer wheels, which are driven by wind, have been used in Tibet and China since the fourth century. The concept of the prayer wheel is a physical manifestation of the phrase \"turning the wheel of Dharma\", which describes the way in which the Buddha taught.\nHistorians, such as Ferdinand D. Lessing, have argued that the prayer wheels developed from Chinese revolving bookcases (), popular among Buddhist monasteries.\nAccording to the Tibetan tradition, the prayer wheel lineage traces back to the famous Indian master, Nagarjuna. Tibetan texts also say that the practice was taught by the Indian Buddhist masters Tilopa and Naropa as well as the Tibetan masters Marpa and Milarepa. Kawaguchi mentions in his book that the prayer wheel originated in the Mani Lhakhang where Je Tsongkhapa invented it.\nPrayer wheels originated from \u2018The School of Shakyamuni sutra, volume 3 \u2013 pagoda and temple\u2019 which states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cthose who set up the place for worship, use the knowledge to propagate the dharma to common people, should there be any man or woman who are illiterate and unable to read the sutra, they should then set up the prayer wheel to facilitate those illiterate to chant the sutra, and the effect is the same as reading the sutra\u201d\nAnother theory is that rotating mantras relate to numerous yogic or Tantric practices whereby the Tantric practitioner visualizes the mantra revolving around his or her nadis and especially around the meridian chakras such as the heart and crown. The prayer wheels are a visual aid for developing the capacity for these types of Tantric visualizations.\nPractice.\nAccording to the lineage texts on prayer wheels, prayer wheels are used to accumulate wisdom and merit (good karma) and to purify negativities (bad karma). In Buddhism, Buddhas and Bodhisattvas have created a variety of skillful means (upaya) to help bring practitioners ever closer to realizing enlightenment. The idea of spinning mantras relates to numerous Tantric practices whereby the Tantric practitioner visualizes mantras revolving around the nadis and especially around the meridian chakras such as the heart and crown. Therefore, prayer wheels are a visual aid for developing one's capacity for these types of Tantric visualizations.\nThe spiritual method for those practicing with a prayer wheel is very specific (with slight variations according to different Buddhist sects). The practitioner most often spins the wheel clockwise, as the direction in which the mantras are written is that of the movement of the sun across the sky. On rare occasions, advanced Tantric practitioners such as those of Senge Dongma, the Lion-Faced Dakini, spin prayer wheels counterclockwise to manifest a more wrathful protective energy. As the practitioner turns the wheel, it is best to focus the mind and repeat the Om Mani Padme Hum mantra. Not only does this increase the merit earned by the wheel's use, but it is a mind-stabilization technique that trains the mind while the body is in motion. Intoning the mani mantra with mindfulness and the \"Bodhicitta\" motivation dramatically enhances the effects of the prayer wheel. However, it is said that even turning it while distracted has benefits and merits, and it is stated in the lineage text that even insects that cross a prayer wheel's shadow will get some benefit. Each revolution is as meritorious as reading the inscription aloud as many times as it is written on the scroll, and this means that the more Om Mani Padme Hum mantras that are inside a prayer wheel, the more powerful it is. It is best to turn the wheel with a gentle rhythm and not too fast or frantically. While turning smoothly, one keeps in mind the motivation and spirit of compassion and \"bodhichitta\" (the noble mind that aspires to full enlightenment for the benefit of all beings).\nThe benefits attributed to the practice of turning the wheel are vast. Not only does it help wisdom, compassion and bodhichitta arise in the practitioner, it also enhances siddhis (spiritual powers such as clairvoyance, precognition, reading others thoughts, etc.).The practitioner can repeat the mantra as many times as possible during the turning of the wheel, stabilizing a calm, meditative mind. At the end of a practice session, there is a Tibetan Buddhist tradition of dedicating any accumulated merits that one may have gathered during practice to the benefit of all sentient beings. Then Om Ah Hum 3 times. This is customary with Tibetans upon completing any Buddhist practice, including the practice of the prayer wheel.\nThubten Zopa Rinpoche has commented that installing a prayer wheel has the capacity to completely transform a place, which becomes \"...peaceful, pleasant, and conducive to the mind.\"\nSimply touching a prayer wheel is said to bring great purification to negative karmas and obscurations.\nTypes.\nHuman-powered.\nHandheld wheels.\nThe handheld prayer wheel () has a cylindrical, generally sheet-metal body (often beautifully embossed) mounted on a metal shaft or pin set into a wooden or metal handle that turns on a circular bearing commonly made of \"Turbinella\" (conch) shell. The cylinder itself is affixed with a cord or chain terminating in a small weight allowing it to be spun by a slight rotation of the wrist. The weighted chain, known as a \u201cgovernor\u201d in Western technology, stabilizes the wheel and keeps it spinning with less input from the practitioner than would otherwise be the case. When the prayer wheel is spun in prayer, the mantras inside become potent with the person's intent, allowing the practitioner to accumulate wisdom and merit.\nLarge wheels.\nPrayer wheels larger than human size are to be seen in separate rooms in Tibetan Buddhist temples and can be set in motion by pilgrims. With the help of a small bell the number of revolutions can be counted. The cylinders of fixed prayer wheels are often inscribed with the formula \u201cOm mani padme hum\u201d (meaning \u201cjewel in the lotus\u201d) in ornamental Lantsa (Ranjana) letters.\nRow installations.\nMany monasteries around Tibet have large, fixed, metal wheels set side by side in a row. Passersby can turn the entire row of wheels simply by sliding their hands over each one. They are set in motion by pilgrims who circumambulate the building in a clockwise direction.\nPowered by other means.\nWater wheels.\nThis type of prayer wheel is simply a prayer wheel that is turned by flowing water. The water that is touched by the wheel is said to become blessed and carries its purifying power into all life forms in the oceans and lakes that it feeds into.\nFire wheels.\nThis wheel is turned by the heat of a candle or electric light. The light emitted from the prayer wheel then purifies the negative karmas of the living beings it touches.\nWind wheels.\nThis type of wheel is turned by wind. The wind that touches the prayer wheel helps alleviate the negative karma of those it touches.\nElectric dharma wheels.\nSome prayer wheels are powered by electric motors. , as these electric wheels are sometimes known, contain one thousand copies of the mantra of Chenrezig and many copies of other mantras. The can be accompanied by lights and music if one so chooses.\nElectricity can certainly be considered similar to the above sources of energy for PW (water, fire, wind). The merit generated by the PW is due to the power of the Dharma Texts and Mantras; not necessarily the \"power\" which rotates them. These PW turn all day, all night, all through the year. The Lamas and practitioners who build, maintain and pay for the electricity rightly help to generate and dedicate the merit.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25126", "revid": "50495242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25126", "title": "Postage stamp", "text": "Piece of paper which shows payment for postage\nA postage stamp is a small piece of paper issued by a post office, postal administration, or other authorized vendors to customers who pay postage (the cost involved in moving, insuring, or registering mail). Then the stamp is affixed to the face or address-side of any item of mail\u2014an envelope or other postal cover (e.g., packet, box, mailing cylinder)\u2014which they wish to send. The item is then processed by the postal system, where a postmark or cancellation mark\u2014in modern usage indicating date and point of origin of mailing\u2014is applied to the stamp and its left and right sides to prevent its reuse. Next the item is delivered to its address.\nAlways featuring the name of the issuing nation (with the exception of the United Kingdom), a denomination of its value, and often an illustration of persons, events, institutions, or natural realities that symbolize the nation's traditions and values, every stamp is printed on a piece of usually rectangular, but sometimes triangular or otherwise shaped special custom-made paper whose back is either glazed with an adhesive gum or self-adhesive.\nBecause governments issue stamps of different denominations in unequal numbers and routinely discontinue some lines and introduce others, and because of their illustrations and association with the social and political realities of the time of their issue, they are often prized for their beauty and historical significance by stamp collectors, whose study of their history and of mailing systems is called philately. Because collectors often buy stamps from an issuing agency with no intention to use them for postage, the revenues from such purchases and payments of postage can make them a source of net profit to that agency. On 1 May 1840, Sir Rowland Hill invented the Penny Black, the first adhesive postage stamp issued in the United Kingdom, selecting a simple design that showed Queen Victoria's profile. The artist Henry Corbould drew her image, basing his work on a medal by William Wyon. Perkins, Bacon &amp; Petch, a leading security printing firm printed the stamp. Within three years postage stamps were introduced in Switzerland and Brazil, a little later in the United States, and by 1860, they were in 90 countries around the world. The first postage stamps did not need to show the issuing country, so no country name was included on them. Thus the United Kingdom remains the only country in the world to omit its name on postage stamps; the monarch's image signifies the United Kingdom as the country of origin.\nInvention.\nThroughout modern history numerous methods were used to indicate that postage had been paid on a mailed item, so several different men have received credit for inventing the postage stamp.\nWilliam Dockwra.\nIn April 1680, William Dockwra, an English searcher at the customs-house in London, and his partner Robert Murray established the London Penny Post. The LPP was a mail system that delivered letters and small parcels up to a pound in weight and \u00a310 in value inside the city of London for the sum of one penny. Confirmation of paid postage was indicated by the use of a hand \"stamp\" to frank the mailed item. Though this \"stamp\" was applied to the letter or parcel itself, rather than to a separate piece of paper, it is considered by many historians to be the world's first postage stamp.\nLovrenc Ko\u0161ir.\nIn 1835, the civil servant Lovrenc Ko\u0161ir from Ljubljana in Austria-Hungary (now Slovenia), suggested the use of \"artificially affixed postal tax stamps\" using \"gepresste Papieroblate\" (\"pressed paper wafers\"), but although civil bureaucrats considered the suggestion in detail, it was not adopted. The 'Papieroblate' were to produce stamps as paper decals so thin as to prevent their reuse.\nRowland Hill.\nIn 1836, Robert Wallace, a Member of (British) Parliament, gave Sir Rowland Hill numerous books and documents about the postal service, which Hill described as a \"half hundred weight of material\". After a detailed study, on 4 January 1837 Hill submitted a pamphlet entitled \"Post Office Reform: Its Importance and Practicability\" to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Thomas Spring Rice, which was marked \"private and confidential\", and not released to the general public. The Chancellor summoned Hill to a meeting at which he suggested improvements and changes to be presented in a supplement, which Hill duly produced and submitted on 28 January 1837. Hill wrote \"Post Office Reform\" while he served as secretary of the South Australian Colonization Commission. The colonization of South Australia roughly followed Edward Gibbon Wakefield's scheme of colonization which emphasized the uniform pricing of land, and Wakefield's ideas influenced Hill's argument for the uniform pricing of postal rates. \nSummoned to give evidence before the Commission for Post Office Enquiry on 13 February 1837, Hill read from the letter he wrote to the Chancellor that included a statement saying that the notation of paid postage could be created... \"by using a bit of paper just large enough to bear the stamp, and covered at the back with a glutinous wash...\" This would eventually become the first unambiguous description of a modern adhesive postage stamp (though the term \"postage stamp\" originated at a later date). Shortly afterward, Hill's revision of the booklet, dated 22 February 1837, containing some 28,000 words, incorporating the supplement given to the Chancellor and statements he made to the commission, was published and made available to the general public. Hansard records that on 15 December 1837, Benjamin Hawes asked the Chancellor of the Exchequer \"whether it was the intention of the Government to give effect to the recommendation of the Commissioners of the Post-office, contained in their ninth report relating to the reduction of the rates of postage, and the issuing of penny stamps?\"\nHill's ideas for postage stamps and charging paid-postage based on weight soon took hold, and were adopted in many countries throughout the world. With the new policy of charging by weight, using envelopes for mailing documents became the norm. Hill's brother Edwin invented a prototype envelope-making machine that folded paper into envelopes quickly enough to match the pace of the growing demand for postage stamps.\nRowland Hill and the reforms he introduced to the United Kingdom postal system appear on several of its commemorative stamps.\nJames Chalmers.\nIn the 1881 book \"The Penny Postage Scheme of 1837\", Scotsman Patrick Chalmers claimed that his father, James Chalmers, published an essay in August 1834 describing and advocating a postage stamp, but submitted no evidence of the essay's existence. Nevertheless, until he died in 1891, Patrick Chalmers campaigned to have his father recognized as the inventor of the postage stamp.\nThe first independent evidence for Chalmers' claim is an essay, dated 8 February 1838 and received by the Post Office on 17 February 1838, in which he proposed adhesive postage stamps to the General Post Office. In this approximately 800-word document concerning methods of indicating that postage had been paid on mail he states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Therefore, of Mr Hill's plan of a uniform rate of postage... I conceive that the most simple and economical mode... would be by Slips... in the hope that Mr Hill's plan may soon be carried into operation I would suggest that sheets of Stamped Slips should be prepared... then be rubbed over on the back with a strong solution of gum...\nChalmers' original document is now in the United Kingdom's National Postal Museum.\nSince Chalmers used the same postage denominations that Hill had proposed in February 1837, it is clear that he was aware of Hill's proposals, but whether he obtained a copy of Hill's booklet or simply read about it in one or both of the two detailed accounts (25 March 1837 and 20 December 1837) published in \"The Times\" is unknown. Neither article mentioned \"a bit of paper just large enough to bear the stamp\", so Chalmers could not have known that Hill had made such a proposal. This suggests that either Chalmers had previously read Hill's booklet and was merely elaborating Hill's idea, or he had independently developed the idea of the modern postage stamp.\nJames Chalmers organized petitions \"for a low and uniform rate of postage\". The first such petition was presented in the House of Commons on 4 December 1837 (from Montrose). Further petitions which he organized were presented on 1 May 1838 (from Dunbar and Cupar), 14 May 1838 (from the county of Forfar), and 12 June 1839. At this same time, other groups organized petitions and presented them to Parliament. All petitions for consumer-oriented, low-cost, volume-based postal rates followed publication of Hill's proposals.\nOther claimants.\nOther claimants include or have included\nHistory.\nThe nineteenth century.\nPostage stamps have facilitated the delivery of mail since the 1840s. Before then, ink and hand-stamps (hence the word 'stamp'), usually made from wood or cork, were often used to frank the mail and confirm the payment of postage. The first adhesive postage stamp, commonly referred to as the Penny Black, was issued in the United Kingdom in 1840. The invention of the stamp was part of an attempt to improve the postal system in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, which, in the early 19th century, was in disarray and rife with corruption. There are varying accounts of the inventor or inventors of the stamp.\nBefore the introduction of postage stamps, mail in the United Kingdom was paid for by the recipient, a system that was associated with an irresolvable problem: the costs of delivering mail were not recoverable by the postal service when recipients were unable or unwilling to pay for delivered items, and senders had no incentive to restrict the number, size, or weight of items sent, whether or not they would ultimately be paid for. The postage stamp resolved this issue in a simple and elegant manner, with the additional benefit of room for an element of beauty to be introduced. Concurrently with the first stamps, the United Kingdom offered wrappers for mail. Later related inventions include postal stationery such as prepaid-postage envelopes, post cards, lettercards, aerogrammes, and postage meters.\nThe postage stamp afforded convenience for both the mailer and postal officials, more effectively recovered costs for the postal service, and ultimately resulted in a better, faster postal system. With the conveniences stamps offered, their use resulted in greatly increased mailings during the 19th and 20th centuries. Postage stamps released during this era were the most popular way of paying for mail; however by the end of the 20th century were rapidly being eclipsed by the use of metered postage and bulk mailing by businesses.\nAs postage stamps with their engraved imagery began to appear on a widespread basis, historians and collectors began to take notice. The study of postage stamps and their use is referred to as philately. Stamp collecting can be both a hobby and a form of historical study and reference, as government-issued postage stamps and their mailing systems have always been involved with the history of nations.\nAlthough a number of people laid claim to the concept of the postage stamp, it is well documented that stamps were first introduced in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland on 1 May 1840 as a part of postal reforms promoted by Sir Rowland Hill. With its introduction the postage fee was paid by the sender and not the recipient, though it was still possible to send mail without prepaying. From when the first postage stamps were used, postmarks were applied to prevent the stamps being used again.\nThe first stamp, the \"Penny Black\", became available for purchase 1 May 1840, to be valid as of 6 May 1840. Two days later, 8 May 1840, the Two Penny Blue was introduced. The Penny Black was sufficient for a letter less than half an ounce to be sent anywhere within the United Kingdom. Both stamps included an engraving of the young Queen Victoria, without perforations, as the first stamps were separated from their sheets by cutting them with scissors.\nThe first stamps did not need to show the issuing country, so no country name was included on them. The United Kingdom remains the only country to omit its name on postage stamps, using the reigning monarch's head as country identification. Following the introduction of the postage stamp in the United Kingdom, prepaid postage considerably increased the number of letters mailed. Before 1839, the number of letters sent in the United Kingdom was typically 76 million. By 1850, this increased five-fold to 350 million, continuing to grow rapidly until the end of the 20th century when newer methods of indicating the payment of postage reduced the use of stamps.\nOther countries soon followed the United Kingdom with their own stamps. The canton of Z\u00fcrich in Switzerland issued the Z\u00fcrich 4 and 6 rappen on 1 March 1843. Although the Penny black could be used to send a letter less than half an ounce anywhere within the United Kingdom, the Swiss did not initially adopt that system, instead continuing to calculate mail rates based on distance to be delivered. Brazil issued the Bull's Eye stamp on 1 August 1843. Using the same printer used for the Penny Black, Brazil opted for an abstract design instead of the portrait of Emperor Pedro II, so his image would not be disfigured by a postmark.\nIn 1845, some postmasters in the United States issued their own stamps, but it was not until 1847 that the first official United States stamps were issued: 5 and 10 cent issues depicting Benjamin Franklin and George Washington. A few other countries issued stamps in the late 1840s. The famous Mauritius \"Post Office\" stamps were issued by Mauritius in September 1847. Many others, such as India, started their use in the 1850s, and by the 1860s most countries issued stamps.\nPerforation of postage stamps began in January 1854. The first officially perforated stamps were issued in February 1854. Stamps from Henry Archer's perforation trials were issued in the last few months of 1850; during the 1851 parliamentary session at the House of Commons of the United Kingdom; and finally in 1853/54 after the United Kingdom government paid Archer \u00a34,000 for his machine and the patent.\nThe Universal Postal Union, established in 1874, prescribed that nations shall only issue postage stamps according to the quantity of real use, and no living persons shall be taken as subjects. The latter rule lost its significance after World War I.\nThe twentieth and twenty-first centuries.\nAfter World War II, it became customary in some countries, especially small Arab nations, to issue postage stamps \"en masse\" as it was realized how profitable that was.\nDuring the 21st century, the amount of mail\u2014and the use of postage stamps, accordingly\u2014has reduced in the world because of electronic mail and other technological innovations. In 2013 the Netherlands PostNL introduced Postzegelcodes, a nine-character alphanumeric code that is written as a 3x3 grid on the piece of mail as an alternative to stamps. \nIn December 2020, 590,000 people sent cards with these handwritten codes.\nDesign.\nWhen the first postage stamps were issued in the 1840s, they followed an almost identical standard in shape, size and general subject matter. They were rectangular in shape. They bore the images of queens, presidents and other political figures. They also depicted the denomination of the postage-paid, and with the exception of the United Kingdom, depicted the name of the country from which issued. Nearly all early postage stamps depict images of national leaders only.\nSoon after the introduction of the postage stamp, other subjects and designs began to appear. Some designs were welcome, others widely criticized. For example, in 1869, the United States Post Office broke the tradition of depicting presidents or other famous historical figures, instead using other subjects including a train and horse.(See: 1869 Pictorial Issue.) The change was greeted with general disapproval, and sometimes harsh criticism from the American public.\nPerforations.\nPerforations are small holes made between individual postage stamps on a sheet of stamps, facilitating separation of a desired number of stamps. The resulting frame-like, rippled edge surrounding the separated stamp defines a characteristic meme for the appearance of a postage stamp.\nIn the first decade of postage stamps' existence (depending on the country), stamps were issued without perforations. Scissors or other cutting mechanisms were required to separate a desired number of stamps from a full sheet. If cutting tools were not used, individual stamps were torn off. This is evidenced by the ragged edges of surviving examples. Mechanically separating stamps from a sheet proved an inconvenience for postal clerks and businesses, both dealing with large numbers of individual stamps on a daily basis. By 1850, methods such as rouletting wheels were being devised in efforts of making stamp separation more convenient, and less time-consuming.\nThe United Kingdom was the first country to issue postage stamps with perforations. The first machine specifically designed to perforate sheets of postage stamps was invented in London by Henry Archer, an Irish landowner and railroad man from Dublin, Ireland. The 1850 Penny Red was the first stamp to be perforated during trial course of Archer's perforating machine. After a period of trial and error and modifications of Archer's invention, new machines based on the principles pioneered by Archer were purchased and in 1854 the United Kingdom postal authorities started continuously issuing perforated postage stamps in the Penny Red and all subsequent designs.\nIn the United States, the use of postage stamps caught on quickly and became more widespread when on 3 March 1851, the last day of its legislative session, Congress passed the \"Act of March 3, 1851\" (\"An Act to reduce and modify the Rates of Postage in the United States\"). Similarly introduced on the last day of the Congressional session four years later, the \"Act of March 3, 1855\" required the prepayment of postage on all mailings. Thereafter, postage stamp use in the United States quickly doubled, and by 1861 had quadrupled.\nIn 1856, under the direction of Postmaster General James Campbell, Toppan and Carpenter, (\"commissioned by the United States government to print United States postage stamps through the 1850s\") purchased a rotary machine designed to separate stamps, patented in England in 1854 by William and Henry Bemrose, who were printers in Derby, England. The original machine cut slits into the paper rather than punching holes, but the machine was soon modified.\nThe first stamp issue to be officially perforated, the 3-cent George Washington, was issued by the United States Post Office on 24 February 1857. Between 1857 and 1861, all stamps originally issued between 1851 and 1856 were reissued with perforations. Initial capacity was insufficient to perforate all stamps printed, thus perforated issues used between February and July 1857 are scarce and quite valuable.\nShapes and materials.\nIn addition to the most common rectangular shape, stamps have been issued in geometric (circular, triangular and pentagonal) and irregular shapes. The United States issued its first circular stamp in 2000 as a hologram of the Earth. Sierra Leone and Tonga have issued stamps in the shapes of fruit. Stamps that are printed on sheets are generally separated by perforations, though, more recently, with the advent of gummed stamps that do not have to be moistened prior to affixing them, designs can incorporate smooth edges (although a purely decorative perforated edge is often present).\nStamps are most commonly made from paper designed specifically for them, and are printed in sheets, rolls, or small booklets. Less commonly, postage stamps are made of materials other than paper, such as embossed foil (sometimes of gold). Switzerland made a stamp that contained a bit of lace and one of wood. The United States produced one of plastic. East Germany issued a stamp of synthetic chemicals. In the Netherlands a stamp was made of silver foil. Bhutan issued one with its national anthem on a playable record.\nGraphic characteristics.\nThe subjects found on the face of postage stamps are generally what defines a particular stamp issue to the public and are often a reason why they are saved by collectors or history enthusiasts. Graphical subjects found on postage stamps have ranged from the early portrayals of kings, queens and presidents to later depictions of ships, birds and satellites, famous people, historical events, comics, dinosaurs, hobbies (knitting, stamp collecting), sports, holiday themes, and a plethora of other subjects too numerous to list.\nArtists, designers, engravers and administrative officials are involved with the choice of subject matter and the method of printing stamps. Early stamp images were almost always produced from an engraving\u2014a design etched into a steel die, which was then hardened and whose impression was transferred to a printing plate. Using an \"engraved\" image was deemed a more secure way of printing stamps as it was nearly impossible to counterfeit a finely detailed image with raised lines for anyone but a master engraver. In the mid-20th century, stamp issues produced by other forms of printing began to emerge, such as lithography, photogravure, intaglio and web offset printing. These later printing methods were less expensive and typically produced images of lesser quality.\nScents.\nOccasionally, postal authorities issue novelty \"scented\" or \"aromatic\" stamps which contain a scent, more readily apparent when rubbed. The effect is achieved by using ink which contains microcapsules that provide the desired fragrance when broken. The scent usually only lasts for a limited time after production, such as a few months or years. Such stamps are usually related to aromatic subjects including coffee, roses, grapes, chocolate, vanilla, cinnamon, pine needles or freshly baked bread. The first scented stamps were issued by Bhutan in 1973.\nTypes.\nApart from these, there are also revenue stamps (used to collect taxes or fees on items like documents, tobacco, alcoholic drinks, hunting licenses, and medicines) and telegraph stamps (for sending telegrams), which fall in a separate category from postage stamps.\nFirst day covers.\nPostage stamps are first issued on a specific date, often referred to as the \"First day of issue.\" A \"first day cover\" usually consists of an envelope, a postage stamp and a postmark with the date of the stamp's first day of issue thereon. Starting in the mid-20th century some countries began assigning the first day of issue to a place associated with the subject of the stamp design, such as a specific town or city. There are two basic types of \"First Day Covers\" (FDCs) noted by collectors. The first and often most desirable type among advanced collectors is a cover sent through the mail in the course of everyday usage, without the intention of the envelope and stamp ever being retrieved and collected. The second type of FDC is often referred to as \"Philatelic\", that is, an envelope and stamp sent by someone with the intention of retrieving and collecting the mailed item at a later time and place. The envelope used for this type of FDC often bears a printed design or cachet of its own in correspondence with the stamp's subject and is usually printed well in advance of the first day of issue date. The latter type of FDC is usually far more common; it is usually inexpensive and relatively easy to acquire. Covers which were sent without any secondary purpose are considered \"non-philatelic\" and often are much more challenging to find and collect.\nSouvenir or miniature sheets.\nPostage stamps are sometimes issued in souvenir sheets or miniature sheets containing one or a small number of stamps. Souvenir sheets typically include additional artwork or information printed on the selvage, the border surrounding the stamps. Sometimes the stamps make up a greater picture. Some countries, and some issues, are produced as individual stamps as well as sheets.\nStamp collecting.\nStamp collecting is a hobby. Collecting is not the same as philately, which is defined as the study of stamps. The creation of a valuable or comprehensive collection, however, may require some philatelic knowledge.\nStamp collectors are an important source of revenue for some small countries that create limited runs of elaborate stamps designed mainly to be bought by stamp collectors. The stamps produced by these countries may far exceed their postal needs. Hundreds of countries, each producing scores of different stamps each year, resulted in 400,000 different types of stamps in existence by 2000. Annual world output averages about 10,000 types.\nSome countries authorize the production of postage stamps that have no postal use, but are intended instead solely for collectors. Other countries issue large numbers of low denomination stamps that are bundled together in starter packs for new collectors. \"Official reprints\" are often printed by companies who have purchased or contracted for those rights and such reprints see no postal use. All of these stamps are often found \"canceled to order\", meaning they are postmarked without ever having passed through the postal system. Most national post offices produce stamps that would not be produced if there were no collectors, some to a far more prolific degree than others.\nSales of stamps to collectors who do not use them for mailing can result in large profits. Examples of excessive issues have been the stamps produced by Nicholas F. Seebeck and stamps produced for the component states of the United Arab Emirates. Seebeck operated in the 1890s as an agent of Hamilton Bank Note Company. He approached Latin American countries with an offer to produce their entire postage stamp needs for free. In return. he would have exclusive rights to market stamps to collectors. Each year a new issue would be produced, but would expire at the end of the year. This assured Seebeck of a continuing supply of remainders. In the 1960s, printers such as the Barody Stamp Company contracted to produce stamps for the separate Emirates and other countries. The sparse population of the desert states made it wholly unlikely that many of these stamps would ever be used for mailing purposes, and earned them the name of the \"sand dune\" countries.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25127", "revid": "32798152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25127", "title": "Pavo", "text": "Pavo may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "25130", "revid": "26637801", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25130", "title": "Ponte Vecchio", "text": "Bridge in Florence, Italy\nThe Ponte Vecchio (; \"Old Bridge\") is a medieval stone closed-spandrel segmental arch bridge over the Arno, in Florence, Italy. The only bridge in Florence spared from destruction during World War II, it is noted for the shops built along it; building shops on such bridges was once a common practice. Butchers, tanners, and farmers initially occupied the shops; the present tenants are jewellers, art dealers, and souvenir sellers. The Ponte Vecchio's two neighbouring bridges are the Ponte Santa Trinita and the Ponte alle Grazie.\nThe bridge connects Via Por Santa Maria (Lungarno degli Acciaiuoli and Lungarno degli Archibusieri) to Via de' Guicciardini (Borgo San Jacopo and Via de' Bardi).\nThe name was given to what was the oldest Florentine bridge when the Ponte alla Carraia was built, then called in contrast to the old one. Beyond the historical value, the bridge over time has played a central role in the city road system, starting from when it connected the Roman Florentia with the Via Cassia Nova commissioned by the emperor Hadrian in 123 AD.\nIn contemporary times, despite being closed to vehicular traffic, the bridge is crossed by a considerable pedestrian flow generated both by its fame and by the fact that it connects places of high tourist interest on the two banks of the river: Piazza del Duomo, Piazza della Signoria on one side with the area of Palazzo Pitti and Santo Spirito in the Oltrarno.\nThe bridge appears in the list drawn up in 1901 by the General Directorate of Antiquities and Fine Arts, as a monumental building to be considered having national artistic heritage.\nHistory and construction.\nThe bridge spans the Arno at its narrowest point where it is believed that a bridge was first built in Roman times, when the via Cassia crossed the river at this point. The Roman piers were of stone, the superstructure of wood. The bridge first appears in a document of 996 and was destroyed by a flood in 1117 and reconstructed in stone. In 1218 the Ponte alla Carraia, a wooden structure, was established nearby which led to it being referred to as \"Ponte Nuovo\" relative to the older (Vecchio) structure. It was swept away again in 1333 except for two of its central piers, as noted by Giovanni Villani in his \"Nuova Cronica\". It was rebuilt in 1345.\nThis location marks one of the earliest crossings of the Arno in Florence, possibly originating from Roman times or even before. Although floods have repeatedly damaged it, the current bridge has stood since approximately 1339-1345. For many years, the only older bridge in the city was the Rubaconte bridge, built nearly a century earlier. But after significant 19th-century modifications to that structure and its destruction in 1944, the Ponte Vecchio claimed its title as the oldest bridge in Florence.\nGiorgio Vasari recorded the traditional view of his day that attributed its design to Taddeo Gaddi\u2014 besides Giotto one of the few artistic names of the trecento still recalled two hundred years later. Modern historians present Neri di Fioravanti as a possible candidate as the builder.\nSheltered in a little loggia at the central opening of the bridge is a weathered dedication stone, which once read \"Nel trentatr\u00e8 dopo il mille-trecento, il ponte cadde, per diluvio dell' acque: poi dieci anni, come al Comun piacque, rifatto fu con questo adornamento\". The Torre dei Mannelli was built at the southeast corner of the bridge to defend it.\nThe bridge consists of three segmental arches: the main arch has a span of , and the two side arches each span . The rise of the arches is between 3.5 and 4.4 metres (11\u00bd to 14\u00bd feet), and the span-to-rise ratio is 5:1. The shallow segmental arches, which require fewer piers than the semicircular arch traditionally used by Romans, enabled ease of access and navigation for animal-drawn carts. Another notable design element is the large piazza at the center of the bridge that Leon Battista Alberti described as a prominent ornament in the city.\nA stone with an inscription from Dante (\"Paradiso\" xvi. 140-7) records the spot at the entrance to the bridge where Buondelmonte de' Buondelmonti was murdered by the Amidei clan in 1215, which began the urban fighting of the Guelfs and Ghibellines.\nThe bridge has always hosted shops and merchants who displayed their goods on tables before their premises, after authorization by the Bargello (a sort of a lord mayor, a magistrate and a police authority).\nLater additions and changes.\nIn order to connect the Palazzo Vecchio (Florence's town hall) with the Palazzo Pitti, in 1565 Cosimo I de' Medici had Giorgio Vasari build the Vasari Corridor, part of which runs above the Ponte Vecchio.\nTo enhance the prestige and clean up the bridge, a decree was made in 1565 that excluded butchers from this bridge (only goldsmiths and jewellers are allowed) that is in effect to this day. The association of butchers had monopolized the shops on the bridge since 1442.\nThe back shops (\"retrobotteghe\") that may be seen from upriver were added in the seventeenth century.\n20th century.\nIn 1900, to honour and mark the fourth century of the birth of the great Florentine sculptor and master goldsmith Benvenuto Cellini, the leading goldsmiths of the bridge commissioned the Florentine sculptor, Raffaello Romanelli, to create a bronze bust of Cellini to stand atop a fountain in the middle of the Eastern side of the bridge, where it stands to this day.\nDuring World War II, the Ponte Vecchio was not destroyed by the German army during their retreat at the advance of the British 8th Army on 4 August 1944, unlike all the other bridges in Florence. This was, according to many locals and tour guides, because of an express order by Hitler. Access to the Ponte Vecchio was, however, obstructed by the destruction of the buildings at both ends of the bridge, which have since been rebuilt using a combination of original and modern designs.\nThe bridge was severely damaged in the 1966 flood of the Arno.\nBetween 2005 and 2006, 5,500 padlocks, known as love locks, which were attached to the railings around the bust of Cellini, were removed by the city council. According to the council, the padlocks were aesthetically displeasing and damaged the bust and its railings. There is now a fine for attaching love locks to the bridge.\nAn announcement in April 2024 stated that work would be completed on the bridge, including a cleaning, an upgrade of the replacement joints previously installed, strengthening of the stone and restoration of the footpath's stone.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25132", "revid": "30395827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25132", "title": "Player killer", "text": ""}
{"id": "25133", "revid": "32860082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25133", "title": "Porto Ottiolu", "text": "Marina in Province of Sassari, Sardinia\nPorto Ottiolu is a private marina and a tourist destination located in the comune of Budoni, Province of Sassari, Sardinia, Italy, on Tyrrhenian Sea, about 35\u00a0km south of Olbia.\nOverview.\nIt was built in 1988 in the place in where was once the ancient Roman port of \"Portiolum,\" and after its immediate success, a huge village was built around it with the same name.\nThe marina can host 405 boats in 8 classes and has complete services. It is the largest marina of the East coast of Sardinia.\nIn its waters, apneist diver Gianluca Genoni repeatedly scored new world records.\nOther activities include fishing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25134", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25134", "title": "Peenem\u00fcnde Army Research Center", "text": "Research center under Nazi Germany\nThe Peenem\u00fcnde Army Research Center (, HVP) was founded in 1937 as one of five military proving grounds under the German Army Weapons Office (\"Heereswaffenamt\"). Several German guided missiles and rockets of World War II were developed by the HVP, including the V-2 rocket. The works were attacked by the British in Operation Crossbow from August 1943, before falling to the Soviets in May 1945.\nHistory.\nOn April 2, 1936, the aviation ministry paid 750,000 reichsmarks to the town of Wolgast for the whole Northern peninsula of the Baltic island of Usedom. By the middle of 1938, the Army facility had been separated from the Luftwaffe facility and was nearly complete, with personnel moved from Kummersdorf. The Army Research Center (\"Peenem\u00fcnde Ost\") consisted of \"Werk Ost\" and \"Werk S\u00fcd\", while \"Werk West\" (Peenem\u00fcnde West) was the Luftwaffe Test Site (), one of the four test and research facilities of the Luftwaffe, with its headquarters facility at \"Erprobungsstelle Rechlin\".\nHVP organization.\nMajor-General Walter Dornberger was the military leader of the V-2 rocket programme and other projects.\nWernher von Braun was the HVP technical director (Dr. Walter Thiel was deputy director until 1943) and there were nine major departments:\nThe Measurements Group (Gerhard Reisig) was part of the BSM, and additional departments included the Production Planning Directorate (Detmar Stahlknecht), the Personnel Office (Richard Sundermeyer), and the Drawings Change Service. Erich Apel was head of a development department, Konrad Dannenberg was Walter Riedel's deputy, Kurt H. Debus was engineer in charge at Test Stand VII, and Eberhard Rees managed V-2 rocket fabrication and assembly.\nGuided missile and rocket development.\nSeveral German guided missiles and rockets of World War II were developed by the HVP, including the V-2 rocket (A-4) (see test launches), and the Wasserfall (35 Peenem\u00fcnde trial firings), Schmetterling, Rheintochter, Taifun, and Enzian missiles. The HVP also performed preliminary design work on very-long-range missiles for use against the United States. That project was sometimes called \"V-3\" and its existence is well documented. The Peenem\u00fcnde establishment also developed other technologies such as the first closed-circuit television system in the world, installed at Test Stand VII to track the launching rockets.\nAccording to Walter Dornberger, \"Rockets worked under water.\" In the summer of 1942, led by Ernst Steinhoff, Pennem\u00fcnde worked on sea launches, either from launching racks on the deck of a submerged submarine, or from towed floats. Dornberger summarized the launches from a depth of 30 to 50 feet (9 to 15 metres), \"A staggering sight it was when those twenty heavy powder rockets suddenly rose, with a rush and a roar, from the calm waters of the Baltic.\"\nAerodynamic Institute.\nThe supersonic wind tunnel at Peenem\u00fcnde's \"Aerodynamic Institute\" eventually had nozzles for speeds up to the record speed of Mach 4.4 (in 1942 or 1943), as well as an innovative desiccant system to reduce the condensation clouding caused by the use of liquid oxygen, in 1940. Led by Rudolph Hermann, who arrived in April 1937 from the University of Aachen, the number of technical staff members reached two hundred in 1943, and it also included Hermann Kurzweg of the University of Leipzig and Walter Haeussermann.\nHeimat-Artillerie-Park 11.\nInitially set up under the HVP as a rocket training battery (Number 444), \"Heimat-Artillerie-Park 11 Karlshagen/Pomerania\" (HAP 11) also contained the A-A Research Command North for the testing of anti-aircraft rockets. The chemist Magnus von Braun, the youngest brother of Wernher von Braun, was employed in the attempted development at Peenem\u00fcnde of anti-aircraft rockets. These were never very successful as weapons during World War II. Their development as practical weapons took another decade of development in the United States and in the U.S.S.R.\nPeenem\u00fcnde V-2 production plant.\nIn November 1938, Walther von Brauchitsch ordered construction of an A-4 production plant at Peenem\u00fcnde, and in January 1939, Walter Dornberger created a subsection of Wa Pruf 11 for planning the Peenem\u00fcnde Production Plant project, headed by G. Schubert, a senior Army civil servant. By midsummer 1943, the first trial runs of the assembly-line in the Production Works at \"Werke S\u00fcd\" were made, but after the end of July 1943 when the enormous hangar \"Fertigungshalle 1\" (F-1, \"Mass Production Plant No. 1\") was just about to go into operation, Operation Hydra bombed Peenem\u00fcnde. On August 26, 1943, Albert Speer called a meeting with Hans Kammler, Dornberger, Gerhard Degenkolb, and Karl Otto Saur to negotiate the move of A-4 main production to an underground factory in the Harz mountains. In early September, Peenem\u00fcnde machinery and personnel for production (including Alban Sawatzki, Arthur Rudolph, and about ten engineers) were moved to the Mittelwerk, which also received machinery and personnel from the two other planned A-4 assembly sites. On October 13, 1943, the Peenem\u00fcnde prisoners from the small F-1 concentration camp boarded rail cars bound for Kohnstein mountain.\nOperation Crossbow.\nTwo Polish janitors of Peenem\u00fcnde's Camp Trassenheide in early 1943 provided maps, sketches and reports to Polish Home Army Intelligence, and in June 1943 British intelligence had received two such reports which identified the \"rocket assembly hall\", \"experimental pit\", and \"launching tower\". The Allies also received information about the V-1 and V-2 rockets and the production sites from the Austrian resistance group around the priest Heinrich Maier. The group later discovered by the Gestapo was in contact with Allen Dulles, the head of the US secret service OSS in Switzerland, and informed him about the research in Peenem\u00fcnde.\nAs the opening attack of the British Crossbow operations against German rocket weapons, the Operation Hydra bombing raid attacked the HVP's \"Sleeping &amp; Living Quarters\" (to specifically target scientists), then the \"Factory Workshops\", and finally the \"Experimental Station\" on the night of August 17/18, 1943. The Polish janitors were given advance warning of the attack, but the workers could not leave due to SS security and the facility had no air raid shelters for the prisoners. Fifteen British and Canadian airmen who were killed on the raid were buried by the Germans in unmarked graves within the secure perimeter. Their recovery at the end of the war was prevented by the Russians authorities and the bodies remain there to this day.\nA year later on July 18, August 4, and August 25, the U.S. Eighth Air Force conducted three additional Peenem\u00fcnde raids to counter suspected hydrogen peroxide production.\nEvacuation.\nAs with the move of the V-2 Production Works to the Mittelwerk, the complete withdrawal of the development of guided missiles was approved by the Army and SS in October 1943. On August 26, 1943, at a meeting in Albert Speer's office, Hans Kammler suggested moving the A-4 Development Works to a proposed underground site in Austria. After a site survey in September by Papa Riedel and Schubert, Kammler chose the code name Zement (\"cement\") for it in December, and work to blast a cavern into a cliff in Ebensee near Lake Traunsee commenced in January 1944. To build the tunnels, a concentration camp (a sub unit of Mauthausen-Gusen) was erected in the vicinity of the planned production sites. In early 1944, construction work started for the test stands and launching pads in the Austrian Alps (code name Salamander), with target areas planned for the Tatra Mountains, the Arlberg range, and the area of the Ortler mountain. Other evacuation locations included:\nFor people being relocated from Peenem\u00fcnde, the new organization was to be designated \"Entwicklungsgemeinschaft Mittelbau\" () and Kammler's order to relocate to Thuringia arrived by teleprinter on January 31, 1945. On February 3, 1945, at the last meeting at Peenem\u00fcnde held regarding the relocation, the HVP consisted of A-4 development/ modification (1940 people), A-4b development (27), Wasserfall and Taifun development (1455), support and administration (760). The first train departed on February 17 with 525 people en route to Thuringia (including Bleicherode, Sangerhausen (district), and Bad Sachsa) and the evacuation was complete in mid-March.\nAnother reaction to the aerial bombing was the creation of a back-up research test range, the Blizna V-2 missile launch site in southeastern Poland. Carefully camouflaged, this secret facility was built by 2000 prisoners from the concentration camp at the SS-Truppen\u00fcbungsplatz Heidelager. The Polish resistance Home Army (\"Armia Krajowa\") captured an intact V2 rocket here in 1943. It had been launched but didn't explode and was later retrieved intact from the Bug River and transferred secretly to London.\nPost-war.\nThe last V-2 launch at Peenem\u00fcnde happened in February 1945, and on May 5, 1945, the soldiers of the Soviet 2nd Belorussian Front under General Konstantin Rokossovsky captured the seaport of Swinem\u00fcnde and all of Usedom Island. Soviet infantrymen under the command of Major Anatole Vavilov stormed the installations at Peenem\u00fcnde and found \"75 percent wreckage\". All of the research buildings and rocket test stands had been demolished.\nEnd of April 1945, a group of more than 450 important rocket scientists from Peenem\u00fcnde were captured by the U.S. Army in Oberammergau while Wernher von Braun, Walter Dornberger and several others surrendered in Reutte on May 2, 1945. As part of Operation Paperclip, a group of 127 engineers was eventually contracted for the continuation of the work at the White Sands Proving Grounds in the USA. Only a few members of the previous HVP staff, such as Helmut Gr\u00f6ttrup and Erich Apel, signed a contract with the Soviets and were forcibly transferred to the USSR as part of Operation Osoaviakhim in October 1946.\nAlthough rumors spread that the Soviet space program revived Peenem\u00fcnde as a test range, more destruction of the technical facilities of Peenem\u00fcnde took place between 1948 and 1961. Only the power station, the airport, and the railroad link to Zinnowitz remained functional. The gas plant for the production of liquid oxygen still lies in ruins at the entrance to Peenem\u00fcnde. Very little remains of most of the other Nazi German facilities there.\nThe Peenem\u00fcnde Historical Technical Museum opened in 1992 in the shelter control room and the area of the former power station and is an anchor point of ERIH, the European Route of Industrial Heritage.\nThe main turbine hall of the Peenem\u00fcnde plant has been used a concert venue, including a 2022 performance by the New York Philharmonic orchestra and the Baltic Sea Philharmonic as part of the Usedom Classical Music Festival. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25135", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25135", "title": "Padstow", "text": "Town in Cornwall, England\nPadstow (; ) is a town, civil parish and fishing port on the north coast of Cornwall, England, United Kingdom. The town is situated on the west bank of the River Camel estuary, approximately northwest of Wadebridge, northwest of Bodmin and northeast of Newquay. As well as Padstow itself, the parish also includes the village of Trevone and surrounding rural areas. At the 2021 census the population of the parish was 2,669 and the population of the built up area was 2,298.\nThe geology of the low plateau west of Padstow has resulted in such features as Tregudda Gorge where erosion along the faultline has caused sheer cliffs to form; and Marble Cliffs which has alternating dark grey and light grey strata. The Round Hole is a collapsed sea cave.\nHistory.\nIn English, Padstow was originally named after \u00c6thelstan who was reported by John Leland to be 'chief governor of privileges onto it'. was commuted into , , or 'Petrock's Place', after the Welsh missionary Saint Petroc, who landed at Trebetherick around AD 500. After his death a monastery (Lanwethinoc, the church of Wethinoc, an earlier holy man) was established here which was of great importance until (probably Padstow) was raided by the Vikings in 981, according to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\". Whether as a result of this attack or later, the monks moved inland to Bodmin, taking with them the relics of St Petroc. The cult of St Petroc was important both in Padstow and Bodmin.\nPadstow is recorded in the \"Domesday Book\" (1086) when it was held by Bodmin Monastery. There was land for 4 ploughs, 5 villeins who had 2 ploughs, 6 smallholders and 24 acres of pasture. It was valued at 10 shillings (half of a pound sterling).\nIn the medieval period, Padstow was commonly called Aldestowe ('old place' in contrast to Bodmin, the 'new place'). or Hailemouth ( being Cornish for 'estuary'). The modern Cornish form derives from and in a simpler form appears in the name of the Lodenek Press, a publisher based in Padstow.\nPadstow had considerable importance in the middle ages as a manor belonging to Bodmin monastery and as the site of a safe haven (one of the few on the north coast). So it became a busy fishing port and the site of nine chapels in addition to the parish church. The manor was leased to the family of Prideaux by the last prior before the dissolution in Henry VIII's reign. The town prospered through trade with Ireland and the English and Welsh ports on the Bristol Channel. Later trade was the export of tin, copper, lead, slate, cured fish and dairy produce, as well as the importing of timber from Norway and Sweden, salt and wine from France, and hemp, iron and jute from Russia. The population in 1841 was 1,791.\nIn the first half of the 19th century it was a significant port of embarcation for emigrants, particular those bound for Canada. Later on a shipbuilding industry developed with five shipyards though by 1900 this had declined. The North Cornwall Railway reached Padstow in 1899, a large hotel was built and there was a revival of the fishing industry.\nThe seal of the borough of Padstow was a ship with three masts, the sails furled and an anchor hanging from the bow, with the legend \"Padstow\".\nThe TV archaeology programme \"Time Team\" filmed in Padstow for the episode \"From Constantinople to Cornwall,\" broadcast on 9 March 2008.\nThere are two Cornish crosses in the parish: one is built into a wall in the old vicarage garden and another is at Prideaux Place (consisting of a four-holed head and part of an ornamented cross shaft). There is also part of a decorated cross shaft in the churchyard.\nDuring World War II, in 1940, a single aircraft dropped some bombs on the town, one of which hit and demolished a terrace of houses in New Street, killing three.\nChurches.\nThe church of St Petroc is one of four said to have been founded by the saint, the others being Little Petherick (or St Petroc Minor), Parracombe and Bodmin. It is quite large and mostly of 13th- and 14th-century date. There is a fine 15th-century font of Catacleuse stone; the pulpit of c. 1530 is also of interest. There are two fine monuments to members of the Prideaux family (Sir \nNicholas, 1627. and Edmund, 1693): there is also a monumental brass of 1421. The benefice is a rectory: Padstow (St Petroc), St Merryn and St Issey with St Petroc Minor now form a group within the deanery of Pydar.\nGovernance.\nThere are two tiers of local government covering Padstow, and parish (town) and unitary authority level: Padstow Town Council and Cornwall Council. The town council is based at Station House, part of the former Padstow railway station.\nAdministrative history.\nPadstow was an ancient parish in the Pydarshire Hundred of Cornwall. In 1583 the town was incorporated as a borough, but its borough status later lapsed.\nIn 1866 a Padstow local government district was established which just covered the town itself. It was administered by an elected local board. Such districts were reconstituted as urban districts under the Local Government Act 1894. The 1894 Act also directed that civil parishes could no longer straddle district boundaries, and so the part of Padstow parish outside the urban district became a separate parish called Padstow Rural. Padstow Urban District was enlarged in 1934 to take in the area of the Padstow Rural parish, which was abolished.\nPadstow Urban District was abolished in 1968. The former urban district then made a rural parish within the Wadebridge and Padstow Rural District and given a parish council. Wadebridge and Padstow Rural District was abolished six years later in 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, becoming part of the new North Cornwall district. As part of the 1974 reforms, parish councils were given the right to declare their parishes to be a town and take the title of town council, which Padstow Parish Council took, becoming Padstow Town Council.\nNorth Cornwall was in turn abolished in 2009. Cornwall County Council then took on district-level functions, making it a unitary authority, and was renamed Cornwall Council.\nEconomy.\nTraditionally a fishing port, Padstow is now a popular tourist destination. Although some of its former fishing fleet remains, it is mainly a yachting haven on a dramatic coastline with few easily navigable harbours. The influence of restaurateur Rick Stein can be seen in the port, and tourists travel from long distances to eat at his restaurant and caf\u00e9s. This has led to the town being dubbed \"Padstein\", by food writers in the British media.\nPlans to build a skatepark in Padstow were proposed and funds were raised to create this at the Recreation Ground (Wheal Jubilee Parc). Construction was completed in 2019.\nTransport.\nMaritime traffic.\nPadstow had considerable importance in the Middle Ages as a manor belonging to Bodmin monastery and as the site of a safe haven (one of the few on the north coast). So it became a busy fishing port. Padstow prospered through trade with Ireland and the English and Welsh ports on the Bristol Channel, and during the early 18th Century returned over \u00a3100 in duties related to coal imports for both the periods 1708-1710 and 1710-1713, more than any other cornish port except Falmouth. Later trade was the export of tin, copper, lead, slate, cured fish and dairy produce, as well as the importing of timber from Norway and Sweden, salt and wine from France, and hemp, iron and jute from Russia.\nIn the first half of the 19th century Padstow was a significant port of embarcation for emigrants, particularly those bound for Canada, and during the mid-19th century ships carrying timber from Canada such as the barques \"Clio\", \"Belle\" and \"Voluna\"; and the brig \"Dalusia\" were making the journey across the Atlantic. Quebec City was a specific destination recorded and while such vessels brought timber, the offer of cheap travel to passengers wishing to emigrate enticed some to make the journey to Canada. Local shipbuilders also benefited from the quality of incoming cargoes, although shipbuilding had been practiced in Padstow for centuries and the town provided ships for the siege of Calais in 1346. The practice continued, aided by the imported materials, and there five shipyards recorded in the late 19th century though by 1900 this had declined.\nThe approach from the sea into the River Camel is partially blocked by the Doom Bar, a bank of sand extending across the estuary which is a significant hazard to shipping and the cause of many shipwrecks. A lifeboat station was established in 1827.\nFor ships entering the estuary, the immediate loss of wind due to the cliffs was a particular hazard, often resulting in ships being swept onto the Doom Bar. A manual capstan was installed on the west bank of the river (its remains can still be seen) and rockets were fired to carry a line to ships so that they could be winched to safety.\nThere have been ferries across the Camel estuary for centuries and the current service, the Black Tor Ferry, carries pedestrians between Padstow and Rock daily throughout the year.\nIn 1964, the harbour commissioners regained control of the harbour from the British Transport Commission and then made some improvements to it. The harbour comprises a tidal outer harbour that is used by ships and commercial vessels, and a smaller inner harbour that is popular with yachtsmen. This inner harbour is a half tide dock that uses a \"gate-flap\" to maintain water levels on an ebbing tide, so that the yachts within stay afloat at all stages of the tide.\nRailway.\nFrom 1899 until 1967, Padstow railway station was the westernmost point of the former Southern Railway. The railway station was the terminus of an extension from Wadebridge of the former Bodmin and Wadebridge Railway and North Cornwall Railway. These lines were part of the London &amp; South Western Railway (LSWR), then incorporated into the Southern Railway in 1923 and British Railways in 1948, but were proposed for closure as part of the Beeching cuts of the 1960s.\nThe LSWR (and Southern Railway) promoted Padstow as a holiday resort; these companies were rivals to the Great Western Railway (which was the larger railway in the West of England). Until 1964, Padstow was served by the \"Atlantic Coast Express\", a direct train service to/from London Waterloo, but the station was closed in 1967. The old railway line is now the Camel Trail, a footpath and cycle path which is popular owing to its picturesque route beside the River Camel. One of the railway mileposts is now embedded outside the Shipwright's Arms public house on the Harbour Front.\nToday, the nearest railway station is at Bodmin Parkway, three miles southeast of Bodmin. Go Cornwall Bus operates buses to the station.\nBuses.\nPadstow is served by bus services 56 from Newquay and 11/11A from Plymouth which also serves Bodmin Parkway as noted above. Both are operated by Go Cornwall Bus and run hourly Monday to Saturday, less frequent on Sundays and Bank Holidays. There is also the Atlantic Coaster from Newquay, run with open top buses and provided by First Kernow.\nFootpaths.\nThe South West Coast Path runs on both sides of the River Camel estuary and crosses from Padstow to Rock via the Black Tor ferry. The path gives walking access to the coast with Stepper Point and Trevose Head within an easy day's walk of Padstow.\nThe Saints' Way long-distance footpath runs from Padstow to Fowey on the south coast of Cornwall.\nThe Camel Trail cycleway follows the course of the former railway (\"see above\") from Padstow. It is open to walkers, cyclists and horse riders and suitable for disabled access. The long route leads to Wadebridge and on to Wenford Bridge and Bodmin, and is used by an estimated 400,000 users each year, generating an income of approximately \u00a33\u00a0million a year.\nCulture.\n'Obby 'Oss festival.\nThe \"'Obby 'Oss\" festival is a major tourist attraction. The festival starts at midnight on May Eve when townspeople gather outside the Golden Lion Inn to sing the \"Night Song.\" By morning, the town has been dressed with greenery and flowers placed around the maypole. The excitement begins with the appearance of one of the 'Obby 'Osses. Male dancers cavort through the town dressed as one of two 'Obby 'Osses, the \"Old\" and the \"Blue Ribbon\" 'Obby 'Osses; as the name suggests, they are stylised kinds of horses. Prodded on by acolytes known as \"Teasers,\" each wears a mask and black frame-hung cape under which they try to catch young maidens as they pass through the town. Throughout the day, the two parades, led by the \"Mayer\" in his top hat and decorated stick, followed by a band of accordions and drums, then the 'Oss and the Teaser, with a host of people \u2013 all singing the \"Morning Song\" \u2013 passing along the streets of the town. Finally, late in the evening, the two 'osses meet, at the maypole, before returning to their respective stables where the crowd sings of the 'Obby 'Oss death, until its resurrection the following May Eve.\nMummers' or Darkie Day.\nOn Boxing Day and New Year's Day, it is a tradition for some residents to don blackface and parade through the town singing 'minstrel' songs. This is an ancient midwinter celebration that occurs every year in Padstow and was originally part of the pagan heritage of midwinter celebrations that were regularly celebrated all over Cornwall where people would guise dance and disguise themselves by blackening up their faces or wearing masks. Recently (since 2007), the people of Penzance have revived its midwinter celebration with the Montol Festival which like Padstow at times would have had people darkening or painting their skin to disguise themselves as well as masking.)\nFolklorists associate the practice with the widespread British custom of blacking up for mumming and morris dancing, and suggest there is no record of slave ships coming to Padstow. Once an unknown local charity event, the day has recently become controversial, perhaps since a description was published. \nAlso some now suggest it is racist for white people to \"black up\" for any reason. \nAlthough \"outsiders\" have linked the day with racism, Padstonians insist that this is not the case and are incredulous at both description and allegations. Long before the controversy Charlie Bate, noted Padstow folk advocate, recounted that in the 1970s the content and conduct of the day were carefully reviewed to avoid potential offence. \nThe Devon and Cornwall Constabulary have taken video evidence twice and concluded there were no grounds for prosecution. \nNonetheless protests resurface annually. The day has now been renamed \"Mummers' Day\" in an attempt to avoid offence and identify it more clearly with established Cornish tradition. \nThe debate has now been subject to academic scrutiny.\nOther similar traditions that use the black-face disguise and are still celebrated within the United Kingdom are the Border Morris dancers, and Molly dancers of the East Midlands and East Anglia.\nCornish wrestling.\nThere have been Cornish wrestling tournaments held in Padstow for at least the last 200 years. Tournaments have been held at the Drill Hall, the \"Lawn\" overlooking the harbour and at the Commercial Hotel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25136", "revid": "44244582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25136", "title": "Dakar Rally", "text": "Off-road rally raid\nThe Dakar Rally () or simply \"The Dakar\" (), formerly known as the Paris\u2013Dakar Rally (), is an annual rally raid organised by the Amaury Sport Organisation (ASO). It is an off-road endurance event traversing terrain much tougher than conventional rallying, and the vehicles used are typically true off-road vehicles and motorcycles, rather than modified on-road vehicles. Most of the competitive special sections are off-road, crossing dunes, mud, camel grass, rocks, and erg. Stages vary from short distances up to per day. Driver fatigue, lack of skill, and the rough terrain usually result in accidents and serious injuries.\nThe event began in 1978 as a rally from Paris, France, to Dakar, Senegal. Between 1992 and 2007 some editions did not start in Paris or did not arrive in Dakar, but the rally kept its name. Security threats in Mauritania led to the cancellation of the 2008 rally, and from 2009 to 2019 the rally was held in South America. Since 2020, the rally has been held in Saudi Arabia. The rally is open to amateurs and professionals, with professionals typically making up about eighty percent of participants.\nHistory.\nPredecessors.\nThe Mediterranean Rally (also known as Algiers-Cape Town Rally) was a trans-Africa rally run in 5 editions between 1951 and 1961. It evolved from the original mixed road and off-road rally to a fully off-road endurance event, during the pioneer years of trans-Africa rallies.\nCrossing the Sahara.\nThe race originated in December 1977, a year after Thierry Sabine got lost in the T\u00e9n\u00e9r\u00e9 desert whilst competing in the 1975 \"Rallye C\u00f4te-C\u00f4te\" between Abidjan and Nice and decided that the desert would be a good location for a regular rally, on the lines of the 1974 London\u2013Sahara\u2013Munich World Cup Rally, the first automobile race to cross the Sahara Desert twice.\nIn 1971, ex-Cream drummer Ginger Baker used the unproven Range Rover to drive from Algeria to Lagos, Nigeria to set up a recording studio and jam with Fela Kuti. Predating the Paris-Dakar Rally the subsequent documentary is replete with such terrain, and documents the vehicle's endurance.\nEarly growth.\n182 vehicles took the start of the inaugural rally in Paris, with 74 surviving the trip to the Senegalese capital of Dakar. Cyril Neveu was the event's first winner, riding a Yamaha motorcycle. The event rapidly grew in popularity, with 216 vehicles taking the start in 1980 and 291 in 1981. The privateer spirit of early racers tackling the event with limited resources encouraged such entrants as Thierry de Montcorg\u00e9 in a Rolls-Royce and Formula 1 driver Jacky Ickx with actor Claude Brasseur in a Citro\u00ebn CX, in the 1981 race won by two-time winner Hubert Auriol.\nIn 1982, there were 382 racers, more than double the number that took the start in 1979. Neveu won the event for a third time, this time riding a Honda motorcycle, while victory in the car class went to the Marreau brothers, driving a privately entered Renault 20. Auriol captured his second bikes class victory in 1983, the first year that Japanese manufacturer Mitsubishi competed in the rally, beginning an association that would last until 2009.\nAt the behest of 1983 car class winner Jacky Ickx, Porsche entered the Dakar in 1984, with the total number of entries now at 427. The German marque won the event at their first attempt courtesy of Ren\u00e9 Metge, who had previously won in the car category in 1981, whilst Ickx finished sixth. Gaston Rahier meanwhile continued BMW's success in the motorcycle category with back-to-back wins in 1984 and 1985, the year of Mitsubishi's first victory of 12 in the car category, Patrick Zaniroli taking the spoils. The 1986 event, won by Metge and Neveu, was marred by the death of event founder Sabine in a helicopter crash, his father Gilbert taking over organisation of the rally.\nPeugeot and Citro\u00ebn domination.\nThe 1987 rally marked the start of an era of increased official factory participation in the car category, as French manufacturer Peugeot arrived and won the event with former World Rally champion Ari Vatanen. The 1987 event was also notable for a ferocious head-to-head duel between Neveu and Auriol in the motorcycle category, the former taking his fifth victory after Auriol was forced to drop out of the rally after breaking both ankles in a fall. The 1988 event reached its zenith in terms of entry numbers, with 603 starters. Vatanen's title defence was derailed when his Peugeot was stolen from the service area at Bamako. Though it was later found, Vatanen was subsequently disqualified from the event, victory instead going to compatriot and teammate Juha Kankkunen.\nPeugeot and Vatanen returned to winning ways in 1989 and 1990, the latter marking Peugeot's final year of rally competition before switching to the World Sportscar Championship. Sister brand Citro\u00ebn took Peugeot's place, Vatanen taking a third consecutive victory in 1991. The 1991 event also saw St\u00e9phane Peterhansel take his first title in the motorcycle category with Yamaha, marking the beginning of an era of domination by the Frenchman.\nFor the 1992 event, the finish line moved to Cape Town, South Africa in a bid to combat a declining number of competitors, where GPS technology was used for the first time. Auriol became the first person to win in multiple classes after taking Mitsubishi's second victory in the car class, while Peterhansel successfully defended his motorcycle category title. The 1993 rally entry list slumped to 153 competitors, around half of the preceding year's figure and around a quarter of that of 1988. The event was the last to be organised by Gilbert Sabine and the Amaury Sport Organisation took over the following year. With the finish line now back in its traditional location of Dakar, Bruno Saby won a third title for Mitsubishi and Peterhansel took a third straight success in the motorcycle category.\nThe 1994 event returned to Paris after reaching Dakar, resulting in a particularly grueling event. Pierre Lartigue took Citro\u00ebn's second win in acrimonious circumstances, as Mitsubishi's leading drivers were forced to withdraw from exhaustion after traversing some particularly demanding sand dunes in the Mauritanian desert that the Citro\u00ebn crews had opted to skip. Peterhansel's did not compete due to a disagreement between Yamaha and the race organizers over the regulations. Edi Orioli claimed a third title in the bikes category. The 1995 and 1996 events begin in the Spanish city of Granada, with Lartigue racking up wins for Citro\u00ebn in both years. Peterhansel returned to take a fourth bikes category win in 1995, but lost to Orioli in 1996 because of refuelling problems.\nMitsubishi in the ascendancy.\nThe 1997 rally ran exclusively in Africa for the first time, with the route running from Dakar to Agadez, Niger and back to Dakar. Citro\u00ebn's withdrawal due to a rule change paved the way for Mitsubishi to take a fourth victory. Japan's Kenjiro Shinozuka became the first non-European to win the event. Peterhansel equalled Neveu's record of five motorcycle category wins in 1997, before going one better in 1998, when the event returned to its traditional Paris-Dakar route. 1998, Dakar veteran Jean-Pierre Fontenay posted another win for Mitsubishi in the car class.\n1999 started in Granada and a maiden success for erstwhile Formula One and sports car driver Jean-Louis Schlesser, who had been constructing his own buggies since 1992. With the help of Renault backing, Schlesser overcame the works Mitsubishi and Nissan crews to win, whilst Peterhansel's decision to switch to the car category allowed Richard Sainct to take BMW's first title in the bikes category since 1985. Schlesser and Sainct both successfully defended their titles in 2000, traversing the route from Dakar to the Egyptian capital of Cairo.\n2001 was the final time that the rally used the familiar Paris-Dakar route, and was notable for Mitsubishi's Jutta Kleinschmidt, as she was the first woman to win the rally \u2013 albeit only after Schlesser was penalised one hour for unsportsmanlike conduct. Fabrizio Meoni took the first Dakar win for Austrian manufacturer KTM, beginning a winning streak that lasted through 2019. The 2002 began in the French town of Arras and long-time Dakar participant Hiroshi Masuoka won the event for Mitsubishi (Masouka had led for much of the previous year's rally.) The 2003 rally featured an unorthodox route from Marseille to Sharm El Sheikh. Masuoka defend his title after teammate and long-time leader Peterhansel was plagued by mechanical problems in the penultimate stage. Sainct meanwhile took honours in the motorcycle category, the third title for both him and KTM.\nMid-2000s.\nBy 2004, the entry list had increased to 595, up from 358 in 2001, with a record 688 competitors starting in 2005. Alongside Mitsubishi and Nissan, Volkswagen now boasted a full factory effort, while Schlesser's Ford-powered buggies and BMWs of the German X-raid team proved thorns in the side of the big budget works teams. The 2004 route was from Clermont-Ferrand to Dakar, and was the year Peterhansel emulated Hubert Auriol's feat of winning the rally on both two wheels and four. The Frenchman defended his title in 2005, when the rally began for the first time in Barcelona. In the bikes category, KTM continued their success with Nani Roma in 2004, who switched to the car category the following year, and Cyril Despres in 2005.\nThe 2006 event moved to Lisbon. Nissan pulled out having failed to provide effective opposition to Mitsubishi, who took a sixth consecutive victory, this time with former skiing champion Luc Alphand after Peterhansel committed a series of errors late in the rally. Peterhansel made amends in 2007, however, taking his third title in the car category for Mitsubishi after a close contest with Alphand after the increasingly competitive Volkswagens retired with mechanical problems. In what would be the final African event of the Dakar, Despres took his second title in the bikes category, having conceded victory in 2006 to Marc Coma after suffering an injury.\n2008: Hungary and Romania as a Temporary Replacement.\nThe 2008 event, due to start in Lisbon, was cancelled on 4 January 2008 amid fears of attacks in Mauritania following the 2007 killing of four French tourists. Chile and Argentina offered to host subsequent events, which were later accepted by the ASO for the 2009 event.\nLater in the year the ASO created a new event, the 2008 Central Europe Rally, to fill the void created by the cancellation of 2008 edition of the Dakar. The ASO legally deferred all entries for 2008 Dakar to this event which served as the legal 2008 edition of the Dakar in Hungary and Romania. It was intended to be part of a series known as the Dakar Series.\nSouth America.\nThe 2009 event, the first held in South America with a respectable 501 competitors, saw Volkswagen take its first win in the Dakar as a works entrant courtesy of Giniel de Villiers. Initially, teammate and former WRC champion Carlos Sainz led the race comfortably until crashing out, but went on to win the event in 2010. After a poor showing in 2009, Mitsubishi withdrew from the competition and left Volkswagen as the sole works entrant. The German marque won the race for a third time in 2011, this time with Nasser Al-Attiyah, before they withdrew to focus on their upcoming WRC entry and leaving the Dakar with no factory participants in the car class. In the bikes, Despres and Coma stretched KTM's incredible unbroken run of success. Both tied on three victories apiece after Coma's third win in 2011.\nIn the 2012 rally, the X-raid team came to the fore, now using Minis in lieu of BMWs. Peterhansel had joined the team in 2010 after Mitsubishi's departure, but had been unable to challenge the Volkswagen drivers. Following Volkswagen's withdrawal, Peterhansel was able to secure his fourth win in the car category and his tenth in total, his main opposition coming from within his own team. Peterhansel successfully defended his title in 2013 as the Damen Jefferies buggies of Sainz and Al-Attiyah failed to last the distance. Despres also racked up a further two wins for KTM in the bikes class in 2012 and 2013, bringing his tally to five, aided by Coma's absence due to injury in the latter year. Coma struck back on his return to the Dakar in 2014, taking a comfortable fourth title and a 13th in succession for KTM, whilst Nani Roma emulated Auriol and Peterhansel by taking his maiden title in the cars class a decade on from his victory on two wheels \u2013 albeit only after team orders by X-raid slowed Peterhansel.\nPeugeot returned for the 2015 event with an all-new, diesel-powered, two-wheel drive contender, but failed to make an impact as X-raid's Minis once more dominated. Al-Attiyah won the event in his second year for the team, while Coma racked up a fifth title in the bikes after the defection of long-time rival Despres to the car class and Peugeot. Peugeot did however see success in 2016 with Peterhansel behind the wheel, racking up his 6th win in the car category, and again in 2017 and 2018 until Peugeot decide to officially leave the competition. In 2019, which was the first Dakar Rally to be held in just one country (Peru), Toyota won for the first time with Nasser Al-Attiyah (in his third victory with three different manufacturers). The bike category saw the KTM works team rider, Australian Toby Price, take his first Dakar victory, winning his second title in 2019. Sam Sunderland and Matthias Walkner won the 2017 and 2018 edition also for the team from Mattighofen (18 overall victories as in 2019).\nSaudi Arabia.\nFollowing the ASO's increasingly deteriorating relationships with South American governments, which culminated in the controversial 2019 disqualification of Bolivian quad rider Juan Carlos Salvatierra, the rally has been held in Saudi Arabia since 2020.\nFurther editions were planned to also feature other Middle Eastern countries starting from 2021, as the contract with the country was only exclusive for the first year. However, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic prevented such an expansion from happening.\nVehicles and classes.\nThe five competitive groups in the Dakar are the motorcycles, quads, the cars class (which ranges from buggies to small SUVs), UTVs, and the trucks class. Many vehicle manufacturers use the rally's harsh environment as both a testing ground and an opportunity to show off their vehicles' durability even though most vehicles are heavily modified from their production specification or purpose-built.\nMotorbikes.\nFor the 2005 rally regulations introduced a limit of 450cc for twin cylinder motorbikes. Single cylinder motorbikes were still open class with no capacity limit.\nAs of 2011, the engine displacement limit for all motorbikes competing in the Dakar Rally is 450cc. Engines may be either single or twin cylinder. Riders are divided into two groups, RallyGP and Rally2.\nA subcategory is the \"Original by Motul\" category (formerly named \"Malle Moto\" due to the only piece of luggage competitors were allowed to take with them was a \"malle\", the French term for a steamer trunk), which refers to motorbikes and quads competing without any kind assistance. The organization provides assistance for this category with 4 people dedicated to the transportation of the competitors' gear between bivouac sites plus any additional equipment or belongings. This includes: 1 trunk, 1 set of wheels, 1 sleeping tent, 1 travel bag, 1 set of tyres, free use of the generators, compressors and tool-boxes, and easy access to race information. Since these competitors are not allowed to receive any outside support, each rider must service their own vehicle. It is often called the category for the toughest of the tough, and one for the Dakar purists.\nKTM has dominated the motorcycle class in recent years, although Honda, Yamaha, Sherco, Hero, \nHusqvarna, and Gas Gas also compete currently. BMW and Cagiva have also enjoyed success in the past.\nQuads.\nPrior to 2009, Quads were a subdivision of the motorbike category, but they were granted their own separate classification in 2009 and are designated Group 3 in the current regulations. They are divided into two subgroups \u2013 Group 3.1, which features two-wheel drive quads with a single cylinder engine with a maximum displacement of 750cc, and Group 3.2, which permits four-wheel drive quads with a maximum engine displacement of 900cc, in either single or twin cylinder layout.\nYamaha went unbeaten in the Quad category as an official class, with their main opposition coming courtesy of Honda and Can-Am.\nQuads were dropped from the Dakar in 2025 due to declining manufacturer support.\nCars.\nThe car class is made up of vehicles weighing less than , which are subdivided into several categories. T1 is made up of \"Improved Cross-Country Vehicles\", subdivided according to engine type (petrol or diesel) and drive type (two-wheel or four-wheel drive), while T2 is made up of \"Cross-Country Series Production Vehicles\", which are subdivided into petrol and diesel categories. There is also an \"Open\" category catering for vehicles conforming to SCORE International regulations.\nMini have been the most successful marque in the car category in recent years, thanks to the efforts of the non-factory X-raid team, with limited involvement currently coming from Toyota, Ford and Haval. Several constructors also produce bespoke buggies for the event, most notably SMG and Damen Jefferies.\nMitsubishi is historically the most successful manufacturer in the car class, with Volkswagen, Citro\u00ebn, Peugeot and Porsche having all tasted success in the past with factory teams. Jean-Louis Schlesser has also won the event twice with his Renault-supported buggies. Factory teams from Nissan and SEAT have also won stages, as has BMW, courtesy of the X-raid team.\nTrucks.\nThe Truck class, first run as a separate category in 1980, is made up of vehicles weighing more than . Trucks participating in the competition are subdivided into \"Series Production\" trucks (T4.1) and \"Modified\" trucks (T4.2), whilst Group T4.3 (formerly known as T5) trucks are rally support trucks \u2013 meaning they travel from bivouac to bivouac to support the competition vehicles. These were introduced to the rally in 1998. The truck event was not run in 1989 after it was decided the vehicles, by this stage with twin engines generating in excess of 1000 horsepower, were too dangerous following the death of a DAF crew member in an accident during the 1988 rally.\nKamaz has dominated the truck category since the turn of the century, although it has come under increasing pressure from rivals such as Iveco, MAN, Renault, and Tatra, which enjoyed much success in the 1990s. Hino, DAF, Perlini, and Mercedes-Benz have also been among the winners in the past.\nUTVs.\nThe utility task vehicle (UTV) category was introduced in 2017. Before this, UTVs ran under the car category as the T3 class. The class rapidly gained in popularity, and in 2021 the class was further subdivided into separate T3 light prototypes category, and T4 SSVs, which are based on production vehicles.\nClassics.\nA new Dakar Classic class was introduced in 2021 for cars and trucks manufactured before 2000, or new vehicles built to original pre-2000 specification. For the fifth edition in 2025, rules allowed another five years where 2005 became the latest specification year for the class, effectively making the rule 20 years for classification as classics.\nThese vehicles share the same bivouac and the organization but run in a parallel, yet different route, suitable for historic vehicles. The scoreboard is not based on fastest time, but rather on regularity rally point scoring system. The class feature a reduced entry fee, yet the same rules and fees apply for the assistance.\nList of winners.\nQuads, SSVs and Light Prototypes.\nSource:\nDakar Classics.\nSource:\nTelevision coverage.\nThe rally is broadcast on television in more than 190 countries. A live feed of the event and a roundup of each day's race progress is made into a 26-minute programme. This has been commentated on by Toby Moody for ten years, and more recently by Neil Cole.\nThe rally organizers and their television crews provide 20 edit stations along the route for various countries to produce their own programmes about the rally. There are four TV helicopters, six stage cameras, and three bivouac crews to make over 1,000 hours of TV over the two-week period.\nA 2006 television documentary \"Race to Dakar\" described the experiences of a team, including the English actor Charley Boorman, in preparation for and entry into the 2006 Dakar Rally.\nIncidents.\nIn 1982, Mark Thatcher, son of the then British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, along with his French co-driver Anny-Charlotte Verney and their mechanic, disappeared for six days. On 9 January, the trio became separated from a convoy of vehicles after they stopped to make repairs to a faulty steering arm. They were declared missing on 12 January. After a large-scale search was instigated, an Algerian military Lockheed L-100 (a version of the C-130 Hercules) search plane spotted their white Peugeot 504 some off course. Thatcher, Verney, and the mechanic were all unharmed.\nThe organiser of the rally, Thierry Sabine, was killed when his Ecureuil helicopter (\"Squirrel-copter\") crashed at 7:30\u00a0p.m. on Tuesday 14 January 1986, into a dune at Mali during a sudden sand-storm. Also killed onboard was the singer-songwriter Daniel Balavoine, helicopter pilot Fran\u00e7ois-Xavier Bagnoud, journalist Nathalie Odent, and Jean-Paul Lefur who was a radiophonic engineer for French radio broadcaster RTL (formerly Radio Luxembourg).\nSix people were killed during the 1988 race, three participants and three local residents. In one incident, Baye Sibi, a 10-year-old Malian girl, was killed by a racer while she crossed a road. A film crew's vehicle killed a mother and daughter in Mauritania on the last day of the race. The race participants killed, in three separate crashes, were a Dutch navigator on the DAF Trucks team, a French privateer, and a French rider. Racers were also blamed for starting a wildfire that caused a panic on a train running between Dakar and Bamako, where three more people were killed.\nIn 2003, French driver Daniel Nebot both rolled and crashed his Toyota heavily at high speed killing his co-driver Bruno Cauvy.\nIn 2005, Spanish motorcyclist Jos\u00e9 Manuel P\u00e9rez died in a Spanish hospital on Monday 10 January after crashing the week before on the 7th stage. Italian motorcyclist Fabrizio Meoni, a two-time winner of the event, became the second Dakar Rally rider to die in two days, following P\u00e9rez on 11 January on stage 11. Meoni was the 11th motorcyclist and the 45th person overall to die in the history of the race. On 13 January a five-year-old Senegalese girl was hit and killed by a service lorry after wandering onto a main road, bringing the total deaths to five.\nIn 2006, 41-year-old Australian KTM motorcyclist Andy Caldecott, in his third time in the Dakar, died on 9 January as a result of neck injuries sustained in a crash approximately into stage 9, between Nouakchott and Kiffa, only a few kilometers (miles) from the location where Meoni had his fatal wreck the year before. He won the third stage of the 2006 event between Nador and Er Rachidia only a few days before his death. The death occurred despite efforts by the event organisers to improve competitor safety, including limiting speed, mandatory rest at fuel stops, and reduced fuel tank capacity for the bike classes. On 13 January a 10-year-old boy died while crossing the course after being hit by a car driven by Latvian M\u0101ris Sauk\u0101ns, while on 14 January a 12-year-old boy was killed after being hit by a support lorry.\nIn 2007, 29-year-old South African motor racer Elmer Symons died of injuries sustained in a crash during the fourth stage of the Rally. Symons crashed with his bike in the desert between Er Rachidia and Ouarzazate, Morocco. Another death occurred on 20 January, the night before the race's finish, when 42-year-old motorcyclist Eric Aubijoux died suddenly. The cause of death was initially believed to be a heart attack, but it was later suggested that Aubijoux had died of internal injuries sustained in a crash earlier that day while competing in the 14th stage of the race.\nThe 2008 Dakar Rally was cancelled due to security concerns after al-Qaeda's murder of four French tourists on Christmas Eve in December 2007 in Mauritania (a country in which the rally spent eight days), various accusations against the rally calling it \"neo-colonialist\", and al-Qaeda's accusations against Mauritania calling it a supporter of \"crusaders, apostates and infidels\". The French-based Amaury Sport Organisation in charge of the rally said in a statement that they had been advised by the French government to cancel the race, which had been due to begin on 5 January 2008 from Lisbon. They said direct threats had also been made against the event by al-Qaeda related organisations.\nOmar Osama bin Laden, the son of Osama bin Laden, attracted news coverage in 2008 by promoting himself as an \"ambassador of peace\" and proposing a horse race across North Africa as a replacement to the Dakar Rally, with sponsors' money going to support child victims of war, saying \"I heard the rally was stopped because of al-Qaida. I don't think they are going to stop me.\"\nOn 7 January 2009, the body of 49-year-old motorcyclist Pascal Terry from France was found. He had been missing for three days and his body lay on a remote part of the second stage between Santa Rosa de la Pampa and Puerto Madryn.\nOn 4 January 2010, a woman watching the Dakar Rally was killed when a vehicle taking part in the race veered off the course and hit her during the opening stage.\nOn 1 January 2012, motorcyclist Jorge Martinez Boero of Argentina died after suffering a cardiac arrest after a fall. He was treated by medical staff within five minutes of the accident, but died on the way to hospital.\nOn 7 January 2015, motorcycle rider Michal Hernik died in unknown circumstances during Stage 3 of the 2015 rally.\nOn 12 January 2020, Portuguese motorcycle rider Paulo Gon\u00e7alves died after suffering a heart attack due to a crash on the seventh stage.\nOn 15 January 2021, motorcyclist Pierre Cherpin of France died. The 52-year-old Frenchman fell off his motorcycle on 10 January, and a rescue team in a helicopter found him unconscious in the desert. He was rushed to a hospital in Saudi Arabia where he was treated for his injuries. He sustained serious head injuries and cracked ribs, and one of his lungs also collapsed. Cherpin underwent emergency neurosurgery and was placed in an artificial coma. Doctors were initially optimistic about his recovery path and there were no complications after the surgery. He died during the medical transfer from Jeddah to France.\nOverall, 76 people, including 31 competitors, have died in the Dakar Rally.\nCriticism.\nWhen the race was held in Africa, it was subject to criticism from several sources, generally focusing on the race's impact on the inhabitants of the African countries through which it passed. Some African residents along the race's course in previous years have said they saw limited benefits from the race; that race participants spent little money on the goods and services local residents can offer. The racers produced substantial amounts of dust along the course, and were blamed for hitting and killing livestock, in addition to occasionally injuring or killing people.\nAfter the 1988 race, when three Africans were killed in collisions with vehicles involved in the race, PANA, a Dakar-based news agency, wrote that the deaths were \"insignificant for the [race's] organisers\". The Vatican City newspaper \"L'Osservatore Romano\" called the race a \"vulgar display of power and wealth in places where men continue to die from hunger and thirst.\" During a 2002 protest at the race's start in Arras, France, a Green Party of France statement described the race as \"colonialism that needs to be eradicated\".\nThe rally was criticised before 2000 for crossing through the disputed territory of Western Sahara, which has been occupied by Morocco since 1975, without the approval of the Polisario Front independence movement, which considers itself the representative of the indigenous Sahrawi people. After the race officials gained formal permission from the Polisario from 2000 onwards this ceased to be an issue.\nThe environmental impact of the race has been another area of criticism. This criticism of the race is the topic of the song \"500 connards sur la ligne de d\u00e9part\" (\"500 Arseholes at the Starting Line\"), on the 1991 album \"Marchand de cailloux\" by French singer Renaud. In 2014, the Dakar rally was criticized for damage done to archaeological sites in Chile.\nThe move to Saudi Arabia for the 2020 Dakar Rally was under heavy criticism because of the situation of human rights in Saudi Arabia and the position of women in that country.\nDespite the criticism from human rights organizations against the choice of host country for the 2020 season, the Dakar Rally was organized in Saudi Arabia for another consecutive year. While it was being denounced as an attempt of sportswashing by Saudi Arabia, the organizers defended the decision.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25137", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25137", "title": "Paris Dakar Rallye", "text": ""}
{"id": "25140", "revid": "50717717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25140", "title": "Perception", "text": "Interpretation of sensory information\nPerception (from la\u00a0'gathering, receiving') is the organization, identification, and interpretation of sensory information, in order to represent and understand the presented information or environment. All perception involves signals that go through the nervous system, which in turn result from physical or chemical stimulation of the sensory system. Vision involves light striking the retina of the eye; smell is mediated by odor molecules; and hearing involves pressure waves.\nPerception is not only the passive receipt of these signals, but it is also shaped by the recipient's learning, memory, expectation, and attention. Sensory input is a process that transforms this low-level information to higher-level information (e.g., extracts shapes for object recognition). The following process connects a person's concepts and expectations (or knowledge) with restorative and selective mechanisms, such as attention, that influence perception.\nPerception depends on complex functions of the nervous system, but subjectively seems mostly effortless because this processing happens outside conscious awareness. Since the rise of experimental psychology in the 19th century, psychology's understanding of perception has progressed by combining a variety of techniques. Psychophysics quantitatively describes the relationships between the physical qualities of the sensory input and perception. Sensory neuroscience studies the neural mechanisms underlying perception. Perceptual systems can also be studied computationally, in terms of the information they process. Perceptual issues in philosophy include the extent to which sensory qualities such as sound, smell or color exist in objective reality rather than in the mind of the perceiver.\nAlthough people traditionally viewed the senses as passive receptors, the study of illusions and ambiguous images has demonstrated that the brain's perceptual systems actively and pre-consciously attempt to make sense of their input. There is still active debate about the extent to which perception is an active process of hypothesis testing, analogous to science, or whether realistic sensory information is rich enough to make this process unnecessary.\nThe perceptual systems of the brain enable individuals to see the world around them as stable, even though the sensory information is typically incomplete and rapidly varying. Human and other animal brains are structured in a modular way, with different areas processing different kinds of sensory information. Some of these modules take the form of sensory maps, mapping some aspect of the world across part of the brain's surface. These different modules are interconnected and influence each other. For instance, taste is strongly influenced by smell.\nProcess and terminology.\nThe process of perception begins with an object in the real world, known as the \"distal stimulus\" or \"distal object\". By means of light, sound, or another physical process, the object stimulates the body's sensory organs. These sensory organs transform the input energy into neural activity\u2014a process called \"transduction\". This raw pattern of neural activity is called the \"proximal stimulus\". These neural signals are then transmitted to the brain and processed. The resulting mental re-creation of the distal stimulus is the \"percept\".\nTo explain the process of perception, an example could be an ordinary shoe. The shoe itself is the distal stimulus. When light from the shoe enters a person's eye and stimulates the retina, that stimulation is the proximal stimulus. The image of the shoe reconstructed by the brain of the person is the percept. Another example could be a ringing telephone. The ringing of the phone is the distal stimulus. The sound stimulating a person's auditory receptors is the proximal stimulus. The brain's interpretation of this as the \"ringing of a telephone\" is the percept.\nThe different kinds of sensation (such as warmth, sound, and taste) are called \"sensory modalities\" or \"stimulus modalities\".\nBruner's model of the perceptual process.\nPsychologist Jerome Bruner developed a model of perception, in which people put \"together the information contained in\" a target and a situation to form \"perceptions of ourselves and others based on social categories.\" This model is composed of three states:\nSaks and John's three components to perception.\nAccording to Alan Saks and Gary Johns, there are three components to perception:\nMultistable perception.\nStimuli are not necessarily translated into a percept and rarely does a single stimulus translate into a percept. An ambiguous stimulus may sometimes be transduced into one or more percepts, experienced randomly, one at a time, in a process termed \"multistable perception\". The same stimuli, or absence of them, may result in different percepts depending on subject's culture and previous experiences.\nAmbiguous figures demonstrate that a single stimulus can result in more than one percept. For example, the Rubin vase can be interpreted either as a vase or as two faces. The percept can bind sensations from multiple senses into a whole. A picture of a talking person on a television screen, for example, is bound to the sound of speech from speakers to form a percept of a talking person.\nTypes of perception.\nVision.\nIn many ways, vision is the primary human sense. Light is taken in through each eye and focused in a way which sorts it on the retina according to direction of origin. A dense surface of photosensitive cells, including rods, cones, and intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells captures information about the intensity, color, and position of incoming light. Some processing of texture and movement occurs within the neurons on the retina before the information is sent to the brain. In total, about 15 differing types of information are then forwarded to the brain proper via the optic nerve.\nThe timing of perception of a visual event, at points along the visual circuit, have been measured. A sudden alteration of light at a spot in the environment first alters photoreceptor cells in the retina, which send a signal to the retina bipolar cell layer which, in turn, can activate a retinal ganglion neuron cell. A retinal ganglion cell is a bridging neuron that connects visual retinal input to the visual processing centers within the central nervous system. Light-altered neuron activation occurs within about 5\u201320 milliseconds in a rabbit retinal ganglion, although in a mouse retinal ganglion cell the initial spike takes between 40 and 240 milliseconds before the initial activation. The initial activation can be detected by an action potential spike, a sudden spike in neuron membrane electric voltage.\nA perceptual visual event measured in humans was the presentation to individuals of an anomalous word. If these individuals are shown a sentence, presented as a sequence of single words on a computer screen, with a puzzling word out of place in the sequence, the perception of the puzzling word can register on an electroencephalogram (EEG). In an experiment, human readers wore an elastic cap with 64 embedded electrodes distributed over their scalp surface. Within 230 milliseconds of encountering the anomalous word, the human readers generated an event-related electrical potential alteration of their EEG at the left occipital-temporal channel, over the left occipital lobe and temporal lobe.\nSound.\nHearing (or \"audition\") is the ability to perceive sound by detecting vibrations (i.e., \"sonic\" detection). Frequencies capable of being heard by humans are called \"audio\" or \"audible\" \"frequencies\", the range of which is typically considered to be between 20\u00a0Hz and 20,000\u00a0Hz. Frequencies higher than audio are referred to as \"ultrasonic\", while frequencies below audio are referred to as \"infrasonic\".\nThe auditory system includes the outer ears, which collect and filter sound waves; the middle ear, which transforms the sound pressure (impedance matching); and the inner ear, which produces neural signals in response to the sound. By the ascending auditory pathway these are led to the primary auditory cortex within the temporal lobe of the human brain, from where the auditory information then goes to the cerebral cortex for further processing.\nSound does not usually come from a single source: in real situations, sounds from multiple sources and directions are as they arrive at the ears. Hearing involves the computationally complex task of separating out sources of interest, identifying them and often estimating their distance and direction.\nTouch.\nThe process of recognizing objects through touch is known as \"haptic perception\". It involves a combination of somatosensory perception of patterns on the skin surface (e.g., edges, curvature, and texture) and proprioception of hand position and conformation. People can rapidly and accurately identify three-dimensional objects by touch. This involves exploratory procedures, such as moving the fingers over the outer surface of the object or holding the entire object in the hand. Haptic perception relies on the forces experienced during touch.\nProfessor Gibson defined the haptic system as \"the sensibility of the individual to the world adjacent to his body by use of his body.\" Gibson and others emphasized the close link between body movement and haptic perception, where the latter is \"active exploration\".\nThe concept of haptic perception is related to the concept of extended physiological proprioception according to which, when using a tool such as a stick, perceptual experience is transparently transferred to the end of the tool.\nTaste.\nTaste (formally known as \"gustation\") is the ability to perceive the flavor of substances, including, but not limited to, food. Humans receive tastes through sensory organs concentrated on the upper surface of the tongue, called \"taste buds\" or \"gustatory calyculi\". The human tongue has 100 to 150 taste receptor cells on each of its roughly-ten thousand taste buds.\nTraditionally, there have been four primary tastes: sweetness, bitterness, sourness, and saltiness. The recognition and awareness of umami, which is considered the fifth primary taste, is a relatively recent development in Western cuisine. Other tastes can be mimicked by combining these basic tastes, all of which contribute only partially to the sensation and flavor of food in the mouth. Other factors include smell, which is detected by the olfactory epithelium of the nose; texture, which is detected through a variety of mechanoreceptors, muscle nerves, etc.; and temperature, which is detected by thermoreceptors. All basic tastes are classified as either \"appetitive\" or \"aversive\", depending upon whether the things they sense are harmful or beneficial.\nSmell.\nSmell is the process of absorbing molecules through olfactory organs, which are absorbed by humans through the nose. These molecules diffuse through a thick layer of mucus; come into contact with one of thousands of cilia that are projected from sensory neurons; and are then absorbed into a receptor (one of 347 or so). It is this process that causes humans to understand the concept of smell from a physical standpoint.\nSmell is also a very interactive sense as scientists have begun to observe that olfaction comes into contact with the other sense in unexpected ways. It is also the most primal of the senses, as it is known to be the first indicator of safety or danger, therefore being the sense that drives the most basic of human survival skills. As such, it can be a catalyst for human behavior on a subconscious and instinctive level.\nSocial.\nSocial perception is the part of perception that allows people to understand the individuals and groups of their social world. Thus, it is an element of social cognition.\nSpeech.\n\"Speech perception\" is the process by which spoken language is heard, interpreted and understood. Research in this field seeks to understand how human listeners recognize the sound of speech (or \"phonetics\") and use such information to understand spoken language.\nListeners manage to perceive words across a wide range of conditions, as the sound of a word can vary widely according to words that surround it and the tempo of the speech, as well as the physical characteristics, accent, tone, and mood of the speaker. Reverberation, signifying the persistence of sound after the sound is produced, can also have a considerable impact on perception. Experiments have shown that people automatically compensate for this effect when hearing speech.\nThe process of perceiving speech begins at the level of the sound within the auditory signal and the process of audition. The initial auditory signal is compared with visual information\u2014primarily lip movement\u2014to extract acoustic cues and phonetic information. It is possible other sensory modalities are integrated at this stage as well. This speech information can then be used for higher-level language processes, such as word recognition.\nSpeech perception is not necessarily uni-directional. Higher-level language processes connected with morphology, syntax, and/or semantics may also interact with basic speech perception processes to aid in recognition of speech sounds. It may be the case that it is not necessary (maybe not even possible) for a listener to recognize phonemes before recognizing higher units, such as words. In an experiment, professor Richard M. Warren replaced one phoneme of a word with a cough-like sound. His subjects restored the missing speech sound perceptually without any difficulty. Moreover, they were not able to accurately identify which phoneme had even been disturbed.\nFaces.\n\"Facial perception\" refers to cognitive processes specialized in handling human faces (including perceiving the identity of an individual) and facial expressions (such as emotional cues.)\nSocial touch.\nThe \"somatosensory cortex\" is a part of the brain that receives and encodes sensory information from receptors of the entire body.\nAffective touch is a type of sensory information that elicits an emotional reaction and is usually social in nature. Such information is actually coded differently than other sensory information. Though the intensity of affective touch is still encoded in the primary somatosensory cortex, the feeling of pleasantness associated with affective touch is activated more in the anterior cingulate cortex. Increased blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) contrast imaging, identified during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), shows that signals in the anterior cingulate cortex, as well as the prefrontal cortex, are highly correlated with pleasantness scores of affective touch. Inhibitory transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) of the primary somatosensory cortex inhibits the perception of affective touch intensity, but not affective touch pleasantness. Therefore, the S1 is not directly involved in processing socially affective touch pleasantness, but still plays a role in discriminating touch location and intensity.\nMulti-modal perception.\nMulti-modal perception refers to concurrent stimulation in more than one sensory modality and the effect such has on the perception of events and objects in the world.\nTime (chronoception).\nChronoception refers to how the passage of time is perceived and experienced. Although the sense of time is not associated with a specific sensory system, the work of psychologists and neuroscientists indicates that human brains do have a system governing the perception of time, composed of a highly distributed system involving the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and basal ganglia. One particular component of the brain, the suprachiasmatic nucleus, is responsible for the circadian rhythm (commonly known as one's \"internal clock\"), while other cell clusters appear to be capable of shorter-range timekeeping, known as an \"ultradian rhythm\".\nOne or more dopaminergic pathways in the central nervous system appear to have a strong modulatory influence on mental chronometry, particularly interval timing.\nAgency.\n\"Sense of agency\" refers to the subjective feeling of having chosen a particular action. Some conditions, such as schizophrenia, can cause a loss of this sense, which may lead a person into delusions, such as feeling like a machine or like an outside source is controlling them. An opposite extreme can also occur, where people experience everything in their environment as though they had decided that it would happen.\nEven in non-pathological cases, there is a measurable difference between the making of a decision and the feeling of agency. Through methods such as the Libet experiment, a gap of half a second or more can be detected from the time when there are detectable neurological signs of a decision having been made to the time when the subject actually becomes conscious of the decision.\nThere are also experiments in which an illusion of agency is induced in psychologically normal subjects. In 1999, psychologists Wegner and Wheatley gave subjects instructions to move a mouse around a scene and point to an image about once every thirty seconds. However, a second person\u2014acting as a test subject but actually a confederate\u2014had their hand on the mouse at the same time, and controlled some of the movement. Experimenters were able to arrange for subjects to perceive certain \"forced stops\" as if they were their own choice.\nFamiliarity.\nRecognition memory is sometimes divided into two functions by neuroscientists: \"familiarity\" and \"recollection\". A strong sense of familiarity can occur without any recollection, for example in cases of deja vu.\nThe temporal lobe (specifically the perirhinal cortex) responds differently to stimuli that feel novel compared to stimuli that feel familiar. Firing rates in the perirhinal cortex are connected with the sense of familiarity in humans and other mammals. In tests, stimulating this area at 10\u201315\u00a0Hz caused animals to treat even novel images as familiar, and stimulation at 30\u201340\u00a0Hz caused novel images to be partially treated as familiar. In particular, stimulation at 30\u201340\u00a0Hz led to animals looking at a familiar image for longer periods, as they would for an unfamiliar one, though it did not lead to the same exploration behavior normally associated with novelty.\nRecent studies on lesions in the area concluded that rats with a damaged perirhinal cortex were still more interested in exploring when novel objects were present, but seemed unable to tell novel objects from familiar ones\u2014they examined both equally. Thus, other brain regions are involved with noticing unfamiliarity, while the perirhinal cortex is needed to associate the feeling with a specific source.\nSexual stimulation.\nSexual stimulation is any stimulus (including bodily contact) that leads to, enhances, and maintains sexual arousal, possibly even leading to orgasm. Distinct from the general sense of touch, sexual stimulation is strongly tied to hormonal activity and chemical triggers in the body. Although sexual arousal may arise without physical stimulation, achieving orgasm usually requires physical sexual stimulation (stimulation of the Krause-Finger corpuscles found in erogenous zones of the body.)\nOther senses.\nOther senses enable perception of body balance (vestibular sense); acceleration, including gravity; position of body parts (proprioception sense). They can also enable perception of internal senses (interoception sense), such as temperature, pain, suffocation, gag reflex, abdominal distension, fullness of rectum and urinary bladder, and sensations felt in the throat and lungs.\nReality.\nIn the case of visual perception, some people can see the percept shift in their mind's eye. Others, who are not picture thinkers, may not necessarily perceive the 'shape-shifting' as their world changes. This esemplastic nature has been demonstrated by an experiment that showed that ambiguous images have multiple interpretations on the perceptual level.\nThe confusing ambiguity of perception is exploited in human technologies such as camouflage and biological mimicry. For example, the wings of European peacock butterflies bear eyespots that birds respond to as though they were the eyes of a dangerous predator.\nThere is also evidence that the brain in some ways operates on a slight \"delay\" in order to allow nerve impulses from distant parts of the body to be integrated into simultaneous signals.\nPerception is one of the oldest fields in psychology. The oldest quantitative laws in psychology are Weber's law, which states that the smallest noticeable difference in stimulus intensity is proportional to the intensity of the reference; and Fechner's law, which quantifies the relationship between the intensity of the physical stimulus and its perceptual counterpart (e.g., testing how much darker a computer screen can get before the viewer actually notices). The study of perception gave rise to the Gestalt School of Psychology, with an emphasis on a holistic approach.\nPhysiology.\nA \"sensory system\" is a part of the nervous system responsible for processing sensory information. A sensory system consists of sensory receptors, neural pathways, and parts of the brain involved in sensory perception. Commonly recognized sensory systems are those for vision, hearing, somatic sensation (touch), taste and olfaction (smell), as listed above. It has been suggested that the immune system is an overlooked sensory modality. In short, senses are transducers from the physical world to the realm of the mind.\nThe receptive field is the specific part of the world to which a receptor organ and receptor cells respond. For instance, the part of the world an eye can see, is its receptive field; the light that each rod or cone can see, is its receptive field. Receptive fields have been identified for the visual system, auditory system and somatosensory system, so far. Research attention is currently focused not only on external perception processes, but also to \"interoception\", considered as the process of receiving, accessing and appraising internal bodily signals. Maintaining desired physiological states is critical for an organism's well-being and survival. Interoception is an iterative process, requiring the interplay between perception of body states and awareness of these states to generate proper self-regulation. Afferent sensory signals continuously interact with higher order cognitive representations of goals, history, and environment, shaping emotional experience and motivating regulatory behavior.\nFeatures.\nConstancy.\n\"Perceptual constancy\" is the ability of perceptual systems to recognize the same object from widely varying sensory inputs. For example, individual people can be recognized from views, such as frontal and profile, which form very different shapes on the retina. A coin looked at face-on makes a circular image on the retina, but when held at angle it makes an elliptical image. In normal perception these are recognized as a single three-dimensional object. Without this correction process, an animal approaching from the distance would appear to gain in size. One kind of perceptual constancy is \"color constancy\": for example, a white piece of paper can be recognized as such under different colors and intensities of light. Another example is \"roughness constancy\": when a hand is drawn quickly across a surface, the touch nerves are stimulated more intensely. The brain compensates for this, so the speed of contact does not affect the perceived roughness. Other constancies include melody, odor, brightness and words. These constancies are not always total, but the variation in the percept is much less than the variation in the physical stimulus. The perceptual systems of the brain achieve perceptual constancy in a variety of ways, each specialized for the kind of information being processed, with phonemic restoration as a notable example from hearing.\nGrouping (Gestalt).\nThe \"principles of grouping\" (or \"Gestalt laws of grouping\") are a set of principles in psychology, first proposed by Gestalt psychologists, to explain how humans naturally perceive objects with patterns and objects. Gestalt psychologists argued that these principles exist because the mind has an innate disposition to perceive patterns in the stimulus based on certain rules. These principles are organized into six categories:\nLater research has identified additional grouping principles.\nContrast effects.\nA common finding across many different kinds of perception is that the perceived qualities of an object can be affected by the qualities of context. If one object is extreme on some dimension, then neighboring objects are perceived as further away from that extreme.\n\"Simultaneous contrast effect\" is the term used when stimuli are presented at the same time, whereas \"successive contrast\" applies when stimuli are presented one after another.\nThe contrast effect was noted by the 17th Century philosopher John Locke, who observed that lukewarm water can feel hot or cold depending on whether the hand touching it was previously in hot or cold water. In the early 20th Century, Wilhelm Wundt identified contrast as a fundamental principle of perception, and since then the effect has been confirmed in many different areas. These effects shape not only visual qualities like color and brightness, but other kinds of perception, including how heavy an object feels. One experiment found that thinking of the name \"Hitler\" led to subjects rating a person as more hostile. Whether a piece of music is perceived as good or bad can depend on whether the music heard before it was pleasant or unpleasant. For the effect to work, the objects being compared need to be similar to each other: a television reporter can seem smaller when interviewing a tall basketball player, but not when standing next to a tall building. In the brain, brightness contrast exerts effects on both neuronal firing rates and neuronal synchrony.\nTheories.\nPerception as direct perception (Gibson).\nCognitive theories of perception assume there is a poverty of the stimulus. This is the claim that sensations, by themselves, are unable to provide a unique description of the world. Sensations require 'enriching', which is the role of the mental model.\nThe perceptual ecology approach was introduced by professor James J. Gibson, who rejected the assumption of a poverty of stimulus and the idea that perception is based upon sensations. Instead, Gibson investigated what information is actually presented to the perceptual systems. His theory \"assumes the existence of stable, unbounded, and permanent stimulus-information in the ambient optic array. And it supposes that the visual system can explore and detect this information. The theory is information-based, not sensation-based.\" He and the psychologists who work within this paradigm detailed how the world could be specified to a mobile, exploring organism via the lawful projection of information about the world into energy arrays. \"Specification\" would be a 1:1 mapping of some aspect of the world into a perceptual array. Given such a mapping, no enrichment is required and perception is direct.\nPerception-in-action.\nFrom Gibson's early work derived an ecological understanding of perception known as \"perception-in-action,\" which argues that perception is a requisite property of animate action. It posits that, without perception, action would be unguided, and without action, perception would serve no purpose. Animate actions require both perception and motion, which can be described as \"two sides of the same coin, the coin is action.\" Gibson works from the assumption that singular entities, which he calls \"invariants,\" already exist in the real world and that all that the perception process does is home in upon them.\nThe constructivist view, held by such philosophers as Ernst von Glasersfeld, regards the continual adjustment of perception and action to the external input as precisely what constitutes the \"entity,\" which is therefore far from being invariant. Glasersfeld considers an \"invariant\" as a target to be homed in upon, and a pragmatic necessity to allow an initial measure of understanding to be established prior to the updating that a statement aims to achieve. The invariant does not, and need not, represent an actuality. Glasersfeld describes it as extremely unlikely that what is desired or feared by an organism will never suffer change as time goes on. This social constructionist theory thus allows for a needful evolutionary adjustment.\nA mathematical theory of perception-in-action has been devised and investigated in many forms of controlled movement, and has been described in many different species of organism using the General Tau Theory. According to this theory, \"tau information\", or time-to-goal information is the fundamental \"percept\" in perception.\nEvolutionary psychology.\nMany philosophers, such as Jerry Fodor, write that the purpose of perception is knowledge. However, evolutionary psychologists hold that the primary purpose of perception is to guide action. They give the example of depth perception, which seems to have evolved not to aid in knowing the distances to other objects but rather to aid movement. Evolutionary psychologists argue that animals ranging from fiddler crabs to humans use eyesight for collision avoidance, suggesting that vision is basically for directing action, not providing knowledge. Neuropsychologists showed that perception systems evolved along the specifics of animals' activities. This explains why bats and worms can perceive different frequency of auditory and visual systems than, for example, humans.\nBuilding and maintaining sense organs is metabolically expensive. More than half the brain is devoted to processing sensory information, and the brain itself consumes roughly one-fourth of one's metabolic resources. Thus, such organs evolve only when they provide exceptional benefits to an organism's fitness.\nScientists who study perception and sensation have long understood the human senses as adaptations. Depth perception consists of processing over half a dozen visual cues, each of which is based on a regularity of the physical world. Vision evolved to respond to the narrow range of electromagnetic energy that is plentiful and that does not pass through objects. Sound waves provide useful information about the sources of and distances to objects, with larger animals making and hearing lower-frequency sounds and smaller animals making and hearing higher-frequency sounds. Taste and smell respond to chemicals in the environment that were significant for fitness in the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. The sense of touch is actually many senses, including pressure, heat, cold, tickle, and pain. Pain, while unpleasant, is adaptive. An important adaptation for senses is range shifting, by which the organism becomes temporarily more or less sensitive to sensation. For example, one's eyes automatically adjust to dim or bright ambient light. Sensory abilities of different organisms often co-evolve, as is the case with the hearing of echolocating bats and that of the moths that have evolved to respond to the sounds that the bats make.\nEvolutionary psychologists claim that perception demonstrates the principle of modularity, with specialized mechanisms handling particular perception tasks. For example, people with damage to a particular part of the brain are not able to recognize faces (\"prosopagnosia\"). Evolutionary psychology suggests that this indicates a so-called face-reading module.\nClosed-loop perception.\nThe theory of closed-loop perception proposes dynamic motor-sensory closed-loop process in which information flows through the environment and the brain in continuous loops. Closed-loop perception appears consistent with anatomy and with the fact that perception is typically an incremental process. Repeated encounters with an object, whether conscious or not, enable an animal to refine its impressions of that object. This can be achieved more easily with a circular closed-loop system than with a linear open-loop one. Closed-loop perception can explain many of the phenomena that open-loop perception struggles to account for. This is largely because closed-loop perception considers motion to be an integral part of perception, and not an interfering component that must be corrected for. Furthermore, an environment perceived via sensor motion, and not despite sensor motion, need not be further stabilized by internal processes.\nFeature integration theory.\nAnne Treisman's feature integration theory (FIT) attempts to explain how characteristics of a stimulus such as physical location in space, motion, color, and shape are merged to form one percept despite each of these characteristics activating separate areas of the cortex. FIT explains this through a two part system of perception involving the preattentive and focused attention stages.\nThe preattentive stage of perception is largely unconscious, and analyzes an object by breaking it down into its basic features, such as the specific color, geometric shape, motion, depth, individual lines, and many others. Studies have shown that, when small groups of objects with different features (e.g., red triangle, blue circle) are briefly flashed in front of human participants, many individuals later report seeing shapes made up of the combined features of two different stimuli, thereby referred to as illusory conjunctions.\nThe unconnected features described in the preattentive stage are combined into the objects one normally sees during the focused attention stage. The focused attention stage is based heavily around the idea of attention in perception and 'binds' the features together onto specific objects at specific spatial locations (see the binding problem).\nShared Intentionality theory.\nA fundamentally different approach to understanding the perception of objects relies upon the essential role of Shared intentionality. Cognitive psychologist professor Michael Tomasello hypothesized that social bonds between children and caregivers would gradually increase through the essential motive force of shared intentionality beginning from birth. The notion of shared intentionality, introduced by Michael Tomasello, was developed by later researchers, who tended to explain this collaborative interaction from different perspectives, e.g., psychophysiology, and neurobiology. The Shared intentionality approach considers perception occurrence at an earlier stage of organisms' development than other theories, even before the emergence of Intentionality. Because many theories build their knowledge about perception based on its main features of the organization, identification, and interpretation of sensory information to represent the holistic picture of the environment, Intentionality is the central issue in perception development. Nowadays, only one hypothesis attempts to explain Shared intentionality in all its integral complexity from the level of interpersonal dynamics to interaction at the neuronal level. Introduced by Latvian professor Igor Val Danilov, the hypothesis of neurobiological processes occurring during Shared intentionality highlights that, at the beginning of cognition, very young organisms cannot distinguish relevant sensory stimuli independently. Because the environment is the cacophony of stimuli (electromagnetic waves, chemical interactions, and pressure fluctuations), their sensation is too limited by the noise to solve the cue problem. The relevant stimulus cannot overcome the noise magnitude if it passes through the senses. Therefore, Intentionality is a difficult problem for them since it needs the representation of the environment already categorized into objects (see also binding problem). The perception of objects is also problematic since it cannot appear without Intentionality. From the perspective of this hypothesis, Shared intentionality is collaborative interactions in which participants share the essential sensory stimulus of the actual cognitive problem. This social bond enables ecological training of the young immature organism, starting at the reflexes stage of development, for processing the organization, identification, and interpretation of sensory information in developing perception. From this account perception emerges due to Shared intentionality in the embryonic stage of development, i.e., even before birth.\nEffects on perception.\nEffect of experience.\nWith experience, organisms can learn to make finer perceptual distinctions, and learn new kinds of categorization. Wine-tasting, the reading of X-ray images and music appreciation are applications of this process in the human sphere. Research has focused on the relation of this to other kinds of learning, and whether it takes place in peripheral sensory systems or in the brain's processing of sense information. Empirical research show that specific practices (such as yoga, mindfulness, Tai Chi, meditation, Daoshi and other mind-body disciplines) can modify human perceptual modality. Specifically, these practices enable perception skills to switch from the external (exteroceptive field) towards a higher ability to focus on internal signals (\"proprioception\"). Also, when asked to provide verticality judgments, highly self-transcendent yoga practitioners were significantly less influenced by a misleading visual context. Increasing self-transcendence may enable yoga practitioners to optimize verticality judgment tasks by relying more on internal (vestibular and proprioceptive) signals coming from their own body, rather than on exteroceptive, visual cues.\nPast actions and events that transpire right before an encounter or any form of stimulation have a strong degree of influence on how sensory stimuli are processed and perceived. On a basic level, the information our senses receive is often ambiguous and incomplete. However, they are grouped together in order for us to be able to understand the physical world around us. But it is these various forms of stimulation, combined with our previous knowledge and experience that allows us to create our overall perception. For example, when engaging in conversation, we attempt to understand their message and words by not only paying attention to what we hear through our ears but also from the previous shapes we have seen our mouths make. Another example would be if we had a similar topic come up in another conversation, we would use our previous knowledge to guess the direction the conversation is headed in.\nEffect of motivation and expectation.\nA \"perceptual set\" (also called \"perceptual expectancy\" or simply \"set\") is a predisposition to perceive things in a certain way. It is an example of how perception can be shaped by \"top-down\" processes such as drives and expectations. Perceptual sets occur in all the different senses. They can be long term, such as a special sensitivity to hearing one's own name in a crowded room, or short-term, as in the ease with which hungry people notice the smell of food. A simple demonstration of the effect involved very brief presentations of non-words such as \"sael\". Subjects who were told to expect words about animals read it as \"seal\", but others who were expecting boat-related words read it as \"sail\".\nSets can be created by motivation and so can result in people interpreting ambiguous figures so that they see what they want to see. For instance, how someone perceives what unfolds during a sports game can be biased if they strongly support one of the teams. In one experiment, students were allocated to pleasant or unpleasant tasks by a computer. They were told that either a number or a letter would flash on the screen to say whether they were going to taste an orange juice drink or an unpleasant-tasting health drink. In fact, an ambiguous figure was flashed on screen, which could either be read as the letter B or the number 13. When the letters were associated with the pleasant task, subjects were more likely to perceive a letter B, and when letters were associated with the unpleasant task they tended to perceive a number 13.\nPerceptual set has been demonstrated in many social contexts. When someone has a reputation for being funny, an audience is more likely to find them amusing. Individual's perceptual sets reflect their own personality traits. For example, people with an aggressive personality are quicker to correctly identify aggressive words or situations. In general, perceptual speed as a mental ability is positively correlated with personality traits such as conscientiousness, emotional stability, and agreeableness suggesting its evolutionary role in preserving homeostasis.\nOne classic psychological experiment showed slower reaction times and less accurate answers when a deck of playing cards reversed the color of the suit symbol for some cards (e.g. red spades and black hearts).\nPhilosopher Andy Clark explains that perception, although it occurs quickly, is not simply a bottom-up process (where minute details are put together to form larger wholes). Instead, our brains use what he calls \"predictive coding\". It starts with very broad constraints and expectations for the state of the world, and as expectations are met, it makes more detailed predictions (errors lead to new predictions, or \"learning processes)\". Clark says this research has various implications; not only can there be no completely \"unbiased, unfiltered\" perception, but this means that there is a great deal of feedback between perception and expectation (perceptual experiences often shape our beliefs, but those perceptions were based on existing beliefs). Indeed, predictive coding provides an account where this type of feedback assists in stabilizing our inference-making process about the physical world, such as with perceptual constancy examples.\nEmbodied cognition challenges the idea of perception as internal representations resulting from a passive reception of (incomplete) sensory inputs coming from the outside world. According to O'Regan (1992), the major issue with this perspective is that it leaves the subjective character of perception unexplained. Thus, perception is understood as an active process conducted by perceiving and engaged agents (perceivers). Furthermore, perception is influenced by agents' motives and expectations, their bodily states, and the interaction between the agent's body and the environment around it.\nPhilosophy.\nPerception is an important part of the theories of many philosophers it has been famously addressed by Rene Descartes, George Berkeley, and Immanuel Kant to name a few. In his work The Meditations Descartes begins by doubting all of his perceptions proving his existence with the famous phrase \"I think therefore I am\", and then works to the conclusion that perceptions are God-given. George Berkely took the stance that all things that we see have a reality to them and that our perceptions were sufficient to know and understand that thing because our perceptions are capable of responding to a true reality. Kant almost meets the rationalists and the empiricists half way. His theory utilizes the reality of a noumenon, the actual objects that cannot be understood, and then a phenomenon which is human understanding through the mind lens interpreting that noumenon.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25141", "revid": "40081289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25141", "title": "Pitch of brass instruments", "text": "Lowest playable resonance frequency of the open instrument\nThe pitch of a brass instrument corresponds to the lowest playable resonance frequency of the open instrument. The combined resonances resemble a harmonic series. The fundamental frequency of the harmonic series can be varied by adjusting the length of the tubing using the instrument's valve, slide, key or crook system, while the player's embouchure, lip tension and air flow serve to select a specific harmonic from the available series for playing. The fundamental is essentially missing from the resonances and is impractical to play on most brass instruments, but the overtones account for most pitches.\nThe following table provides the pitch of the second harmonic (the lowest playable resonance on most brass instruments, an octave above the fundamental frequency) and length for some common brass instruments in descending order of pitch. This pitch is notated transpositionally as middle C for many of these brass instruments.\nRange.\nThe normal playing range of most three-valved brass instruments extends from three whole tones below the 2nd harmonic of the instrument to the 10th harmonic. Skilled players can produce tones outside this range. For many transposing brass instruments, this range is written as extending from F\u266f below middle C to E two octaves and a third above middle C.\nThe orchestral horn is an exception as it was classically assigned a range beginning at its fourth harmonic.\nWhole tube vs half tube.\nThe ease with which a player produces the fundamental note of each harmonic series for each tubing length of a modern brass instrument varies with the instrument's design. As bore width increases relative to length, it becomes easier for the player to resist the instrument's tendency to jump to the second harmonic instead of producing the fundamental frequency. Brass instruments with sufficient bore to play fundamentals with relative ease and accuracy are called \"whole-tube\" instruments, while instruments that are limited to the second harmonic as a lowest note in practical use are called \"half-tube\" instruments. These terms stem from a comparison to organ pipes, which produce the same pitch as the pedal tone (fundamental) of a brass instrument of equal length.\nCertain low brass instruments such as trombone, tuba, euphonium, and alto horn are whole-tube and can play the fundamental tone of each harmonic series with relative ease. Furthermore, the low brass often use extra valves to extend their range uniformly, since the fundamental is chromatically discontinuous with the lowest 2nd harmonic reachable on a three-valve instrument or via the seven-position slide on a trombone. Trombone and tuba in particular are often called upon to play pedal tones and \"false tones\" or \"privileged tones\" which have a pitch between the normal range and the fundamental.\nHorn.\nThe modern standard orchestral horn is a double B\u266d/F horn. The player can switch between the two modes using a thumb-operated fourth valve. The fundamental pitch of the F horn is near that of the tuba. Horn notation is a complex subject beyond the scope of this article, but what is written as middle C for the horn is the fourth harmonic of the unlengthened instrument, not the second. Horn music makes greater use of the higher range of the harmonic series than do most other modern brass instruments.\nBass trombone.\nThe modern bass trombone is the same length as a tenor trombone, but typically has two valves, pitched in F and G\u266d. When combined, these valves put the instrument into D. The modern contrabass trombone is usually constructed in F and fitted with two valves in either D and B\u266d combining to give A\u266d, or in C and D\u266d combining to give A. The less common double slide contrabass in low B\u266d is often fitted with a valve in F. All these instruments are notated in bass clef at concert pitch.\nTuba.\nThe bass tuba is commonly available in F and E\u266d, while contrabass tubas are available in C and B\u266d."}
{"id": "25142", "revid": "21860424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25142", "title": "Sus (genus)", "text": "Genus of even-toed ungulates\nSus () is the genus of domestic and wild pigs, within the even-toed ungulate family Suidae. \"Sus\" includes domestic pigs (\"Sus domesticus\") and their ancestor, the common Eurasian wild boar (\"Sus scrofa\"), along with various other species. \"Sus\" species, like all suids, are native to the Eurasian and African continents, ranging from Europe to the Pacific islands.\nJuvenile pigs are known as piglets. Pigs live in complex social groups and are considered one of the more intelligent mammals, as reflected in their ability to learn.\nWith around 1 billion of this species alive at any time, the domestic pig is among the most populous large mammals in the world. Pigs are omnivores and can consume a wide range of food. Pigs are biologically similar to humans and are thus frequently used for human medical research.\nEtymology.\nThe \"Online Etymology Dictionary\" provides anecdotal evidence as well as linguistic, saying that the term derives\nprobably from Old English , found in compounds, ultimate origin unknown. Originally \"young pig\" (the word for adults was \"swine\"). Apparently related to Low German , Dutch (\"but the phonology is difficult\" -- \"OED\"). ... Another Old English word for \"pig\" was , related to \"\" \"furrow,\" from PIE *\"perk\"- \"dig, furrow\" (source also of Latin \"pig,\" see \"pork\"). \"This reflects a widespread IE tendency to name animals from typical attributes or activities\" [Roger Lass]. Synonyms \"grunter\", \"oinker\" are from sailors' and fishermen's euphemistic avoidance of uttering the word pig at sea, a superstition perhaps based on the fate of the Gadarene swine, who drowned.\nThe \"Online Etymology Dictionary\" also traces the evolution of sow, the term for a female pig, through various historical languages:\nOld English ', ' \"female of the swine,\" from Proto-Germanic *\"su\"- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German \"su\", German , Dutch , Old Norse '), from PIE root *\"su\"- (cognates: Sanskrit \"wild boar, swine;\" Avestan \"hu\" \"wild boar;\" Greek \"hys\" \"swine;\" Latin \"swine\", \"pertaining to swine\"; Old Church Slavonic ' \"swine;\" Lettish \"sivens\" \"young pig;\" Welsh ', Irish ' \"swine; Old Irish \"\" \"snout, plowshare\"), possibly imitative of pig noise; note that Sanskrit \"sukharah\" means \"maker of (the sound) \"su\"\".\nAn adjectival form is \"porcine\". Another adjectival form (technically for the subfamily rather than genus name) is \"suine\" (comparable to \"bovine\", \"canine\", etc.); for the family, it is \"suid\" (as with \"bovid\", \"canid\").\nDescription and behaviour.\nA typical pig has a large head with a long snout that is strengthened by a special prenasal bone and by a disk of cartilage at the tip. The snout is used to dig into the soil to find food and is a very acute sense organ. Each foot has four hooves with the two larger central toes bearing most of the weight, and the outer two also being used in soft ground.\nThe dental formula of adult pigs is 3.1.4.33.1.4.3, giving a total of 44 teeth. The rear teeth are adapted for crushing. In the male, the canine teeth form tusks, which grow continuously and are sharpened by constantly being ground against each other.\nOccasionally, captive mother pigs may savage their own piglets, often if they become severely stressed. Some attacks on newborn piglets are non-fatal. Others may kill the piglets and sometimes, the mother may eat them. An estimated 50% of piglet fatalities are due to the mother attacking, or unintentionally crushing, the newborn pre-weaned animals.\nDistribution and evolution.\nWith around 1 billion individuals alive at any time, the domestic pig is one of the most numerous large mammals on the planet.\nThe ancestor of the domestic pig is the wild boar, which is one of the most numerous and widespread large mammals. Its many subspecies are native to all but the harshest climates of continental Eurasia and its islands and Africa as well, from Ireland and India to Japan and north to Siberia.\nLong isolated from other pigs on the many islands of Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines, pigs have evolved into many different species, including wild boar, bearded pigs, and warty pigs. Humans have introduced pigs into Australia, North and South America, and numerous islands, either as wild boar or accidentally as escaped domestic pigs which have gone feral.\nHabitat and reproduction.\nThe wild boar (\"Sus scrofa\") can take advantage of any forage resources. Therefore, they can live in virtually any productive habitat that can provide enough water to sustain large mammals such as pigs. Pigs are famously fecund; when well-fed, a sow can birth twelve or more piglets in her annual litter. If there is increased foraging by wild boars in certain areas, they can cause a nutritional shortage which can cause the pig population to decrease. If the nutritional state returns to normal, the pig population will most likely rise due to the pigs' naturally increased reproduction rate.\nDiet and foraging.\nPigs are omnivores, which means that they consume both plants and animals. In the wild, they are foragers, searching through their habitat for food (which, for pigs, often includes digging with their snouts). Wild pigs eat roots, tubers, leaves, fruits, mushrooms, and flowers, in addition to some insects (especially insect grubs) and fish. Pigs are famously fond of truffle mushrooms, which grow underground; pigs find them by scent and unearth them with their snouts. In Europe, trained \"truffle pigs\" find these valuable fungi for humans. Pigs do not hunt, but will readily eat carrion, eggs, and other animal foods that they can find. As livestock, pigs were once fed all manner of mixed household food scraps (called \"slops\"), but on large modern farms are now fed mostly corn and soybean meal with a mixture of vitamins and minerals added. Traditionally, pigs were raised on dairy farms and fed any excess milk and the whey left over from cheese and butter making. Pigs brought so much extra income to these farms that they earned the nickname \"mortgage lifters\". Older pigs will consume three to five gallons of water per day. When kept as pets, the optimal healthy diet consists mainly of a balanced diet of raw vegetables, although some may give their pigs commercial mini pig pellet feed.\nRelationship with humans.\nMost pigs today are domesticated pigs raised for meat (known as pork). Miniature breeds are commonly kept as pets. Because of their foraging abilities and excellent sense of smell, people in many European countries use them to find truffles. Both wild and feral pigs are commonly hunted.\nApart from meat, pig skin is turned into leather, and their hairs are used to make brushes. The relatively short, stiff, coarse pig hairs are called bristles, and were once so commonly used in paintbrushes that in 1946 the Australian Government launched Operation Pig Bristle. In May 1946, in response to a shortage of pig bristles for paintbrushes to paint houses in the post-World War II construction boom, the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) flew in 28 short tons of pig bristles from China, their only commercially available source at the time.\nUse in human healthcare.\nHuman skin is very similar to pig skin, therefore many preclinical studies employ pig skin. In addition to providing use in biomedical research and for drug testing, genetic advances in human healthcare have provided a pathway for domestic pigs to become xenotransplantation candidates for humans.\nSpecies.\nThe genus \"Sus\" is currently thought to contain nine living species. Several extinct species (\u2020) are known from fossils.\nExtant species.\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:15%; min-width:180px;\"|Common name\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:25%;\"|Scientific name and subspecies\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:15%; min-width:180px;\"|Range\n!scope\n\"col\" style\n\"width:29%;\"\n!scope\n\"col\" style\n\"width:16%; min-width:112px;\"\n!scope=\"row\"|Palawan bearded pig\n!scope=\"row\"|Bornean bearded pig\n!scope=\"row\"|Visayan warty pig\n!scope=\"row\"|Celebes warty pig or Sulawesi warty pig\n!scope=\"row\"|Domestic pig\n!scope=\"row\"|Oliver's warty pig or Mindoro warty pig\n!scope=\"row\"|Philippine warty pig\n!scope=\"row\"|Wild boar\n!scope=\"row\"|Javan warty pig\nDomestication.\nPigs have been domesticated since ancient times in the Old World. Pigs were domesticated on each end of Eurasia, and possibly several times. It is now thought that pigs were attracted to human settlements for the food scraps, and that the process of domestication began as a commensal relationship. Archaeological evidence suggests that pigs were being managed in the wild in a way similar to the way they are managed by some modern New Guineans from wild boar as early as 13,000\u201312,700 BP in the Near East in the Tigris Basin, \u00c7ay\u00f6n\u00fc, Cafer H\u00f6y\u00fck, Neval\u0131 \u00c7ori. Remains of pigs have been dated to earlier than 11,400 BP in Cyprus that must have been introduced from the mainland which suggests domestication in the adjacent mainland by then.\nPigs were also domesticated in China, potentially more than once. In some parts of China pigs were kept in pens from early times, separating them from wild populations and allowing farmers to create breeds that were fatter and bred more quickly. Early Modern Europeans brought these breeds back home and crossed them with their own pigs, which was the origins of most modern pig breeds.\nIn India, pigs have been domesticated for a long time mostly in Goa and some rural areas for pig toilets. This practice also occurred in China. Though ecologically logical as well as economical, pig toilets are waning in popularity as use of septic tanks and/or sewerage systems is increasing in rural areas.\nHernando de Soto and other early Spanish explorers brought pigs to southeastern North America from Europe. As in medieval Europe, pigs are valued on certain oceanic islands for their self-sufficiency, which allows them to be turned loose, although the practice does have drawbacks (see environmental impact).\nThe domestic pig (\"Sus domesticus\") is usually given the scientific name \"Sus scrofa domesticus\", although some taxonomists, including the American Society of Mammalogists, call it \"S.\u00a0domesticus\", reserving \"S.\u00a0scrofa\" for the wild boar. It was domesticated approximately 5,000 to 7,000 years ago. The upper canines form sharp distinctive tusks that curve outward and upward. Compared to other artiodactyles, their head is relatively long, pointed, and free of warts. Their head and body length ranges from and they can weigh between .\nIn November 2012, scientists sequenced the genome of the domestic pig. The similarities between the pig and human genomes mean that the new data may have wide applications in the study and treatment of human genetic diseases.\nIn August 2015, a study looked at over 100 pig genome sequences to ascertain their process of domestication. The study indicated that pigs were domesticated separately in Western Asia and China, with Western Asian pigs introduced into Europe where they crossed with wild boar. A model that fitted the data included admixture with a now extinct ghost population of wild pigs during the Pleistocene. The study also found that despite back-crossing with wild pigs, the genomes of domestic pigs have strong signatures of selection at DNA loci that affect behavior and morphology. The study concluded that human selection for domestic traits likely counteracted the homogenizing effect of gene flow from wild boars and created domestication islands in the genome.\nIn culture.\nPigs have been important in culture across the world since Neolithic times. They appear in art, literature, and religion. In Asia the wild boar is one of 12 animal images comprising the Chinese zodiac, while in Europe the boar represents a standard charge in heraldry. In Islam and Judaism pigs and those who handle them are viewed negatively, and the consumption of pork is forbidden.\nPigs are alluded to in animal epithets and proverbs. \nThe pig has been celebrated throughout Europe since ancient times in its carnivals, the name coming from the Italian \"carne levare\", the lifting of meat.\nPigs have been brought into literature for varying reasons, ranging from the pleasures of eating, as in Charles Lamb's \"A Dissertation upon Roast Pig\", to William Golding's \"Lord of the Flies\" (with the fat character \"Piggy\"), where the rotting boar's head on a stick represents Beelzebub, \"lord of the flies\", and George Orwell's allegorical novel \"Animal Farm\", where the central characters, representing Soviet leaders, are all pigs.\nEnvironmental damage.\nDomestic pigs that have escaped from urban areas or were allowed to forage in the wild, and in some cases wild boars which were introduced as prey for hunting, have given rise to large populations of feral pigs in North and South America, Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii, and other areas where pigs are not native. Accidental or deliberate releases of pigs into countries or environments where they are an alien species have caused extensive environmental change. Their omnivorous diet, aggressive behaviour, and their feeding method of rooting in the ground all combine to severely alter ecosystems unused to pigs. Pigs will even eat small animals and destroy nests of ground nesting birds. The Invasive Species Specialist Group lists feral pigs on the list of the world's 100 worst invasive species and says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Feral pigs like other introduced mammals are major drivers of extinction and ecosystem change. They have been introduced into many parts of the world, and will damage crops and home gardens as well as potentially spreading disease. They uproot large areas of land, eliminating native vegetation and spreading weeds. This results in habitat alteration, a change in plant succession and composition and a decrease in native fauna dependent on the original habitat.\nHealth problems.\nBecause of their biological similarities, pigs can harbour a range of parasites and diseases that can be transmitted to humans. Examples of such zoonoses include trichinosis, \"Taenia solium\", cysticercosis, and brucellosis. Pigs also host large concentrations of parasitic ascarid worms in their digestive tracts.\nSome strains of influenza are endemic in pigs, the most significant of which are H1N1, H1N2, and H3N2, the first of which has caused several outbreaks among humans, including the Spanish flu, 1977 Russian flu pandemic, and the 2009 swine flu pandemic. \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25144", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25144", "title": "Packet radio", "text": "Form of amateur radio data communications using the AX25 protocol\nIn digital radio, packet radio is the application of packet switching techniques to digital radio communications. Packet radio uses a packet switching protocol as opposed to circuit switching or message switching protocols to transmit digital data via a radio communication link.\nPacket radio is frequently used by amateur radio operators. The AX.25 (Amateur X.25) protocol was derived from the X.25 data link layer protocol and adapted for amateur radio use. Every AX.25 packet includes the sender's amateur radio callsign, which satisfies the United States Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requirements for amateur radio station identification. AX.25 allows other stations to automatically repeat packets to extend the range of transmissions. It is possible for any packet station to act as a digipeater, linking distant stations with each other through ad hoc networks. This makes packet radio especially useful for emergency communications.\nPacket radio can be used in mobile communications. Some mobile packet radio stations transmit their location periodically using the Automatic Packet Reporting System (APRS). If the APRS packet is received by an \"i-gate\" station, position reports and other messages can be routed to an internet server, and made accessible on a public web page. This allows amateur radio operators to track the locations of vehicles, hikers, high-altitude balloons, etc., along with telemetry and other messages around the world.\nSome packet radio implementations also use dedicated point-to-point links such as TARPN. In cases such as this, new protocols have emerged such as Improved Layer 2 Protocol (IL2P) supporting forward error correction for noisy and weak signal links.\nHistory.\nEarlier digital radio communications modes were telegraphy (using Morse code), teleprinter (using Baudot code) and facsimile.\nAloha and PRNET.\nSince radio circuits inherently possess a broadcast network topology (i.e., many or all nodes are connected to the network simultaneously), one of the first technical challenges faced in the implementation of packet radio networks was a means to control access to a shared communication channel to avoid collisions of signals. Professor Norman Abramson of the University of Hawai\u02bbi led development of a packet radio network known as ALOHAnet and performed a number of experiments beginning in the 1970s to develop methods to arbitrate access to a shared radio channel by network nodes. This system operated on UHF frequencies at 9,600 baud. From this work the Aloha multiple access protocol was derived. Subsequent enhancements in channel access techniques made by Leonard Kleinrock \"et al.\" in 1975 would lead Robert Metcalfe to use carrier-sense multiple access (CSMA) protocols in the design of the now commonplace Ethernet local area network (LAN) technology.\nOver 1973\u201376, DARPA created a packet radio network called PRNET in the San Francisco Bay area and conducted a series of experiments with SRI to verify the use of ARPANET (a precursor to the Internet) communications protocols (later known as Internet Protocol (IP)) over packet radio links between mobile and fixed network nodes. This system was quite advanced, as it made use of direct sequence spread spectrum (DSSS) modulation and forward error correction (FEC) techniques to provide 100\u00a0kbit/s and 400\u00a0kbit/s data channels. These experiments were generally considered to be successful, and also marked the first demonstration of Internetworking, as in these experiments data was routed between the ARPANET, PRNET, and SATNET (a satellite packet radio network) networks. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, DARPA operated a number of terrestrial and satellite packet radio networks connected to the ARPANET at various military and government installations.\nAmateur Packet Radio and the AMPRNet.\nAmateur radio operators began experimenting with packet radio in 1978, when\u2014after obtaining authorization from the Canadian government\u2014Robert Rouleau, VE2PY; Bram Frank, VE2BFH; Norm Pearl, VE2BQS; and Jacques Orsali, VE2EHP of the Montreal Amateur Radio Club Montreal, Quebec, began experimenting with transmitting ASCII encoded data over VHF amateur radio frequencies using homebuilt equipment. In 1980, Doug Lockhart VE7APU, and the Vancouver Area Digital Communications Group (VADCG) in Vancouver, British Columbia began producing standardized equipment (Terminal Node Controllers) in quantity for use in amateur packet radio networks. In 1989, Lockhart was inducted by the Canadian Amateur Radio Federation (CARF, now Radio Amateurs of Canada), as its First Member of the Canadian Amateur Radio Hall of Fame (CARHOF) for his outstanding contribution to the development of Amateur Packet Radio Communications. In 2003, Rouleau was inducted into CQ Amateur Radio magazine's hall of fame for his work on the Montreal Protocol in 1978.\nNot long after this activity began in Canada, amateurs in the US became interested in packet radio. In 1980, the United States Federal Communications Commission (FCC) granted authorization for United States amateurs to transmit ASCII codes via amateur radio. Repeaters may be designed for amateur packet radio, these are dubbed \"digipeaters\". The first known amateur packet radio activity in the US occurred in San Francisco during December 1980, when a packet repeater was put into operation on 2 meters by Hank Magnuski KA6M, and the Pacific Packet Radio Society (PPRS). In keeping with the dominance of DARPA and ARPANET at the time, the nascent amateur packet radio network was dubbed the AMPRNet in DARPA style. Magnuski obtained IP address allocations in the network for amateur radio use worldwide.\nMany groups of amateur radio operators interested in packet radio soon formed throughout the country including the Pacific Packet Radio Society (PPRS) in California, the Tucson Amateur Packet Radio Corporation (TAPR) in Arizona and the Amateur Radio Research and Development Corporation (AMRAD) in Washington, D.C.\nBy 1983, TAPR was offering the first TNC available in kit form. Packet radio started becoming more and more popular across North America and by 1984 the first packet-based bulletin board systems began to appear. Packet radio proved its value for emergency operations following the crash of an Aeromexico airliner in a neighborhood in Cerritos, California, in August 1986. Volunteers linked several key sites to pass text traffic via packet radio which kept voice frequencies clear.\nFor an objective description of early developments in amateur packet radio, refer to the article \"Packet Radio in the Amateur Service\".\nConcepts.\nPacket radio can be differentiated from other digital radio switching schemes by the following attributes:\nThis is very similar to how packets of data are transferred between nodes on the Internet.\nOne of the first challenges faced by amateurs implementing packet radio is that almost all amateur radio equipment (and most surplus commercial/military equipment) has historically been designed to transmit voice, not data. Like any other digital communications system that uses analog media, packet radio systems require a modem. Since the radio equipment to be used with the modem was intended for voice, early amateur packet systems used AFSK modems that followed telephone standards (notably the Bell 202 standard). While this approach worked, it was not optimal, because it used a 25\u00a0kHz FM channel to transmit at 1,200 baud. When using a direct FSK modulation like G3RUH's packet radio modem, a 9,600 baud transmission is easily made in the same channel. In addition, the baseband characteristics of the audio channel provided by voice radios are often quite different from those of telephone audio channels. This led to the need in some cases to enable or disable pre-emphasis or de-emphasis circuits in the radios and/or modems.\nAnother problem faced by early \"packeteers\" was the issue of asynchronous versus synchronous data transfer. At the time, most personal computers had asynchronous RS-232 serial ports for data communications between the computer and devices such as modems. The RS-232 standard specifies an asynchronous, start-stop mode of data transmission where data is sent in groups (characters) of 7 or 8 bits. Unfortunately, the simple AFSK modems typically used provide no timing signal to indicate the start of a packet frame. That led to the need for a mechanism to enable the receiver to know when to start assembling each packet frame. The method used is called asynchronous framing. The receiver looks for the \"frame boundary octet,\" then begins decoding the packet data that follows it. Another frame boundary octet marks the end of the packet frame.\nA number of data \"conversations\" are possible on a single radio channel over a finite period.\nA basic packet radio station consists of a computer or dumb terminal, a modem, and a transceiver with an antenna. Traditionally, the computer and modem are combined in one unit, the terminal node controller (TNC), with a dumb terminal (or terminal emulator) used to input and display data. Increasingly, personal computers are taking over the functions of the TNC, with the modem either a standalone unit or implemented entirely in software. Alternatively, multiple manufacturers (including Kenwood and Alinco) now market handheld or mobile radios with built-in TNCs, allowing connection directly to the serial port of a computer or terminal with no other equipment required. The computer is responsible for managing network connections, formatting data as AX.25 packets, and controlling the radio channel. Frequently it provides other functionality as well, such as a simple bulletin board system to accept messages while the operator is away.\nLayers.\nFollowing the OSI model, packet radio networks can be described in terms of the physical, data link, and network layer protocols on which they rely.\nPhysical.\nModems used for packet radio vary in throughput and modulation technique, and are normally selected to match the capabilities of the radio equipment in use.\nMost commonly used method is one using audio frequency-shift keying (AFSK) within the radio equipment's existing speech bandwidth.\nThe first amateur packet radio stations were constructed using surplus Bell 202 1,200 bit/s modems, and despite its low data rate, Bell 202 modulation has remained the standard for VHF operation in most areas. More recently, 9,600 bit/s has become a popular, although more technically demanding, alternative. At HF frequencies, Bell 103 modulation is used, at a rate of 300 bit/s.\nDue to historical reasons, all commonly used modulations are based on an idea of minimal modification to the radio itself, usually just connecting the computer's audio output directly to the transmitter's microphone input and receiver's audio output directly to the computer's microphone input. Upon adding a \"turn the transmitter on\" output signal (\"PTT\") for transmitter control, one has made a \"radio modem\".\nDue to this simplicity, and just having suitable microchips at hand, the \"Bell 202\" modulation became standard way to send the packet radio data over the radio as two distinct tones. The tones are 1,200\u00a0Hz for Mark and 2,200\u00a0Hz for space (1,000\u00a0Hz shift). In the case of \"Bell 103\" modulation, a 200\u00a0Hz shift is used. The data is differentially encoded with a NRZI pattern, where a data zero bit is encoded by a change in tones and a data one bit is encoded by no change in tones.\nWays to achieve higher speeds than 1,200 bits/s, include using telephone modem chips via the microphone and audio out connectors. This has been proven to work at speeds up to 4,800 bit/s using fax V.27 modems in half-duplex mode. These modems use phase-shift keying which works fine when there is no amplitude-shift keying, but at faster speeds such as 9,600 bit/s, signal levels become critical and they are extremely sensitive to group delay in the radio. These systems were pioneered by Simon Taylor (G1NTX) and Jerry Sandys (G8DXZ) in the 1980s. Other systems which involved small modification of the radio were developed by James Miller (G3RUH) and operated at 9,600 bit/s.\n1,200 bit/s AFSK node controllers on 2 meters (144\u2013148\u00a0MHz) are the most commonly found packet radio. For 1,200/2,400 bit/s UHF/VHF packet radio, amateurs use commonly available narrow band FM voice radios. For HF packet, 300 bit/s data is used over single sideband (SSB) modulation. For high speed packet (9,600 bit/s upwards), special radios or modified FM radios must be used.\nCustom modems have been developed which allow throughput rates of 19.2\u00a0kbit/s, 56\u00a0kbit/s, and even 1.2\u00a0Mbit/s over amateur radio links on FCC permitted frequencies of 440\u00a0MHz and above. However, special radio equipment is needed to carry data at these speeds. The interface between the \"modem\" and the \"radio\" is at the \"intermediate frequency\" part of the radio as opposed to the audio section used for 1,200\u00a0bit/s operation. The adoption of these high-speed links has been limited.\nIn many commercial data radio applications, audio baseband modulation is not used. Data is transmitted by altering the transmitter output frequency between two distinct frequencies (in the case of FSK modulation, other alternates exist).\nThe 2.4\u00a0GHz \"Wi-Fi\" band partially overlaps an amateur radio band, so commercial Wi-Fi hardware can be adapted and used by licensed amateur radio operators at higher power levels, although restrictions on amateur radio limit the appeal of using packet radio to connect to the internet. US FCC regulations do not allow amateur radio communications to be encrypted or private, in addition to other content restrictions.\nData link.\nPacket radio networks rely on the AX.25 data link layer protocol, derived from the X.25 protocol suite and intended specifically for amateur radio use. Despite its name, AX.25 defines both the physical and data link layers of the OSI model. (It also defines a network layer protocol, though this is seldom used.)\nNetwork.\nPacket radio has most often been used for direct, keyboard-to-keyboard connections between stations, either between two live operators or between an operator and a bulletin board system. No network services above the data link layer are required for these applications.\nTo provide automated routing of data between stations (important for the delivery of electronic mail), several network layer protocols have been developed for use with AX.25. Most prominent among these network layer protocols are NET/ROM &amp; TheNET, ROSE, FlexNet and TexNet.\nIn principle, any network layer protocol may be used, including the ubiquitous Internet Protocol.\nImplementations.\nMany commercial operations, particularly those that make use of vehicle dispatch (e.g. taxis, tow trucks, police) were quick to note the value of packet radio systems to provide simple mobile data systems. This led to the rapid development of a number of commercial packet radio systems:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25146", "revid": "1316262185", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25146", "title": "Pizza cheese", "text": "Cheese for use specifically on pizza\nPizza cheese encompasses several varieties and types of cheeses and dairy products that are designed and manufactured for use specifically on pizza. These include processed and modified cheese, such as mozzarella-like processed cheeses and mozzarella variants. The term can also refer to any type of cheese suitable for use on pizza. The most popular cheeses used in the preparation of pizza are mozzarella (accounting for about 30%), provolone, cheddar and Parmesan. Emmental, \"pecorino romano\" and ricotta are often used as toppings, and processed pizza cheeses manufactured specifically for pizza are mass-produced. Some mass-produced pizza cheeses are frozen after manufacturing and shipped frozen.\nProcessed pizza cheese is manufactured to produce optimal qualities in browning, melting, stretchiness and fat and moisture content. Several studies and experiments have analyzed the impact of vegetable oil, manufacturing and culture processes, denatured whey proteins and other changes to create ideal and economical pizza cheeses. In 1997, it was estimated that annual production of pizza cheese products was 1 million tons in the United States and 100,000 in Europe, and in 2000 demand for the product in Europe was increasing by 8% per year. The trend of steadily-increasing production and consumption of mozzarella and pizza cheese continued into the first decade of the 21st century in the United States.\nVarieties and types.\nThe \"International Dictionary of Food and Cooking\" defines pizza cheese as \"a soft spun-curd cheese similar to Mozzarella made from cow's milk...\" that is \"...used particularly for pizzas and contains somewhat less water than real Mozzarella...\" Most are at least 95 percent mozzarella, with different moisture and fat densities. Cheese for frozen pizzas may be comminuted, in which the cheese is processed into minute granules or fragments. Low-moisture mozzarella can be formulated specifically for pizza. Cheese may be processed into blocks, from which the product can be grated, made into granules or sliced for use on pizza or other foods. Pizza cheese frequently consists of a blend of two or more cheeses, such as low-moisture mozzarella or provolone. Low-moisture mozzarella was first manufactured in dairy factories in the Midwestern United States, and was originally called \"pizza cheese\". Compared to standard mozzarella, low-moisture mozzarella has a firmer texture, is easier to grate, has better browning and melting characteristics, and is less perishable.\nGlobally, mozzarella is the most popular pizza cheese. However, it has been estimated that in the United States only 30% of all pizza cheese used is actual mozzarella. Provolone is the second most popular one. Cheddar may be mixed with mozzarella to preserve chewiness. Grated Parmesan may be added to the top of a pizza, and typically does not melt well when cooked. A diverse variety of processed pizza cheeses are produced, including analogue cheese. Provel is one example. Other pizza cheeses include Emmental and \"pecorino romano\"; Detroit-style pizza is noted for its use of Wisconsin brick cheese. Ricotta is used for calzones or as a topping.\nSeveral cheeses may be mixed together in its formulation, and each has individual browning and blistering characteristics. For example, a combination of mozzarella and Cheddar may blister less when cooked compared to other combinations, because cheddar has less elasticity, while mozzarella and provolone may brown less compared to other combinations.\nProcessed pizza cheeses.\nPasteurized and processed cheese-like products for pizza that are quicker and cheaper to produce than real cheese and designed to melt well and remain chewy are used on many mass-produced pizzas in North America and the United Kingdom. These products are referred to as \"analogue\" (or \"analog\") \"pizza cheese\"; in the UK the term \"cheese analogue\" is used, making clear that it is not actually cheese. In the book \"Technology of Cheesemaking\", editors Law and Tamimethat state that analogue pizza cheese appears to be the leading type of cheese analogue produced globally. Each year in the United States, 700 million frozen pizzas are sold, three-quarters of which contain cheese substitutes.\nAnalogue pizza cheeses may be formulated for processing with less sophisticated cheese-making equipment than is required for mozzarella cheese, such as using simple mixing and molding. They tend to have a soft texture and once melted, may have a slightly \"stringy\" quality when pulled or bitten into. They may lack fusion, i.e. shredded pieces might not flow together when they melt. New stabilizer systems have been developed that have helped to enable the creation of analogue pizza cheeses.\nAn example of a processed pizza cheese is Provel, which uses Cheddar, Swiss, and provolone cheeses as flavorants. Some analogue types are made with casein, a by-product of milk, and vegetable oil, rather than milk fat. Casein-based mozzarella-like imitation processed cheeses prepared using rennet are also used as a mozzarella substitute on frozen pizzas.\nIn some instances, the production of analogue pizza cheese can be similar to the production of cream cheese, although production may be different and homogenization may be avoided. In some varieties, the product is heated to remain at a specific temperature and for a specific amount of time, which causes the proteins in the mix to gelatinize. During this process, salts in the mix serve to emulsify it and thus improve the meltability of the final product. The heated product is then placed in packaging such as bags-in-boxes while still hot, as it will flow when hot but solidifies as it cools. During packaging, these types of pizza cheeses are then quick-cooled to avoid browning of the product, which can occur via the Maillard reaction.\nResearch and development.\nManufacturers and academics have conducted studies and experiments in an effort to improve the stretchiness, melting characteristics, browning, fat content and water retention of pizza cheese. Several patents exist for specialized varieties of pizza cheese and for its processing. A study by Rudan and Barbano found that the addition of a thin layer of vegetable oil atop low- and reduced-fat pizza cheese increased meltability and reduced browning and dehydration when the product was cooked, but the texture remained overly chewy and tough. A study by Perry et al. found various methods to heighten the melt of low-fat pizza cheese by increasing its moisture, including the use of pre-acidification, fat-replacers, and exopolysaccharide starter cultures as well as higher pasteurization temperatures.\nManufacturers aim for a moisture content of 50\u201352% and a fat-in-dry-matter content of 35\u201340%. A study published in the \"International Journal of Food &amp; Science Technology\" found that a 12.5:87.5 blend of vetch milk and cow milk improved stretchiness and melting characteristics. Vetch is a legume that has seeds which are similar to lentils. An experiment published in the \"International Journal of Dairy Technology\" suggested that the level of galactose, a monosaccharide sugar that is less sweet than glucose and fructose, can be reduced using different culture techniques. An article in the \"International Journal of Food Engineering\" found that trisodium citrate, a food additive used to preserve and add flavor to foods, slightly improved the preferred qualities of pizza cheese. Research published in \"Dairy Industries International\" suggested that denatured whey proteins increased moisture retention, but that the improvements were very slight and not economically worthwhile relative to the minor improvements.\nSome consumers prefer pizza cheese with less browning, which can be achieved using low-moisture part-skim mozzarella with a low galactose content. Some varieties derived from skim mozzarella variants were designed not to require aging or the use of fermentation starter. Others can be produced through the direct acidification of milk, which may be used in place of bacterial fermentation.\nProduction and business.\nIn the United States, the production and consumption of mozzarella and pizza cheese steadily increased in the mid-20th century, and this trend has continued into the first decade of the 21st century. In the U.S., several hundred million pounds of pizza cheese is consumed annually. In 1997, it was estimated that annual production of the product was 1 million tons (2 billion pounds) in the United States and 100,000 tonnes (98,000 long tons; 110,000 short tons, 220,460,000 pounds) in Europe. It has been estimated that 30% of all pizza cheese used in the United States is mozzarella. As of 2000, demand for the product was growing in Europe by 8 percent per year.\nMass-produced pizza cheese is used by the foodservice industry, quick service restaurants, and other industries and businesses. The world's largest manufacturer of pizza cheese, Leprino Foods Company, processes 600,000 tonnes (590,000 long tons; 660,000 short tons, 1,322,760,000 pounds) a year. Leprino Foods holds patents for some specialized mozzarella production processes that enable the quick manufacture of the product. One such product is a frozen shredded cheese used for pizza that is created in a few hours from milk. Other U.S. companies also mass-produce pizza cheese, which is shipped in a frozen state. As of 2000, Glanbia is the largest producer of pizza cheese in Europe. Some retail and commercially mass-produced frozen pizzas have cheese stuffed into the pizza crust.\nUse by region.\nSignificant amounts of pizza cheese are used in Europe, Australia, New Zealand and the United States. Whole milk mozzarella is popular in pizzas in the East and Southwest regions of the U.S., while one survey showed that provolone was more popular on the east and west coast. Cheddar may be used more in the Eastern and Southern regions of the U.S. Provel cheese is typically used in the preparation of St. Louis\u2013style pizza in the U.S.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25147", "revid": "49887303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25147", "title": "Peggy Lee", "text": "American singer (1920\u20132002)\nNorma Deloris Egstrom (May 26, 1920 \u2013 January 21, 2002), known professionally as Peggy Lee, was an American jazz and popular music singer, songwriter, and actress whose career spanned seven decades. From her beginning as a vocalist on local radio to singing with Benny Goodman's big band, Lee created a sophisticated persona, writing music for films, acting, and recording conceptual record albums combining poetry and music. Called the \"Queen of American pop music\", Lee recorded more than 1,100 masters and co-wrote over 270 songs. She is best known for her role in the Walt Disney classic \"Lady and the Tramp\", where she voiced Darling, Peg, the Siamese cats, among others. She received an Academy Award nomination for her role in the 1955 film \"Pete Kelly's Blues\".\nEarly life.\nLee was born Norma Deloris Egstrom in Jamestown, North Dakota, United States, on May 26, 1920, the seventh of the eight children of Selma Emele (n\u00e9e Anderson) Egstrom and Marvin Olaf Egstrom, a station agent for the Midland Continental Railroad. Her family were Lutherans. Her father was Swedish-American and her mother was Norwegian-American. After her mother died when Lee was four, her father married Minnie Schaumberg Wiese. His family's original name was Ekstr\u00f6m.\nLee and her family lived in several towns along the Midland Continental Railroad (Jamestown, Nortonville, and Wimbledon). She graduated from Wimbledon High School in 1937.\nLee began singing at a young age. In Wimbledon, she was the female singer for a six-piece college dance band with leader Lyle \"Doc\" Haines. She traveled to various locations with Haines's quintet on Fridays after school and on weekends.\nLee first sang professionally on KOVC radio in Valley City, North Dakota, in 1936. She later had her own 15-minute Saturday radio show sponsored by a local restaurant that paid her salary in food. Both during and after her high-school years, Lee sang for small sums on local radio stations.\nIn October 1937, radio personality Ken Kennedy, of North Dakota's most widely heard station, WDAY in Fargo, auditioned her and put her on the air that day, but not before he changed her name to Peggy Lee.\nIn March 1938, at age 17, Lee left home for Hollywood, California. Her first job was seasonal work on Balboa Island, Newport Beach, as a short-order cook and waitress at Harry's Cafe. When the job ended after Easter, she was hired as a carnival barker at the Balboa Fun Zone. She wrote about this experience in the song \"The Nickel Ride\", which she composed with Dave Grusin for the 1974 film of the same name.\nLater in 1938, Lee returned to Hollywood to audition for the MC at The Jade. Her employment was cut short when she fainted onstage due to overwork and malnutrition. After she was taken to the Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center she was told she needed a tonsillectomy. Lee returned to North Dakota for the operation.\nIn 1939, Lee was hired to perform regularly at The Powers Hotel in Fargo, and toured with both the Sev Olson and the Will Osborne Orchestras. She was also again broadcasting at WDAY.\nWhen Lee returned to California in 1940, she took a job singing at The Doll House in Palm Springs. There, she developed her trademark sultry purr, having decided to compete with the noisy crowd with subtlety rather than volume.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I knew I couldn't sing over them, so I decided to sing under them. The more noise they made, the more softly I sang. When they discovered they couldn't hear me, they began to look at me. Then, they began to listen. As I sang, I kept thinking, \"softly with feeling\". The noise dropped to a hum; the hum gave way to silence. I had learned how to reach and hold my audience\u2014softly, with feeling.\nWhile performing at The Doll House, Lee met Frank Bering, the owner of the Ambassador East and West in Chicago. He offered her a gig at the Buttery Room, a nightclub in the Ambassador Hotel West. There, she was noticed by bandleader Benny Goodman. According to Lee:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Benny's then-fianc\u00e9e, Lady Alice Duckworth, came into the Buttery, and she was very impressed. So the next evening, she brought Benny in, because they were looking for a replacement for Helen Forrest. And although I didn't know, I was it. He was looking at me strangely, I thought, but it was just his preoccupied way of looking. I thought that he didn't like me at first, but it just was that he was preoccupied with what he was hearing.\nShe joined his band in August 1941 and made her first recording, singing \"Elmer's Tune\". Lee stayed with the Benny Goodman Orchestra for two years.\nCareer.\nRecording career.\nIn 1942, Lee had her first top ten hit, \"Somebody Else Is Taking My Place\", followed in 1943 by \"Why Don't You Do Right?\", which sold more than one million copies and made her famous. She sang with Goodman's orchestra in two 1943 films, \"Stage Door Canteen\" and \"The Powers Girl\".\nIn March 1943, Lee married Dave Barbour, a guitarist in Goodman's band. Lee said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;David joined Benny's band and there was a ruling that no one should fraternize with the girl singer. But I fell in love with David the first time I heard him play, and so I married him. Benny then fired David, so I quit, too. Benny and I made up, although David didn't play with him anymore. Benny stuck to his rule. I think that's not too bad a rule, but you can't help falling in love with somebody.\nWill Friedwald has written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;when she left the band that spring [1943], her intention was to quit the footlights altogether and become Mrs. Barbour, fulltime housewife. It's to Mr. Barbour's credit that he refused to let his wife's singing and composing talent lie dormant for too long. \"I fell in love with David Barbour,\" she recalled. \"But 'Why Don't You Do Right' was such a giant hit that I kept getting offers and kept turning them down. And at that time it was a lot of money, but it really didn't matter to me at all. I was very happy. All I wanted was to have a family and cling to the children [daughter Nicki]. Well, they kept talking to me and finally David joined them and said 'You really have too much talent to stay at home and someday you might regret it.'\"\nIn 1944, Lee drifted back to songwriting and occasional recording sessions for Capitol Records, for which she recorded a long string of hits, many of them with lyrics and music by Lee and Barbour, including \"I Don't Know Enough About You\" and \"It's a Good Day\". Her recording of \"Golden Earrings\", the title song of a 1947 movie, was a hit throughout 1947\u201348. \"Ma\u00f1ana\", by Lee and Barbour, was her eleventh solo hit recording, and remained on the charts for 21 weeks, including nine at the top position. The song sold more than a million copies, and earned the Top Disc Jockey Record of the Year award from \"Billboard\" magazine. From 1946 to 1949, Lee also recorded for Capitol's library of electrical transcriptions for radio stations. An advertisement for Capitol Transcriptions in a trade magazine noted that the transcriptions included \"special voice introductions by Peggy\".\nIn 1948, Lee joined vocalists Perry Como and Jo Stafford as a host of the NBC Radio musical program \"The Chesterfield Supper Club\". She was a regular on \"The Jimmy Durante Show\" and appeared frequently on Bing Crosby's radio shows during the late 1940s and early 1950s.\nHer relationship with Capitol spanned almost three decades aside from a brief detour (1952\u20131956) at Decca. For that label, she recorded \"Black Coffee\" and had hit singles such as \"Lover\" and \"Mister Wonderful\".\nIn 1958, she recorded her own version of \"Fever\" by Little Willie John, written by Eddie Cooley and Otis Blackwell. Lee created a new arrangement for the song, and added lyrics (\"Romeo loved Juliet\", \"Captain Smith and Pocahontas\"), which she neglected to copyright. Her version of \"Fever\" was a hit and was nominated in three categories at the 1st Annual Grammy Awards in 1959, including Record of the Year and Song of the Year.\nWhile Lee was in London for a 1970 engagement at Royal Albert Hall, she invited Paul and Linda McCartney to dinner at The Dorchester. At the dinner, the couple gave Lee a song they had written, \"Let's Love\". In July 1974, with Paul McCartney producing, Lee recorded the song at the Record Plant in Los Angeles, and it became the title track of her 40th album, her only one on Atlantic Records.\nActing career.\nLee starred opposite Danny Thomas in \"The Jazz Singer\" (1952), a remake of the Al Jolson film, \"The Jazz Singer\" (1927). She played an alcoholic blues singer in \"Pete Kelly's Blues\" (1955), for which she was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.\nLee provided speaking and singing voices for several characters in the Disney movie \"Lady and the Tramp\" (1955), playing the human Darling, the dog Peg, and the two Siamese cats, Si and Am. She also co-wrote, with Sonny Burke, all of the original songs for the film, including \"He's A Tramp\", \"Bella Notte\", \"La La Lu\", \"The Siamese Cat Song\", and \"Peace on Earth\". In 1987, when \"Lady and the Tramp\" was released on VHS, Lee sought performance and song royalties on the video sales. When the Disney company refused to pay, she filed a lawsuit in 1988. After a prolonged legal battle, in 1992, Lee was awarded $2.3 million for breach of contract, plus $500,000 for unjust enrichment, $600,000 for illegal use of Lee's voice and $400,000 for the use of her name.\nPeggy Lee also wrote the lyrics for \"Johnny Guitar\" (with music composer Victor Young), the title track of the 1954 film, \"Johnny Guitar\", which she sings partially at the end of the movie.\nDuring her career, Lee appeared in hundreds of variety shows, and several TV movies and specials.\nSongwriting.\nLee wrote or co-wrote more than 270 songs. In addition to her own material to sing, she was hired to score and compose songs for movies. For the Disney movie \"Lady and the Tramp\", she co-composed all of the original songs with Burke, and supplied the singing and speaking voices of four characters.\nOver the years, her songwriting collaborators included David Barbour, Laurindo Almeida, Harold Arlen, Sonny Burke, Cy Coleman, Duke Ellington, Dave Grusin, Quincy Jones, Francis Lai, Jack Marshall, Johnny Mandel, Marian McPartland, Willard Robison, Lalo Schifrin, and Victor Young.\nLee's first published song was in 1941, \"Little Fool\". \"What More Can a Woman Do?\" was recorded by Sarah Vaughan with Dizzy Gillespie and Charlie Parker. \"Ma\u00f1ana (Is Soon Enough for Me)\" was number one on the Billboard singles chart for nine weeks in 1948, from the week of March 13 to May 8.\nLee was a mainstay of Capitol Records when rock and roll came onto the American music scene. She was among the first of the \"old guard\" to recognize this new genre, as seen by her recording music from the Beatles, Randy Newman, Carole King, James Taylor, and other up-and-coming songwriters. From 1957 until her final disc for the company in 1972, she produced a steady stream of two or three albums per year that usually included standards (often arranged quite differently from the original), her own compositions, and material from young artists.\nMany of her compositions have become standards, performed by singers such as Tony Bennett, Nat King Cole, Natalie Cole, Bing Crosby, Doris Day, Ella Fitzgerald, Judy Garland, Diana Krall, Queen Latifah, Barry Manilow, Bette Midler, Janelle Monae, Nina Simone, Regina Spektor, Sarah Vaughan and others.\nPersonal life.\nLee was married four times: to guitarist and composer Dave Barbour (1943\u20131951), actor Brad Dexter (1953), actor Dewey Martin (1956\u20131958), and percussionist Jack Del Rio (1964). All the marriages ended in divorce.\nOn November 11, 1943, Lee gave birth to her only child, daughter Nicki Lee Foster (who died in 2014), in her marriage to Barbour.\nLee learned Transcendental Meditation and said she was taught \"by the Maharishi personally and that was a great honor.\"\nLawsuit.\nIn 1987, Peggy Lee was asked to help promote the first VHS release of \"Lady and the Tramp\", for which she was paid an honorarium for $500. Lee contended Disney had breached the 1952 contract she had signed with the studio, which denied Disney the right to make \"transcriptions for sale to the public\" without her approval. Disney CEO Michael Eisner refused to pay Lee her share of the royalties. On November 16, 1988, Lee sued the Walt Disney Company for breach of contract, claiming that she retained the rights to transcriptions of the music, arguing that videotape editions were transcriptions. Her lawyers demanded $50 million in damages for compensation. In March 1991, Lee was awarded $2.3 million for breach of contract, plus $500,000 for unjust enrichment, $600,000 for illegal use of Lee's voice and $400,000 for the use of her name. From the $72 million Disney had earned in videocassette sales, by 1995, Lee's award was estimated to be four percent of the sales.\nIn October 1992, the California Court of Appeals upheld the judgement that Disney had to pay Lee over $3 million in compensation. Though videocassettes did not exist when Lee signed her contract with Disney, she nevertheless had retained the rights to phonograph recordings and transcriptions of the film. Stephen Lachs, a Los Angeles County Superior Court judge, later ruled that videocassettes were considered under the category of transcriptions. In December 1992, the California Supreme Court denied a hearing on Disney's appeal of lower-court rulings, which upheld the studio had committed breach of contract.\nDeath.\nLee continued to perform into the 1990s, sometimes using a wheelchair. After years of poor health, she died of complications from diabetes and a heart attack on January 21, 2002, at the age of 81. She was cremated and her ashes were buried with a bench-style monument in Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles.\nLegacy.\nLee is often cited as the inspiration for the Margarita cocktail. In 1948, after a trip to Mexico, she and her husband ventured into the Balinese Room in Galveston, Texas. She requested a drink similar to one she had had in Mexico, and the head bartender, Santos Cruz, created the Margarita, and named it after the Spanish version of Peggy's name.\nLee was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for Recording in 1960. The star is at 6319 Hollywood Boulevard.\nBaseball's Tug McGraw, whose career with both the New York Mets and Philadelphia Phillies ranged from 1965 to 1984, named one of his pitches the Peggy Lee. He explained to \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\": \"That's the one where the hitter is out in front of it and says, 'Is that all there is?'\"\nIn 1971, Lee sang the Lord's Prayer at the funeral of Louis Armstrong.\nThe designer of the Miss Piggy Muppet, Bonnie Erickson, who grew up in Lee's home state of North Dakota, was inspired by Lee for the Miss Piggy character in 1974. Originally called Miss Piggy Lee, her name was shortened to Miss Piggy when the Muppet gained fame.\nIn 1975, Lee received an honorary doctorate in music from North Dakota State University, and in 2000, she received another from Jamestown University.\nIn 1983, Lee had a hybrid tea rose named in her honor that was pink with a touch of peach. The Peggy Lee Rose was the 1983 American Beauty Rose of the Year.\nIn 2003, \"There'll Be Another Spring: A Tribute to Miss Peggy Lee\" was held at Carnegie Hall. Produced by recording artist Richard Barone, the sold-out event included performances by Cy Coleman, Debbie Harry, Nancy Sinatra, Rita Moreno, Marian McPartland, Chris Connor, Petula Clark, Maria Muldaur, Dee Dee Bridgewater, Quincy Jones, Shirley Horn, and others. In 2004, Barone brought the event to a sold-out Hollywood Bowl, and then to Chicago's Ravinia Festival, with expanded casts including Maureen McGovern, Jack Jones, and Bea Arthur. The Carnegie Hall concert was broadcast on NPR's \"JazzSet\".\nThe Wimbledon depot building, where she and her family lived and worked, became the Midland Continental Depot Transportation Museum, featuring The Peggy Lee Exhibit, in 2012. The upper floor of the museum, where the Egstrom family once lived, features exhibits that trace Lee's career and her regional and state connection.\nOn the occasion of the 100th anniversary of Lee's birth, May 26, 2020, The Grammy Museum hosted an online panel discussion featuring musicians Billie Eilish, k.d. lang, Eric Burton (The Black Pumas), as well as Lee's granddaughter, Holly Foster Wells, and the author of \"Peggy Lee: A Century of Song\", Tish Oney.\nLee has been noted as an influence on artists such as Paul McCartney, Madonna, Beyonc\u00e9, k.d. lang, Elvis Costello, Diana Krall, Dusty Springfield, Rita Coolidge, Rita Moreno, and Billie Eilish.\nIn 2020, the ASCAP Foundation, along with Lee's family, established the annual Peggy Lee Songwriter Award. The inaugural award went to Michael Blum and Jenna Lotti for their song \"Fake ID\".\nWork.\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccolades.\nLee was nominated for 13 Grammy Awards. In 1969, her hit \"Is That All There Is?\" won her the Grammy for Best Contemporary Vocal Performance. In 1995, she was given the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.\nShe received the Rough Rider Award from the state of North Dakota in 1975, the Pied Piper Award from the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers in 1990, the Ella Award for Lifetime Achievement from the Society of Singers in 1994, the Living Legacy Award from the Women's International Center in 1994, and the Presidents Award from the Songwriters Guild of America in 1999. Other honors include induction into the Big Band Jazz Hall of Fame in 1992, the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1999, and the Songbook Hall of Fame from the Great American Songbook Foundation in 2020.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25152", "revid": "8945644", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25152", "title": "Perfection of Wisdom", "text": ""}
{"id": "25154", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25154", "title": "Paris-Dakar rally", "text": ""}
{"id": "25155", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25155", "title": "Paris-Dakar", "text": ""}
{"id": "25156", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25156", "title": "Pinuccio Sciola", "text": "Italian painter\nPinuccio Sciola (15 March 1942 \u2013 13 May 2016) was an Italian sculptor and muralist from San Sperate, Sardinia. His work has been mentioned as a major attraction of the nearby town of Assemini and Alghero.\nIn 1973 Sciola travelled to Mexico City to work with David Alfaro Siqueiros. He then focused primarily on sculpture. Among his most well-known pieces are the \"pietre sonore\" (\"sounding stones\") \u2013 large sculptures made of limestones or basalts that alter their appearance at human contact.\nSciola's work was exhibited at the 37th Venice Biennale (1976), the 10th Rome Quadriennale (1985) and Expo 2000 in Hannover. Public commissions include the Rotonda della Besana in Milan (1984); The Grand Trianon in Versailles (1996); and Renzo Piano's Auditorium City of Music Park in Rome (2003). \nIn 1996 his sound-stones were played by the percussionist Pierre Favre at the Time in Jazz Festival in Berchidda. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25157", "revid": "173996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25157", "title": "Paolo Fresu", "text": "Italian jazz musician (born 1961)\nPaolo Fresu (; born 10 February 1961) is an Italian jazz trumpet and flugelhorn player, as well as a composer and arranger of music. His unique trumpet sound is recognized as one of the most distinctive in the contemporary jazz scene.\nFresu plays four distinct instruments: trumpet, flugelhorn, muted trumpet, and electronics. He selectively uses a t.c. electronic effects unit and \"one from the past\" by DigiTech, through this equipment, he see it as a way to go back in time. Fresu demonstrates his versatile trumpet skills through his rendition of Monteverdi's \"Si dolce \u00e8 il tormento\" and Handel's aria \"Lascia ch'io Pianga.\"\nEarly life.\nFresu began studying the trumpet at age 11 in the \"Bernardo De Muro\" music band of Berchidda. At a young age, Fresu joined \"Banda\" a local marching band, where a member gave him a cassette of \"Miles Davis in Europe,\" with \"Autumn Leave.\"\nFresu professionally started in 1982, where he recorded with RAI, an Italian public broadcasting corporation, under the direction of Bruno Tommaso.\nIn the early 80s, Paolo Fresu had attended the Siena Summer Jazz Seminars and impressed Enrico Rava with his performance. It was over the next 10 years did Fresu become a major player in the Italian scene. He started with his quintet, which is currently going, and then began to branched out through a variety of projects.\nCareer.\nBorn in Berchidda, Sardinia, he picked up the trumpet at the age of 11, and played in the band Bernardo de Muro in his home town Berchidda. Fresu graduated from the Conservatory of Cagliari in 1984, in trumpet studies under Enzo Morandini, and attended the University of Bologna School of music and performing arts in Bologna. He made his debut in 1985, with the release of his first album \"Ostinato.\"\nHe has collaborated with leading Italian musicians like Franesco D'Andrea, Gianluigi Trovesi, Giorgio Gaslini, Enrico Rava, Bruno Tommaso, Giovanni Tommaso, Enrico Pieranunzi, Tiziana Ghiglioni. To European and Americans like Kenny Wheeler, John Taylor, Dave Liebman, Dave Holland, Phil Woods, Riccardo Del Fr\u00e0, Gerry Mulligan, Bob Brookmayer, John Zorn, John Abercrombie, Helen Merril, Richard Galliano, etc.\nOne of Paolo Fresu known collabaration is with Omar Sosa, a cuban born pianist.\nHe has taught at the Siena Jazz National Seminars, as well as jazz university courses in Terni, and is the director of Nuoro Jazz Seminars in Nuoro, Italy. He has led the Jazz Seminars in Nuoro for 25 years.\nFresu composes music for theatre, poem, dance, radio, television, and film.\nIn 2007, he recorded and toured with Carla Bley's quartet, the Lost Chords.\nIn 2011, he released \"Mistico Mediterraneo\", which featured him, Daniele di Bonaventura and five other members playing bandoneons in A Filetta style.\nIn 2012, his quintet performed at the Sirifort Auditorium, New Delhi, India, to celebrate 10 years of the Italian culture center there.\nIn 2015, Fresu was awarded an honorary doctorate of music from Berklee College of Music.\nPaolo Fresu is the artistic director of the Berchidda Festival Time In Jazz.\nT\u00fbk Music.\nPaolo Fresu has worked as a producer under his own label, T\u01d4k Music, where he not only produces his own albums, but artists like Dino Rubino and Marco Bardoscia who he has collaborated with by recording a Chet Baker tribute album \"Tiempo di Chet\" (2018). Fresu has also formed a trio with Bardoscia and Rubino, where they play music inspired by poet Lawrence Ferlinghetti. His label T\u00fbk Music was created in 2010 with his colleague Luca Devito, who previously had experience being a production coordinator. With the creation of the label, Fresu and Devito sought to venture off the traditional jazz path and more into the electronic and ethnic sounds, to give incentive to young musicians. While they did create the label to go towards a jazz electronic path, Fresu is not against or preventing the label from working within the tradition jazz path, as they want to be inclusive to everyone.\nThe labels projects, including Fresu's is based on the digital-related path as Dresu sees it is vital to be present and aware of the new media, ways for building creativity and music. Therefore, Fresu sees digital media as a powerful tool to make music be in the ears of people.\nPartial discography.\nThe complete official discography of Paolo Fresu can be found on his official website (more than 600 tracks).\nAs leader.\nPaolo Fresu 5et\nPaolo Fresu Devil Quartet\nPaolo Fresu\nAs sideman.\nWith Joe Barbieri\nWith Carla Bley\nWith Daniele di Bonaventura\nWith Uri Caine\nWith Lars Danielsson\nWith Peter Gabriel\nWith Aldo Romano\nWith Ralph Towner\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nPaolo Fresu. \"Tempo e relazione\" in Brooklyn Rail (September 2021), as part of section \"How Long Is Now?\" guest edited by Francesca Pietropaolo: https://brooklynrail.org/2021/09/criticspage"}
{"id": "25158", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25158", "title": "Paolo Fresu/Discography", "text": ""}
{"id": "25159", "revid": "45203278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25159", "title": "Punta Sardegna", "text": "Punta Sardegna is a panoramic site on the coast of northern Sardinia, near Porto Rafael, Palau.\nA curious air force observatory with a view on Bocche di Bonifacio and La Maddalena."}
{"id": "25160", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25160", "title": "Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy", "text": "Viral disease affecting human brains\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nProgressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a rare and often fatal viral disease characterized by progressive damage (\"-pathy\") or inflammation of the white matter (\"leuko-\") of the brain (\"-encephalo-\") at multiple locations (\"multifocal\"). It is caused by the JC virus, which is normally present and kept under control by the immune system. The JC virus is harmless except in cases of weakened immune systems. In general, PML has a mortality rate of 30\u201350% in the first few months, and those who survive can be left with varying degrees of neurological disabilities.\nPML occurs almost exclusively in patients with severe immune deficiency, most commonly among patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), but people on chronic immunosuppressive medications including chemotherapy are also at increased risk of PML, such as patients with transplants, Hodgkin's lymphoma, multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, and other autoimmune diseases.\nSigns and symptoms.\nSymptoms can develop over several weeks to months, and they depend on location of damage in the brain and the degree of damage. The most prominent symptoms are \"clumsiness, progressive weakness, and visual, speech, and sometimes personality changes\".\nThe lesions affecting the parietal and occipital lobes of the brain can lead to a phenomenon known as alien hand syndrome.\nCause.\nJC virus infection.\nThe cause of PML is a type of polyomavirus called the JC virus (JCV), after the initials of the person (John Cunningham) from whose tissue the virus was first successfully cultured. Publications indicate 39 to 58% of the general population are seropositive for antibodies to JCV, indicating current or previous infection with the virus. Other publications put the percentage at 70 to 90% of the general population. JCV causes persistent asymptomatic infection in about one-third of the adult population, based on viral shedding into the urine from the site of asymptomatic infection in the kidney. The virus causes disease only when the immune system has been severely weakened.\nImmunosuppression.\nPML is most common in people with HIV1 infection; prior to the advent of effective antiretroviral therapy, as many as 5% of people with AIDS eventually developed PML. Why PML occurs more frequently in people with AIDS than in other immunosuppressive conditions is unclear; some research suggests the effects of HIV on brain tissue, or on JCV itself, make JCV more likely to become active in the brain and increase its damaging inflammatory effects.\nPML can also occur in people on immunosuppressive therapy, such as efalizumab, belatacept, and various transplant drugs, which are meant to weaken the immune system.\nMultiple sclerosis medications.\nNatalizumab (Tysabri) was approved in 2004 by the FDA for the treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS). It supposedly works by preventing white blood cells from entering the brain. It was subsequently withdrawn from the market by its manufacturer after it was linked with three cases of PML. All three initial cases were taking natalizumab in combination with interferon beta-1a. After a safety review, the drug was returned to the market in 2006 as a monotherapy for MS under a special prescription program. As of May 2011, over 130 cases of PML had been reported in MS patients, all in patients who had taken natalizumab for more than a year. While none of them had taken the drug in combination with other disease-modifying treatments, previous use of MS treatments increases the risk of PML between three- and four-fold. The estimated prevalence of PML in MS is 1.5 cases per thousand natalizumab users. Around 20% of MS patients with PML die, and most of the rest are very disabled. One case study describes an MS patient who, during a 4-year course of dimethyl fumarate, developed PML and died.\nFingolimod (Gilenya) was https:// by the FDA for MS. In 2015, the first case of PML and a case of \"probable PML\" were reported by two Gilenya users that could not be tied to previous immunosuppressant therapies. These new cases are now being added to the drug information sheet included with every prescription (i.e. the \"drug label\").\nPathogenesis.\nPML is a demyelinating disease, in which the myelin sheath covering the axons of nerve cells is gradually destroyed, impairing the transmission of nerve impulses. It affects the subcortical white matter, particularly that of the parietal and occipital lobes. PML destroys oligodendrocytes and produces intranuclear inclusions. It is similar to another demyelinating disease, MS, but progresses much more quickly. The breakdown of myelin is proportional to the degree of immunocompromise.\nDiagnosis.\nPML is diagnosed in a patient with a progressive course of the disease, finding JC virus DNA in spinal fluid together with consistent white-matter lesions on brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); alternatively, a brain biopsy is diagnostic when the typical histopathology of demyelination, bizarre astrocytes, and enlarged oligodendroglial nuclei are present, coupled with techniques showing the presence of JC virus.\nCharacteristic evidence of PML on brain CT scan images are multifocal, noncontrast enhancing hypodense lesions without mass effect, but MRI is far more sensitive than CT. The most common area of involvement is the cortical white matter of frontal and parieto occipital lobes, but lesions may occur anywhere in the brain, such as the basal ganglia, external capsule, and posterior cranial fossa structures such as the brain stem and cerebellum.\nAlthough typically multifocal, natalizumab-associated PML is often monofocal, predominantly in the frontal lobe.\nTreatment.\nNo drugs effectively inhibit or cure the virus infection without toxicity. Therefore, treatment aims at reversing the immune deficiency to slow or stop the disease progress. In patients on immunosuppression, this means stopping the drugs or using plasma exchange to accelerate the removal of the biologic agent that put the person at risk for PML.\nIn HIV-infected people, this may mean starting highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). AIDS patients starting HAART after being diagnosed with PML tend to have a slightly longer survival time than patients who were already on HAART and then develop PML. Some AIDS patients with PML have been able to survive for several years, with HAART. A rare complication of effective HAART is immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), in which increased immune system activity actually increases the damage caused by the JCV infection; although IRIS can often be managed with medication, it is extremely dangerous in PML.\nCidofovir was studied as possible treatment for PML and has been used on a case-by-case basis, working in some, but not others.\nCytarabine (also known as ARA-C), a chemotherapy drug used to treat certain cancers, has been prescribed on an experimental basis for a small number of non-AIDS PML patients, and stabilized the neurological condition of a minority of these patients. One patient regained some cognitive function lost as a result of PML.\nIn June 2010, the first case report appeared of a PML patient being successfully treated with the antimalarial drug mefloquine with activity against the JC virus. The patient cleared the virus and had no further neurological deterioration. Two case reports of using interleukin-2 successfully have been published. Some success have been reported with mirtazapine, but this has not been demonstrated in clinical trials.\nA number of drugs work against JC virus in cell culture, but no proven, effective therapy is known in humans.\nFor example, Brincidofovir (1-O-hexadecyloxypropyl-cidofovir /CMX001) available as Tembexa, suppresses JCV, but has been found to have toxicity at therapeutic dosage.\nInfusion of donor T cells specific to the related BK polyomavirus has shown possible effect in treating PML in one small study by Katy Rezvani's group, but needs further study.\nIn December 2021, Cellevolve announced it is launching a clinical trial for the treatment of PML utilizing BK virus specific T-cells (VSTs).\nPrognosis.\nOne-third to one-half of people with PML die in the first few months following diagnosis, depending on the severity of their underlying disease. Survivors can be left with variable degrees of neurological disability.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25161", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25161", "title": "Idiopathic intracranial hypertension", "text": "Medical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nIdiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH), previously known as pseudotumor cerebri and benign intracranial hypertension, is a condition characterized by increased intracranial pressure (pressure around the brain) without a detectable cause. The main symptoms are headache, vision problems, ringing in the ears, and shoulder pain. Complications may include vision loss.\nThis condition is idiopathic, meaning there is no known cause. Risk factors include being overweight or a recent increase in weight. Tetracycline may also trigger the condition. The diagnosis is based on symptoms and a high opening pressure found during a lumbar puncture with no specific cause found on a brain scan.\nTreatment includes a healthy diet, salt restriction, and exercise. The medication acetazolamide may also be used along with the above measures. A small percentage of people may require surgery to relieve the pressure.\nAbout 2 per 100,000 people are newly affected per year. The condition most commonly affects women aged 20\u201350. Women are affected about 20 times more often than men. The condition was first described in 1897.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe most common symptom of IIH is severe headache, which occurs in almost all (92\u201394%) cases. It is characteristically worse in the morning, generalized in character and throbbing in nature. It may be associated with nausea and vomiting. The headache can be made worse by any activity that further increases the intracranial pressure, such as coughing and sneezing. The pain may also be experienced in the neck and shoulders. Many have pulsatile tinnitus, a whooshing sensation in one or both ears (64\u201387%); this sound is synchronous with the pulse. Various other symptoms, such as numbness of the extremities, generalized weakness, pain and/or numbness in one or both sides of the face, loss of smell, and loss of coordination, are reported more rarely; none are specific for IIH. In children, numerous nonspecific signs and symptoms may be present.\nThe increased pressure leads to compression and traction of the cranial nerves, a group of nerves that arise from the brain stem and supply the face and neck. Most commonly, the abducens nerve (sixth nerve) is involved. This nerve supplies the muscle that pulls the eye outward. Those with sixth nerve palsy therefore experience horizontal double vision which is worse when looking towards the affected side. More rarely, the oculomotor nerve and trochlear nerve (third and fourth nerve palsy, respectively) are affected; both play a role in eye movements. The facial nerve (seventh cranial nerve) is affected occasionally \u2013 the result is total or partial weakness of the muscles of facial expression on one or both sides of the face.\nThe increased pressure leads to papilledema, which is swelling of the optic disc, the spot where the optic nerve enters the eyeball. This occurs in practically all cases of IIH, but not everyone experiences symptoms from this. Those who do experience symptoms typically report \"transient visual obscurations\", episodes of difficulty seeing that occur in both eyes but not necessarily at the same time. Long-term untreated papilledema leads to visual loss, initially in the periphery but progressively towards the center of vision.\nPhysical examination of the nervous system is typically normal apart from the presence of papilledema, which is seen on examination of the eye with a small device called an ophthalmoscope or in more detail with a fundus camera. If there are cranial nerve abnormalities, these may be noticed on eye examination in the form of a squint (third, fourth, or sixth nerve palsy) or as facial nerve palsy. If the papilledema has been longstanding, visual fields may be constricted and visual acuity may be decreased. Visual field testing by automated (Humphrey) perimetry is recommended as other methods of testing may be less accurate. Longstanding papilledema leads to optic atrophy, in which the disc looks pale and visual loss tends to be advanced.\nCauses.\n\"Idiopathic\" means of unknown cause. Therefore, IIH can only be diagnosed if there is no alternative explanation for the symptoms. Intracranial pressure may be increased due to medications such as high-dose vitamin A derivatives (e.g., isotretinoin for acne), long-term tetracycline antibiotics (for a variety of skin conditions). Hormonal contraceptives, particularly the oral contraceptive pill (OCP), are not associated with IIH. A systematic review published in 2020 suggests the use of the term \"drug-induced intracranial hypertension (DIIH)\" after having applied a 'strict drug-causality algorithm' in determining IIH cases likely caused by the drugs they evaluated.\nThere are numerous other diseases, mostly rare conditions, that may lead to intracranial hypertension. If there is an underlying cause, the condition is termed \"secondary intracranial hypertension\". Common causes of secondary intracranial hypertension include obstructive sleep apnea (a sleep-related breathing disorder), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), chronic kidney disease, and Beh\u00e7et's disease.\nOn July 1, 2022, the FDA issued an update that gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists, drugs that are approved for treating precocious puberty, may be a risk factor for developing pseudotumor cerebri.\nMechanism.\nThe cause of IIH is not known. The Monro\u2013Kellie rule states that the intracranial pressure is determined by the amount of brain tissue, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood inside the bony cranial vault. Three theories therefore exist as to why the pressure might be raised in IIH: an excess of CSF production, increased volume of blood or brain tissue, or obstruction of the veins that drain blood from the brain.\nThe first theory, that of increased production of cerebrospinal fluid, was proposed in early descriptions of the disease. However, there is no experimental data that supports a role for this process in IIH.\nThe second theory posits that either increased blood flow to the brain or increase in the brain tissue itself may result in the raised pressure. Little evidence has accumulated to support the suggestion that increased blood flow plays a role, but recently Bateman et al. in phase contrast MRA studies have quantified cerebral blood flow (CBF) in vivo and suggests that CBF is abnormally elevated in many people with IIH. Both biopsy samples and various types of brain scans have shown an increased water content of the brain tissue. It remains unclear why this might be the case.\nThe third theory suggests that restricted venous drainage from the brain may be impaired resulting in congestion. Many people with IIH have narrowing of the transverse sinuses. It is not clear whether this narrowing is the pathogenesis of the disease or a secondary phenomenon. It has been proposed that a positive biofeedback loop may exist, where raised ICP (intracranial pressure) causes venous narrowing in the transverse sinuses, resulting in venous hypertension (raised venous pressure), decreased CSF resorption via arachnoid granulation and further rise in ICP.\nDiagnosis.\nThe diagnosis may be suspected on the basis of the history and examination. To confirm the diagnosis, as well as excluding alternative causes, several investigations are required; more investigations may be performed if the history is not typical or the person is more likely to have an alternative problem: children, men, the elderly, or women who are not overweight.\nInvestigations.\nNeuroimaging, usually with computed tomography (CT/CAT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), is used to exclude any mass lesions. In IIH these scans typically appear to be normal, although small or slit-like ventricles, dilatation and buckling of the optic nerve sheaths and \"empty sella sign\" (flattening of the pituitary gland due to increased pressure) and enlargement of Meckel's caves may be seen.\nAn MR venogram is also performed in most cases to exclude the possibility of venous sinus stenosis/obstruction or cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. A contrast-enhanced MRV (ATECO) scan has a high detection rate for abnormal transverse sinus stenoses. These stenoses can be more adequately identified and assessed with catheter cerebral venography and manometry. Buckling of the bilateral optic nerves with increased perineural fluid is also often noted on MRI imaging.\nLumbar puncture is performed to measure the opening pressure, as well as to obtain cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to exclude alternative diagnoses. If the opening pressure is increased, CSF may be removed for transient relief (see below). The CSF is examined for abnormal cells, infections, antibody levels, the glucose level, and protein levels. By definition, all of these are within their normal limits in IIH. Occasionally, the CSF pressure measurement may be normal despite very suggestive symptoms. This may be attributable to the fact that CSF pressure may fluctuate over the course of the normal day. If the suspicion of problems remains high, it may be necessary to perform more long-term monitoring of the ICP by a pressure catheter.\nClassification.\nThe original criteria for IIH were described by Dandy in 1937.\nThey were modified by Smith in 1985 to become the \"modified Dandy criteria\". Smith included the use of more advanced imaging: Dandy had required ventriculography, but Smith replaced this with computed tomography. In a 2001 paper, Digre and Corbett amended Dandy's criteria further. They added the requirement that the person is awake and alert, as coma precludes adequate neurological assessment, and require exclusion of venous sinus thrombosis as an underlying cause. Furthermore, they added the requirement that no other cause for the raised ICP is found.\nIn a 2002 review, Friedman and Jacobson propose an alternative set of criteria, derived from Smith's. These require the absence of symptoms that could not be explained by a diagnosis of IIH, but do not require the actual presence of any symptoms (such as headache) attributable to IIH. These criteria also require that the lumbar puncture is performed with the person lying sideways, as a lumbar puncture performed in the upright sitting position can lead to artificially high pressure measurements. Friedman and Jacobson also do not insist on MR venography for every person; rather, this is only required in atypical cases (see \"diagnosis\" above).\nTreatment.\nThe primary goal in treatment of IIH is the prevention of visual loss and blindness, as well as symptom control. IIH is treated mainly through the reduction of CSF pressure and IIH may resolve after initial treatment, may go into spontaneous remission (although it can still relapse at a later stage), or may continue chronically. There are three main treatment approaches: weight loss, different medications and surgical interventions. Remission is seen for most patients that achieve a weight loss of around 6\u201310%. Bariatric surgery can be an option for those patients that don't achieve weight loss with lifestyle changes and diet.\nLumbar puncture.\nThe first step in symptom control is drainage of cerebrospinal fluid by lumbar puncture. If necessary, this may be performed at the same time as a diagnostic LP (such as done in search of a CSF infection). In some cases, this is sufficient to control the symptoms, and no further treatment is needed.\nThe procedure can be repeated if necessary, but this is generally taken as a clue that additional treatments may be required to control the symptoms and preserve vision. Repeated lumbar punctures are regarded as unpleasant by people, and they present a danger of introducing spinal infections if done too often. Repeated lumbar punctures are sometimes needed to control the ICP urgently if the person's vision deteriorates rapidly.\nMedication.\nThe best-studied medical treatment for intracranial hypertension is acetazolamide (Diamox), which acts by inhibiting the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, and it reduces CSF production by six to 57 percent. It can cause the symptoms of hypokalemia (low blood potassium levels), which include muscle weakness and tingling in the fingers. Acetazolamide cannot be used in pregnancy, since it has been shown to cause embryonic abnormalities in animal studies. Also, in human beings it has been shown to cause metabolic acidosis as well as disruptions in the blood electrolyte levels of newborn babies. The diuretic furosemide is sometimes used for a treatment if acetazolamide is not tolerated, but this drug sometimes has little effect on the ICP.\nVarious analgesics (painkillers) may be used in controlling the headaches of intracranial hypertension. In addition to conventional agents such as paracetamol, a low dose of the antidepressant amitriptyline or the anticonvulsant topiramate have shown some additional benefit for pain relief.\nThe use of steroids in the attempt to reduce the ICP is controversial. These may be used in severe papilledema, but otherwise their use is discouraged.\nVenous sinus stenting.\nVenous sinus stenoses leading to venous hypertension appear to play a significant part in relation to raised ICP, and stenting of a transverse sinus may resolve venous hypertension, leading to improved CSF resorption, decreased ICP, cure of papilledema and other symptoms of IIH.\nA self-expanding metal stent is permanently deployed within the dominant transverse sinus across the stenosis under general anaesthesia. In general, people are discharged the next day. People require double antiplatelet therapy for a period of up to 3 months after the procedure and aspirin therapy for up to 1 year.\nIn a systematic analysis of 19 studies with 207 cases, there was an 87% improvement in overall symptom rate and 90% cure rate for treatment of papilledema. Major complications only occurred in 3/207 people (1.4%). In the largest single series of transverse sinus stenting there was an 11% rate of recurrence after one stent, requiring further stenting.\nDue to the permanence of the stent and small but definite risk of complications, most experts will recommend that person with IIH must have papilledema and have failed medical therapy or are intolerant to medication before stenting is undertaken.\nSurgery.\nTwo main surgical procedures are used for the treatment of IIH: \"optic nerve sheath decompression and fenestration\" and cerebral shunting. Surgery would normally only be offered if medical therapy is either unsuccessful or not tolerated. The choice between these two procedures depends on the predominant problem in IIH. Neither procedure is perfect: both may cause significant complications, and both may eventually fail in controlling the symptoms. There are no randomized controlled trials to guide the decision as to which procedure is best.\nOptic nerve sheath fenestration is an operation that involves the making of an incision in the connective tissue lining of the optic nerve in its portion behind the eye. It is not entirely clear how it protects the eye from the raised pressure, but it may be the result of either diversion of the CSF into the orbit or the creation of an area of scar tissue that lowers the pressure. The effects on the intracranial pressure itself are more modest. Moreover, the procedure may lead to significant complications, including blindness in 1\u20132%. The procedure is therefore recommended mainly in those who have limited headache symptoms but significant papilledema or threatened vision, and those who have undergone unsuccessful treatment with a shunt or have a contraindication for shunt surgery.\nShunt surgery, usually performed by neurosurgeons, involves the creation of a conduit by which CSF can be drained into another body cavity. The initial procedure is usually a lumboperitoneal (LP) shunt, which connects the subarachnoid space in the lumbar spine with the peritoneal cavity. A pressure valve is usually included in the circuit to avoid excessive drainage when the person is erect. LP shunting provides long-term relief in about half the cases; others require revision of the shunt, often on more than one occasion, usually due to shunt obstruction. If the lumboperitoneal shunt needs repeated revisions, a \"ventriculoatrial\" or \"ventriculoperitoneal shunt\" may be considered. These shunts are inserted in one of the lateral ventricles of the brain, usually by stereotactic surgery, and then connected either to the right atrium of the heart or the peritoneal cavity. Given the reduced need for revisions in ventricular shunts, it is possible that this procedure will become the first-line type of shunt treatment.\nIt has been shown that in obese people, bariatric surgery (and especially gastric bypass surgery) can lead to resolution of the condition in over 95%.\nPrognosis.\nIt is not known what percentage of people with IIH will remit spontaneously, and what percentage will develop chronic disease.\nIIH does not normally affect life expectancy. The major complications from IIH arise from untreated or treatment-resistant papilledema. In various case series, the long-term risk of one's vision being significantly affected by IIH is reported to lie anywhere between 10 and 25%.\nEpidemiology.\nOn average, IIH occurs in about one per 100,000 people, and can occur in children and adults. The median age at diagnosis is 30. IIH occurs predominantly in women, especially in the ages 20 to 45, who are four to eight times more likely than men to be affected. Overweight and obesity strongly predispose a person to IIH: women who are more than ten percent over their ideal body weight are thirteen times more likely to develop IIH, and this figure goes up to nineteen times in women who are more than twenty percent over their ideal body weight. In men this relationship also exists, but the increase is only five-fold in those over 20 percent above their ideal body weight.\nDespite several reports of IIH in families, there is no known genetic cause for IIH. People from all ethnicities may develop IIH. In children, there is no difference in incidence between males and females.\nFrom national hospital admission databases it appears that the need for neurosurgical intervention for IIH has increased markedly over the period between 1988 and 2002. This has been attributed at least in part to the rising prevalence of obesity, although some of this increase may be explained by the increased popularity of shunting over optic nerve sheath fenestration.\nHistory.\nThe first report of IIH was by the German physician Heinrich Quincke, who described it in 1893 under the name serous meningitis. The term \"pseudotumor cerebri\" was introduced in 1904 by his compatriot Max Nonne. Numerous other cases appeared in the literature subsequently; in many cases, the raised intracranial pressure may actually have resulted from underlying conditions. For instance, the otitic hydrocephalus reported by London neurologist Sir Charles Symonds may have resulted from venous sinus thrombosis caused by middle ear infection. Diagnostic criteria for IIH were developed in 1937 by the Baltimore neurosurgeon Walter Dandy; Dandy also introduced subtemporal decompressive surgery in the treatment of the condition.\nThe terms \"benign\" and \"pseudotumor\" derive from the fact that increased intracranial pressure may be associated with brain tumors. Those people in whom no tumour was found were therefore diagnosed with \"pseudotumor cerebri\" (a disease mimicking a brain tumor). The disease was renamed benign intracranial hypertension in 1955 to distinguish it from intracranial hypertension due to life-threatening diseases (such as cancer); however, this was also felt to be misleading because any disease that can blind someone should not be thought of as benign, and the name was therefore revised in 1989 to \"idiopathic (of no identifiable cause) intracranial hypertension\".\nShunt surgery was introduced in 1949; initially, ventriculoperitoneal shunts were used. In 1971, good results were reported with lumboperitoneal shunting. Negative reports on shunting in the 1980s led to a brief period (1988\u20131993) during which optic nerve fenestration (which had initially been described in an unrelated condition in 1871) was more popular. Since then, shunting is recommended predominantly, with occasional exceptions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25162", "revid": "33989260", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25162", "title": "Plymouth Hoe", "text": "Public space in Plymouth, England\nPlymouth Hoe, referred to locally as The Hoe, is a large south-facing open public space in the English coastal city of Plymouth, Devon. \nThe Hoe is adjacent to and above the low limestone cliffs that form the seafront and commands views of Plymouth Sound, Drake's Island, and across the Hamoaze to Mount Edgcumbe in Cornwall. The name derives from the Anglo-Saxon word \"hoh\", a sloping ridge shaped like an inverted foot and heel (a term that survives in a few other placenames, notably Sutton Hoo).\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJohn Lucas, sergeant, had 8d. for cutting Gogmagog.\n\u2014An audit book of 1514.\n Until the early 17th century large outline images of the giants Gog and Magog (or Goemagot and Corineus) had for a long time been cut into the turf of the Hoe exposing the white limestone beneath. These figures were periodically re-cut and cleaned. No trace of them remains today, but this likely commemorates the Cornish foundation myth, being the point \u2013 \"Lam Goemagot\", 'the Giant's Leap' \u2013 from which the Giant was cast into the sea by the hero Corineus.\nPlymouth Hoe is perhaps best known for the probably apocryphal story that Sir Francis Drake played his famous game of bowls here in 1588 while waiting for the tide to change before sailing out with the English fleet to engage with the Spanish Armada. The British Library holds a http:// from this era.\nA Tudor fortress guarded the neck of water between the eastern Hoe and Mount Batten and some sheer granite and limestone cannon points remain, however in the late 1660s, following The Restoration, a massive star-shaped stone fortress known as the Royal Citadel, was constructed to replace it. Its purpose was to protect the port and probably also to intimidate the townsfolk who had leaned towards Parliament during the Civil War. It remains occupied by the military.\nFrom 1880 there was a popular bandstand on the Hoe. It was removed for scrap metal during the Second World War and never rebuilt. A three tier belvedere built in 1891 survives; it was built on the site of a camera obscura, probably built in the 1830s, which showed views of the harbour. Below this site was the Bull Ring (now a memorial garden), and a grand pleasure pier, started in 1880, which provided a dance hall, refreshment, promenading and a landing place for boat trips. The pier was destroyed by German bombing in World War II.\nThere is an imposing series of Victorian terraces to the west of the naval memorial which previously continued to the Grand Hotel and, until it was destroyed by bombing, the grand clubhouse of the Royal Western Yacht Club. The club then merged with the Royal Southern and occupied that club's older premises which it had created from the regency public steam baths by the basin at West Hoe before the rejuvenated club moved in the late 1980s to Queen Anne Battery.\nLandmarks.\nA prominent landmark on the Hoe is Smeaton's Tower. This is the upper portion of John Smeaton's Eddystone Lighthouse, which was originally built on the Eddystone Rocks, located to the south, in 1759. It was dismantled in 1882 and moved, stone by stone, to the Hoe where it was re-erected.\nSmeaton's Tower overlooks Tinside Lido, a 1930s outdoor pool or lido which sits upon the limestone shoreline at the base of the cliff. Most of the works to create the swimming areas and Madeira Road were carried out to make work for the local unemployed during the Depression.\nA statue of Sir Francis Drake by Joseph Boehm (a copy of the original in his home town of Tavistock) was placed here in 1884 to commemorate him. There are also several war memorials along the northern side of the Hoe. The largest commemorates the Royal Naval dead of the two world wars; its central obelisk is by Robert Lorimer and was unveiled in 1924, while the surrounding sunken garden was added by Edward Maufe in 1954. The Armada Memorial was opened in 1888 to celebrate the tercentenary of the Spanish Armada.\nThe Hoe also includes a long broad tarmacked promenade (currently a disabled motorists car park) which serves as a spectacular military parade ground and which is often used for displays by Plymouth-based Royal Navy, Royal Marines, the Army garrison, as well as for travelling funfairs and open-air concerts.\nSet into the shape of the southern sea facing fortifications of the Royal Citadel is the Citadel Hill Laboratory of the Marine Biological Association of the UK, which also houses the Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Science. Below and to the east, perched on the rocky foreshore is the clubhouse of the Royal Plymouth Corinthian Yacht Club.\nTourism.\nThe Hoe is a popular area for Plymothians and visitors. There is always a great deal of activity on the water, including frequent warship movements, ferries going and coming from France and Spain, fishing trawlers and a swarm of larger and smaller sailing boats. The Fastnet yacht race ends here. The annual two-day British Firework Championships attracts tens of thousands of spectators.\nFor forty years, there has been controversy about development on the edges of the Hoe green space. The erection of two discount hotel chain buildings, at the southern end of Armada Way and the other at the Sound end of Leigham Street, contrast with their Victorian surroundings. The former Grand Hotel has been converted into apartments and the long derelict yacht club site has now been filled by a modern block of flats.\nThe Plymouth Dome, a turreted and domed building, built into a small old quarry site above Tinside as an historical theme tourist attraction, failed to obtain sufficient funding and closed in 2006, despite having been visited by 2.3 million people. Between 2013 and 2016 it was a restaurant owned by celebrity chef Gary Rhodes.\nTombstoning.\nIn the early 21st century Plymouth Hoe became notorious for the practice of tombstoning, which involves leaping feet-first into the sea from any accessible high point. This caused a number of serious injuries and deaths, leading to the dismantling of seafront diving boards and closure of parts of the waterfront to discourage the activity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25163", "revid": "49287023", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25163", "title": "Plymouth Sound", "text": "Plymouth Sound, or locally just The Sound, is a deep inlet or sound in the English Channel near Plymouth in England.\nDescription.\nIts southwest and southeast corners are Penlee Point in Cornwall and Wembury Point in Devon, a distance of about 3 nautical miles (6\u00a0km). Its northern limit is Plymouth Hoe giving a north\u2013south distance of nearly 3 nautical miles (6\u00a0km).\nThe Sound has three water entrances. The marine entrance is from the English Channel to the south, with a deep-water channel to the west of the Plymouth Breakwater. There are two freshwater inlets: one, from the northwest, is from the River Tamar via the Hamoaze and Devonport Dockyard, the largest naval dockyard in western Europe. The other, at northeast, is from the River Plym disgorging into its narrow estuary, Cattewater harbour between Mount Batten and the Royal Citadel.\nIn the centre of the Sound, midway between Bovisand Bay and Cawsand Bay, is Plymouth Breakwater, which creates a harbour protecting anchored ships from the frequent south-western storms. The breakwater is around long, stands in around 11 metres / 36 feet of water and was built by John Rennie and Joseph Whidbey starting in 1812. The breakwater has a lighthouse on its western end and a beacon with a spherical cage on top at the eastern end. It is said that the cage is a lifesaving device designed to keep wrecked sailors from drowning in the huge waves of a storm on the low-lying breakwater.\nDrake's Island is 400 metres long and around 100 metres wide and situated at the north of the Sound. It was fortified to defend Drake's Channel, the only deep-water route to Devonport. The \"Bridge\" is a shallow reef that links Drake's Island and the Cornish mainland. At low water the depth of the Bridge can be less than one metre but at high water it can rise to 5 metres. In World War I this natural barrier was supplemented by other obstructions to prevent submarines and small ships attacking the naval base.\nUsage.\nIn addition to ships of the Royal Navy, large commercial vessels, including ferries to France and Spain use the Sound from Millbay Docks. Fishing vessels use it from Sutton Harbour beside the old town of Plymouth, called the Barbican. There are marinas at Sutton Harbour, Mount Wise in the Hamoaze and at Turnchapel. Waterborne traffic in the Sound is controlled by the King\u2019s Harbour Master for Plymouth.\nHistory.\nMount Batten, a former Royal Air Force flying boat and search and rescue base, is located at the northeast corner of the Sound. T. E. Lawrence was stationed here as Aircraftman Shaw.\nOver the years, the Sound has been defended by Drake's Island, Picklecombe Fort, Cawsand Fort, the Breakwater Fort, Fort Bovisand, Staddon Fort and Stamford Fort.\nA harbour and reservoir were built at Bovisand before the fort existed to supply men-o-war anchored in the Sound with fresh water. Joseph Whidbey supervised the building of the Breakwater from Bovisand Lodge, from which there is a view down the full length of the breakwater.\nThe \"Titanic\" was due to have docked here briefly on its return voyage to Britain, and the ship had a painting of Plymouth Sound on board.\nAs of 2019, there is a campaign to create the first National Marine Park in Britain off Plymouth Sound.\nNotable events.\nThe Sound has been the site of a number of aircraft crashes and shipwrecks:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25165", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25165", "title": "Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and Under Water", "text": ""}
{"id": "25166", "revid": "7181920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25166", "title": "Carrozzeria Pininfarina", "text": ""}
{"id": "25167", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25167", "title": "QuentinTarrantino", "text": ""}
{"id": "25168", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25168", "title": "Quentin Tarrantino", "text": ""}
{"id": "25169", "revid": "10199389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25169", "title": "Quentin Tarantino", "text": "American filmmaker (born 1963)\nQuentin Jerome Tarantino ( ; born March 27, 1963) is an American filmmaker, actor, and author. His films are characterized by graphic violence, extended dialogue often featuring much profanity, and references to popular culture. His work has earned a cult following alongside critical and commercial success; he has been named by some as the most influential director of his generation and has received numerous awards and nominations, including two Academy Awards, two BAFTA Awards, and four Golden Globe Awards. His films have grossed more than $1.9 billion worldwide.\nTarantino began his career with the independent crime film \"Reservoir Dogs\" (1992). His second film, the crime comedy-drama \"Pulp Fiction\" (1994), was a major success and won numerous awards, including the Cannes Film Festival's and the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. He next wrote and starred in the action horror film \"From Dusk till Dawn\" (1996). His third film as director, \"Jackie Brown\" (1997), paid homage to blaxploitation films.\nTarantino wrote and directed the martial arts films ' (2003) and ' (2004), with both volumes combined regarded as a single film. He then made the exploitation-slasher film \"Death Proof\" (2007), which was part of a double feature with \"From Dusk till Dawn\" director Robert Rodriguez, released under the collective title \"Grindhouse\". His next film, \"Inglourious Basterds\" (2009), followed an alternate account of World War II. He followed this with \"Django Unchained\" (2012), a slave revenge Spaghetti Western which won him his second Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. His eighth film, \"The Hateful Eight\" (2015), was a revisionist Western thriller and opened to audiences with a roadshow release.\nTarantino's ninth and most recent film, \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\" (2019), was a comedy-drama set in the late 1960s about the transition of Old Hollywood to New Hollywood; his debut novel, a novelization of the film, was published in 2021. He has tentative plans for his tenth film to be his last before retiring from filmmaking.\nEarly life.\nQuentin Jerome Tarantino was born in Knoxville, Tennessee, on March 27, 1963, the only child of Connie McHugh and aspiring actor Tony Tarantino, who left the family before his son's birth. He has claimed to have Cherokee ancestry through his mother, who was also of Irish descent, while his father was Italian-American. He was named in part after Quint Asper, Burt Reynolds's character in the TV series \"Gunsmoke\". Tarantino's mother met his father during a trip to Los Angeles; after a brief marriage and divorce, she left Los Angeles and moved to Knoxville, where her parents lived, and returned to Los Angeles with her son in 1966.\nTarantino's mother married musician Curtis Zastoupil soon after arriving in Los Angeles, and the family moved to nearby Torrance, California. Zastoupil accompanied Tarantino to numerous film screenings while his mother allowed him to see more mature movies, such as \"Carnal Knowledge\" (1971) and \"Deliverance\" (1972). After his mother divorced Zastoupil in 1973 and received a misdiagnosis of Hodgkin's lymphoma, Tarantino was again sent to live with his grandparents in Knoxville. Less than a year later, he returned to Torrance.\nAt the age of 14, Tarantino wrote one of his earliest works, a screenplay called \"Captain Peachfuzz and the Anchovy Bandit\" that was based on the 1977 film \"Smokey and the Bandit\". He later revealed that his mother had ridiculed his writing skills when he was younger, and he subsequently vowed never to share any of his future wealth with her. As a 15-year-old, he was grounded by his mother for shoplifting Elmore Leonard's novel \"The Switch\" from a Kmart. He was allowed to leave only to attend the Torrance Community Theater, where he participated in such plays as \"Two Plus Two Makes Sex\" and \"Romeo and Juliet\". The same year, he dropped out of Narbonne High School in Harbor City.\nCareer.\n1980\u20131989: Early jobs and screenplays.\nThrough the 1980s, Tarantino had a number of jobs. After lying about his age, he worked as an usher at an adult movie theater in Torrance, called the Pussycat Theater. He spent time as a recruiter in the aerospace industry, and for five years he worked at Video Archives, a video store in Manhattan Beach, California. He was well known in the local community for his film knowledge and video recommendations; Tarantino stated, \"When people ask me if I went to film school, I tell them, 'No, I went to films.\" In 1986, Tarantino was employed in his first Hollywood job, working with Video Archives colleague Roger Avary, as production assistants on Dolph Lundgren's exercise video, \"Maximum Potential\".\nBefore working at Video Archives, Tarantino co-wrote \"Love Birds In Bondage\" with Scott Magill. Tarantino would go on to produce and direct the short film. Magill committed suicide in 1987, after which all film shot was destroyed. Later, Tarantino attended acting classes at the James Best Theatre Company, where he met several of his eventual collaborators for his next film. In 1987, Tarantino co-wrote and directed \"My Best Friend's Birthday\" (1987). It was left uncompleted, but some of its dialogue was included in \"True Romance\".\nThe following year, he played an Elvis impersonator in \"Sophia's Wedding: Part 1\", an episode in the fourth season of \"The Golden Girls\", which was broadcast on November 19, 1988. Tarantino recalled that the pay he received for the part helped support him during the preproduction of \"Reservoir Dogs\"; he estimated he was initially paid about $650 but went on to receive about $3,000 in residuals over three years because the episode was frequently rerun due to it being on a \"best of...\" lineup.\n1990\u20131999: Breakthrough and acclaim.\nAfter meeting Lawrence Bender at a friend's barbecue, Tarantino discussed with him about an unwritten dialogue-driven heist film. Bender encouraged Tarantino to write the screenplay, which he wrote in three and a half weeks and presented to Bender unformatted. Impressed with the script, Bender managed to forward it through contacts to director Monte Hellman. Hellman cleaned up the screenplay and helped secure funding from Richard N. Gladstein at Live Entertainment (which later became Artisan, now known as Lionsgate). Harvey Keitel read the script and also contributed to the budget, taking a role as co-producer and also playing a major part in the picture. In January 1992, it was released as Tarantino's crime thriller \"Reservoir Dogs\"\u2014which he wrote, directed, and acted in as Mr. Brown\u2014and screened at the Sundance Film Festival. The film was an immediate hit, receiving a positive response from critics.\nTarantino's screenplay \"True Romance\" was optioned and the film was eventually released in 1993. The second script that Tarantino sold was for the film \"Natural Born Killers\", which was revised by Dave Veloz, Richard Rutowski and director Oliver Stone. Tarantino was given story credit and stated in an interview that he wished the film well, but later disowned the final film. Tarantino also did an uncredited rewrite on \"It's Pat\" (1994). Other films where he was an uncredited screenwriter include \"Crimson Tide\" (1995) and \"The Rock\" (1996).\nFollowing the success of \"Reservoir Dogs\", Tarantino was approached by major film studios and offered projects that included \"Speed\" (1994) and \"Men in Black\" (1997), but he instead retreated to Amsterdam to work on his script for \"Pulp Fiction\". Tarantino wrote, directed, and acted in the dark comedy crime film \"Pulp Fiction\" in 1994, maintaining the graphic depiction of violence from his earlier film as well as the non-linear storylines. Tarantino received the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay, which he shared with Roger Avary, who contributed to the story. He also received a nomination in the Best Director category. The film received another five nominations, including for Best Picture. Tarantino also won the for the film at the 1994 Cannes Film Festival. The film grossed over $200 million and earned positive reviews.\nIn 1995, Tarantino participated in the anthology film \"Four Rooms\", a collaboration that also included directors Robert Rodriguez, Allison Anders and Alexandre Rockwell. Tarantino directed and acted in the fourth segment of \"The Man from Hollywood\", a tribute to the \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\" episode \"Man from the South\". He joined Rodriguez again later in the year with a supporting role in \"Desperado\". One of Tarantino's first paid writing assignments was for \"From Dusk till Dawn\", which Rodriguez directed later in 1996, re-teaming with Tarantino in another acting role, alongside Harvey Keitel, George Clooney and Juliette Lewis. His third feature film was \"Jackie Brown\" (1997), an adaptation of Elmore Leonard's novel \"Rum Punch\". A homage to blaxploitation films, it starred Pam Grier, who starred in many of the films of that genre in the 1970s. It received positive reviews and was called a \"comeback\" for Grier and co-star Robert Forster. Leonard considered \"Jackie Brown\" to be his favorite of the 26 different screen adaptations of his novels and short stories.\nIn the 1990s, Tarantino had a number of other minor acting roles, including in \"Eddie Presley\" (1992), \"The Coriolis Effect\" (1994), \"Sleep With Me\" (1994), \"Somebody to Love\" (1994), \"All-American Girl\" (1995), \"Destiny Turns on the Radio\" (1995), and \"Girl 6\" (1996). Also in 1996, he starred in \"Steven Spielberg's Director's Chair\", a simulation video game that uses pre-generated film clips. In 1998, Tarantino made his major Broadway stage debut as an amoral psycho killer in a revival of the 1966 play \"Wait Until Dark\", which received unfavorable reviews for his performance from critics.\n2000\u20132009: Subsequent success.\nTarantino went on to write and direct ', a highly stylized \"revenge flick\" in the cinematic traditions of Chinese martial arts films, Japanese period dramas, Spaghetti Westerns, and Italian horror. It was based on a character called The Bride and a plot that he and \"Kill Bill\"'s lead actress Uma Thurman had developed during the making of \"Pulp Fiction\". It was originally set for a single theatrical release, but its four-hour running time prompted Tarantino to divide it into two movies. Tarantino says he still considers it a single film in his overall filmography. ' was released in 2003 and \"\" was released in 2004.\nFrom 2002 to 2004, Tarantino portrayed villain McKenas Cole in the ABC television series \"Alias\". In 2004, Tarantino attended the 2004 Cannes Film Festival, where he served as president of the jury. \"Volume 2\" of \"Kill Bill\" had a screening there, but was not in competition. Tarantino then contributed to Robert Rodriguez's 2005 neo-noir film \"Sin City\", and was credited as \"Special Guest Director\" for his work directing the car sequence featuring Clive Owen and Benicio del Toro. In May 2005, Tarantino co-wrote and directed \"Grave Danger\", the finale of \"\". For this episode, Tarantino was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series at the 57th Primetime Emmy Awards.\nIn 2007, Tarantino directed the exploitation slasher film \"Death Proof\". Released as a take on 1970s double features, under the banner \"Grindhouse\", it was co-directed with Rodriguez who did the other feature which was the body horror film \"Planet Terror\". Box-office sales were low but the film garnered mostly positive reviews.\nTarantino's film \"Inglourious Basterds\", released in 2009, is the story of a group of Jewish-American guerrilla soldiers in Nazi-occupied France in an alternate history of World War II. He had planned to start work on the film after \"Jackie Brown\" but postponed this to make \"Kill Bill\" after a meeting with Uma Thurman. Filming began on \"Inglorious Bastards\", as it was provisionally titled, in October 2008. The film opened in August 2009 to positive reviews with the highest box office gross in the US and Canada for the weekend on release. For the film, Tarantino received his second nomination for the Academy Award for Best Director and Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay.\n2010\u2013present: Established auteur.\nIn 2011, production began on \"Django Unchained\", a film about the revenge of a former slave in the Southern United States in 1858. The film stemmed from Tarantino's desire to produce a Spaghetti Western set in America's Deep South during the Antebellum Period. Tarantino called the proposed style \"a southern\", stating that he wanted \"to do movies that deal with America's horrible past with slavery and stuff but do them like spaghetti westerns, not like big issue movies. I want to do them like they're genre films, but they deal with everything that America has never dealt with because it's ashamed of it, and other countries don't really deal with because they don't feel they have the right to\". It was released in December 2012 and became his highest grossing film to date. He also received his second Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay.\nIn November 2013, Tarantino said he was working on a new film and that it would be another Western, though not a sequel to \"Django Unchained\". On January 11, 2014, it was revealed that the film would be titled \"The Hateful Eight\". The script was then leaked in January 2014. Aggrieved by the breach of confidence, Tarantino considered abandoning the production which was due to start the next winter and publish it as a novel instead. He stated that he had given the script to a few trusted colleagues, including Bruce Dern, Tim Roth and Michael Madsen.\nOn April 19, 2014, Tarantino directed a live reading of the leaked script at the United Artists Theater in the Ace Hotel Los Angeles for the \"Live Read\" series. Tarantino explained that they would read the first draft of the script, and added that he was writing two new drafts with a different ending. Filming went ahead as planned with the new draft in January 2015. \"The Hateful Eight\" was released on December 25, 2015, as a roadshow presentation in 70 mm film-format theaters, before being released in digital theaters on December 30, 2015. The film received mostly positive reviews from critics.\nIn July 2017, it was reported that Tarantino's next project would be a film about the Manson Family murders. In February 2018, it was announced that the film's title would be \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood,\" and that Leonardo DiCaprio would play Rick Dalton, a fictional star of television Westerns, with Brad Pitt as Dalton's longtime stunt double Cliff Booth; Margot Robbie would be playing real life actress Sharon Tate, portrayed as Dalton's next-door neighbor. Filming took place in the summer of 2018. In wake of the Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse allegations, Tarantino severed ties to The Weinstein Company and Miramax and sought a new distributor after working with Weinstein for his entire career. \nThe film officially premiered at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival, where it was in competition for the . Sony Pictures eventually distributed the film, which was theatrically released in July 2019. It received critical acclaim Peter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" declared, \"Tarantino's all-star fantasia links Hollywood and Manson-era violence into the best and most explosive cinema we've seen all year.\" The film earned 10 Oscar nominations at the 92nd Academy Awards including three for Tarantino for Best Picture, Best Director and Best Original Screenplay.\nIn November 2022, Tarantino revealed plans to shoot an eight-episode television series in 2023. No further details were provided. Tarantino later elaborated that this project was \"The Movie Critic,\" which he later adapted into a film script before deciding not to pursue the project in either format. The film was set in 1977 and centered on a man who wrote movie reviews for a porn magazine. He stated: \"I was so excited about the writing, but I wasn\u2019t really that excited about dramatizing what I wrote once we were in pre-production.\"\nTenth and final film.\nIn 2009, Tarantino said that he planned to retire from filmmaking when he is 60 to focus on writing novels and film literature. He is skeptical of the film industry going digital, saying, \"If it actually gets to the place where you can't show 35\u00a0mm film in theaters anymore and everything is digital projection, I won't even make it to 60.\" He said though \"not etched in stone\" he intends to retire after making his tenth movie: \"If I get to the 10th, do a good job and don't screw it up, well that sounds like a good way to end the old career.\" In January 2025, at the 2025 Sundance Film Festival, Tarantino said he was in \"no hurry\" to make his final film, preferring to wait at least a year, prioritizing to instead write a stage play.\nAs a producer.\nTarantino has used his Hollywood power to give smaller and foreign films more attention. These films are often labeled \"Presented by Quentin Tarantino\" or \"Quentin Tarantino Presents\". In 1995, Tarantino formed Rolling Thunder Pictures with Miramax to release or re-release several independent and foreign features. By 1997, Miramax had shut down the company due to poor sales. The following films were released by Rolling Thunder Pictures: \"Chungking Express\" (1994, dir. Wong Kar-wai), \"Switchblade Sisters\" (1975, dir. Jack Hill), \"Sonatine\" (1993, dir. Takeshi Kitano), \"Hard Core Logo\" (1996, dir. Bruce McDonald), \"The Mighty Peking Man\" (1977, dir. Ho Meng Hua), \"Detroit 9000\" (1973, dir. Arthur Marks), \"The Beyond\" (1981, dir. Lucio Fulci), and \"Curdled\" (1996, dir. Reb Braddock). \nIn 2001, he produced the US release of the Hong Kong martial arts film \"Iron Monkey\", which made over $14 million worldwide. In 2004, he brought the Chinese martial arts film \"Hero\" to the US. It opened at number-one at the box office and eventually earning $53.5 million. \nWhile Tarantino was in negotiations with Lucy Liu for \"\", the two helped produce the Hungarian sports documentary \"Freedom's Fury\", which was released in 2006. When he was approached about a documentary about the Blood in the Water match, a water polo match between Hungary and the USSR at the 1956 Melbourne Olympics, Tarantino said \"This is the best story I've ever been told. I'd love to be involved\".\nIn 2006, another \"Quentin Tarantino presents\" production, \"Hostel\", opened at number-one at the box office with a $20.1 million opening weekend. He presented 2006's \"The Protector\", and is a producer of the 2007 film \"\". In 2008, he produced the Larry Bishop-helmed \"Hell Ride\", a revenge biker film.\nAs a film exhibitor.\nIn February 2010, Tarantino bought the New Beverly Cinema in Los Angeles. Tarantino allowed the previous owners to continue operating the theater, but stated he would make occasional programming suggestions. He was quoted as saying: \"As long as I'm alive, and as long as I'm rich, the New Beverly will be there, showing films shot on 35\u00a0mm.\" Starting in 2014, Tarantino took a more active role in programming film screenings at the New Beverly, showing his own films as well as prints from his personal collection. In 2021, Tarantino announced that he had also purchased the Vista Theatre in Los Angeles, stating that he intends to keep it a first-run theatre, and that like The New Beverly it will only show movies on film.\nFilmmaking style and influence.\nEarly influences.\nIn the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" directors' poll, Tarantino listed his 12 favorite films: \"Apocalypse Now\", \"The Bad News Bears\", \"Carrie\", \"Dazed and Confused\", \"The Great Escape\", \"His Girl Friday\", \"Jaws\", \"Pretty Maids All in a Row\", \"Rolling Thunder\", \"Sorcerer\", \"Taxi Driver\", and \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\".\nSergio Leone's Spaghetti Western films were a profound influence including \"Once Upon a Time in the West\". He is an admirer of the 1981 film \"Blow Out\", directed by Brian De Palma, which led to his casting of John Travolta in \"Pulp Fiction\". Similarly, Tarantino was captivated with Jim McBride's 1983 remake of \"Breathless\" and with Richard Gere's unlikable but charismatic protagonist. The film's popular culture references, in particular the comic book Silver Surfer, inspired him to have the character's poster on Mr. Orange's apartment wall in \"Reservoir Dogs\". Tarantino has also labeled \"Rio Bravo\" as one of his influences. He listed the Australian suspense film \"Roadgames\" (1981) as another favorite film.\nOther films he cited as formative influences include Hong Kong martial arts films (such as \"Five Fingers of Death\" and \"Enter the Dragon\"), John Woo action films (\"A Better Tomorrow II\" and \"The Killer\"), John Carpenter films (\"Assault on Precinct 13\" and \"The Thing\"), blaxploitation films (including \"The Mack\" and \"Foxy Brown\"), Jean-Luc Godard films (\"Bande \u00e0 Part\" and the 1960 version of \"Breathless\"), and Sonny Chiba's work (\"The Street Fighter\" and \"Shadow Warriors\").\nIn August 2007, while teaching in a four-hour film course during the 9th Cinemanila International Film Festival in Manila, Tarantino cited Filipino directors Cirio H. Santiago, Eddie Romero and Gerardo de Le\u00f3n as personal icons from the 1970s. He referred to De Leon's \"soul-shattering, life-extinguishing\" movies on vampires and female bondage, citing in particular \"Women in Cages\"; \"It is just harsh, harsh, harsh\", he said, and described the final shot as one of \"devastating despair\". Upon his arrival in the Philippines, Tarantino was quoted in the local newspaper as saying, \"I'm a big fan of RP [Republic of the Philippines] cinema.\"\nStyle.\nTarantino's films often feature graphic violence, a tendency which has sometimes been criticized. \"Reservoir Dogs\" was initially denied United Kingdom certification because of his use of torture as entertainment. Tarantino has frequently defended his use of violence, saying that \"violence is so good. It affects audiences in a big way\". When questioned in an interview for \"Kill Bill: Volume 1\" why his movies contained so much graphic violence, he responded, \"Because it's so much fun!\" The number of expletives and deaths in Tarantino's films were measured by analytics website FiveThirtyEight. In the examples given by the site, \"\"Reservoir Dogs\" features 'just' 10 on-screen deaths, but 421 profanities. \"Django Unchained\", on the other hand, has 'just' 262 profanities but 47 deaths.\" He often blends aesthetic elements, in tribute to his favorite films and filmmakers. In \"Kill Bill\", he melds comic strip formulas and visuals within a live action film sequence, in some cases by the literal use of cartoon or anime images.\nTarantino has also occasionally used a non-linear story structure in his films, most notably with \"Pulp Fiction.\" He has also used the style in \"Reservoir Dogs\", \"Kill Bill\", and \"The Hateful Eight\". Tarantino's script for \"True Romance\" was originally told in a non-linear style, before director Tony Scott decided to use a more linear approach. Critics have since referred to the use of this shifting timeline in films as the \"Tarantino Effect\". Actor Steve Buscemi has described Tarantino's novel style of filmmaking as \"bursting with energy\" and \"focused\". According to Tarantino, a hallmark of all his movies is that there is a different sense of humor in each one, which prompts the viewer to laugh at scenes that are not funny. However, he insists that his films are dramas, not comedies.\nTarantino's use of dialogue is noted for its mundane conversations with popular culture references. For example, when Jules and Vincent in \"Pulp Fiction\" are driving to a hit, they talk about Vincent's trip to Europe, discussing the differences in countries such as a McDonald's \"Quarter Pounder with Cheese\" being called a \"Royale with Cheese\" in France because of the metric system. In the opening scene to \"Reservoir Dogs\", Mr. Brown (played by Tarantino) interprets the meaning of Madonna's song \"Like a Virgin\". In \"Jackie Brown\", Jackie and Max chat over a cup of coffee while listening to a vinyl record by the Delfonics' \"Didn't I (Blow Your Mind This Time)\".\nTarantino has said that his films take place in one of two cinematic universes, one being the more realistically grounded world of films like \"Reservoir Dogs\" and \"Pulp Fiction\", and the other being a meta-fictional narrative which Tarantino says represents the kind of films the characters in his main cinematic universe would watch, which separates films such as \"From Dusk till Dawn\" and \"Kill Bill\" from Tarantino's primary narrative. He also creates his own products and brands that he uses in his films to varying degrees. His own fictional brands, including \"Acu\u00f1a Boys Tex-Mex Food\", \"Big Kahuna Burger\", \"G.O. Juice\", \"Jack Rabbit Slim's\", \"K-Billy\", \"Red Apple cigarettes\", \"Tenku Brand Beer\" and \"Teriyaki Donut\", replace the use of product placement, sometimes to a humorous extent. Tarantino is also known for his choice of music in his films, including soundtracks that often use songs from the 1960s and 70s. In 2011, he was recognized at the 16th Critics' Choice Awards with the inaugural Music+Film Award.\nA recurring image in his films are scenes where women's bare feet feature prominently. When asked about foot fetishism, Tarantino responded, \"I don't take it seriously. There's a lot of feet in a lot of good directors' movies. That's just good direction. Like, before me, the person foot fetishism was defined by was Luis Bu\u00f1uel, another film director. And Alfred Hitchcock was accused of it and Sofia Coppola has been accused of it.\"\nTarantino has stated in many interviews that his writing process is like writing a novel before formatting it into a script, saying that this creates the blueprint of the film and makes the film feel like literature. About his writing process he told website The Talks, \"My head is a sponge. I listen to what everyone says, I watch little idiosyncratic behavior, people tell me a joke and I remember it. People tell me an interesting story in their life and I remember it. ... when I go and write my new characters, my pen is like an antenna, it gets that information, and all of a sudden these characters come out more or less fully formed. I don't write their dialogue, I get them talking to each other.\"\nCollaborators.\nTarantino has built up an informal \"repertory company\" of actors who have appeared in many roles in his films. Most notable of these is Samuel L. Jackson, who has appeared in five films directed by Tarantino and a sixth written by him, \"True Romance\". Other frequent collaborators include Uma Thurman, who has been featured in three films and whom Tarantino has described as his \"muse\"; Zo\u00eb Bell, who has acted or performed stunts in seven Tarantino films; Michael Madsen, James Parks and Tim Roth, who respectively appear in five, four and three films. In addition, Roth appeared in \"Four Rooms\", an anthology film where Tarantino directed the final segment, and filmed a scene for \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\" before it was cut for time.\nOther actors who have appeared in several films by Tarantino include Michael Bacall, Michael Bowen, Bruce Dern, Harvey Keitel, Michael Parks, Kurt Russell, and Craig Stark, who have appeared in three films each.\nLeonardo DiCaprio and Brad Pitt have each appeared in two Tarantino films, the second of which, \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\", they appear in together. Like Jackson, Pitt also appeared in the Tarantino-penned \"True Romance\". Christoph Waltz appeared in two Tarantino films, \"Inglourious Basterds\" and \"Django Unchained\", winning a Best Supporting Actor Oscar for each role. Waltz had been working as an actor since the 1970s in numerous German movies and TV shows but was a relative unknown in America when he was cast as Hans Landa in his first film for Tarantino.\nEditor Sally Menke, who worked on all Tarantino films until her death in 2010, was described by Tarantino in 2007 as \"hands down my number one collaborator\".\nControversies.\nSpike Lee criticisms.\nIn 1997, Spike Lee questioned Tarantino's use of racial slurs in his films, especially the N-word, particularly in \"Pulp Fiction\" and \"Jackie Brown\". In a \"Variety\" interview discussing \"Jackie Brown\", Lee said, \"I'm not against the word ... And some people speak that way, but Quentin is infatuated with that word... I want Quentin to know that all African Americans do not think that word is trendy or slick.\" Tarantino responded on \"The Charlie Rose Show\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As a writer, I demand the right to write any character in the world that I want to write. I demand the right to be them, I demand the right to think them and I demand the right to tell the truth as I see they are, all right? And to say that I can't do that because I'm white, but the Hughes brothers can do that because they're black, that is racist. That is the heart of racism, all right. And I do not accept that\u00a0... That is how a segment of the black community that lives in Compton, lives in Inglewood, where \"Jackie Brown\" takes place, that lives in Carson, that is how they talk. I'm telling the truth. It would not be questioned if I was black, and I resent the question because I'm white. I have the right to tell the truth. I do not have the right to lie.\nTarantino said on \"The Howard Stern Show\" that Lee would have to \"stand on a chair to kiss [his] ass.\" Samuel L. Jackson, who has appeared in both directors' films, defended Tarantino. At the Berlin Film Festival, where \"Jackie Brown\" was screened, Jackson said: \"I don't think the word is offensive in the context of this film\u00a0... Black artists think they are the only ones allowed to use the word. Well, that's bull. \"Jackie Brown\" is a wonderful homage to black exploitation films. This is a good film, and Spike hasn't made one of those in a few years.\" Tarantino argued that black audiences appreciated his blaxploitation-influenced films more than some of his critics, and that \"Jackie Brown\" was primarily made for black audiences.\n\"Django Unchained\" was the subject of controversy because of its use of racial slurs and depiction of slavery. Reviewers defended the use of the language by pointing out the historic context of race and slavery in America. Lee, in an interview with \"Vibe\", said that he would not see the film: \"All I'm going to say is that it's disrespectful to my ancestors. That's just me ... I'm not speaking on behalf of anybody else.\" Lee later tweeted: \"American slavery was not a Sergio Leone spaghetti western. It was a holocaust. My ancestors are slaves. Stolen from Africa. I will honor them.\"\nRoman Polanski and Harvey Weinstein.\nIn a 2003 Howard Stern interview, Tarantino defended the director Roman Polanski against charges that Polanski had raped then-13-year-old Samantha Geimer in 1977. He said that Polanski's actions were \"not rape\" and Geimer \"...wanted to have it\". The interview resurfaced in 2018 and drew criticism, including from Geimer, who stated in an interview, \"He was wrong. I bet he knows it... I hope he doesn't make an ass of himself and keep talking that way.\" Within days of the interview resurfacing, Tarantino issued an apology, stating \"Fifteen years later, I realize how wrong I was... I incorrectly played devil's advocate in the debate for the sake of being provocative.\"\nOn October 18, 2017, Tarantino gave an interview discussing sexual harassment and assault allegations against producer Harvey Weinstein. Tarantino said his then-girlfriend Mira Sorvino told him in the mid-1990s about her experience with Weinstein. Tarantino confronted Weinstein at the time and received an apology. Tarantino said: \"What I did was marginalize the incidents. I knew enough to do more than I did.\"\nOn February 3, 2018, in an interview with \"The New York Times\", \"Kill Bill\" actress Uma Thurman said Weinstein had sexually assaulted her, and that she had reported this to Tarantino. Tarantino said he confronted Weinstein, as he had previously when Weinstein made advances on his former partner, demanding he apologize. He banned him from contact with Thurman for the remainder of the film's production. In a June 2021 interview on the \"Joe Rogan Experience\" podcast, Tarantino said he regretted not pressing Weinstein further, saying he did not know the extent of his misconduct before the 2017 scandal. He remarked on his \"sad\" view of his past relationship with Weinstein, saying he once looked up to him for fostering his career and describing him as \"a fucked up father figure\".\nAltercations with industry peers.\nIn 1993, Tarantino sold his script for \"Natural Born Killers,\" which was rewritten, giving him only a story credit. He later disowned the film, which caused enmity and resulted in the publication of a \"tell-all\" book titled \"Killer Instinct\" by Jane Hamsher\u2014who, with Don Murphy, had an original option on the screenplay and produced the film\u2014calling Tarantino a \"one-trick pony\" and becoming \"famous for being famous.\" Tarantino physically assaulted Murphy in the AGO restaurant in West Hollywood, California in October 1997. Murphy subsequently filed a $5 million lawsuit against Tarantino; the case ended with the judge ordering Tarantino to pay Murphy $450.\nIn 1994, Tarantino had an on-set feud with Denzel Washington during the filming of \"Crimson Tide\" over what was described as \"Tarantino's racist dialogue added to the script\". A few years later Washington apologized to Tarantino saying he \"buried that hatchet\".\nIn 1997, during the Oscars ceremony, Tarantino was accompanying Mira Sorvino when the then-MTV News host, Chris Connelly, called over to Sorvino from the media scrum. Before she could talk to Connelly, Tarantino grabbed Sorvino telling her, \"He's the editor of \"Premiere\" and he did a story on my Dad,\" and pulled her away. Connelly, a former \"Premiere\" magazine editor-in-chief said, \"No, I didn't.\" As they walked off, Tarantino gave the journalist the finger saying \"Fuck you!\" and spat at him. The article that angered Tarantino included a 1995 interview from a biography by Jami Bernard with his biological father, Tony Tarantino, someone he had never met, which he considered \"pretty tasteless\".\nIn 2009, Tarantino was set to appear on the talk show \"Late Show with David Letterman\" to promote \"Inglourious Basterds\". A few years prior to this event, David Letterman had interviewed a former \"unnamed\" girlfriend of Tarantino on his show. Letterman joked about the relationship questioning why a \"glorious movie star\" would date a \"little squirrelly guy\". A couple of days later, Tarantino phoned Letterman, screaming angrily, \"I'm going to beat you to death! I'm going to kill you! I'm coming to New York, and I'm gonna beat the crap out of you! How can you say that about me?!\" Letterman offered to pay for Tarantino's flight and let him choose the method of fighting, which Tarantino determined would be \"bats\". However, Letterman never heard from Tarantino again, until years later, when he came on the show to promote the new film. The host approached Tarantino in the make-up room, just before the show went live, and demanded an apology. Tarantino was not forthcoming, but at his publicist's urging, he begrudgingly conceded.\nIn 2013, during an interview with Krishnan Guru-Murthy on \"Channel 4 News\" while promoting \"Django Unchained\" in the UK, Tarantino reacted angrily when he was questioned about whether there was a link between movie violence and real-life violence. He informed Guru-Murthy that he had commented on the subject many times before and did not need to explain again, therefore was \"shutting [his] butt down\". Tarantino further defied the journalist, saying: \"I refuse your question. I'm not your slave and you're not my master. You can't make me dance to your tune. I'm not a monkey.\"\nIn 2019, during the Cannes Film Festival, at the \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\" press conference, a journalist asked why Margot Robbie had so few lines in the film. Tarantino responded indignantly \"I just reject your hypothesis\", with no further comment.\nFilm criticisms.\nIn June 2020, Tarantino became an officially recognized critic on the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes where his reviews are part of the \"Tomatometer\" rating. He has since published over 30 film reviews, including director essays, on his New Beverly Cinema website.&lt;ref name=\"archive.org/web/thenewbev\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nTarantino reappraises films in ways that challenge the views of mainstream film criticism, for example, he considers the 1983 film \"Psycho II\" to be superior to the original 1960 film \"Psycho\". He is also among a few notable directors, including Martin Scorsese and Edgar Wright, who appreciate Elaine May's 1987 film \"Ishtar\", despite its reputation as being a notorious box-office flop and one of the worst films ever made.\nTarantino has opined that Steven Spielberg's \"Jaws\" is \"the greatest movie of all time. Maybe not the best film, but the best movie ever made\". He commented further that his \"favourite Spielberg-directed movie, again with \"Jaws\" carved out on its own Mount Rushmore, is \"Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom\" ... He pushes the envelope, he creates PG-13; a movie so fucking badass it created a new level in the MPAA.\"\nOther work.\nBooks.\nIn 2020, Tarantino signed a two-book deal with HarperCollins.\"\" He published his first novel in June 2021, a novelization of \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\". It received positive reviews from \"The New York Times\" and \"The Guardian\". The second book titled \"Cinema Speculation\", about films of the New Hollywood era, inspired by film critic Pauline Kael was published on November 1, 2022.\nPodcast.\nIn June 2021, Tarantino announced plans to start a podcast with Roger Avary. The podcast is named after Video Archives, a video rental store that both directors worked at prior to their film careers, and features the directors and occasional guests examining a film which could have been offered for rental at the store. The podcast premiered on July 19, 2022.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and marriage.\nIn the early 1990s, Tarantino dated comedians Margaret Cho and Kathy Griffin. From 1995 to 1998, he dated actress Mira Sorvino and was her date at the 68th Oscars ceremony where she won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. In March 1998 they separated, with Sorvino releasing a statement that \"[We] still love each other very much\" but had reached a \"mutual decision to go their separate ways.\" From 2003 to 2005, Tarantino was in a romantic relationship with filmmaker Sofia Coppola. The two have remained friends since their breakup.\nOn June 30, 2017, Tarantino became engaged to Israeli singer Daniella Pick, daughter of musician Zvika Pick. They met in 2009 when Tarantino was in Israel to promote \"Inglourious Basterds\". They married on November 28, 2018, in a Reform Jewish ceremony in their Beverly Hills Home. As of January 2020, they were splitting their time between the Ramat Aviv Gimel neighborhood of Tel Aviv and Los Angeles. As a result, he is trying to learn Hebrew. On February 22, 2020, their son was born in Israel. On July 3, 2022, their second child, a daughter, was also born in Israel.\nTarantino has a maternal half-brother, and three paternal half-siblings.\nPolitical views.\nIn 2015, Tarantino said that Barack Obama is his favorite president and voiced support for the Black Lives Matter movement.\nIn response to the Hamas-led attack on Israel on October 7, 2023, Tarantino visited a military base in southern Israel to \"boost the morale\" of Israeli troops.\nIn August 2024, Tarantino expressed his intention to vote for Democratic presidential nominee Kamala Harris in the 2024 presidential election on Bill Maher's podcast \"Club Random\".\nFaith and religious views.\nAs a youth, Tarantino attended an Evangelical church, describing himself as \"baptized, born again and everything in between\". Tarantino said this was an act of rebellion against his Catholic mother as she had encouraged what might usually be considered more conventional forms of rebellion, such as his interests in comic books and horror films. Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, Tarantino was evasive about his religious beliefs but said he believed in God, whom he credited with giving him his writing ability.\nIn the 2010s, Tarantino continued ascribing his talents to gifts from God but expressed uncertainty regarding God's existence. \"I think I was born Catholic, but I was never practiced,\" said Tarantino. \"As time has gone on, as I've become a man and made my way further as an adult, I'm not sure how much any of that I believe in. I don't really know if I believe in God, especially not in this Santa Claus character that people seemed to have conjured up.\" In June 2021, Tarantino said he was an atheist.\nViews on gun violence and police brutality.\nTarantino has said he does not believe that violence in film inspires real acts of violence. In an interview with Terry Gross, Tarantino expressed \"annoyance\" at the suggestion that there is a link between the two, saying, \"I think it's disrespectful to [the] memory of those who died to talk about movies ... Obviously the issue is gun control and mental health.\"\nIn October 2015, Tarantino attended a rally held in New York protesting police brutality. The event aimed to call attention to \"police brutality and its victims\". At the event Tarantino made a speech, \"I'm a human being with a conscience ... And when I see murder I cannot stand by. And I have to call the murdered the murdered and I have to call the murderers the murderers.\"\nAs a response to Tarantino's comments police unions across the United States called for a boycott of his upcoming film at the time, \"The Hateful Eight\". Patrick J. Lynch, union president of the Police Benevolent Association of the City of New York, said, \"It's no surprise that someone who makes a living glorifying crime and violence is a cop-hater, too. The police officers that Quentin Tarantino calls 'murderers' aren't living in one of his depraved big screen fantasies \u2014 they're risking and sometimes sacrificing their lives to protect communities from real crime and mayhem.\" The Los Angeles Police Department Chief Charlie Beck said Tarantino \"doesn't understand the nature of the violence. Mr. Tarantino lives in a fantasy world. That's how he makes his living. His movies are extremely violent, but he doesn't understand violence. \u2026 Unfortunately, he mistakes lawful use of force for murder, and it's not.\"\nTarantino's response to this criticism was, \"All cops are not murderers ... I never said that. I never even implied that.\" In an MSNBC interview with Chris Hayes, he said, \"Just because I was at an anti-police brutality protest doesn't mean I'm anti-police.\" He clarified his protest comments, \"We were at a rally where unarmed people \u2013 mostly black and brown \u2013 who have been shot and killed or beaten or strangled by the police, and I was obviously referring to the people in those types of situations. I was referring to Eric Garner, I was referring to Sam DuBose, I was referring to Antonio Guzman Lopez, I was referring to Tamir Rice ... In those cases in particular that we're talking about, I actually do believe that they were murder [\"sic\"].\"\nFilmography.\nTarantino has stated that he plans to make a total of just ten films before retiring as a director, as a means of ensuring an overall high quality within his filmography. He believes \"most directors have horrible last movies,\" that ending on a \"decent movie is rare,\" and that ending on a \"good movie is kind of phenomenal.\" Tarantino considers \"Kill Bill: Volume 1\" and \"Kill Bill: Volume 2\" to be a single movie. While he wrote and produced 2026 film, \"The Adventures of Cliff Booth\", a sequel to \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\" set in 1977, he chose not to direct it, instead he handed the project to David Fincher, whom he calls \"one of the two best directors\".\nAwards, honors and recognition.\nTarantino and his films have received numerous nominations for major awards, including Academy Awards, BAFTA Awards, Golden Globe Awards, Directors Guild of America Awards, and Saturn Awards. He has won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay twice, for \"Pulp Fiction\" and \"Django Unchained\". He has been nominated four times for the at the Cannes Film Festival, winning once for \"Pulp Fiction\" in 1994. In addition to his recognition for writing and directing films, Tarantino has received five Grammy Award nominations and a Primetime Emmy Award nomination.\nIn 2005, Tarantino was awarded the honorary Icon of the Decade at the 10th Empire Awards. He has received lifetime achievement awards from two organizations, Cinemanila, and from the Rome Film Festival in 2012. In 2011, Tarantino was given an Honorary C\u00e9sar by the .\nFor his work on \"Pulp Fiction\", Tarantino became the first director to ever sweep \"The Big Four\" critics awards (LA, NBR, NY, NSFC) and the first of the five directors (including Curtis Hanson, Steven Soderbergh, David Fincher, and Barry Jenkins) to do so as of 2025.\nRecognition.\nDuring his career, Tarantino's films have garnered a cult following, as well as critical and commercial success. In 2005, he was included on the annual \"Time\" 100 list of the most influential people in the world. He was also on \"The Daily Telegraph\" list of \"Top 100 Living Geniuses\" in 2007. Filmmaker and historian Peter Bogdanovich has called him \"the single most influential director of his generation\". Tarantino has received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the film industry.\nIn 2013, a survey of seventeen academics was carried out to discover which filmmakers had been referenced the most in essays and dissertations on film that had been marked in the previous five years. It revealed that Tarantino was the most-studied director in the United Kingdom, ahead of Alfred Hitchcock, Christopher Nolan, Martin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg.\nDirected Academy Award performancesUnder Tarantino's direction, these actors have received Academy Award nominations (and wins) for their performances in their respective roles.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25170", "revid": "9471924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25170", "title": "Quartile", "text": "Statistic which divides data into four same-sized parts for analysis\nIn statistics, quartiles are a type of quantiles which divide the number of data points into four parts, or \"quarters\", of more-or-less equal size. The data must be ordered from smallest to largest to compute quartiles; as such, quartiles are a form of order statistic. The three quartiles, resulting in four data divisions, are as follows:\nAlong with the minimum and maximum of the data (which are also quartiles), the three quartiles described above provide a five-number summary of the data. This summary is important in statistics because it provides information about both the center and the spread of the data. Knowing the lower and upper quartile provides information on how big the spread is and if the dataset is skewed toward one side. Since quartiles divide the number of data points evenly, the range is generally not the same between adjacent quartiles (i.e. usually (\"Q\"3 - \"Q\"2) \u2260 (\"Q\"2 - \"Q\"1)). Interquartile range (IQR) is defined as the difference between the 75th and 25th percentiles or \"Q\"3 - \"Q\"1. While the maximum and minimum also show the spread of the data, the upper and lower quartiles can provide more detailed information on the location of specific data points, the presence of outliers in the data, and the difference in spread between the middle 50% of the data and the outer data points.\nComputing methods.\nDiscrete distributions.\nFor discrete distributions, there is no universal agreement on selecting the quartile values.\nMethod 1.\nThis rule is employed by the TI-83 calculator boxplot and \"1-Var Stats\" functions.\nMethod 2.\nThe values found by this method are also known as \"Tukey's hinges\"; see also midhinge.\nMethod 4.\nIf we have an ordered dataset formula_1, then we can interpolate between data points to find the formula_2th empirical quantile if formula_3 is in the formula_4 quantile. If we denote the integer part of a number formula_5 by formula_6, then the empirical quantile function is given by,\nformula_7,\nformula_8 is the last data point in quartile \"p\", and formula_9 is the first data point in quartile \"p\"+1.\nformula_10 measures where the quartile falls between formula_8 and formula_9. If formula_10 = 0 then the quartile falls exactly on formula_8. If formula_10 = 0.5 then the quartile falls exactly half way between formula_8 and formula_9. \nformula_7,\nwhere formula_19 and formula_20.\nTo find the first, second, and third quartiles of the dataset we would evaluate formula_21, formula_22, and formula_23 respectively.\nAnother way to explain this method is that we are finding a rank within the data, which can then be used to determine the value of the first, second, or third quartile. The rank for the formula_2th quartile is calculated using\nrank formula_25.\nThe formula_2th quartile is the value in the data set (when sorted from least to greatest) whose position equals the rank number. For example, a rank of 1 means the formula_2th quartile is the smallest value in the data set. If the rank is not an integer, interpolate between the data points. So a rank of 1.5 means the formula_2th quartile is the value halfway between the first and second data points.\nExample 1.\nOrdered Data Set (of an odd number of data points): 6, 7, 15, 36, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 47, 49.\nThe bold number (40) is the median splitting the data set into two halves with equal number of data points.\nExample 2.\nOrdered Data Set (of an even number of data points): 7, 15, 36, 39, 40, 41.\nThe bold numbers (36, 39) are used to calculate the median as their average. As there are an even number of data points, the first three methods all give the same results. (The Method 3 is executed such that the median is not chosen as a new data point and the Method 1 started.)\nContinuous probability distributions.\nIf we define a continuous probability distributions as formula_29 where formula_30 is a real valued random variable, its cumulative distribution function (CDF) is given by\nformula_31.\nThe CDF gives the probability that the random variable formula_30 is less than or equal to the value formula_33. Therefore, the first quartile is the value of formula_33 when formula_35, the second quartile is formula_33 when formula_37, and the third quartile is formula_33 when formula_39. The values of formula_33 can be found with the quantile function formula_41 where formula_42 for the first quartile, formula_43 for the second quartile, and formula_44 for the third quartile. The quantile function is the inverse of the cumulative distribution function if the cumulative distribution function is monotonically increasing because the one-to-one correspondence between the input and output of the cumulative distribution function holds.\nOutliers.\nThere are methods by which to check for outliers in the discipline of statistics and statistical analysis. Outliers could be a result from a shift in the location (mean) or in the scale (variability) of the process of interest. Outliers could also be evidence of a sample population that has a non-normal distribution or of a contaminated population data set. Consequently, as is the basic idea of descriptive statistics, when encountering an outlier, we have to explain this value by further analysis of the cause or origin of the outlier. In cases of extreme observations, which are not an infrequent occurrence, the typical values must be analyzed. The Interquartile Range (IQR), defined as the difference between the upper and lower quartiles (formula_45), may be used to characterize the data when there may be extremities that skew the data; the interquartile range is a relatively robust statistic (also sometimes called \"resistance\") compared to the range and standard deviation. There is also a mathematical method to check for outliers and determining \"fences\", upper and lower limits from which to check for outliers.\nAfter determining the first (lower) and third (upper) quartiles (formula_46 and formula_47 respectively) and the interquartile range (formula_48) as outlined above, then fences are calculated using the following formula:\n formula_49\n formula_50\nThe lower fence is the \"lower limit\" and the upper fence is the \"upper limit\" of data, and any data lying outside these defined bounds can be considered an outlier. The fences provide a guideline by which to define an outlier, which may be defined in other ways. The fences define a \"range\" outside which an outlier exists; a way to picture this is a boundary of a fence. It is common for the lower and upper fences along with the outliers to be represented by a boxplot. For the boxplot shown on the right, only the vertical heights correspond to the visualized data set while horizontal width of the box is irrelevant. Outliers located outside the fences in a boxplot can be marked as any choice of symbol, such as an \"x\" or \"o\". The fences are sometimes also referred to as \"whiskers\" while the entire plot visual is called a \"box-and-whisker\" plot.\nWhen spotting an outlier in the data set by calculating the interquartile ranges and boxplot features, it might be easy to mistakenly view it as evidence that the population is non-normal or that the sample is contaminated. However, this method should not take place of a hypothesis test for determining normality of the population. The significance of the outliers varies depending on the sample size. If the sample is small, then it is more probable to get interquartile ranges that are unrepresentatively small, leading to narrower fences. Therefore, it would be more likely to find data that are marked as outliers.\nComputer software for quartiles.\nExcel.\nThe Excel function \"QUARTILE.INC(array, quart)\" provides the desired quartile value for a given array of data, using Method 3 from above. The \"QUARTILE\" function is a legacy function from Excel 2007 or earlier, giving the same output of the function \"QUARTILE.INC\". In the function, \"array\" is the dataset of numbers that is being analyzed and \"quart\" is any of the following 5 values depending on which quartile is being calculated. \nMATLAB.\nIn order to calculate quartiles in Matlab, the function \"quantile\"(\"A\",\"p\") can be used. Where \"A\" is the vector of data being analyzed and \"p\" is the percentage that relates to the quartiles as stated below. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25172", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25172", "title": "Quantum Mechanics", "text": ""}
{"id": "25173", "revid": "51070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25173", "title": "Quadword", "text": ""}
{"id": "25175", "revid": "50883675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25175", "title": "Quadratic equation", "text": "Polynomial equation of degree two\nIn mathematics, a quadratic equation (from la\u00a0'square') is an equation that can be rearranged in standard form as\nformula_1\nwhere the variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; represents an unknown number, and \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\" represent known numbers, where \"a\" \u2260 0. (If \"a\" \n 0 and \"b\" \u2260 0 then the equation is linear, not quadratic.) The numbers \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\" are the \"coefficients\" of the equation and may be distinguished by respectively calling them, the \"quadratic coefficient\", the \"linear coefficient\" and the \"constant coefficient\" or \"free term\".\nThe values of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; that satisfy the equation are called \"solutions\" of the equation, and \"roots\" or \"zeros\" of the quadratic function on its left-hand side. A quadratic equation has at most two solutions. If there is only one solution, one says that it is a double root. If all the coefficients are real numbers, there are either two real solutions, or a real double root, or two complex solutions that are complex conjugates of each other. A quadratic equation always has two roots, if complex roots are included and a double root is counted for two. A quadratic equation can be factored into an equivalent equation \nformula_2\nwhere r and s are the solutions for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. \nThe quadratic formula\nformula_3\nexpresses the solutions in terms of a, b, and c. Completing the square is one of several ways for deriving the formula.\nSolutions to problems that can be expressed in terms of quadratic equations were known as early as 2000 BC.\nThe quadratic equation contains only powers of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; that are non-negative integers, and therefore it is a polynomial equation. In particular, it is a second-degree polynomial equation, since the greatest power is two.\nSolving the quadratic equation.\nA quadratic equation whose coefficients are real numbers can have either zero, one, or two distinct real-valued solutions, also called \"roots\". When there is only one distinct root, it can be interpreted as two roots with the same value, called a double root. When there are no real roots, the coefficients can be considered as complex numbers with zero imaginary part, and the quadratic equation still has two complex-valued roots, complex conjugates of each-other with a non-zero imaginary part. A quadratic equation whose coefficients are arbitrary complex numbers always has two complex-valued roots which may or may not be distinct.\nThe solutions of a quadratic equation can be found by several alternative methods.\nFactoring by inspection.\nIt may be possible to express a quadratic equation \"ax\"2 + \"bx\" + \"c\" \n 0 as a product (\"px\" + \"q\")(\"rx\" + \"s\") \n 0. In some cases, it is possible, by simple inspection, to determine values of \"p\", \"q\", \"r,\" and \"s\" that make the two forms equivalent to one another. If the quadratic equation is written in the second form, then the \"Zero Factor Property\" states that the quadratic equation is satisfied if \"px\" + \"q\" \n 0 or \"rx\" + \"s\" \n 0. Solving these two linear equations provides the roots of the quadratic.\nFor most students, factoring by inspection is the first method of solving quadratic equations to which they are exposed. If one is given a quadratic equation in the form \"x\"2 + \"bx\" + \"c\" \n 0, the sought factorization has the form (\"x\" + \"q\")(\"x\" + \"s\"), and one has to find two numbers \"q\" and \"s\" that add up to \"b\" and whose product is \"c\" (this is sometimes called \"Vieta's rule\" and is related to Vieta's formulas). As an example, \"x\"2 + 5\"x\" + 6 factors as (\"x\" + 3)(\"x\" + 2). The more general case where \"a\" does not equal 1 can require a considerable effort in trial and error guess-and-check, assuming that it can be factored at all by inspection.\nExcept for special cases such as where \"b\" \n 0 or \"c\" \n 0, factoring by inspection only works for quadratic equations that have rational roots. This means that the great majority of quadratic equations that arise in practical applications cannot be solved by factoring by inspection.\nCompleting the square.\nThe process of completing the square makes use of the algebraic identity\nformula_4\nwhich represents a well-defined algorithm that can be used to solve any quadratic equation. Starting with a quadratic equation in standard form, \"ax\"2 + \"bx\" + \"c\" \n 0 \nWe illustrate use of this algorithm by solving 2\"x\"2 + 4\"x\" \u2212 4 \n 0\nformula_5\nformula_6\nformula_7\nformula_8\nformula_9\nformula_10\nformula_11\nThe plus\u2013minus symbol \"\u00b1\" indicates that both formula_12 and formula_13 are solutions of the quadratic equation.\nQuadratic formula and its derivation.\nCompleting the square can be used to derive a general formula for solving quadratic equations, called the quadratic formula. The mathematical proof will now be briefly summarized. It can easily be seen, by polynomial expansion, that the following equation is equivalent to the quadratic equation:\nformula_14\nTaking the square root of both sides, and isolating \"x\", gives:\nformula_15\nSome sources, particularly older ones, use alternative parameterizations of the quadratic equation such as \"ax\"2 + 2\"bx\" + \"c\" \n 0 or \"ax\"2 \u2212 2\"bx\" + \"c\" \n 0\u00a0, where \"b\" has a magnitude one half of the more common one, possibly with opposite sign. These result in slightly different forms for the solution, but are otherwise equivalent.\nA number of alternative derivations can be found in the literature. These proofs are simpler than the standard completing the square method, represent interesting applications of other frequently used techniques in algebra, or offer insight into other areas of mathematics.\nA lesser known quadratic formula, as used in Muller's method, provides the same roots via the equation\nformula_16 \nThis can be deduced from the standard quadratic formula by Vieta's formulas, which assert that the product of the roots is \"c\"/\"a\". It also follows from dividing the quadratic equation by formula_17 giving formula_18 solving this for formula_19 and then inverting.\nOne property of this form is that it yields one valid root when \"a\" \n 0, while the other root contains division by zero, because when \"a\" \n 0, the quadratic equation becomes a linear equation, which has one root. By contrast, in this case, the more common formula has a division by zero for one root and an indeterminate form 0/0 for the other root. On the other hand, when \"c\" \n 0, the more common formula yields two correct roots whereas this form yields the zero root and an indeterminate form 0/0.\nWhen neither a nor c is zero, the equality between the standard quadratic formula and Muller's method,\nformula_20\ncan be verified by cross multiplication, and similarly for the other choice of signs.\nReduced quadratic equation.\nIt is sometimes convenient to reduce a quadratic equation so that its leading coefficient is one. This is done by dividing both sides by \"a\", which is always possible since \"a\" is non-zero. This produces the \"reduced quadratic equation\":\nformula_21\nwhere \"p\" \n \"b\"/\"a\" and \"q\" \n \"c\"/\"a\". This monic polynomial equation has the same solutions as the original.\nThe quadratic formula for the solutions of the reduced quadratic equation, written in terms of its coefficients, is\nformula_22\nDiscriminant.\nIn the quadratic formula, the expression underneath the square root sign is called the \"discriminant\" of the quadratic equation, and is often represented using an upper case \"D\" or an upper case Greek delta:\nformula_23\nA quadratic equation with \"real\" coefficients can have either one or two distinct real roots, or two distinct complex roots. In this case the discriminant determines the number and nature of the roots. There are three cases:\nThus the roots are distinct if and only if the discriminant is non-zero, and the roots are real if and only if the discriminant is non-negative.\nGeometric interpretation.\nThe function \"f\"(\"x\") \n \"ax\"2 + \"bx\" + \"c\" is a quadratic function. The graph of any quadratic function has the same general shape, which is called a parabola. The location and size of the parabola, and how it opens, depend on the values of \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\". If \"a\" &gt; 0, the parabola has a minimum point and opens upward. If \"a\" &lt; 0, the parabola has a maximum point and opens downward. The extreme point of the parabola, whether minimum or maximum, corresponds to its vertex. The \"x-coordinate\" of the vertex will be located at formula_27, and the \"y-coordinate\" of the vertex may be found by substituting this \"x-value\" into the function. The \"y-intercept\" is located at the point (0, \"c\").\nThe solutions of the quadratic equation \"ax\"2 + \"bx\" + \"c\" \n 0 correspond to the roots of the function \"f\"(\"x\") \n \"ax\"2 + \"bx\" + \"c\", since they are the values of \"x\" for which \"f\"(\"x\") \n 0. If \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\" are real numbers and the domain of \"f\" is the set of real numbers, then the roots of \"f\" are exactly the \"x\"-coordinates of the points where the graph touches the \"x\"-axis. If the discriminant is positive, the graph touches the \"x\"-axis at two points; if zero, the graph touches at one point; and if negative, the graph does not touch the \"x\"-axis.\nQuadratic factorization.\nThe term\nformula_28\nis a factor of the polynomial\nformula_29\nif and only if \"r\" is a root of the quadratic equation\nformula_30\nIt follows from the quadratic formula that\nformula_31\nIn the special case \"b\"2 \n 4\"ac\" where the quadratic has only one distinct root (\"i.e.\" the discriminant is zero), the quadratic polynomial can be factored as\nformula_32\nGraphical solution.\nThe solutions of the quadratic equation \nformula_33\nmay be deduced from the graph of the quadratic function\nformula_34\nwhich is a parabola.\nIf the parabola intersects the x-axis in two points, there are two real roots, which are the x-coordinates of these two points (also called x-intercept).\nIf the parabola is tangent to the x-axis, there is a double root, which is the x-coordinate of the contact point between the graph and parabola.\nIf the parabola does not intersect the x-axis, there are two complex conjugate roots. Although these roots cannot be visualized on the graph, their real and imaginary parts can be.\nLet h and k be respectively the x-coordinate and the y-coordinate of the vertex of the parabola (that is the point with maximal or minimal y-coordinate. The quadratic function may be rewritten\nformula_35\nLet d be the distance between the point of y-coordinate 2\"k\" on the axis of the parabola, and a point on the parabola with the same y-coordinate (see the figure; there are two such points, which give the same distance, because of the symmetry of the parabola). Then the real part of the roots is h, and their imaginary part are \u00b1\"d\". That is, the roots are \nformula_36\nor in the case of the example of the figure\nformula_37\nAvoiding loss of significance.\nAlthough the quadratic formula provides an exact solution, the result is not exact if real numbers are approximated during the computation, as usual in numerical analysis, where real numbers are approximated by floating point numbers (called \"reals\" in many programming languages). In this context, the quadratic formula is not completely stable.\nThis occurs when the roots have different order of magnitude, or, equivalently, when \"b\"2 and \"b\"2 \u2212 4\"ac\" are close in magnitude. In this case, the subtraction of two nearly equal numbers will cause loss of significance or catastrophic cancellation in the smaller root. To avoid this, the root that is smaller in magnitude, \"r\", can be computed as formula_38 where \"R\" is the root that is bigger in magnitude. This is equivalent to using the formula\nformula_39\nusing the plus sign if formula_40 and the minus sign if formula_41\nA second form of cancellation can occur between the terms \"b\"2 and 4\"ac\" of the discriminant, that is when the two roots are very close. This can lead to loss of up to half of correct significant figures in the roots.\nExamples and applications.\nThe golden ratio is found as the positive solution of the quadratic equation formula_42\nThe equations of the circle and the other conic sections\u2014ellipses, parabolas, and hyperbolas\u2014are quadratic equations in two variables.\nGiven the cosine or sine of an angle, finding the cosine or sine of the angle that is half as large involves solving a quadratic equation.\nThe process of simplifying expressions involving the square root of an expression involving the square root of another expression involves finding the two solutions of a quadratic equation.\nDescartes' theorem states that for every four kissing (mutually tangent) circles, their radii satisfy a particular quadratic equation.\nThe equation given by Fuss' theorem, giving the relation among the radius of a bicentric quadrilateral's inscribed circle, the radius of its circumscribed circle, and the distance between the centers of those circles, can be expressed as a quadratic equation for which the distance between the two circles' centers in terms of their radii is one of the solutions. The other solution of the same equation in terms of the relevant radii gives the distance between the circumscribed circle's center and the center of the excircle of an ex-tangential quadrilateral.\nCritical points of a cubic function and inflection points of a quartic function are found by solving a quadratic equation.\nIn physics, for motion with constant acceleration formula_43, the displacement or position formula_44 of a moving body can be expressed as a quadratic function of time formula_45 given the initial position formula_46 and initial velocity formula_47: formula_48.\nIn chemistry, the pH of a solution of weak acid can be calculated from the negative base-10 logarithm of the positive root of a quadratic equation in terms of the acidity constant and the analytical concentration of the acid.\nHistory.\nBabylonian mathematicians, as early as 2000 BC (displayed on Old Babylonian clay tablets) could solve problems relating the areas and sides of rectangles. There is evidence dating this algorithm as far back as the Third Dynasty of Ur. In modern notation, the problems typically involved solving a pair of simultaneous equations of the form:\nformula_49\nwhich is equivalent to the statement that x and y are the roots of the equation:\nformula_50\nThe steps given by Babylonian scribes for solving the above rectangle problem, in terms of x and y, were as follows:\nIn modern notation this means calculating formula_51, which is equivalent to the modern day quadratic formula for the larger real root (if any) formula_52 with \"a\" = 1, \"b\" = \u2212\"p\", and \"c\" = \"q\".\nGeometric methods were used to solve quadratic equations in Babylonia, Egypt, Greece, China, and India. The Egyptian Berlin Papyrus, dating back to the Middle Kingdom (2050 BC to 1650 BC), contains the solution to a two-term quadratic equation. Babylonian mathematicians from circa 400 BC and Chinese mathematicians from circa 200 BC used geometric methods of dissection to solve quadratic equations with positive roots. Rules for quadratic equations were given in \"The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\", a Chinese treatise on mathematics. These early geometric methods do not appear to have had a general formula. Euclid, the Greek mathematician, produced a more abstract geometrical method around 300 BC. With a purely geometric approach Pythagoras and Euclid created a general procedure to find solutions of the quadratic equation. In his work \"Arithmetica\", the Greek mathematician Diophantus solved the quadratic equation, but giving only one root, even when both roots were positive.\nIn 628 AD, Brahmagupta, an Indian mathematician, gave in his book \"Br\u0101hmasphu\u1e6dasiddh\u0101nta\" the first explicit (although still not completely general) solution of the quadratic equation \"ax\"2 + \"bx\" \n \"c\" as follows: \"To the absolute number multiplied by four times the [coefficient of the] square, add the square of the [coefficient of the] middle term; the square root of the same, less the [coefficient of the] middle term, being divided by twice the [coefficient of the] square is the value.\" This is equivalent to\nformula_53\nThe \"Bakhshali Manuscript\" written in India in the 7th century AD contained an algebraic formula for solving quadratic equations, as well as linear indeterminate equations (originally of type \"ax\"/\"c\" \n \"y\").\nMuhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi (9th century) developed a set of formulas that worked for positive solutions. Al-Khwarizmi goes further in providing a full solution to the general quadratic equation, accepting one or two numerical answers for every quadratic equation, while providing geometric proofs in the process. He also described the method of completing the square and recognized that the discriminant must be positive, which was proven by his contemporary 'Abd al-Ham\u012bd ibn Turk (Central Asia, 9th century) who gave geometric figures to prove that if the discriminant is negative, a quadratic equation has no solution. While al-Khwarizmi himself did not accept negative solutions, later Islamic mathematicians that succeeded him accepted negative solutions, as well as irrational numbers as solutions. Ab\u016b K\u0101mil Shuj\u0101 ibn Aslam (Egypt, 10th century) in particular was the first to accept irrational numbers (often in the form of a square root, cube root or fourth root) as solutions to quadratic equations or as coefficients in an equation. The 9th century Indian mathematician Sridhara wrote down rules for solving quadratic equations.\nThe Jewish mathematician Abraham bar Hiyya Ha-Nasi (12th century, Spain) authored the first European book to include the full solution to the general quadratic equation. His solution was largely based on Al-Khwarizmi's work. The writing of the Chinese mathematician Yang Hui (1238\u20131298 AD) is the first known one in which quadratic equations with negative coefficients of 'x' appear, although he attributes this to the earlier Liu Yi. By 1545 Gerolamo Cardano compiled the works related to the quadratic equations. The quadratic formula covering all cases was first obtained by Simon Stevin in 1594. In 1637 Ren\u00e9 Descartes published \"La G\u00e9om\u00e9trie\" containing the quadratic formula in the form we know today.\nAdvanced topics.\nAlternative methods of root calculation.\nVieta's formulas.\n\"Vieta's formulas\" (named after Fran\u00e7ois Vi\u00e8te) are the relations\nformula_54 \nbetween the roots of a quadratic polynomial and its coefficients. They result from comparing term by term the relation\nformula_55\nwith the equation\nformula_56\nThe first Vieta's formula is useful for graphing a quadratic function. Since the graph is symmetric with respect to a vertical line through the vertex, the vertex's \"x\"-coordinate is located at the average of the roots (or intercepts). Thus the \"x\"-coordinate of the vertex is\nformula_57\nThe \"y\"-coordinate can be obtained by substituting the above result into the given quadratic equation, giving\nformula_58\nAlso, these formulas for the vertex can be deduced directly from the formula (see Completing the square)\nformula_59\nFor numerical computation, Vieta's formulas provide a useful method for finding the roots of a quadratic equation in the case where one root is much smaller than the other. If |\"x\"2| \u00ab |\"x\"1|, then \"x\"1 + \"x\"2 \u2248 \"x\"1, and we have the estimate:\nformula_60\nThe second Vieta's formula then provides:\nformula_61\nThese formulas are much easier to evaluate than the quadratic formula under the condition of one large and one small root, because the quadratic formula evaluates the small root as the difference of two very nearly equal numbers (the case of large \"b\"), which causes round-off error in a numerical evaluation. The figure shows the difference between (i)\u00a0a direct evaluation using the quadratic formula (accurate when the roots are near each other in value) and (ii)\u00a0an evaluation based upon the above approximation of Vieta's formulas (accurate when the roots are widely spaced). As the linear coefficient \"b\" increases, initially the quadratic formula is accurate, and the approximate formula improves in accuracy, leading to a smaller difference between the methods as \"b\" increases. However, at some point the quadratic formula begins to lose accuracy because of round off error, while the approximate method continues to improve. Consequently, the difference between the methods begins to increase as the quadratic formula becomes worse and worse.\nThis situation arises commonly in amplifier design, where widely separated roots are desired to ensure a stable operation (see Step response).\nTrigonometric solution.\nIn the days before calculators, people would use mathematical tables\u2014lists of numbers showing the results of calculation with varying arguments\u2014to simplify and speed up computation. Tables of logarithms and trigonometric functions were common in math and science textbooks. Specialized tables were published for applications such as astronomy, celestial navigation and statistics. Methods of numerical approximation existed, called prosthaphaeresis, that offered shortcuts around time-consuming operations such as multiplication and taking powers and roots. Astronomers, especially, were concerned with methods that could speed up the long series of computations involved in celestial mechanics calculations.\nIt is within this context that we may understand the development of means of solving quadratic equations by the aid of trigonometric substitution. Consider the following alternate form of the quadratic equation,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere the sign of the \u00b1 symbol is chosen so that \"a\" and \"c\" may both be positive. By substituting\nand then multiplying through by cos2(\"\u03b8\") / \"c\", we obtain\nIntroducing functions of 2\"\u03b8\" and rearranging, we obtain\nwhere the subscripts \"n\" and \"p\" correspond, respectively, to the use of a negative or positive sign in equation '[1]'. Substituting the two values of \"\u03b8\"n or \"\u03b8\"p found from equations '[4]' or '[5]' into '[2]' gives the required roots of '[1]'. Complex roots occur in the solution based on equation '[5]' if the absolute value of sin 2\"\u03b8\"p exceeds unity. The amount of effort involved in solving quadratic equations using this mixed trigonometric and logarithmic table look-up strategy was two-thirds the effort using logarithmic tables alone. Calculating complex roots would require using a different trigonometric form.\nTo illustrate, let us assume we had available seven-place logarithm and trigonometric tables, and wished to solve the following to six-significant-figure accuracy:\nformula_62\nSolution for complex roots in polar coordinates.\nIf the quadratic equation formula_70 with real coefficients has two complex roots\u2014the case where formula_71 requiring \"a\" and \"c\" to have the same sign as each other\u2014then the solutions for the roots can be expressed in polar form as\nformula_72\nwhere formula_73 and formula_74\nGeometric solution.\nThe quadratic equation may be solved geometrically in a number of ways. One way is via Lill's method. The three coefficients \"a\", \"b\", \"c\" are drawn with right angles between them as in SA, AB, and BC in Figure\u00a06. A circle is drawn with the start and end point SC as a diameter. If this cuts the middle line AB of the three then the equation has a solution, and the solutions are given by negative of the distance along this line from A divided by the first coefficient \"a\" or SA. If \"a\" is 1 the coefficients may be read off directly. Thus the solutions in the diagram are \u2212AX1/SA and \u2212AX2/SA.\nThe Carlyle circle, named after Thomas Carlyle, has the property that the solutions of the quadratic equation are the horizontal coordinates of the intersections of the circle with the horizontal axis. Carlyle circles have been used to develop ruler-and-compass constructions of regular polygons.\nGeneralization of quadratic equation.\nThe formula and its derivation remain correct if the coefficients \"a\", \"b\" and \"c\" are complex numbers, or more generally members of any field whose characteristic is not 2. (In a field of characteristic 2, the element 2\"a\" is zero and it is impossible to divide by it.)\nThe symbol\nformula_75\nin the formula should be understood as \"either of the two elements whose square is \"b\"2 \u2212 4\"ac\", if such elements exist\". In some fields, some elements have no square roots and some have two; only zero has just one square root, except in fields of characteristic 2. Even if a field does not contain a square root of some number, there is always a quadratic extension field which does, so the quadratic formula will always make sense as a formula in that extension field.\nCharacteristic 2.\nIn a field of characteristic 2, the quadratic formula, which relies on 2 being a unit, does not hold. Consider the monic quadratic polynomial\nformula_76\nover a field of characteristic 2. If \"b\" \n 0, then the solution reduces to extracting a square root, so the solution is\nformula_77\nand there is only one root since\nformula_78\nIn summary,\nformula_79\nSee quadratic residue for more information about extracting square roots in finite fields.\nIn the case that \"b\" \u2260 0, there are two distinct roots, but if the polynomial is irreducible, they cannot be expressed in terms of square roots of numbers in the coefficient field. Instead, define the 2-root \"R\"(\"c\") of \"c\" to be a root of the polynomial \"x\"2 + \"x\" + \"c\", an element of the splitting field of that polynomial. One verifies that \"R\"(\"c\") + 1 is also a root. In terms of the 2-root operation, the two roots of the (non-monic) quadratic \"ax\"2 + \"bx\" + \"c\" are\nformula_80\nand\nformula_81\nFor example, let \"a\" denote a multiplicative generator of the group of units of \"F\"4, the Galois field of order four (thus \"a\" and \"a\" + 1 are roots of \"x\"2 + \"x\" + 1 over \"F\"4. Because (\"a\" + 1)2 \n \"a\", \"a\" + 1 is the unique solution of the quadratic equation \"x\"2 + \"a\" \n 0. On the other hand, the polynomial \"x\"2 + \"ax\" + 1 is irreducible over \"F\"4, but it splits over \"F\"16, where it has the two roots \"ab\" and \"ab\" + \"a\", where \"b\" is a root of \"x\"2 + \"x\" + \"a\" in \"F\"16.\nThis is a special case of Artin\u2013Schreier theory.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25176", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25176", "title": "Quadratic equations", "text": ""}
{"id": "25178", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25178", "title": "Applications of quantum mechanics", "text": "Theories, models and concepts that go back to the quantum hypothesis of Max Planck\nQuantum physics is a branch of modern physics in which energy and matter are described at their most fundamental level, that of energy quanta, elementary particles, and quantum fields. Quantum physics encompasses any discipline concerned with systems that exhibit notable quantum-mechanical effects, where waves have properties of particles, and particles behave like waves. Applications of quantum mechanics include explaining phenomena found in nature as well as developing technologies that rely upon quantum effects, like integrated circuits and lasers.\nQuantum mechanics is also critically important for understanding how individual atoms are joined by covalent bonds to form molecules. The application of quantum mechanics to chemistry is known as quantum chemistry. Quantum mechanics can also provide quantitative insight into ionic and covalent bonding processes by explicitly showing which molecules are energetically favorable to which others and the magnitudes of the energies involved. \nHistorically, the first applications of quantum mechanics to physical systems were the algebraic determination of the hydrogen spectrum by Wolfgang Pauli and the treatment of diatomic molecules by Lucy Mensing.\nIn many aspects modern technology operates at a scale where quantum effects are significant. Important applications of quantum theory include quantum chemistry, quantum optics, quantum computing, superconducting magnets, light-emitting diodes, the optical amplifier and the laser, the transistor and semiconductors such as the microprocessor, medical and research imaging such as magnetic resonance imaging and electron microscopy. Explanations for many biological and physical phenomena are rooted in the nature of the chemical bond, most notably the macro-molecule DNA.\nElectronics.\nMany modern electronic devices are designed using quantum mechanics. Examples include lasers, electron microscopes, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) devices and the components used in computing hardware. The study of semiconductors led to the invention of the diode and the transistor, which are indispensable parts of modern electronics systems, computer and telecommunications devices. Another application is for making laser diodes and light-emitting diodes, which are a high-efficiency source of light. The global positioning system (GPS) makes use of atomic clocks to measure precise time differences and therefore determine a user's location.\nMany electronic devices operate using the effect of quantum tunneling. Flash memory chips found in USB drives use quantum tunneling to erase their memory cells. Some negative differential resistance devices also utilize the quantum tunneling effect, such as resonant tunneling diodes. Unlike classical diodes, its current is carried by resonant tunneling through two or more potential barriers (see figure at right). Its negative resistance behavior can only be understood with quantum mechanics: As the confined state moves close to Fermi level, tunnel current increases. As it moves away, the current decreases. Quantum mechanics is necessary to understand and design such electronic devices.\nCryptography.\nMany scientists are currently seeking robust methods of directly manipulating quantum states. Efforts are being made to more fully develop quantum cryptography, which will theoretically allow guaranteed secure transmission of information.\nAn inherent advantage yielded by quantum cryptography when compared to classical cryptography is the detection of passive eavesdropping. This is a natural result of the behavior of quantum bits; due to the observer effect, if a bit in a superposition state were to be observed, the superposition state would collapse into an eigenstate. Because the intended recipient was expecting to receive the bit in a superposition state, the intended recipient would know there was an attack, because the bit's state would no longer be in a superposition.\nQuantum computing.\nAnother goal is the development of quantum computers, which are expected to perform certain computational tasks exponentially faster than classical computers. Instead of using classical bits, quantum computers use qubits, which can be in superpositions of states. Quantum programmers are able to manipulate the superposition of qubits in order to solve problems that classical computing cannot do effectively, such as searching unsorted databases or integer factorization. IBM claims that the advent of quantum computing may progress the fields of medicine, logistics, financial services, artificial intelligence and cloud security.\nAnother active research topic is quantum teleportation, which deals with techniques to transmit quantum information over arbitrary distances.\nMacroscale quantum effects.\nWhile quantum mechanics primarily applies to the smaller atomic regimes of matter and energy, some systems exhibit quantum mechanical effects on a large scale. Superfluidity, the frictionless flow of a liquid at temperatures near absolute zero, is one well-known example. So is the closely related phenomenon of superconductivity, the frictionless flow of an electron gas in a conducting material (an electric current) at sufficiently low temperatures. The fractional quantum Hall effect is a topological ordered state which corresponds to patterns of long-range quantum entanglement. States with different topological orders (or different patterns of long range entanglements) cannot change into each other without a phase transition.\nOther phenomena.\nQuantum theory also provides accurate descriptions for many previously unexplained phenomena, such as black-body radiation and the stability of the orbitals of electrons in atoms. It has also given insight into the workings of many different biological systems, including smell receptors and protein structures. Recent work on photosynthesis has provided evidence that quantum correlations play an essential role in this fundamental process of plants and many other organisms. Even so, classical physics can often provide good approximations to results otherwise obtained by quantum physics, typically in circumstances with large numbers of particles or large quantum numbers. Since classical formulas are much simpler and easier to compute than quantum formulas, classical approximations are used and preferred when the system is large enough to render the effects of quantum mechanics insignificant.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25179", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25179", "title": "Quark", "text": "Elementary particle, main constituent of matter\nA quark () is a type of elementary particle and a fundamental constituent of matter. Quarks combine to form composite particles called hadrons, the most stable of which are protons and neutrons, the components of atomic nuclei. All commonly observable matter is composed of up quarks, down quarks and electrons. Owing to a phenomenon known as \"color confinement\", quarks are never found in isolation; they can be found only within hadrons, which include baryons (such as protons and neutrons) and mesons, or in quark\u2013gluon plasmas. For this reason, much of what is known about quarks has been drawn from observations of hadrons.\nQuarks have various intrinsic properties, including electric charge, mass, color charge, and spin. They are the only elementary particles in the Standard Model of particle physics to experience all four fundamental interactions, also known as \"fundamental forces\" (electromagnetism, gravitation, strong interaction, and weak interaction), as well as the only known particles whose electric charges are not integer multiples of the elementary charge.\nThere are six types, known as \"flavors\", of quarks: up, down, charm, strange, top, and bottom. Up and down quarks have the lowest masses of all quarks. The heavier quarks rapidly change into up and down quarks through a process of particle decay: the transformation from a higher mass state to a lower mass state. Because of this, up and down quarks are generally stable and the most common in the universe, whereas strange, charm, bottom, and top quarks can only be produced in high energy collisions (such as those involving cosmic rays and in particle accelerators). For every quark flavor there is a corresponding type of antiparticle, known as an antiquark, that differs from the quark only in that some of its properties (such as the electric charge) have equal magnitude but opposite sign.\nThe quark model was independently proposed by physicists Murray Gell-Mann and George Zweig in 1964. Quarks were introduced as parts of an ordering scheme for hadrons, and there was little evidence for their physical existence until deep inelastic scattering experiments at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center in 1968. Accelerator program experiments have provided evidence for all six flavors. The top quark, first observed at Fermilab in 1995, was the last to be discovered.\nClassification.\nThe Standard Model is the theoretical framework describing all the known elementary particles. This model contains six flavors of quarks (), named up (), down (), strange (), charm (), bottom (), and top (). Antiparticles of quarks are called \"antiquarks\", and are denoted by a bar over the symbol for the corresponding quark, such as for an up antiquark. As with antimatter in general, antiquarks have the same mass, mean lifetime, and spin as their respective quarks, but the electric charge and other charges have the opposite sign.\nQuarks are spin- particles, which means they are fermions according to the spin\u2013statistics theorem. They are subject to the Pauli exclusion principle, which states that no two identical fermions can simultaneously occupy the same quantum state. This is in contrast to bosons (particles with integer spin), of which any number can be in the same state. Unlike leptons, quarks possess color charge, which causes them to engage in the strong interaction. The resulting attraction between different quarks causes the formation of composite particles known as \"hadrons\" (see \"\" below).\nThe quarks that determine the quantum numbers of hadrons are called \"valence quarks\"; apart from these, any hadron may contain an indefinite number of virtual \"sea\" quarks, antiquarks, and gluons, which do not influence its quantum numbers. There are two families of hadrons: baryons, with three valence quarks, and mesons, with a valence quark and an antiquark. The most common baryons are the proton and the neutron, the building blocks of the atomic nucleus. A great number of hadrons are known (see list of baryons and list of mesons), most of them differentiated by their quark content and the properties these constituent quarks confer. The existence of \"exotic\" hadrons with more valence quarks, such as tetraquarks () and pentaquarks (), was conjectured from the beginnings of the quark model but not discovered until the early 21st century.\nElementary fermions are grouped into three generations, each comprising two leptons and two quarks. The first generation includes up and down quarks, the second strange and charm quarks, and the third bottom and top quarks. All searches for a fourth generation of quarks and other elementary fermions have failed, and there is strong indirect evidence that no more than three generations exist. Particles in higher generations generally have greater mass and less stability, causing them to decay into lower-generation particles by means of weak interactions. Only first-generation (up and down) quarks occur commonly in nature. Heavier quarks can only be created in high-energy collisions (such as in those involving cosmic rays), and decay quickly; however, they are thought to have been present during the first fractions of a second after the Big Bang, when the universe was in an extremely hot and dense phase (the quark epoch). Studies of heavier quarks are conducted in artificially created conditions, such as in particle accelerators.\nHaving electric charge, mass, color charge, and flavor, quarks are the only known elementary particles that engage in all four fundamental interactions of contemporary physics: electromagnetism, gravitation, strong interaction, and weak interaction. Gravitation is too weak to be relevant to individual particle interactions except at extremes of energy (Planck energy) and distance scales (Planck distance). However, since no successful quantum theory of gravity exists, gravitation is not described by the Standard Model.\nSee the table of properties below for a more complete overview of the six quark flavors' properties.\nHistory.\nThe quark model was independently proposed by physicists Murray Gell-Mann and George Zweig in 1964. The proposal came shortly after Gell-Mann's 1961 formulation of a particle classification system known as the \"Eightfold Way\" \u2013 or, in more technical terms, SU(3) flavor symmetry, streamlining its structure. Physicist Yuval Ne'eman had independently developed a scheme similar to the Eightfold Way in the same year. An early attempt at constituent organization was available in the Sakata model.\nAt the time of the quark theory's inception, the \"particle zoo\" included a multitude of hadrons, among other particles. Gell-Mann and Zweig posited that they were not elementary particles, but were instead composed of combinations of quarks and antiquarks. Their model involved three flavors of quarks, up, down, and strange, to which they ascribed properties such as spin and electric charge. The initial reaction of the physics community to the proposal was mixed. There was particular contention about whether the quark was a physical entity or a mere abstraction used to explain concepts that were not fully understood at the time.\nIn less than a year, extensions to the Gell-Mann\u2013Zweig model were proposed. Sheldon Glashow and James Bjorken predicted the existence of a fourth flavor of quark, which they called \"charm\". The addition was proposed because it allowed for a better description of the weak interaction (the mechanism that allows quarks to decay), equalized the number of known quarks with the number of known leptons, and implied a mass formula that correctly reproduced the masses of the known mesons.\nDeep inelastic scattering experiments conducted in 1968 at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) and published on October 20, 1969, showed that the proton contained much smaller, point-like objects and was therefore not an elementary particle. Physicists were reluctant to firmly identify these objects with quarks at the time, instead calling them \"partons\" \u2013 a term coined by Richard Feynman. The objects that were observed at SLAC would later be identified as up and down quarks as the other flavors were discovered. Nevertheless, \"parton\" remains in use as a collective term for the constituents of hadrons (quarks, antiquarks, and gluons). Richard Taylor, Henry Kendall and Jerome Friedman received the 1990 Nobel Prize in physics for their work at SLAC.\nThe strange quark's existence was indirectly validated by SLAC's scattering experiments: not only was it a necessary component of Gell-Mann and Zweig's three-quark model, but it provided an explanation for the kaon () and pion () hadrons discovered in cosmic rays in 1947.\nIn a 1970 paper, Glashow, John Iliopoulos and Luciano Maiani presented the GIM mechanism (named from their initials) to explain the experimental non-observation of flavor-changing neutral currents. This theoretical model required the existence of the as-yet undiscovered charm quark. The number of supposed quark flavors grew to the current six in 1973, when Makoto Kobayashi and Toshihide Maskawa noted that the experimental observation of CP violation could be explained if there were another pair of quarks.\nCharm quarks were produced almost simultaneously by two teams in November 1974 (see November Revolution) \u2013 one at SLAC under Burton Richter, and one at Brookhaven National Laboratory under Samuel Ting. The charm quarks were observed bound with charm antiquarks in mesons. The two parties had assigned the discovered meson two different symbols, J and \u03c8; thus, it became formally known as the meson. The discovery finally convinced the physics community of the quark model's validity.\nIn the following years a number of suggestions appeared for extending the quark model to six quarks. Of these, the 1975 paper by Haim Harari was the first to coin the terms \"top\" and \"bottom\" for the additional quarks.\nIn 1977, the bottom quark was observed by a team at Fermilab led by Leon Lederman. This was a strong indicator of the top quark's existence: without the top quark, the bottom quark would have been without a partner. It was not until 1995 that the top quark was finally observed, also by the CDF and D\u00d8 teams at Fermilab. It had a mass much larger than expected, almost as large as that of a gold atom.\nEtymology.\nFor some time, Gell-Mann was undecided on an actual spelling for the term he intended to coin, until he found the word \"quark\" in James Joyce's 1939 book \"Finnegans Wake\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\n\u2013 Three quarks for Muster Mark!\nSure he hasn't got much of a bark\nAnd sure any he has it's all beside the mark.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe word \"quark\" is an old English word meaning \"to croak\" and the above-quoted lines are about a bird choir mocking king Mark of Cornwall in the legend of Tristan and Iseult. Especially in the German-speaking parts of the world there is a widespread legend, however, that Joyce had taken it from the word , a German word of Slavic origin which denotes a curd cheese, but is also a colloquial term for \"trivial nonsense\". In the legend it is said that he had heard it on a journey to Germany at a farmers' market in Freiburg.\nSome authors, however, defend a possible German origin of Joyce's word \"quark\". Gell-Mann went into further detail regarding the name of the quark in his 1994 book \"The Quark and the Jaguar\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In 1963, when I assigned the name \"quark\" to the fundamental constituents of the nucleon, I had the sound first, without the spelling, which could have been \"kwork\". Then, in one of my occasional perusals of \"Finnegans Wake\", by James Joyce, I came across the word \"quark\" in the phrase \"Three quarks for Muster Mark\". Since \"quark\" (meaning, for one thing, the cry of the gull) was clearly intended to rhyme with \"Mark\", as well as \"bark\" and other such words, I had to find an excuse to pronounce it as \"kwork\". But the book represents the dream of a publican named Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker. Words in the text are typically drawn from several sources at once, like the \"portmanteau\" words in \"Through the Looking-Glass\". From time to time, phrases occur in the book that are partially determined by calls for drinks at the bar. I argued, therefore, that perhaps one of the multiple sources of the cry \"Three quarks for Muster Mark\" might be \"Three quarts for Mister Mark\", in which case the pronunciation \"kwork\" would not be totally unjustified. In any case, the number three fitted perfectly the way quarks occur in nature.\nZweig preferred the name \"ace\" for the particle he had theorized, but Gell-Mann's terminology came to prominence once the quark model had been commonly accepted.\nThe quark flavors were given their names for several reasons. The up and down quarks are named after the up and down components of isospin, which they carry. Strange quarks were given their name because they were discovered to be components of the strange particles discovered in cosmic rays years before the quark model was proposed; these particles were deemed \"strange\" because they had unusually long lifetimes. Glashow, who co-proposed the charm quark with Bjorken, is quoted as saying, \"We called our construct the 'charmed quark', for we were fascinated and pleased by the symmetry it brought to the subnuclear world.\" The names \"top\" and \"bottom\", coined by Harari, were chosen because they are \"logical partners for up and down quarks\". Alternative names for top and bottom quarks are \"truth\" and \"beauty\" respectively, but these names have somewhat fallen out of use. While \"truth\" never did catch on, accelerator complexes devoted to massive production of bottom quarks are sometimes called \"beauty factories\".\nProperties.\nElectric charge.\nQuarks have fractional electric charge values \u2013 either \u2212 or + times the elementary charge (\"e\"), depending on flavor. Up, charm, and top quarks (collectively referred to as \"up-type quarks\") have a charge of +\u00a0\"e\"; down, strange, and bottom quarks (\"down-type quarks\") have a charge of \u2212\u00a0\"e\". Antiquarks have the opposite charge to their corresponding quarks; up-type antiquarks have charges of \u2212\u00a0\"e\" and down-type antiquarks have charges of +\u00a0\"e\". Since the electric charge of a hadron is the sum of the charges of the constituent quarks, all hadrons have integer charges: the combination of three quarks (baryons), three antiquarks (antibaryons), or a quark and an antiquark (mesons) always results in integer charges. For example, the hadron constituents of atomic nuclei, neutrons and protons, have charges of 0\u00a0\"e\" and +1\u00a0\"e\" respectively; the neutron is composed of two down quarks and one up quark, and the proton of two up quarks and one down quark.\nSpin.\nSpin is an intrinsic property of elementary particles, and its direction is an important degree of freedom. It is sometimes visualized as the rotation of an object around its own axis (hence the name \"\"), though this notion is somewhat misguided at subatomic scales because elementary particles are believed to be point-like.\nSpin can be represented by a vector whose length is measured in units of the reduced Planck constant \"\u0127\" (pronounced \"h bar\"). For quarks, a measurement of the spin vector component along any axis can only yield the values + or \u2212; for this reason quarks are classified as spin- particles. The component of spin along a given axis \u2013 by convention the \"z\" axis \u2013 is often denoted by an up arrow \u2191 for the value + and down arrow \u2193 for the value \u2212, placed after the symbol for flavor. For example, an up quark with a spin of + along the \"z\" axis is denoted by u\u2191.\nWeak interaction.\nA quark of one flavor can transform into a quark of another flavor only through the weak interaction, one of the four fundamental interactions in particle physics. By absorbing or emitting a W boson, any up-type quark (up, charm, and top quarks) can change into any down-type quark (down, strange, and bottom quarks) and vice versa. This flavor transformation mechanism causes the radioactive process of beta decay, in which a neutron () \"splits\" into a proton (), an electron () and an electron antineutrino () (see picture). This occurs when one of the down quarks in the neutron () decays into an up quark by emitting a virtual boson, transforming the neutron into a proton (). The boson then decays into an electron and an electron antineutrino.\nBoth beta decay and the inverse process of \"inverse beta decay\" are routinely used in medical applications such as positron emission tomography (PET) and in experiments involving neutrino detection.\nWhile the process of flavor transformation is the same for all quarks, each quark has a preference to transform into the quark of its own generation. The relative tendencies of all flavor transformations are described by a mathematical table, called the Cabibbo\u2013Kobayashi\u2013Maskawa matrix (CKM matrix). Enforcing unitarity, the approximate magnitudes of the entries of the CKM matrix are:\n formula_1\nwhere \"V\"\"ij\" represents the tendency of a quark of flavor \"i\" to change into a quark of flavor \"j\" (or vice versa).\nThere exists an equivalent weak interaction matrix for leptons (right side of the W boson on the above beta decay diagram), called the Pontecorvo\u2013Maki\u2013Nakagawa\u2013Sakata matrix (PMNS matrix). Together, the CKM and PMNS matrices describe all flavor transformations, but the links between the two are not yet clear.\nStrong interaction and color charge.\nAccording to quantum chromodynamics (QCD), quarks possess a property called \"color charge\". There are three types of color charge, arbitrarily labeled \"blue\", \"green\", and \"red\". Each of them is complemented by an anticolor \u2013 \"antiblue\", \"antigreen\", and \"antired\". Every quark carries a color, while every antiquark carries an anticolor.\nThe system of attraction and repulsion between quarks charged with different combinations of the three colors is called strong interaction, which is mediated by force carrying particles known as \"gluons\"; this is discussed at length below. The theory that describes strong interactions is called quantum chromodynamics (QCD). A quark, which will have a single color value, can form a bound system with an antiquark carrying the corresponding anticolor. The result of two attracting quarks will be color neutrality: a quark with color charge \"\u03be\" plus an antiquark with color charge \u2212\"\u03be\" will result in a color charge of 0 (or \"white\" color) and the formation of a meson. This is analogous to the additive color model in basic optics. Similarly, the combination of three quarks, each with different color charges, or three antiquarks, each with different anticolor charges, will result in the same \"white\" color charge and the formation of a baryon or antibaryon.\nIn modern particle physics, gauge symmetries \u2013 a kind of symmetry group \u2013 relate interactions between particles (see gauge theories). Color SU(3) (commonly abbreviated to SU(3)c) is the gauge symmetry that relates the color charge in quarks and is the defining symmetry for quantum chromodynamics. Just as the laws of physics are independent of which directions in space are designated \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\", and remain unchanged if the coordinate axes are rotated to a new orientation, the physics of quantum chromodynamics is independent of which directions in three-dimensional color space are identified as blue, red, and green. SU(3)c color transformations correspond to \"rotations\" in color space (which, mathematically speaking, is a complex space). Every quark flavor \"f\", each with subtypes \"f\"B, \"f\"G, \"f\"R corresponding to the quark colors, forms a triplet: a three-component quantum field that transforms under the fundamental representation of SU(3)c. The requirement that SU(3)c should be local \u2013 that is, that its transformations be allowed to vary with space and time \u2013 determines the properties of the strong interaction. In particular, it implies the existence of eight gluon types to act as its force carriers.\nMass.\nTwo terms are used in referring to a quark's mass: \"current quark mass\" refers to the mass of a quark by itself, while \"constituent quark mass\" refers to the current quark mass plus the mass of the gluon particle field surrounding the quark. These masses typically have very different values. Most of a hadron's mass comes from the gluons that bind the constituent quarks together, rather than from the quarks themselves. While gluons are inherently massless, they possess energy \u2013 more specifically, quantum chromodynamics binding energy (QCBE) \u2013 and it is this that contributes so greatly to the overall mass of the hadron (see mass in special relativity). For example, a proton has a mass of approximately , of which the rest mass of its three valence quarks only contributes about ; much of the remainder can be attributed to the field energy of the gluons (see chiral symmetry breaking). The Standard Model posits that elementary particles derive their masses from the Higgs mechanism, which is associated to the Higgs boson. It is hoped that further research into the reasons for the top quark's large mass of ~, almost the mass of a gold atom, might reveal more about the origin of the mass of quarks and other elementary particles.\nSize.\nIn QCD, quarks are considered to be point-like entities, with zero size. As of 2014, experimental evidence indicates they are no bigger than 10\u22124 times the size of a proton, i.e. less than 10\u221219 metres.\nTable of properties.\nThe following table summarizes the key properties of the six quarks. Flavor quantum numbers (isospin (\"I\"3), charm (\"C\"), strangeness (\"S\", not to be confused with spin), topness (\"T\"), and bottomness (\"B\"\u2032)) are assigned to certain quark flavors, and denote qualities of quark-based systems and hadrons. The baryon number (\"B\") is + for all quarks, as baryons are made of three quarks. For antiquarks, the electric charge (\"Q\") and all flavor quantum numbers (\"B\", \"I\"3, \"C\", \"S\", \"T\", and \"B\"\u2032) are of opposite sign. Mass and total angular momentum (\"J\"; equal to spin for point particles) do not change sign for the antiquarks.\nInteracting quarks.\nAs described by quantum chromodynamics, the strong interaction between quarks is mediated by gluons, massless vector gauge bosons. Each gluon carries one color charge and one anticolor charge. In the standard framework of particle interactions (part of a more general formulation known as perturbation theory), gluons are constantly exchanged between quarks through a virtual emission and absorption process. When a gluon is transferred between quarks, a color change occurs in both; for example, if a red quark emits a red\u2013antigreen gluon, it becomes green, and if a green quark absorbs a red\u2013antigreen gluon, it becomes red. Therefore, while each quark's color constantly changes, their strong interaction is preserved.\nSince gluons carry color charge, they themselves are able to emit and absorb other gluons. This causes \"asymptotic freedom\": as quarks come closer to each other, the chromodynamic binding force between them weakens. Conversely, as the distance between quarks increases, the binding force strengthens. The color field becomes stressed, much as an elastic band is stressed when stretched, and more gluons of appropriate color are spontaneously created to strengthen the field. Above a certain energy threshold, pairs of quarks and antiquarks are created. These pairs bind with the quarks being separated, causing new hadrons to form. This phenomenon is known as \"color confinement\": quarks never appear in isolation. This process of hadronization occurs before quarks formed in a high energy collision are able to interact in any other way. The only exception is the top quark, which may decay before it hadronizes.\nSea quarks.\nHadrons contain, along with the \"valence quarks\" () that contribute to their quantum numbers, virtual quark\u2013antiquark () pairs known as \"sea quarks\" (). Sea quarks form when a gluon of the hadron's color field splits; this process also works in reverse in that the annihilation of two sea quarks produces a gluon. The result is a constant flux of gluon splits and creations colloquially known as \"the sea\". Sea quarks are much less stable than their valence counterparts, and they typically annihilate each other within the interior of the hadron. Despite this, sea quarks can hadronize into baryonic or mesonic particles under certain circumstances.\nOther phases of quark matter.\nUnder sufficiently extreme conditions, quarks may become \"deconfined\" out of bound states and propagate as thermalized \"free\" excitations in the larger medium. In the course of asymptotic freedom, the strong interaction becomes weaker at increasing temperatures. Eventually, color confinement would be effectively lost in an extremely hot plasma of freely moving quarks and gluons. This theoretical phase of matter is called quark\u2013gluon plasma.\nThe exact conditions needed to give rise to this state are unknown and have been the subject of a great deal of speculation and experimentation. An estimate puts the needed temperature at kelvin. While a state of entirely free quarks and gluons has never been achieved (despite numerous attempts by CERN in the 1980s and 1990s), recent experiments at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider have yielded evidence for liquid-like quark matter exhibiting \"nearly perfect\" fluid motion.\nThe quark\u2013gluon plasma would be characterized by a great increase in the number of heavier quark pairs in relation to the number of up and down quark pairs. It is believed that in the period prior to 10\u22126 seconds after the Big Bang (the quark epoch), the universe was filled with quark\u2013gluon plasma, as the temperature was too high for hadrons to be stable.\nGiven sufficiently high baryon densities and relatively low temperatures \u2013 possibly comparable to those found in neutron stars \u2013 quark matter is expected to degenerate into a Fermi liquid of weakly interacting quarks. This liquid would be characterized by a condensation of colored quark Cooper pairs, thereby breaking the local SU(3)c symmetry. Because quark Cooper pairs harbor color charge, such a phase of quark matter would be color superconductive; that is, color charge would be able to pass through it with no resistance.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25180", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25180", "title": "Queen", "text": "Queen most commonly refers to:\nQueen or QUEEN may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "25182", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25182", "title": "Quantization (physics)", "text": "Systematic procedure of turning a classical theory into a quantum one\n \nQuantization (in British English quantisation) is the systematic transition procedure from a classical understanding of physical phenomena to a newer understanding known as quantum mechanics. It is a procedure for constructing quantum mechanics from classical mechanics. A generalization involving infinite degrees of freedom is field quantization, as in the \"quantization of the electromagnetic field\", referring to photons as field \"quanta\" (for instance as light quanta). This procedure is basic to theories of atomic physics, chemistry, particle physics, nuclear physics, condensed matter physics, and quantum optics.\nHistorical overview.\nIn 1901, when Max Planck was developing the distribution function of statistical mechanics to solve the ultraviolet catastrophe problem, he realized that the properties of blackbody radiation can be explained by the assumption that the amount of energy must be in countable fundamental units, i.e. amount of energy is not continuous but discrete. That is, a minimum unit of energy exists and the following relationship holds formula_1\nfor the frequency formula_2. Here, formula_3 is called the Planck constant, which represents the amount of the quantum mechanical effect. It means a fundamental change of mathematical model of physical quantities.\nIn 1905, Albert Einstein published a paper, \"On a heuristic viewpoint concerning the emission and transformation of light\", which explained the photoelectric effect on quantized electromagnetic waves. The \"energy quantum\" referred to in this paper was later called \"photon\".\u00a0 In July 1913, Niels Bohr used quantization to describe the spectrum of a hydrogen atom in his paper \"On the constitution of atoms and molecules\". \nThe preceding theories have been successful, but they are very phenomenological theories.\u00a0 However, the French mathematician Henri Poincar\u00e9 first gave a systematic and rigorous definition of what quantization is in his 1912 paper \"Sur la th\u00e9orie des quanta\". \nThe term \"quantum physics\" was first used in Johnston's \"Planck's Universe in Light of Modern Physics\".\u00a0 (1931).\nCanonical quantization.\nCanonical quantization develops quantum mechanics from classical mechanics. One introduces a commutation relation among canonical coordinates. Technically, one converts coordinates to operators, through combinations of creation and annihilation operators. The operators act on quantum states of the theory. The lowest energy state is called the vacuum state.\nQuantization schemes.\nEven within the setting of canonical quantization, there is difficulty associated to quantizing arbitrary observables on the classical phase space. This is the ordering ambiguity: classically, the position and momentum variables \"x\" and \"p\" commute, but their quantum mechanical operator counterparts do not. Various \"quantization schemes\" have been proposed to resolve this ambiguity, of which the most popular is the Weyl quantization scheme. Nevertheless, Groenewold's theorem dictates that no perfect quantization scheme exists. Specifically, if the quantizations of \"x\" and \"p\" are taken to be the usual position and momentum operators, then no quantization scheme can perfectly reproduce the Poisson bracket relations among the classical observables.\nCovariant canonical quantization.\nThere is a way to perform a canonical quantization without having to resort to the non covariant approach of foliating spacetime and choosing a Hamiltonian. This method is based upon a classical action, but is different from the functional integral approach.\nThe method does not apply to all possible actions (for instance, actions with a noncausal structure or actions with gauge \"flows\"). It starts with the classical algebra of all (smooth) functionals over the configuration space. This algebra is quotiented over by the ideal generated by the Euler\u2013Lagrange equations. Then, this quotient algebra is converted into a Poisson algebra by introducing a Poisson bracket derivable from the action, called the Peierls bracket. This Poisson algebra is then \u210f -deformed in the same way as in canonical quantization.\nIn quantum field theory, there is also a way to quantize actions with gauge \"flows\". It involves the Batalin\u2013Vilkovisky formalism, an extension of the BRST formalism.\nDeformation quantization.\nOne of the earliest attempts at a natural quantization was Weyl quantization, proposed by Hermann Weyl in 1927. Here, an attempt is made to associate a quantum-mechanical observable (a self-adjoint operator on a Hilbert space) with a real-valued function on classical phase space. The position and momentum in this phase space are mapped to the generators of the Heisenberg group, and the Hilbert space appears as a group representation of the Heisenberg group. In 1946, H. J. Groenewold considered the product of a pair of such observables and asked what the corresponding function would be on the classical phase space. This led him to discover the phase-space star-product of a pair of functions.\nMore generally, this technique leads to deformation quantization, where the \u2605-product is taken to be a deformation of the algebra of functions on a symplectic manifold or Poisson manifold. However, as a natural quantization scheme (a functor), Weyl's map is not satisfactory. \nFor example, the Weyl map of the classical angular-momentum-squared is not just the quantum angular momentum squared operator, but it further contains a constant term . (This extra term offset is pedagogically significant, since it accounts for the nonvanishing angular momentum of the ground-state Bohr orbit in the hydrogen atom, even though the standard QM ground state of the atom has vanishing l.)\nAs a mere \"representation change\", however, Weyl's map is useful and important, as it underlies the alternate \"equivalent\" phase space formulation of conventional quantum mechanics.\nGeometric quantization.\nIn mathematical physics, geometric quantization is a mathematical approach to defining a quantum theory corresponding to a given classical theory. It attempts to carry out quantization, for which there is in general no exact recipe, in such a way that certain analogies between the classical theory and the quantum theory remain manifest. For example, the similarity between the Heisenberg equation in the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics and the Hamilton equation in classical physics should be built in.\nA more geometric approach to quantization, in which the classical phase space can be a general symplectic manifold, was developed in the 1970s by Bertram Kostant and Jean-Marie Souriau. The method proceeds in two stages. First, once constructs a \"prequantum Hilbert space\" consisting of square-integrable functions (or, more properly, sections of a line bundle) over the phase space. Here one can construct operators satisfying commutation relations corresponding exactly to the classical Poisson-bracket relations. On the other hand, this prequantum Hilbert space is too big to be physically meaningful. One then restricts to functions (or sections) depending on half the variables on the phase space, yielding the quantum Hilbert space.\nPath integral quantization.\nA classical mechanical theory is given by an action with the permissible configurations being the ones which are extremal with respect to functional variations of the action. A quantum-mechanical description of the classical system can also be constructed from the action of the system by means of the path integral formulation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25183", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25183", "title": "Queen Kristina of Sweden", "text": ""}
{"id": "25184", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25184", "title": "Quantile", "text": "Statistical method of dividing data into equal-sized intervals for analysis\nIn statistics and probability, quantiles are cut points dividing the range of a probability distribution into continuous intervals with equal probabilities or dividing the observations in a sample in the same way. There is one fewer quantile than the number of groups created. Common quantiles have special names, such as \"quartiles\" (four groups), \"deciles\" (ten groups), and \"percentiles\" (100 groups). The groups created are termed halves, thirds, quarters, etc., though sometimes the terms for the quantile are used for the groups created, rather than for the cut points.\nq-quantiles are values that partition a finite set of values into q subsets of (nearly) equal sizes. There are \"q\" \u2212 1 partitions of the q-quantiles, one for each integer k satisfying 0 &lt; \"k\" &lt; \"q\". In some cases the value of a quantile may not be uniquely determined, as can be the case for the median (2-quantile) of a uniform probability distribution on a set of even size. Quantiles can also be applied to continuous distributions, providing a way to generalize rank statistics to continuous variables (see percentile rank). When the cumulative distribution function of a random variable is known, the q-quantiles are the application of the\" quantile function\" (the inverse function of the cumulative distribution function) to the values {1/\"q\", 2/\"q\", \u2026, (\"q\" \u2212 1)/\"q\"}.\nQuantiles of a population.\nAs in the computation of, for example, standard deviation, the estimation of a quantile depends upon whether one is operating with a statistical population or with a sample drawn from it. For a population, of discrete values or for a continuous population density, the k-th q-quantile is the data value where the cumulative distribution function crosses \"k\"/\"q\". That is, x is a k-th q-quantile for a variable X if\n Pr[\"X\" &lt; \"x\"] \u2264 \"k\"/\"q\" or, equivalently, Pr[\"X\" \u2265 \"x\"] \u2265 1 \u2212 \"k\"/\"q\"\nand\n Pr[\"X\" \u2264 \"x\"] \u2265 \"k\"/\"q\"\nwhere Pr is the probability function. For a finite population of N equally probable values indexed 1, \u2026, \"N\" from lowest to highest, the k-th q-quantile of this population can equivalently be computed via the value of Ip \n \"N\" \"k\"/\"q\". If Ip is not an integer, then round up to the next integer to get the appropriate index; the corresponding data value is the k-th q-quantile. On the other hand, if Ip is an integer then any number from the data value at that index to the data value of the next index can be taken as the quantile, and it is conventional (though arbitrary) to take the average of those two values (see Estimating quantiles from a sample).\nIf, instead of using integers k and q, the \"p-quantile\" is based on a real number p with 0 &lt; \"p\" &lt; 1 then p replaces \"k\"/\"q\" in the above formulas. This broader terminology is used when quantiles are used to parameterize continuous probability distributions. Moreover, some software programs (including Microsoft Excel) regard the minimum and maximum as the 0th and 100th percentile, respectively. However, this broader terminology is an extension beyond traditional statistics definitions.\nExamples.\nThe following two examples use the Nearest Rank definition of quantile with rounding. For an explanation of this definition, see percentiles.\nEven-sized population.\nConsider an ordered population of 10 data values [3, 6, 7, 8, 8, 10, 13, 15, 16, 20]. What are the 4-quantiles (the \"quartiles\") of this dataset?\nSo the first, second and third 4-quantiles (the \"quartiles\") of the dataset [3, 6, 7, 8, 8, 10, 13, 15, 16, 20] are [7, 9, 15]. If also required, the zeroth quartile is 3 and the fourth quartile is 20.\nOdd-sized population.\nConsider an ordered population of 11 data values [3, 6, 7, 8, 8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 16, 20]. What are the 4-quantiles (the \"quartiles\") of this dataset?\nSo the first, second and third 4-quantiles (the \"quartiles\") of the dataset [3, 6, 7, 8, 8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 16, 20] are [7, 9, 15]. If also required, the zeroth quartile is 3 and the fourth quartile is 20.\nRelationship to the mean.\nFor any population probability distribution on finitely many values, and generally for any probability distribution with a mean and variance, it is the case that\nformula_1\nwhere Q(p) is the value of the p-quantile for 0 &lt; \"p\" &lt; 1 (or equivalently is the k-th q-quantile for \"p\" = \"k\"/\"q\"), where \u03bc is the distribution's arithmetic mean, and where \u03c3 is the distribution's standard deviation. In particular, the median (\"p\" = \"k\"/\"q\" = 1/2) is never more than one standard deviation from the mean.\nThe above formula can be used to bound the value \"\u03bc\" + \"z\u03c3\" in terms of quantiles.\nWhen \"z\" \u2265 0, the value that is \"z\" standard deviations above the mean has a lower bound\nformula_2\nFor example, the value that is \"z\" = 1 standard deviation above the mean is always greater than or equal to \"Q\"(\"p\" = 0.5), the median, and the value that is \"z\" = 2 standard deviations above the mean is always greater than or equal to \"Q\"(\"p\" = 0.8), the fourth quintile.\nWhen \"z\" \u2264 0, there is instead an upper bound\nformula_3\nFor example, the value \"\u03bc\" + \"z\u03c3\" for \"z\" = \u22123 will never exceed \"Q\"(\"p\" = 0.1), the first decile.\nEstimating quantiles from a sample.\nOne problem which frequently arises is estimating a quantile of a (very large or infinite) population based on a finite sample of size N.\nModern statistical packages rely on a number of techniques to estimate the quantiles.\nHyndman and Fan compiled a taxonomy of nine algorithms used by various software packages. \nAll methods compute Qp, the estimate for the p-quantile (the k-th q-quantile, where \"p\" \n \"k\"/\"q\") from a sample of size N by computing a real valued index h. When h is an integer, the h-th smallest of the N values, xh, is the quantile estimate. Otherwise a rounding or interpolation scheme is used to compute the quantile estimate from h, \"x\"\u230a\"h\"\u230b, and \"x\"\u2308\"h\"\u2309. (For notation, see floor and ceiling functions).\nThe first three are piecewise constant, changing abruptly at each data point, while the last six use linear interpolation between data points, and differ only in how the index h used to choose the point along the piecewise linear interpolation curve, is chosen.\nMathematica, Matlab, R and GNU Octave programming languages support all nine sample quantile methods. SAS includes five sample quantile methods, SciPy and Maple both include eight, EViews and Julia include the six piecewise linear functions, Stata includes two, Python includes two, and Microsoft Excel includes two. Mathematica, SciPy and Julia support arbitrary parameters for methods which allow for other, non-standard, methods.\nThe estimate types and interpolation schemes used include:\nNotes:\n (\"N\" + 1) / 2 when \"p\" \n 1/2.\nOf the techniques, Hyndman and Fan recommend R-8, but most statistical software packages have chosen R-6 or R-7 as the default.\nThe standard error of a quantile estimate can in general be estimated via the bootstrap. The Maritz\u2013Jarrett method can also be used.\nThe asymptotic distribution of the sample median.\nThe sample median is the most examined one amongst quantiles, being an alternative to estimate a location parameter, when the expected value of the distribution does not exist, and hence the sample mean is not a meaningful estimator of a population characteristic. Moreover, the sample median is a more robust estimator than the sample mean.\nOne peculiarity of the sample median is its asymptotic distribution: when the sample comes from a continuous distribution, then the sample median has the anticipated Normal asymptotic distribution,\n formula_4\nThis extends to the other quantiles,\n formula_5\nwhere \"f\"(\"xp\") is the value of the distribution density at the p-th population quantile (formula_6). \nBut when the distribution is discrete, then the distribution of the sample median and the other quantiles fails to be Normal (see examples in https://stats.stackexchange.com/a/86638/28746).\nA solution to this problem is to use an alternative definition of sample quantiles through the concept of the \"mid-distribution\" function, which is defined as \n formula_7\nThe definition of sample quantiles through the concept of mid-distribution function can be seen as a generalization that can cover as special cases the continuous distributions. For discrete distributions the sample median as defined through this concept has an asymptotically Normal distribution, see Ma, Y., Genton, M. G., &amp; Parzen, E. (2011). Asymptotic properties of sample quantiles of discrete distributions. Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 63(2), 227\u2013243.\nApproximate quantiles from a stream.\nComputing approximate quantiles from data arriving from a stream can be done efficiently using compressed data structures. The most popular methods are t-digest and KLL. These methods read a stream of values in a continuous fashion and can, at any time, be queried about the approximate value of a specified quantile.\nBoth algorithms are based on a similar idea: compressing the stream of values by summarizing identical or similar values with a weight. If the stream is made of a repetition of 100 times v1 and 100 times v2, there is no reason to keep a sorted list of 200 elements, it is enough to keep two elements and two counts to be able to recover the quantiles. With more values, these algorithms maintain a trade-off between the number of unique values stored and the precision of the resulting quantiles. Some values may be discarded from the stream and contribute to the weight of a nearby value without changing the quantile results too much. The t-digest maintains a data structure of bounded size using an approach motivated by \"k\"-means clustering to group similar values. The KLL algorithm uses a more sophisticated \"compactor\" method that leads to better control of the error bounds at the cost of requiring an unbounded size if errors must be bounded relative to p.\nBoth methods belong to the family of \"data sketches\" that are subsets of Streaming Algorithms with useful properties: t-digest or KLL sketches can be combined. Computing the sketch for a very large vector of values can be split into trivially parallel processes where sketches are computed for partitions of the vector in parallel and merged later.\nThe algorithms described so far directly approximate the empirical quantiles without any particular assumptions on the data, in essence the data are simply numbers or more generally, a set of items that can be ordered. These algorithms are computer science derived methods. Another class of algorithms exist which assume that the data are realizations of a random process. These are statistics derived methods, sequential nonparametric estimation algorithms in particular. There are a number of such algorithms such as those based on stochastic approximation or Hermite series estimators. \nThese statistics based algorithms typically have constant update time and space complexity, but have different error bound guarantees compared to computer science type methods and make more assumptions. The statistics based algorithms do present certain advantages however, particularly in the non-stationary streaming setting i.e. time-varying data. The algorithms of both classes, along with some respective advantages and disadvantages have been recently surveyed.\nDiscussion.\nStandardized test results are commonly reported as a student scoring \"in the 80th percentile\", for example. This uses an alternative meaning of the word percentile as the \"interval\" between (in this case) the 80th and the 81st scalar percentile. This separate meaning of percentile is also used in peer-reviewed scientific research articles. The meaning used can be derived from its context.\nIf a distribution is symmetric, then the median is the mean (so long as the latter exists). But, in general, the median and the mean can differ. For instance, with a random variable that has an exponential distribution, any particular sample of this random variable will have roughly a 63% chance of being less than the mean. This is because the exponential distribution has a long tail for positive values but is zero for negative numbers.\nQuantiles are useful measures because they are less susceptible than means to long-tailed distributions and outliers. Empirically, if the data being analyzed are not actually distributed according to an assumed distribution, or if there are other potential sources for outliers that are far removed from the mean, then quantiles may be more useful descriptive statistics than means and other moment-related statistics.\nClosely related is the subject of least absolute deviations, a method of regression that is more robust to outliers than is least squares, in which the sum of the absolute value of the observed errors is used in place of the squared error. The connection is that the mean is the single estimate of a distribution that minimizes expected squared error while the median minimizes expected absolute error. Least absolute deviations shares the ability to be relatively insensitive to large deviations in outlying observations, although even better methods of robust regression are available.\nThe quantiles of a random variable are preserved under increasing transformations, in the sense that, for example, if m is the median of a random variable X, then 2\"m\" is the median of 2\"X\", unless an arbitrary choice has been made from a range of values to specify a particular quantile. (See quantile estimation, above, for examples of such interpolation.) Quantiles can also be used in cases where only ordinal data are available.\nOther quantifications.\nValues that divide sorted data into equal subsets other than four have different names.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25185", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25185", "title": "Q", "text": "Seventeenth letter of the Latin alphabet\nQ, or q, is the seventeenth letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is pronounced , most commonly spelled \"cue\", but also \"kew\", \"kue\", and \"que\".\nHistory.\nThe Semitic sound value of Q\u00f4p was (voiceless uvular stop), and the form of the letter could have been based on the eye of a needle, a knot, or even a monkey with its tail hanging down. is a sound common to Semitic languages, but not found in many European languages. In common with other glyphs derived from the Proto-Sinaitic script, the letter has been suggested to have its roots in Egyptian hieroglyphs.\nIn an early form of Ancient Greek, qoppa (\u03d8) probably came to represent several labialized velar stops, among them and . As a result of later sound shifts, these sounds in Greek changed to and respectively. Therefore, qoppa was transformed into two letters: qoppa, which stood for the number 90, and phi (\u03a6), which stood for the aspirated sound that came to be pronounced in Modern Greek.\nThe Etruscans used Q in conjunction with V to represent , and this usage was copied by the Romans with the rest of their alphabet. In the earliest Latin inscriptions, the letters C, K and Q were all used to represent the two sounds and , which were not differentiated in writing. Of these, Q was used before a rounded vowel (e.g. \u27e8EQO\u27e9 'ego'), K before (e.g. \u27e8KALENDIS\u27e9 'calendis'), and C elsewhere. Later, the use of C (and its variant G) replaced most usages of K and Q: Q survived only to represent when immediately followed by a sound.\nIn Turkey between 1928 and 2013 the use of the letter Q, alongside X and W, was banned from official government documents, such as street signs and brochures. The letter forms part of the Kurdish alphabet but is not present in Turkish.\nTypographic variants.\nUppercase \"Q\".\nDepending on the typeface used to typeset the letter Q, the letter's tail may either bisect its bowl as in Helvetica, meet the bowl as in Univers, or lie completely outside the bowl as in PT Sans. In writing block letters, bisecting tails are the fastest to write, as they require less precision. All three styles are considered equally valid, with most serif typefaces having a Q with a tail that meets the circle, while sans-serif typefaces are more equally split between those with bisecting tails and those without. Typefaces with a disconnected Q tail, while uncommon, have existed since at least 1529. A common method among type designers to create the shape of the Q is by simply adding a tail to the letter O.\nOld-style serif fonts, such as Garamond, may contain two uppercase Qs: one with a short tail to be used in short words, and another with a long tail to be used in long words. Some early metal type fonts included up to 3 different Qs: a short-tailed Q, a long-tailed Q, and a long-tailed Q-u ligature. This print tradition was alive and well until the 19th century, when long-tailed Qs fell out of favor; even recreations of classic typefaces such as Caslon began being distributed with only short Q tails. American typographer D. B. Updike, who was known to disapprove of the long-tailed Q, celebrated their demise in his 1922 book \"Printing Types\", claiming that Renaissance printers made their Q tails longer and longer simply to \"outdo each other\". Latin-language words, which are much more likely than English words to contain \"Q\" as their first letter, have also been cited as the reason for their existence. The long-tailed Q had fallen out of use with the advent of early digital typography, as many early digital fonts could not choose different glyphs based on the word that the glyph was in, but it has seen something of a comeback with the advent of OpenType fonts and LaTeX, both of which can automatically typeset the long-tailed Q when it is called for and the short-tailed Q when it is not.\nOwing to the allowable variation between letters, Q, like &amp;, is often cited as a letter that gives type designers a greater opportunity for self-expression. Identifont is an automatic typeface identification service that identifies typefaces by asking questions about their appearance and later asks about the Q tail if the \"sans-serif\" option is chosen. In the Identifont database, the distribution of Q tails is:\nSome type designers prefer one \"Q\" design over another: Adrian Frutiger, famous for the airport typeface that bears his name, remarked that most of his typefaces feature a Q tail that meets the bowl and then extends horizontally. Frutiger considered such Qs to make for more \"harmonious\" and \"gentle\" typefaces. \"Q\" often makes the list of their favorite letters; for example, Sophie Elinor Brown, designer of Strato, has listed \"Q\" as being her favorite letter.\nLowercase \"q\".\nThe lowercase \"q\" is usually seen as a lowercase \"o\" or \"c\" with a descender (i.e., downward vertical tail) extending from the right side of the bowl, with or without a swash (i.e., flourish), or even a reversed lowercase p. The \"q\"'s descender is usually typed without a swash due to the major style difference typically seen between the descenders of the \"g\" (a loop) and \"q\" (vertical). When handwritten, or as part of a handwriting font, the descender of the \"q\" sometimes finishes with a rightward swash to distinguish it from the letter \"g\" (or, particularly in mathematics, from the digit \"9\").\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\nIn English, the digraph \u27e8qu\u27e9 most often denotes the cluster ; however, in borrowings from French, it represents , as in 'plaque'. See the list of English words containing Q not followed by U. Q is the second least frequently used letter in the English language (after Z), with a frequency of just 0.1% in words. Q has the fourth fewest English words where it is the first letter, after X, Z, and Y.\nOther languages.\nIn most European languages written in the Latin script, such as Romance and Germanic languages, \u27e8q\u27e9 appears almost exclusively in the digraph \u27e8qu\u27e9. In French, Occitan, Catalan, and Portuguese, \u27e8qu\u27e9 represents or ; in Spanish, it represents . \u27e8qu\u27e9 replaces \u27e8c\u27e9 for before front vowels \u27e8i\u27e9 and \u27e8e\u27e9, since in those languages \u27e8c\u27e9 represents a fricative or affricate before front vowels. In Italian, \u27e8qu\u27e9 represents (where is the semivowel allophone of ). In Albanian, Q represents , as in Sh\"q\"ip.\nThe letter is often not used often or at all in other languages, The letter is not officially part of the Cornish (Standard Written Form), Estonian, Icelandic, Irish, Latvian, Lithuanian, Polish, Serbo-Croatian, Scottish Gaelic, Slovenian, Turkish, or Welsh alphabets. However, in some of them, it may be found in borrowings.\n\u27e8q\u27e9 has a wide variety of other pronunciations in some European languages and in non-European languages that have adopted the Latin alphabet.\nOther systems.\nThe International Phonetic Alphabet uses \u27e8\u27e9 for the voiceless uvular stop.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25187", "revid": "49409394", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25187", "title": "History of Qatar", "text": "The history of Qatar spans from its first duration of human occupation to its formation as a modern state. Human occupation of Qatar dates back 50,000 years, and Stone Age encampments and tools have been unearthed in the Arabian Peninsula. Mesopotamia was the first civilization to have a presence in the area during the Neolithic period, evidenced by the discovery of potsherds originating from the Ubaid period near coastal encampments.\nThe peninsula fell under the domain of several different empires during its early years of settlement, including the Seleucid, the Parthians and the Sasanians. In 628 AD, the population was introduced to Islam after Muhammad sent an envoy to Munzir ibn Sawa who was the Sasanid governor of Eastern Arabia. It became a pearl trading center by the 8th century. The Abbasid era saw the rise of several settlements. After the Bani Utbah and other Arab tribes conquered Bahrain in 1783, the Al Khalifa imposed their authority over Bahrain and mainland Qatar. Over the following centuries, Qatar was a site of contention between the Wahhabi of Najd and the Al Khalifa. The Ottomans expanded their empire into Eastern Arabia in 1871, withdrawing from the area in 1915 after the beginning of World War I.\nIn 1916, Qatar became a British protectorate and Abdullah Al Thani signed a treaty stipulating that he could only cede territory to the British in return for protection from all aggression by sea and support in case of a land attack. A 1934 treaty granted more extensive protection. In 1935, a 75-year oil concession was granted to Qatar Petroleum and high-quality oil was discovered in 1940 in Dukhan.\nDuring the 1950s and 1960s, increasing oil revenues brought prosperity, rapid immigration, substantial social progress, and the beginnings of the country's modern history. After Britain announced a policy of ending the treaty relationships with the Persian Gulf sheikdoms in 1968, Qatar joined the other eight states then under British protection in a plan to form a federation of Arab emirates. By mid-1971, as the termination date of the British treaty relationship approached, the nine still had not agreed on terms of union. Accordingly, Qatar declared its independence on September 3, 1971. In June 1995, deputy emir Hamad bin Khalifa became the new emir after he deposed his father Khalifa bin Hamad in a bloodless coup. The Emir permitted more liberal press and municipal elections as a precursor to parliamentary elections. A new constitution was approved via public referendum in April 2003 and came into effect in June 2004.\nPrehistory.\nPaleolithic Age.\nIn 1961, a Danish archaeological expedition carried out on the peninsula uncovered approximately 30,000 stone implements from 122 Paleolithic sites. Most of the sites were situated along the coastline, and were divided into four separate cultural groups based on flint typology. Macrolithic tools such as scrapers, arrowheads and hand axes dating to the Lower and Middle Paleolithic periods were among the discoveries.\nThe flooding of the Persian Gulf roughly 8,000 years ago, resulted in the displacement of Persian Gulf inhabitants, the formation of the Qatari Peninsula and the occupation of Qatar to capitalize on its coastal resources. From this time onward, Qatar was regularly used as rangeland for nomadic tribes from the Najd and al-Hasa regions in Saudi Arabia, and a number of seasonal encampments were constructed around sources of water.\nNeolithic period (8000\u20133800 BC).\nAl Da'asa, a settlement located on the western coast of Qatar, is the most extensive Ubaid site in the country. It was excavated by the 1961 Danish team. The site is theorized to have accommodated a small seasonal encampment, possibly a lodging for a hunting-fishing-gathering group who made recurrent visits. This is evidenced by the discovery of nearly sixty fire pits at the site, which may have been used to cure and dry fish, in addition to flint tools such as scrapers, cutters, blades and arrowheads. Furthermore, many painted Ubaid potsherds and a carnelian bead were found in the fire pits, suggesting overseas connections.\nIn an excavation done in Al Khor in 1977\u201378, several Ubaid-period graves were uncovered in what is considered the earliest recorded burial site in the country. One grave contained the cremated remains of a young woman with no grave goods. Eight other graves contained grave goods, including beads made of shell, carnelian, and obsidian. The obsidian most likely originated from Najran in southwest Arabia.\nBronze Age (2100\u20131155 BC).\nThe Qatari Peninsula was close enough to the Dilmun civilization in Bahrain to have felt its influence. Barbar pottery was excavated in two sites by the Qatar Archaeology Project, suggesting Qatar's involvement in Dilmun's trade network. When the people of Dilmun began engaging in maritime activities around 2100 to 1700 BC, the inhabitants of Qatar started diving for pearls in the Persian Gulf. The Qataris were engaged in the trading of pearls and date palms during this era.\nIt has been argued that the remains of Dilmun settlements found in Qatar do not represent major evidence of long-term human habitation. Qatar remained largely uninhabited during this period due to regular migration by nomadic Arab tribes searching for untapped food and water sources. The settlements dating to the Dilmun period, particularly in Al Khor Island, may have been established to expedite trade journeys between Bahrain to the closest significant settlement in the Persian Gulf, Tell Abraq. Another scenario entails that the encampments were created by visiting fishermen or pearl fishers from Dilmun. It has also been suggested that the presence of pottery is indicative of trade between the inhabitants of Qatar and the Dilmun civilization, though this is considered unlikely due to the scarce population of the peninsula during this period.\nKassite Babylonian-influenced materials dating back to the second millennium BC, which were found in Al Khor Island, are evidence of trade relations between the inhabitants of Qatar and the Kassite. Among the findings were 3,000,000 crushed snail shells and Kassite potsherds. It has been asserted that Qatar was the site of the earliest known production of shellfish dye owing to a purple dye industry operated by the Kassite which existed on the island. The dye was obtained from the murex snail and was known as \"Tyrian purple\". Dye production may have been supervised by the Kassite administration in Bahrain to export the dye to Mesopotamia.\nAntiquity.\nIron Age and Babylonian\u2013Persian control (680\u2013325 BC).\nAssyrian king Esarhaddon led a successful campaign against \"Bazu\", an area which encompassed Dilmun and Qatar, in c.\u2009680 BC. To date, no archaeological evidence of early Iron Age settlements has been discovered in the peninsula. This is likely due to adverse climatic changes rendering Qatar less inhabitable during this period.\nIn the 5th century BC, Greek historian Herodotus published the earliest known description of the population of Qatar, describing its inhabitants as 'sea-faring Canaanites'.\nHellenistic period (325\u2013250 BC).\nAround 325 BC, Alexander the Great sent his top admiral, Androsthenes of Thasos, to survey the entire Persian Gulf. The requested charts arrived shortly after Alexander died in 323 BC. Seleucus I Nicator was awarded the eastern part of the Ancient Greek Empire after Alexander's death. Starting from 312 BC, he expanded the Seleucid Empire eastward of Babylon, purportedly encompassing parts of Eastern Arabia. Archaeological evidence of Greek-influenced materials has been discovered in Qatar. Excavations north of Dukhan uncovered potsherds of Seleucid characteristics, and a cairnfield consisting of 100 burial mounds dating to the era was discovered in Ras Abrouq. The relatively large number of cairns suggest a sizeable sea-faring community prevailed in the area.\nAfter losing most of their territories in the Persian Gulf, Seleucid influence ceased in the area by c.\u2009250 BC.\nPersian control (250 BC \u2013 642 AD).\nFollowing the eviction of the Seleucid by the Parthian Empire in c.\u2009250 BC, the latter gained dominion over the Persian Gulf and Arabian coast. As the Parthians were dependent on trade routes through the Persian Gulf, they established garrisons along the coast. Pottery recovered from expeditions in Qatar has demonstrated links to the Parthian Empire.\nRas Abrouq, a coastal city north of Dukhan, housed a fishing station which foreign vessels used to dry fish in 140 BC. Several stone structures and large quantities of fish bones were recovered from the site.\nPliny the Elder, a Roman author, wrote an account of the peninsula's inhabitants around the mid-first century AD. He referred to them as the \"Catharrei\" and described them as nomads who constantly roamed in search of water and food. Around the second century, Ptolemy produced the first known map to depict the landmass, referring to it as \"Catura\".\nIn 224 AD, the Sasanian Empire gained control over the territories surrounding the Persian Gulf. Qatar played a role in the commercial activity of the Sasanids, contributing to at least two commodities: precious pearls and purple dye. Sasanid pottery and glassware were found in Mezru'ah, a city north-west of Doha, and fragments of glassware and pottery were discovered in a settlement in Umm al-Ma'a.\nUnder the Sasanid reign, many of the inhabitants in Eastern Arabia were introduced to Christianity after the religion was dispersed eastward by Mesopotamian Christians. Monasteries were constructed in Qatar during this era, and further settlements were founded. During the latter part of the Christian era, Qatar was known by the Syriac name 'Beth Qatraye' (\u0712\u071d\u072c \u0729\u071b\u072a\u071d\u0710; \"region of the Qataris\"). A variant of this was 'Beth Catara'. The region also included Bahrain, Tarout Island, Al-Khatt, and Al-Hasa. The dioceses of Beth Qatraye did not form an ecclesiastical province, except for a short period during the mid-to-late seventh century. They were instead subject to the Metropolitan of Fars.\nMuhammad sent Al-Ala'a Al-Hadrami, a Muslim envoy, to a Persian ruler in Eastern Arabia named Munzir ibn Sawa Al Tamimi in 628 and requested that he and his people accept Islam. Munzir obliged his request, and most Arab tribes in Qatar converted to Islam. It has been proposed by historian Habibur Rahman that Munzir ibn Sawa's seat of administration existed in the Murwab or Umm al-Ma'a area of Qatar. This theory is supported by an archaeological find of approximately 100 small stone-built Islamic-period houses and fortified palaces of a tribal leader in Murwab, which are thought to have originated from the early Islamic period. After the adoption of Islam, the Arabs led the Muslim conquest of Persia which resulted in the fall of the Sasanian Empire.\nIt is likely that some settled populations in Qatar did not immediately convert to Islam. Isaac of Nineveh, a 7th-century Syriac Christian bishop regarded as a saint in some churches, was born in Beth Qatraye. Other notable Christian scholars dating to this period who hailed from Beth Qatraye include Dadisho Qatraya, Gabriel of Qatar, Gabriel Arya and Ahob of Qatar. In 674, the bishops of Beth Qatraye stopped attending synods.\nCaliphate rule.\nUmayyad period (661\u2013750).\nQatar was described as a famous horse and camel breeding centre during the Umayyad period. It began benefiting from its commercially strategic position in the Persian Gulf during the 8th century, going on to become a center of pearl trading.\nDuring the Second Fitna, a renowned Khariji commander named Qatari ibn al-Fuja'a, who was described as the most popular, admired and powerful Khariji leader, led the Azariqa, a sub-sect of the Khawarij, into numerous battles. He held the title of Amir al-Mu'minin and ruled over the radical Azariqa movement for more than 10 years. Born in Al Khuwayr in Qatar, he also minted the first known Kharjite coins, the earliest of which dated to 688 or 689.\nThe Umayyad Caliphate brought about much political and religious change in Western Asia starting from the late seventh century. As a result, there were many revolts against the Umayyad at the end of the seventh century, particularly in Qatar and Bahrain. Ibn al-Fuja'a led an uprising against the Umayyad caliphs for more than twenty years.\nIn 750, discontent in the caliphate had reached a critical level due to the treatment of non-Arab citizens in the Empire. The Abbasid Revolution resulted in the overthrow of the Umayyad Caliphate, ushering in the Abbasid period.\nAbbasid period (750\u20131253).\nSeveral settlements, including Murwab, were developed during the Abbasid period. Over 100 stone-built houses, two mosques, and an Abbasid fort were constructed in Murwab during this era. Murwab fort is the oldest intact fort in the country and was built over the ruins of a previous fort which was destroyed by fire. The town was the site of the first sizable settlement established off the coastal area of Qatar. A similar site, containing T'ang stoneware and dating to the 9th and 10th centuries, was discovered in Al Naman (north of Zubarah).\nSubstantial development in the pearling industry around the Qatari Peninsula occurred during the Abbasid era. Ships from Basra en route to India and China would make stops in the port of Qatar during this period. Chinese porcelain, West African coins and pieces from Thailand have been discovered in Qatar. Archaeological remains from the 9th century suggest that Qatar's inhabitants used greater wealth, perhaps from the pearl trade, to construct higher quality homes and public buildings. However, when the caliphate's prosperity declined in Iraq, so too did it in Qatar.\nMost of Eastern Arabia, particularly Bahrain and the Qatari Peninsula, were sites of revolt against the Abbasid Caliphate around 868. Mohammed ibn Ali, a revolutionary, roused the people of Bahrain and Qatar into a rebellion, but the rebellion was unsuccessful, and he relocated to Basra. He was later successful in instigating the Zanj Rebellion.\nA radical Isma'ili group called the Qarmatians established a utopian republic in Eastern Arabia in 899. They considered the pilgrimage to Mecca a superstition and once in control of the Bahraini state they launched raids along the pilgrim routes crossing the Arabian Peninsula. In 906, they ambushed the pilgrim caravan returning from Mecca and massacred 20,000 pilgrims.\nQatar is mentioned in 13th-century Muslim scholar Yaqut al-Hamawi's book, \"Mu'jam Al-Buldan (Dictionary of Countries)\", which alludes to the Qataris' fine striped woven cloaks and their skills in improvement and finishing of spears, known as khattiyah spears. The spears acquired their name as an homage to the region of Al-Khatt which encompassed present-day Qatif, Uqair and Qatar.\nPost-Islamic Golden Age.\nUsfurids and Ormus control (1253\u20131515).\nMuch of Eastern Arabia was controlled by the Usfurids in 1253, but control of the region was later seized by the prince of Ormus in 1320. Qatar's pearls provided the kingdom with one of its main sources of income. The Portuguese defeated the Ormus by 1507 following the destruction of their fleet by Afonso de Albuquerque's forces. However, Albuquerque's captains grew rebellious, and he was compelled to abandon the Ormus island. Ultimately, in 1515, King Manuel I killed Sultan Saifuddin's vizier Reis Hamed, pressuring the Sultan to become a vassal of King Manuel.\nPortuguese and Ottoman control (1521\u20131670).\nBahrain and mainland Qatar had been seized by the Portuguese in 1521. After the Portuguese claimed control, they constructed a series of fortresses along the Arabian Coast. However, there have been limited findings of Portuguese ruins in Qatar. One possible contender for a Portuguese presence is the 16th-century fort built in Portuguese architectural style in the ruined town of Ruwayda. A map dating to 1563 created by Portuguese cartographer L\u00e1zaro Lu\u00eds depicts \"Sidade de Catar\", making it the earliest depiction of any specific settlement in Qatar. Some historians believe that it refers to Ruwayda, though there remains much ambiguity as to the location's true identity.\nGasparo Balbi, a Venetian merchant and traveler, made the first mention of Qatar in a print book in the West. The book, titled \"Viaggio dell\u2019Indie Orientali Balbi\", detailed Balbi's travels to the Far East from 1579 to 1588. In it, he mentions a place called 'Barechator', thought to be a corruption of \"Bar Qatar\", or mainland Qatar.\nThe Portuguese focused on creating a commercial empire in Eastern Arabia, and exported gold, silver, silks, cloves, amber, horses and pearls. The population of Al-Hasa submitted voluntarily to the rule of the Ottomans in 1550, preferring them to the Portuguese. After the Portuguese were expelled from the area in 1602 by the Dutch and British, the Ottomans saw little need to maintain a military presence in the Al-Hasa region. As a result, the Ottomans were expelled by the Bani Khalid in 1670.\nRule of Bani Khalid (1670\u20131783).\nHaving expelled the Ottomans, the Bani Khalid held jurisdiction over Qatar from 1670 onward. In 1766, the Utub clans of Al Jalahma and Al Khalifa migrated from Kuwait to Zubarah in Qatar. By the time of their arrival in Zubarah, the Bani Khalid exercised weak power over Qatar, though the largest village was ruled by a distant relative of the Bani Khalid. After the Persian occupation of Basra in 1777 many merchants and families moved from Basra and Kuwait to Zubarah. The town became a thriving center of trade and pearling in the Persian Gulf region after this movement.\nThe Al Khalifa claimed Qatar and Bahrain by 1783, whereas Bani Khalid control of neighboring Al-Hasa officially came to an end in 1795.\nAl Khalifa and Saudi control (1783\u20131868).\nFollowing Persian aggression towards Zubarah, the Utub and other Arab tribes drove the Persians from Bahrain in 1783. Al Jalahma seceded from the Utub alliance sometime before the Utub annexed Bahrain in 1783 and returned to Zubarah. This left the Al Khalifa tribe in undisputed possession of Bahrain, who then transferred their power base from Zubarah to Manama. They continued to exert authority over the mainland and paid tribute to the Wahhabi to ward off challenges on Qatar. However, Qatar did not develop a centralized authority because the Al Khalifa sheikhs were primarily concerned with the affairs of Bahrain. As a result, Qatar went through many periods of 'transitory sheikhs', including Rahmah ibn Jabir al-Jalhami. By 1790, Zubarah was described as a safe haven for merchants who enjoyed complete protection and no customs duties.\nThe town came under threat by the Wahhabi from 1780 onward due to the intermittent raids launched on the Bani Khalid strongholds in Al-Hasa. The Wahhabi thought the population of Zubarah would conspire against their regime with the help of the Bani Khalid. They also believed that its residents practiced teachings contrary to the Wahhabi doctrine and regarded the town as an important gateway to the Persian Gulf. Saudi general Sulaiman ibn Ufaysan led a raid against the town in 1787. Five years later, a massive Wahhabi force conquered Al Hasa, forcing many refugees to flee to Zubarah. Wahhabi forces besieged Zubarah and several neighboring settlements in 1794 as punishment for accommodating asylum seekers. The local chieftains were allowed to continue carrying out administrative tasks but were required to pay a tax.\nAfter defeating the Bani Khalid in 1795, the Wahhabi were attacked on two fronts. The Ottomans and Egyptians assaulted the western front, while the Al Khalifa in Bahrain and the Omanis launched an attack against the eastern front. The Wahhabi allied themselves with the Al Jalahmah tribe in Qatar, who engaged the Al Khalifa and Omanis on the eastern frontier.\nIn 1811, upon being made aware of advancements by the Egyptians on the western frontier, the Wahhabi amir reduced his garrisons in Bahrain and Zubarah to re-position his troops. Said bin Sultan of Muscat capitalized on this and attacked the Wahhabi garrisons in Bahrain and Zubarah. The fort in Zubarah was set ablaze, and the Al Khalifa were effectively restored to power.\nBritish involvement.\nBritain's desire for secure passage for East India Company ships led it to impose its own order in the Persian Gulf. An agreement known as the General Maritime Treaty was signed between the East India Company and the sheikhs of the coastal area (later known as the Trucial Coast) in 1820. It acknowledged British authority in the Persian Gulf and sought to end piracy and the slave trade. Bahrain became a party to the treaty, and it was assumed that Qatar, as a dependency, was also a party to it.\nA report compiled by Major Colebrook in 1820 gives the first descriptions of the major towns in Qatar. All of the coastal cities mentioned in his report were situated near the Persian Gulf pearl banks and had been practicing pearl fishing for millenniums. Until the late eighteenth century, all of the principal towns of Qatar, including Al Huwaila, Fuwayrit, Al Bidda and Doha were situated on the east coast. Doha developed around the largest of these, Al Bidda. The population consisted of nomadic and settled Arabs and a significant proportion of slaves brought from East Africa. As punishment for piracy committed by the inhabitants of Doha, an East India Company vessel bombarded the town in 1821. They razed the town, forcing between 300 and 400 natives to flee.\nA survey carried out by the British in 1825 notes that Qatar did not have a central authority and was governed by local sheikhs. Doha was ruled by the Al-Buainain tribe. In 1828, a member of the Al-Buainain murdered a native of Bahrain, prompting the Bahraini sheikh to imprison the offender. The Al-Buainain tribe revolted, provoking the Al Khalifa to destroy their fort and expel them from Doha. The expulsion of the Al-Buainain granted the Al Khalifa greater jurisdiction over Doha.\nBahraini\u2013Saudi contention.\nDesiring to keep surveillance over the proceedings of the Wahhabis, Bahrain stationed a government official named Abdullah bin Ahmad Al-Khalifa on the coast of Qatar as early as 1833. Turning against the Bahrainis, he instigated the people of Al Huwailah to revolt against the Al Khalifa and open up a correspondence with the Wahhabis in 1835. Shortly after the revolt, a peace agreement was signed by both parties under the mediation of the son of the Sultan of Muscat. As part of the stipulations, Al Huwailah was demolished and its residents were moved to Bahrain. However, nephews of Abdullah bin Ahmed almost immediately violated the agreement when they incited members of the Al Kuwari tribe to attack Al Huwailah.\nResidents of the peninsula were susceptible to skirmishes between the forces of the sheikh of Bahrain and the Egyptian military commander of Al-Hasa. At the end of 1839 or the beginning of 1840, the governor of Al-Hasa dispatched troops to lay waste to Qatar following the refusal of the Na'im tribe of Zubarah to pay the demanded tribute. The assassination of a governor in Hofuf prematurely ended the expedition before the forces could reach the country.\nIn 1847, Abdullah bin Ahmed Al Khalifa and a Qatari chief named Isa bin Tarif formed a coalition against Muhammad bin Khalifa, the ruler of Bahrain. In November, bin Khalifa landed in Al Khor with 500 troops and military support from the governors of Qatif and Al-Hasa. The opposition forces numbered 600 troops and were led by bin Tarif. On 17 November, a decisive battle, which came to be known as the Battle of Fuwayrit, took place between the coalition forces and the Bahraini forces. The coalition forces were defeated after bin Tarif and eighty of his men were killed. After he defeated the resistance troop, bin Khalifa demolished Al Bidda and moved its inhabitants to Bahrain. He sent his brother, Ali bin Khalifa, as an envoy to Al Bidda. However, he did not exercise any administrative powers, and local tribal leaders remained responsible for the internal affairs of Qatar.\nMohammed bin Thani and his tribe migrated from Fuwayrit to Al Bidda in 1848. Prior to this migration, each tribe and settlement had its independent leader, and there was no documented instance of their unification in battle. The concept of a unified land or nation was not present. However, with Mohammed bin Thani's arrival, Qatar began to gain significant economic and political weight.\nIn 1851, Qatar served as a flashpoint for a conflict between Faisal bin Turki, Imam of the Emirate of Najd, and Muhammad bin Khalifa. Faisal had long sought to gain control of Bahrain and had previously attempted, and failed, to invade the island. In May 1851, Faisal launched his third attempt to capture Bahrain, ordering his forces to proceed towards Al Bidda, Qatar, which was intended to be used as a staging area for an invasion of Bahrain. In response, Ali bin Khalifa, the Bahraini representative in Qatar, called on all men of fighting age to defend Al Bidda, as well as sending for help from Saeed bin Tahnun Al Nahyan of Abu Dhabi. Mohammed bin Thani served as one of the leaders of the Qatari forces.\nFrom 2 June to 4 June 1851, the Battle of Mesaimeer was fought between Qatari-Bahraini and Wahhabi forces. On the first day, a skirmish of gunfire ensued between the Qatari-Bahraini forces and those of Faisal ibn Turki without any close combat. According to British and oral reports, the Wahhabis were routed by the allied forces on this day. On the second day, Qatari forces, led by Mohammed bin Thani's son Jassim, engaged Faisal's troops in a fierce battle while the Bahraini forces retreated to their ships, observing from the sea. On the third day, Faisal's forces retreated to their camp at Mesaimeer. Mohammed bin Thani advised Ali bin Khalifa to make peace with Faisal, fearing a renewed attack once they regrouped. This suggestion was rebuffed by Ali bin Khalifa, who perceived it as betrayal.\nShortly after the battle ended, Mohammed bin Thani negotiated a separate peace agreement with Faisal in which he agreed to be under Wahhabi governance provided that he remains chief of Al Bidda. Faisal obliged his request, leading to Muhammad bin Khalifa imposing a blockade of Al Bidda after receiving news of this. On 8 June, Qatari forces under the leadership of Mohammed bin Thani assumed control of Burj Al-Maah, a watchtower guarding Doha's main water source, close to Al Bidda Fort where the allied forces of Ali bin Khalifa and Saeed bin Tahnoun were stationed. Upon hearing the news, they fled to Bahrain without incident, much to the dismay of Faisal who admonished Mohammed bin Thani for not capturing them.\nOn 25 July, 1851, Saeed bin Tahnun negotiated a treaty between the Bahrainis and Wahhabis, in which the Bahrainis would pay an annual zakat to Faisal in exchange for his renouncement of any claims to Qatar and return of Al Bidda to the chieftainship of Ali bin Khalifa. Mohammed bin Thani, as party to this agreement, agreed to relinquish his position. This agreement led to Faisal's departure for Al-Hasa on 26 July, 1851. Despite the peace agreement being signed earlier, Al Bidda's blockade was only lifted on 2 August, 1851.\nEconomic repercussions.\nIn a move which angered Mohammed bin Khalifa, Faisal bin Turki provided a safe haven for Abdullah bin Ahmed's sons in Dammam in 1852. Consequently, the Bahrainis attempted to drive away residents of Al Bidda and Doha who were suspected of being loyal to the Wahhabi by imposing an economic blockade on the inhabitants, which prevented them from engaging in pearl hunting. The blockade continued until the end of the year. In February 1853, the Wahhabi began marching from Al-Hasa to Al Khor. After Bahrain received assurance from Qatar that they would not cooperate with the Wahhabi forces if they crossed their borders, they sent Ali bin Khalifa to the mainland to act as a collaborator with the local resistance. A British-mediated peace agreement was reached between the two parties in 1853.\nHostilities were provoked again after the Bahraini sheikh, in response to the harboring of Bahraini fugitives in Dammam, stopped paying tribute to the Wahhabi amir in 1859 and proceeded to instigate Qatari tribes to attack its subjects. Following threats made by Abdullah bin Faisal Al Saud to attack Bahrain, the British navy dispatched a ship off the coast of Dammam to prevent any attacks. The situation escalated in May 1860 when Abdullah threatened to occupy the coast of Qatar until the annual tribute was paid. In May 1861, Bahrain signed a treaty with the British government in which the latter agreed to offer protection and recognize Qatar as a dependent of Bahrain. In February 1862, the treaty was ratified by the Indian government.\nFollowing the involvement of the British, the sway that the Al Khalifa tribe held over Qatar's affairs began declining. Mohammed bin Thani was described by Gifford Palgrave as the acknowledged governor of the Qatar Peninsula in 1863. Some of Al Wakrah's inhabitants were forced to vacate the town by the Bahraini sheikh in April 1863 due to alleged links with the Wahhabi. The town's chief, Mohammed Bu Kuwara, was taken into custody on a similar charge. In 1866, a report by the British revealed that Qatar was paying an annual zakat of 4,000 German krones to the Wahhabi, in encroachment of the 1861 British treaty. The report also contended that the Al Khalifa were taxing the people of Qatar for the same annual payment.\nQatari\u2013Bahraini War.\nIn June 1867, Ali bin Khalifa, the Bahraini representative in Qatar and brother of Muhammad bin Khalifa, seized a Bedouin from Al Wakrah and deported him to Bahrain. Mohammed bin Thani demanded his release, but Ali bin Khalifa refused. This prompted Mohammed bin Thani to expel him from Al Wakrah. Upon receiving news of this, Muhammad bin Khalifa released the Bedouin prisoner and expressed his desire for renewed peace talks. Jassim bin Mohammed Al Thani, the son of Mohammed bin Thani, traveled to Bahrain to negotiate on his behalf. He was imprisoned upon arrival, and a large number of ships and troops were soon sent to punish the people of Al Wakrah and Al Bidda. Abu Dhabi joined on Bahrain's behalf due to the conception that Al Wakrah served as a refuge for fugitives from Oman. Later that year, the combined forces sacked the two aforementioned Qatari cities with 2,000 men in what would come to be known as the Qatari\u2013Bahraini War. A British record later stated: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"(...) the towns of Doha and Wakrah were, at the end of 1867 temporarily blotted out of existence, the houses being dismantled and the inhabitants deported.\"\nIn either late 1867 or June 1868, the Qataris attempted to launch a counterattack against the Bahrainis, however, they were defeated in the Battle of Damsah. An account of the battle written in 1933 by C.U. Aitchison, under-secretary of the British Raj, is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As both the Bahrain and Abu Dhabi Shaikhs were bound by their engagements with the British Government to abstain from aggression of every kind by sea; to appeal to the British Resident as arbitrator; and to afford full redress for all maritime offences which could justly be charged against them or their subjects, steps were taken to exact reparation for these outrages. Before this could be effected the tribes of Qatar retaliated by an attack on Bahrain which proved unsuccessful; but in the naval action which took place a number of vessels were destroyed and great loss of life occurred.\nContemporary sources state the 1868 attack was particularly violent, in some 1,000 were killed and 60 ships were destroyed.\nThe aftermath of the Battle of Damsah saw the Qatari forces execute a strategic withdrawal, prompting a pursuit by Bahraini troops to the settlement of Al Wakrah. At this location, the Qatari contingent mounted a defense, successfully encircling the Bahraini forces and capturing two of their commanders. The engagement concluded with a negotiated exchange of prisoners, following which Jassim bin Mohammed returned to his seat of power in Doha.\nThe joint Bahraini-Abu Dhabi incursion and Qatari counterattack prompted the British political agent, Colonel Lewis Pelly, to impose a settlement in 1868. Pelly's mission to Bahrain and Qatar and the peace treaty that resulted were milestones in Qatar's history. It implicitly recognized the distinctness of Qatar from Bahrain and explicitly acknowledged the position of Mohammed bin Thani as an important representative of the Peninsula's tribes.\nOttoman control (1871\u20131913).\nThe Ottoman Empire expanded into Eastern Arabia in 1871. After establishing themselves on the Al-Hasa coast, they advanced towards Qatar. Al Bidda soon came to serve as a base of operations for Bedouins harassing the Ottomans in the south, and Abdullah II Al-Sabah of Kuwait was sent to the town to secure a landing for the Ottoman troops. He brought with him four Ottoman flags for the most influential people in Qatar. Mohammed bin Thani received and accepted one of the flags but sent it to Al Wakrah and continued hoisting the local flag above his house. Jassim bin Mohammed accepted a flag and flew it above his house. A third flag was given to Ali bin Abdul Aziz, the ruler of Al Khor.\nThe British reacted negatively to the Ottoman's advancements as they felt their interests were at stake. Receiving no response to their objections, the British gunboat Hugh Rose arrived in Qatar on 19 July 1871. After inspecting the situation, Sidney Smith, the assistant political resident in the Persian Gulf, discovered that Qatar flew the flags willingly. To further add to their apprehension, Jassim bin Mohammed, who assumed his father's role during this period, authorized the Ottomans to send 100 troops and equipment to Al Bidda in December 1871. By January 1872, the Ottomans had incorporated Qatar into their dominion. It was designated a province in Najd under the control of the sanjak of Najd. Jassim bin Mohammed was appointed as the kaymakam (sub-governor) of the district, and most other Qataris were allowed to keep their positions in the new government.\nCharles Grant, the assistant political resident, falsely reported that the Ottomans sent a contingent of 100 troops from Qatif to Zubarah under the command of Hossein Effendi in August 1873. The sheikh of Bahrain reacted negatively to this because the Na'im tribe, which resided in Zubarah, had signed a treaty agreeing to be his subjects. Upon being confronted by the sheikh, Grant referred him to political resident Edward Ross. Ross informed the sheikh that he believed he had no right to protect tribes residing in Qatar. In September, the sheikh reiterated his sovereignty over the town and tribe. Grant replied by arguing that there was no special mention of the Na'im or Zubarah in any treaties signed with Bahrain. A British government official concurred with his views, stating that the sheikh of Bahrain \"should, as far as practicable abstain from interfering in complications on the mainland.\"\nAnother chance arose for the Al Khalifa to renew their claim on Zubarah in 1874 after an opposition leader named Nasir bin Mubarak moved to Qatar. They believed that Mubarak, with the assistance of Jassim bin Mohammed, would target the Na'im living in Zubarah as a prelude to an invasion. As a result, a contingent of Bahraini reinforcements was sent to Zubarah, to the disapproval of the British, who suggested that the sheikh was involving himself in complications. Edward Ross made it apparent that a government council decision advised the sheikh that he should not interfere in the affairs of Qatar. The Al Khalifa remained in consistent contact with the Na'im, drafting 100 members of the tribe in their army and offering financial assistance. Jassim bin Mohammed expelled some members of the tribe after they attacked ships near Al Bidda in 1878.\nDespite the opposition of many prominent Qatari tribes, Jassim bin Mohammed continued to show support for the Ottomans. However, there were no signs of improvement in the partnership between the two parties, and relations further deteriorated when the Ottomans refused to aid Jassim in his expedition of Abu Dhabi-occupied Khor Al Adaid in 1882. In addition, the Ottomans supported the Ottoman subject Mohammed bin Abdul Wahab, who attempted to supplant Jassim bin Mohammed in 1888.\nQatari\u2013Abu Dhabi War.\nDuring the period of Ottoman influence, Qatar was involved in a protracted conflict known as the Qatari\u2013Abu Dhabi War. This series of territorial disputes and military conflicts occurred between Qatar, led by Jassim bin Mohammed Al Thani, and the Emirate of Abu Dhabi, under Zayed bin Khalifa Al Nahyan, from 1881 to 1893. The conflict was rooted in longstanding territorial disputes over poorly defined borders, competition for control of resources such as grazing lands and pearl banks, and the secession of the Qubaisat tribe from Abu Dhabi to Qatar in 1869. It was further complicated by allegations of piracy in disputed territories and the broader imperial rivalry between the Ottoman Empire and Britain in the Gulf region.\nThe war began with early skirmishes in 1881, including the battles of Baynunah, Suwaihan, and Al-Marsaf. Tensions escalated over the following years, with both sides engaging in raids and counter-raids. A significant incident, commonly known as the Second Destruction of Doha, occurred in August 1888 when Abu Dhabi forces attacked Doha, resulting in numerous casualties including the death of Jassim's son, Ali bin Jassim.\nThe conflict reached its climax with the Battle of Khannour from January to February 1889. Jassim, with limited Ottoman support, mobilized a coalition of tribal forces to capture the fort of Khannour in Abu Dhabi territory after a 20-day siege. Following this, Qatari forces conducted extensive raids across Abu Dhabi territory, reaching as far as Al Ain and Al Buraimi.\nAfter years of hostilities and diplomatic maneuvering, the conflict was finally resolved in 1893 through an agreement jointly brokered by the British and Ottomans. This war marked an important phase in Qatar's transition towards independence and its emergence as a distinct political entity in the Gulf region, even while nominally under Ottoman rule. The conflict also reinforced British dominance in the region while exposing the limits of Ottoman influence.\nBattle of Al Wajbah.\nIn February 1893, Mehmed Hafiz Pasha arrived in Qatar to seek unpaid taxes and accost Jassim bin Mohammed's opposition to proposed Ottoman administrative reforms. Fearing that he would face death or imprisonment, Jassim bin Mohammed moved to Al Wajbah ( miles west of Doha); he was accompanied by several tribe members. Mehmed demanded that he disband his troops and pledge his loyalty to the Ottomans. However, Jassim bin Mohammed remained adamant in his refusal to comply with Ottoman authority. In March 1893, Mehmed imprisoned his brother, Ahmed bin Mohammed Al Thani, in addition to 13 prominent Qatari tribal leaders on the Ottoman corvette \"Merrikh\". After Mehmed declined an offer to release the captives for a fee of ten thousand liras, he ordered a column of approximately 200 Ottoman troops to advance towards Jassim bin Mohammed's fortress in Al Wajbah under the command of Yusuf Effendi.\nShortly after arriving at Al Wajbah, Effendi's troops came under heavy gunfire by Qatari infantry and cavalry troops, which totaled 3,000 to 4,000 men. They retreated to Shebaka fortress, where they once again sustained casualties from a Qatari incursion. After they retreated to the fortress of Al Bidda, Jassim bin Mohammed's advancing column besieged the fortress and cut off the neighborhood's water supply. The Ottomans conceded defeat and agreed to relinquish the Qatari captives in return for the safe passage of Mehmed Pasha's cavalry to Hofuf by land. Although Qatar did not gain full independence from the Ottoman Empire, the result of the battle forced a treaty that would later form the basis of Qatar emerging as an autonomous country within the empire.\nLater Ottoman presence.\nOn the cusp of Ottoman withdrawal from the Peninsula in 1915, the British government wrote the following description of the Ottoman presence in Qatar:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The Qatar Peninsula, to the east of the island of Bahrain, is ruled by Shaikh \u2019Abdullah bin Jasim, a rich and powerful chief, who has a following of about 2,000 fighting men. Some few years ago his father was engaged in hostilities with the Turks, who succeeded, after some hard fighting, in establishing a garrison in the fort of Al Bida\u2019 (Dohah) on the eastern side of the peninsula and in reducing Jasim to nominal subjection. He is now styled qaim-maqam of the peninsula under the Porte, and flies the Turkish flag, but he dislikes his rulers and would be glad to be rid of them. The Bani Hajar tribes can muster about 4,500 fighting men, which with the Shaikh\u2019s 2,000, would give altogether 6,500; but 4,500 represents as large a force as he is ever likely to bring together. Since about 1900 various attempts have been made by the Porte to assert its sovereignty in other parts of the Qatar peninsula, and in 1910 Turkish mudirs were to be despatched to Zubarah, Odaid, Wakrah, and Abu \u2019Ali Island. His Majesty\u2019s Government, however, protested against this, and, indeed, have never acknowledged Turkish rule in Qatar. In 1913 Turkey consented to remove her garrison from Qatar; but that agreement has not yet been signed, hence the garrison remains.\nThe Turkish garrison lives in the fort of Al Bida\u2019, which is in the centre of the town and a little back from the sea. The garrison consists of, at the most, 100 infantry and there are said to be 12 gunners in charge of two old guns. There is an outpost of eight Turkish soldiers in a tower, over the well of Mushairib, about a mile from the fort.\nShaikh Abdullah, who succeeded to the chiefship of Qatar in 1913, is friendly towards the British, and afraid of Bin S\u2019aud. He would no doubt be glad to be rid of the Turks.\"\nBritish protectorate (1916\u20131971).\nThe Ottomans officially renounced sovereignty over Qatar in 1913, and in 1916, the new ruler Abdullah bin Jassim Al Thani signed a treaty with Britain, thereby instating the area under the trucial system. This meant that Qatar relinquished its autonomy in foreign affairs, such as the power to cede territory, and other affairs, in exchange for Britain's military protection from external threats. The treaty also had provisions suppressing slavery, piracy, and gunrunning, but the British were not strict about enforcing those provisions.\nDespite Qatar coming under British protection, Abdullah bin Jassim's position was insecure. Uncooperative tribes refused to pay tribute; disgruntled family members intrigued against him; and he felt vulnerable to the designs of Bahrain and the Wahhabi. The Al Thani were merchant princes, reliant on trade and especially the pearl trade, and dependent on other tribes to do their fighting for them, primarily the Bani Hajer who owed their allegiance to Ibn Saud, amir of the Najd and Al-Hasa. Despite numerous requests by Abdullah bin Jassim for strong military support, weapons, and a loan, the British were reluctant to become involved in inland affairs. This changed in the 1930s when competition for oil concessions in the region intensified.\nOil drilling.\nThe scramble for oil raised the stakes in regional territorial disputes and signified the need to establish territorial borders. The first move came in 1922 at a boundary conference in Uqair when prospector Major Frank Holmes attempted to include Qatar in an oil concession he was discussing with Ibn Saud. Sir Percy Cox, the British representative, saw through the ploy and drew a line on the map separating the Qatar Peninsula from the mainland. The first oil survey took place in 1926 under the direction of George Martin Lees, a geologist contracted to the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (APOC), but no oil was found. The oil issue rose again in 1933 after an oil strike in Bahrain. Lees had already noted that, in such an eventuality, Qatar should be investigated again. After lengthy negotiations on 17 May 1935, Abdullah bin Jassim signed a concession agreement with Anglo-Persian representatives for a period of 75 years in return for 400,000 rupees on signature and 150,000 rupees per annum with royalties. As part of the agreement, Great Britain made more specific promises of assistance than they had in earlier treaties. APOC transferred the concession to the IPC subsidiary company Petroleum Development (Qatar) Ltd. to meet its obligations under the Red Line Agreement.\nBahrain claimed rule over a group of islands between the two countries in 1936. The largest island was Hawar Islands, situated off the west coast of Qatar, where the Bahrainis had established a small military garrison. Britain accepted the Bahraini claim over Abdullah bin Jassim's objections, largely because the Bahraini sheikh's personal British adviser was able to phrase their case in a legal manner familiar to British officials. In 1937, the Bahrainis again laid claim to the deserted town of Zubarah after being involved in an armed conflict between Abdullah bin Jassim and the Na'im tribe. Abdullah bin Jassim sent a large, heavily armed force and defeated the Na'im. The British political resident in Bahrain supported Qatar's claim and warned Hamad ibn Isa Al Khalifa, the ruler of Bahrain, not to intervene militarily. Indignant over the loss of Zubarah, Hamad ibn Isa imposed a crushing embargo on trade and travel to Qatar.\nDrilling of the first oil well began in Dukhan in October 1938, and over a year later, the well struck oil in the Upper Jurassic limestone. Unlike the Bahraini strike, this was similar to Saudi Arabia's Dammam field discovered three years before. Production was halted between 1942 and 1947 because of World War II and its aftermath. The disruption of food supplies caused by the war prolonged a period of economic hardship in Qatar, which began in the 1920s with the collapse of the pearl trade and was exacerbated in the early 1930s with the onsets of the Great Depression and the Bahraini embargo. As was the case in previous times of privation, entire families and tribes moved to other parts of the Persian Gulf, leaving many Qatari villages deserted. Abdullah bin Jassim went into debt and groomed his favored second son, Hamad bin Abdullah Al Thani, to be his successor in preparation for his retirement. However, Hamad bin Abdullah's death in 1948 led to a succession crisis in which the main candidates were Abdullah bin Jassim's eldest son, Ali bin Abdullah Al Thani, and Hamad bin Abdullah's teenage son, Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani.\nOil exports and payments for offshore rights began in 1949 and marked a turning point in Qatar. The oil revenues would dramatically transform the economy and society and would also provide the focus for domestic disputes and foreign relations. This became apparent to Abdullah bin Jassim when several of his relatives threatened armed opposition if they did not receive increases in their allowances. Aged and anxious, Abdullah bin Jassim turned to the British. He promised to abdicate and agreed to an official British presence in Qatar in exchange for recognition and support of Ali bin Abdullah as ruler in 1949.\nUnder British tutelage, the 1950s saw the development of government structures and public services. Ali bin Abdullah was at first reluctant to share power, which had centered in his household, with an infant bureaucracy run and staffed mainly by outsiders. Ali bin Abdullah's increasing financial difficulties and inability to control striking oil workers and difficult sheikhs led him to succumb to British pressure. The first official budget was drawn up by a British adviser in 1953. By 1954, there were forty-two Qatari government employees.\nProtests and reforms.\nLarge numbers of protests against the British and the ruling family occurred during the 1950s. One of the largest took place in 1956; it drew 2,000 participants, most of whom were high-ranking Qataris allied with Arab nationalists and dissatisfied oil workers. During another protest which took place in August 1956, the participants waved Egyptian flags and chanted anti-colonialism slogans. In October 1956, protesters tried to sabotage oil pipelines in the Persian Gulf by destroying the pipelines with a bulldozer. These were major impetuses to the development of the British-run police force which was established by the British in 1949. The demonstrations led Ali bin Abdullah to invest the police with his personal authority and support. This was a significant reversal of his previous reliance on his retainers and Bedouin fighters.\nPublic services developed slowly during the 1950s. The first telephone exchange opened in 1953, the first desalination plant in 1954, and the first power plant in 1957. A dock, a customs warehouse, an airstrip, and a police headquarters were also built in this period. In the 1950s, 150 adult males of the ruling family received grants from the government. Sheikhs also received land and government positions. This mollified them as long as oil revenues increased. However, when revenues declined in the late 1950s, Ali bin Abdullah could not handle the family pressures this engendered. Discontent was fueled by his residence in Switzerland, extravagant spending, and hunting trips in Pakistan, especially among those who were excluded from the regime's largesse (non-Al Thani Qataris) and among other branches of Al Thani who desired more privileges. Seniority and proximity to the Sheikh determined the size of allowances.\nSuccumbing to family pressures and poor health, Ali bin Abdullah abdicated in 1960. Instead of handing power over to Khalifa bin Hamad, who had been named heir apparent in 1948, he made his son, Ahmad bin Ali, ruler. Nonetheless, Khalifa bin Hamad gained considerable power as heir apparent and deputy ruler, in large part because Ahmad bin Ali spent much time outside the country. One of his first acts was to increase funding for the sheikhs at the expense of development projects and social services. In addition to allowances, adult male Al Thani were given government positions. This added to the anti-regime resentment already felt by, among others, oil workers, low-ranking Al Thani, dissident sheikhs, and some leading government officials. These individuals formed the National Unity Front in response to a fatal shooting of a protester on 19 April 1963 by one of Sheikh Ahmad bin Ali's nephews. While the Saudi monarch was at the ruler's palace on 20 April 1963, a demonstration occurred in front of the building. Police fired and killed three demonstrators, prompting the National Unity Front to organize a general strike on 21 April. The strike lasted around two weeks with most public services affected.\nThe group made a statement that week where it listed 35 of its demands to the government entailing less authority for the ruling family; protection for oil workers; recognition of trade unions; voting rights for citizens and the Arabization of the leadership. Ahmed bin Ali rejected most of these demands and moved to arrest and detain fifty of the most prominent National Unity Front members and sympathizers without trial in early May. The government also instituted some reforms in response to the movements. This included the provision of land and loans to poor farmers, instituting a policy of preferential hiring of Qatari citizens, and the election of a municipal council.\nThe infrastructure, foreign labor force, and bureaucracy continued to grow in the 1960s, largely under the instruction of Khalifa bin Hamad. There were also some early attempts at diversifying Qatar's economic base, most notably with the establishment of a cement factory, a national fishing company, and small-scale agriculture. An official gazette was first published in 1961, and in 1962, a nationality law was introduced. No cabinets existed during this period, however, British and Egyptian advisers helped establish a number of governmental departments, such as the Department of Agriculture and a Department of Labor and Social Affairs.\nFederation of nine Emirates.\nIn 1968, Britain announced its plans to withdraw its military commitments east of Suez (including those in force with Qatar) in the following three years. Because of the Persian Gulf sheikhdoms' vulnerability and small size, the rulers of Bahrain, Qatar and the Trucial Coast contemplated forming a federation after the British withdrawal. The federation was first proposed in February 1968, when the rulers of Abu Dhabi and Dubai announced their intention to form a coalition, extending an invitation to other Gulf states to join. Later that month, in a summit meeting attended by the rulers of Bahrain, Qatar, and the Trucial Coast, the government of Qatar proposed the formation of a federation of Arab emirates to be governed by a higher council composed of nine rulers. This proposal was accepted and a declaration of union was approved. There were, however, several disagreements between the rulers on matters such as the location of the capital, the drafting of the constitution, and the distribution of ministries.\nThe rulers remained divided on multiple issues despite Khalifa bin Hamad's election as chairman of the Temporary Federal Council in July 1968 and the establishment of numerous ministries. Two opposing blocs surfaced soon after the initial proposal, with Qatar and Dubai aligning together to oppose the inclinations of Bahrain and Abu Dhabi. Bahrain, being backed by Abu Dhabi, made efforts to marginalize the other rulers' roles in the union in an attempt to assume a leadership role and thus gain political leverage over their long-standing territorial disputes with Iran. The last meeting occurred in October 1969 when Zayed Al Nahyan and Khalifa bin Hamad were elected the first president and prime minister of the federation, respectively. There were stalemates on numerous issues during the meeting, including the position of vice president, the defense of the federation, and whether a constitution was required. Shortly after the meeting, the Political Agent in Abu Dhabi revealed the British government's interests in the outcome of the session, prompting Qatar and Ras al Khaimah to withdraw from the federation over perceived foreign interference in internal affairs. The federation was consequently disbanded despite efforts by Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Britain to reinvigorate discussions.\nAhmad bin Ali subsequently promulgated a provisional constitution in April 1970, which declared Qatar an independent Arab Islamic state with the Sharia as its basic law. Khalifa bin Hamad was appointed prime minister in May. The first Council of Ministers was sworn in on 1 January 1970; seven of its ten members were Al Thani. Khalifa bin Hamad's argument prevailed with regard to the federation proposal.\nIndependence (1971\u2013present).\nQatar declared its independence on 1 September 1971 and became an independent state on 3 September. When Ahmad bin Ali issued the formal announcement from his Swiss villa instead of from his palace in Doha, many Qataris were convinced that it was time for a change in leadership. On 22 February 1972, Khalifa bin Hamad deposed Ahmad bin Ali whilst he was on a hunting trip in Iran. Khalifa bin Hamad had the tacit support of Al Thani and Britain, as well as the political, financial, and military support of Saudi Arabia. In contrast to his predecessor's policies, Khalifa bin Hamad cut family allowances and increased spending on social programs, including housing, health, education, and pensions. In addition, he filled many top government posts with close relatives. \nIn October 1973, the Arab oil embargo precipitated a sharp rise in global crude prices, which quadrupled over the course of the six-month restriction, creating what became known as the first oil shock. The surge in revenue brought significant economic changes to oil-exporting states, including Qatar. A second oil crisis followed in 1979, again driving up prices and leading to fuel shortages in consumer markets. Regional instability deepened with the outbreak of the Iran\u2013Iraq War in 1980. The conflict prompted most Persian Gulf states, including Qatar, to provide financial assistance to Iraq. In response to perceived security threats, particularly from post-revolutionary Iran, the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) was established in 1981, bringing together Qatar and five other Arab states of the Persian Gulf in a collective framework for diplomatic coordination.\nIn 1991, Qatar played a significant role in the Gulf War, particularly during the Battle of Khafji, in which Qatari tanks rolled through the streets of the town and provided fire support for Saudi Arabian National Guard units which were engaging Iraqi Army troops. Qatar allowed coalition troops from Canada to use the country as an airbase to launch aircraft on CAP duty and also permitted air forces from the United States and France to operate in its territories.\nIn 1993, Khalifa bin Hamad remained the emir, but his son, Hamad bin Khalifa, the heir apparent and minister of defense, had taken over much of the day-to-day running of the country. The two consulted with each other on all matters of importance. On 27 June 1995, Hamad bin Khalifa deposed his father in a bloodless coup. An unsuccessful counter-coup was staged in 1996, and is believed by Qatari officials to have been supported by the leadership of Qatar's traditional allies, the UAE and Saudi Arabia. The Emir announced his intention for Qatar to move toward democracy and permitted more liberal press, establishing media network Al Jazeera in 1996. He issued a decree specifying the electoral process of the Central Municipal Council (CMC) in 1998, and in 1999 the first CMC elections were held. A new constitution was approved via public referendum in April 2003 and enacted in June 2005. Economic, social, and democratic reforms occurred in the following years. In 2003, a woman was appointed to the cabinet as minister of education.\nQatar and Bahrain had disputes over the ownership of Hawar Islands since the mid-20th century. In 2001, the International Court of Justice awarded Bahrain sovereignty over Hawar Islands while allotting Qatar sovereignty over smaller disputed islands and the Zubarah region in mainland Qatar. During the trial, Qatar provided the court with 82 forged documents to substantiate their claims of sovereignty over the territories in question. These claims were withdrawn at a later stage after Bahrain discovered the forgeries.\nIn 2003, Qatar served as the US Central Command headquarters and one of the main launching sites of the invasion of Iraq. In March 2005, a suicide bombing killed a British teacher at the Doha Players Theatre, shocking the country, which had not previously experienced acts of terrorism. The bombing was carried out by Omar Ahmed Abdullah Ali, an Egyptian resident in Qatar who had suspected ties to Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. In June 2013, Sheikh Hamad Bin Khalifa stepped down as emir and transferred leadership to his son and heir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani.\nAs a means to manage the revenue gained from LNG sales, the Qatar Investment Authority was established in 2005. In 2008, the government launched Qatar National Vision 2030, which provides a framework for Qatar's long-term development as well as identifying threats and solutions.\nArab Spring and military involvement (2010\u2013).\nQatar played a role in the revolutionary wave of demonstrations, protests, and civil wars in the Arab world collectively known as the Arab Spring. Having shifted from its traditional diplomatic role as a mediator, Qatar moved to support several transitional states and upheavals in the Middle East and North Africa.\nDuring the initial months of the Arab Spring, the country's most extensive media network, Al Jazeera, helped mobilize Arab support and shaped the narratives of protests and demonstrations. Qatar sent hundreds of ground troops to support the National Transitional Council during the 2011 Libyan civil war. The troops were primarily military advisers, and were sometimes labelled as \"mercenaries\" by the media. Qatar also participated in the aerial campaign alongside several other coalition members.\nQatar has taken a proactive role in the Syrian civil war, which began in the Spring of 2011. In 2012, Qatar announced they would begin arming and bankrolling the opposition. It was further reported that Qatar had funded the Syrian rebellion by \"as much as $3 billion\" over the first two years of the civil war.\nBeginning in 2015, Qatar has participated in the Saudi-led intervention in the Yemeni civil war against the Houthis and forces loyal to former President Ali Abdullah Saleh, who was deposed in the aftermath of the Arab Spring uprisings.\nDiplomatic crises (2014\u20132021).\nIn March 2014, in protest of Qatar's alleged involvement in financing factions and political parties in ongoing Middle Eastern conflicts, Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Bahrain recalled their ambassadors to Qatar. The three countries returned their ambassadors in November of that year after an agreement was reached.\nOn 5 June 2017, several countries led by Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Bahrain and Egypt (collectively referred to as the 'Quartet') severed ties with Qatar and enacted several punitive measures, such as closing air, land and sea borders to Qatar. Saudi Arabia also halted Qatari involvement in the ongoing war in Yemen. The Quartet justified their actions by alluding to alleged Qatari ties to 'terrorist groups' in the region. On 5 January 2021, almost four years after the beginning of the incident, it was announced that the two parties reached an agreement in a deal brokered by Kuwait and the United States.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25188", "revid": "1318206001", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25188", "title": "Geography of Qatar", "text": " \nQatar is a peninsula in the east of Arabia, bordering the Persian Gulf and Saudi Arabia in a strategic location near major petroleum and natural gas deposits. The State of Qatar occupies on a peninsula that extends about north into the Persian Gulf from the Arabian Peninsula.\nVarying in width between , the land is mainly flat (the highest point is ) and rocky. Notable features include coastal salt pans, elevated limestone formations (the Dukhan anticline) along the west coast under which lies the Dukhan oil field, and massive sand dunes surrounding Khor Al Adaid, an inlet of the Persian Gulf in the southeast known to local English speakers as the Inland Sea.\nArea and boundaries.\nQatar has one land border. The country borders Saudi Arabia to the south. The boundary with Saudi Arabia was settled in 1965 but never demarcated. This terrestrial sector extends from the head of the Gulf of Salwah at Abu Samra to Khor Al Adaid, spanning a linear distance of approximately .\nQatar presents as a peninsula encompassed by the tepid waters of the Persian Gulf on its eastern and northern flanks. The western margin is delineated by the Gulf of Salwah, a concave formation which effectively severs Qatar's terrestrial connection with the Al-Ahsa coast and Bahrain.\nQatar's northwest coast is fewer than from the main islands of Bahrain, while the small Hawar Islands of Bahrain are only off the coast. The largest islet of the Hawar Islands is located off Qatari mainland. The peninsula's northernmost point is Ras Rakan.\nMaritime claims.\nQatar's maritime boundaries include a contiguous zone of , an exclusive economic zone of as determined by bilateral agreements, and of territorial sea. Maritime boundaries were ratified in April 1992 with Decree No. 40. The exclusive economic zone was declared in 1974.\nSituated on the western shore of the Persian Gulf, the Qatari promontory extends longitudinally into the waters, affording it a strategic position for the interception of rain-bearing winds and the regulation of maritime currents in the south-western basin of the Persian Gulf. The extended coastline facilitates the exploitation of pearl banks and piscatorial resources while also providing access to subaqueous petroleum deposits. Aside from hosting large numbers of pearl beds yielding high quality pearls, Qatari waters also host 48% of the coral reefs in the Persian Gulf.\nThe Qatari coast is further distinguished by its manifold indentations, comprising both convex protrusions of land into the sea, such as Ras Laffan, and concave incursions of water into the terrestrial mass. Moreover, the littoral serves as a natural harbour and transit point for numerous vessels plying the waters of the Persian Gulf.\nIslands.\nOf the islands belonging to Qatar, Halul is the most important. Lying about east of Doha, it serves as a storage area and loading terminal for oil from the surrounding offshore fields. Hawar and the adjacent islands immediately off the west coast are the subject of a territorial dispute between Qatar and Bahrain.\nClimate.\nThe long summer (June through September) is characterized by intense heat and alternating dryness and humidity, with temperatures exceeding . Temperatures are moderate from November to March, ranging from as high as in April to as low as in January. Rainfall averages per year, confined to the winter months, and falling in brief storms which are occasionally heavy enough to flood the small ravines and the usually dry wadis.\nSudden, violent dust storms occasionally descend on the peninsula, blotting out the sun, causing wind damage, and temporarily disrupting transport and other services.\nThe scarcity of rainfall and the limited underground water, most of which has such a high mineral content that it is unsuitable for drinking or irrigation, severely restricted the population and the extent of agricultural and industrial development the country could support until desalination projects began. Although water continues to be provided from underground sources, most is obtained by desalination of seawater.\nTopography and natural regions.\nThe peninsula of Qatar is low-lying. Its shape is the surface expression of the anticlinal Qatar Arch, formed during the Precambrian Amar Collision about https:// 620. It is enveloped by loose sand and pebbles broken off the outcropping limestone. Smooth plains covered by fine-grained dust are found in the east, while the south and south-west portions of the peninsula mainly comprise sand dunes and salt flats (locally known as sabkhas), particularly near Mesaieed and Khor Al Adaid. Sakbahs can also be found in western Qatar, near Dukhan and Sawda Natheel. Hill ranges (jebels) can be found in western Qatar near Dukhan and at Jebel Fuwayrit on the northeast coast. For purposes of categorization, the country is divided into five principal regions: coastal plain, interior plain, central belt, Dukhan region, and southern desert.\nCoastal plain.\nThe littoral of Qatar, extending some from Abu Samra to Khor Al Adaid via Ar Ru'ays, is emergent and characterized by recent geological formations. The western coast from Abu Samra to Ras Dukhan is relatively straight, while northward to Ar Ru'ays is indented with circular and oblong water incursions. The eastern coast is broader, with elevations increasing eastward from Dohah Al Husain. Many flat, low-lying offshore islands are located near the coast and are accompanied by coral reefs. As a result of salt water coming into contact with the low-lying land, many salt flats (known locally as sabkhas) have formed near the coast.\nInterior plain.\nCommencing at the inland margins of the coastal strip, this region is demarcated in the north by the Al Mafjar-Abu Dhalouf line. It broadens considerably southward, with its northern sector spanning between Al-\u02bdAdhbah and Ar Rakiyat, while its southern base between Umm Al Qahab and Al Suwaihliya measures . The surface is studded with eleven closed basins. The northern sector is relatively flat, while the central sector, between Fuwayrit and Rawdat Al Faras, exhibits more complex topography with elevations ranging from to .\nCentral belt.\nThis zone aligns with Qatar's primary north-south oriented dome. It is distinguished by its topographical diversity, with elevations ranging from to above sea level. The surface is uneven, with circular or rectangular hills along the western borders reaching heights of to . Fourteen closed basins are scattered throughout, smaller in the east within the Rus Formation and larger in the west within the Dammam Formation. The highest points are found in the hills southeast of Al Jemailiya and to the west of the Al Jemailiya-Ash-Shahaniyah road.\nDukhan region.\nOccupying the greater part of Qatar's western flank, this area extends from Ras Abrouq in the north to An Nakhsh in the south. It is characterized by complex structural units, with elevations reaching at Khashm An-Nakhsh and depressions as low as below sea level in the Dukhan Sabkha. This sabkha, the largest inland salt flat in the Persian Gulf, runs for approximately , occupies an area of , and accommodates the lowest point of Qatar at below sea level. Jebel Nakhsh, a notable mountain ridge south of Dukhan, contains substantial deposits of gypsum.\nSouthern desert.\nThis region occupies 34.7% of Qatar's total area, south of Doha's latitude. It bears topographical similitude to the desert areas of Abu Dhabi, Saudi Arabia, and Bahrain, with undulating sand dunes interspersed with rocky hamada surfaces. It is divided into four sub-regions:\nLandforms.\nSabkhas.\nThe peninsula is notable for its sabkhas, or salt flats, of which the two distinct varieties are coastal and inland. The coastal sabkhas, more prevalent on the eastern seaboard, encompass an area of approximately . These coastal formations rarely exceed an elevation of to metres above sea level, with some portions lying below the waterline. Consequently, during exceptionally high tides, often exacerbated by strong easterly winds, seawater may inundate these low-lying areas.\nInland sabkhas, while less common, are of significant geological interest. A prominent example, Dukhan Sabkha, lies 3 kilometres east of Jebel Dukhan and south of the Bay of Zekreet. This depression, covering , is largely situated below sea level and contains the lowest point in Qatar at below the sea's surface. It stretches 24 kilometres from north to south and from east to west. A second notable inland sabkha complex straddles the borders of Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. This formation comprises three discrete areas: Sawda Natheel to the south, Jawa Salama to the west, and Al Khufus to the east. These sabkhas, mostly subsea in elevation, collectively span an area of .\nDepressions.\nThe surface of the Qatar Peninsula is punctuated by numerous small depressions, referred to as \"rawda\" or the plural \"riyadh\". These formations present as enclosed basins, save for those in the south-central region which may be open on one or more sides. The morphology of these depressions is diverse, ranging from circular to elongated forms, with some exhibiting irregular platforms. The scale of these depressions also varies widely. The most extensive, such as the Almajdah Depression, stretch for several kilometres, while the smallest span mere tens of metres. Their formation is primarily attributed to the dissolution of surface limestone by rainwater runoff, a process that has been active across much of the peninsula.\nValleys.\nDry valleys, known as wadis, are featured most prominently in Qatar's northern region and the vicinity of Jebel Dukhan. They are characterised by their internal drainage systems, which terminate in shallow depressions rarely exceeding 2 to 3 metres in depth. While they may extend for several kilometres in length, they maintain a remarkably narrow profile, with a width invariably less than 100 metres.\nHills.\nThe peninsula features several low hills scattered throughout its western and southern regions. Notable among these is Jebel Dukhan, a series of convex hillocks extending north-south along the west coast. The peninsula's terrain also features distinctive flat-topped hills, formed by horizontal strata capped with relatively hard rock. These formations exhibit steep, often concave or stepped slopes, shaped by varying degrees of rock resistance.\nTopographical features range from small, conical hills\u2014where the resistant rock cap has eroded\u2014to more extensive mesa-like formations. Elevation varies considerably; in the Zekreet Peninsula and near Al Khor, the hills are to above sea level. The southern hills are much taller, with Qatar's highest point, Qurayn Abu al Bawl (also known as Tuwayyir Al Hamir) being over above sea level.\nWildlife.\nFlora.\nAlthough most of the country consists of sand deserts, a small part of the country houses different vegetation zones, where trees, reeds and shrubs like tamarind, phragmites, and mace can grow. These regions are mostly to the east, near the coast. The inherent limiting factor for vegetation growth is water availability. Certain geographical features partially alleviate this water scarcity, such as rawdas, which are large depressions found on the soil surface and which help recharge the aquifers. As these sites constitute the most easily obtainable sources of shallow groundwater, they are also among the areas most abundant in wild vegetation.\nIn the south, where groundwater is exceedingly scarce, vegetation can found growing in wadis (dry river valleys) fed by run-off from nearby hills and in rawdas. Sabkhas are another habitat known to contain various plant species. Vegetation in sabkhas is closely tied to soil salinity and moisture availability. Inland sabkhas are typically sparsely vegetated due to extreme salinity and aridity. Species that persist under these conditions include \"Zygophyllum qatarense\", \"Anabasis setifera\", which occurs along sabkha margins, and the halophytic grass Aeluropus lagopoides. By contrast, coastal sabkhas situated beyond mangrove zones are more frequently vegetated, often supporting dense stands of salt-tolerant flora. Typical genera include Arthrocnemum, Halocnemum, Halopeplis, and Limonium. Halopeplis and Limonium are commonly found on slightly raised, drier saline land, whereas Arthrocnemum and Halocnemum are more abundant in low-lying, moisture-retaining areas.\nFauna.\nThere are 21 species of mammals that have been recorded in Qatar. Larger terrestrial mammals such as the Arabian oryx and Arabian gazelle are protected animals and are held in nature reserves. The Arabian gazelle is the only native gazelle species to Qatar and is locally referred to as 'rheem'. \nQatar's territorial waters in the Persian Gulf are rich in marine life. Sea turtles nest en masse on the coastline from Fuwayrit to Ras Laffan. The Ministry of Environment (MME) carries out routine patrols of nesting areas to ensure their conservation. Dugongs are known to congregate off the country's coasts. In the course of a study being carried out in 1986 and 1999 on the Persian Gulf, the largest-ever group sightings were made of more than 600 individuals to the west of Qatar.\nGeology and mineral deposits.\nMost of Qatar's surface lies on Cenozoic strata. These strata have an abundance of mineral resources, most of which have not yet been exploited, such as limestone and clay. The Upper Dammam Formation in the Middle Eocene period is the most predominant surface layer. It is constituted by limestone and Dolomite. The northern zone of Qatar, which comprises the most significant source of fresh groundwater in the peninsula, primarily draws its water from the Umm Err Radhuma Formation and Rus Formation dating to the Paleocene and Lower Eocene periods, respectively. The Mesozoic strata are the most important layers as they contain petroleum. The first substantial deposit of crude oil was discovered in 1940 in the Jurassic period Arab Formation.\nResources and land use.\nBased on 2011 estimates, 5.6% of the land is agricultural. Arable land comprises 1.1%, permanent crops 0.2% and permanent pasture 4.6%.[] 94.4% of the land was used for other uses. In 2003, of land was irrigated.\nSevere conditions, such as extremely high temperatures and lack of water and fertile soil, hinder increased agricultural production. Orthents, the predominant soil type in the peninsula, accounting for approximately 1,020,000 ha, are unfavorable for crop cultivation because of their extreme shallowness. The limited groundwater that permits agriculture in some areas is being depleted so rapidly that saltwater is encroaching and making the soil inhospitable to all but the most salt-resistant crops.\nPolitical and human geography.\nThe capital, Doha, is located on the central east coast on a sweeping (if shallow) harbor. Other ports include Umm Said, Al Khawr, and Al Wakrah. Only Doha and Umm Said are capable of handling commercial shipping, although a large port and a terminal for loading natural gas are planned at Ras Laffan Industrial City, north of Al Khawr. Coral reefs and shallow coastal waters make navigation difficult in areas where channels have not been dredged.\nDoha is the capital of the country and the major administrative, commercial, and population center. In 1993 it was linked to other towns and development sites by a system of about of paved roads. Doha's international airport has an approximately main runway, capable of receiving all kinds of aircraft.\nHistorically, settlement distribution in Qatar has mainly been dictated by the presence of obtainable fresh groundwater. Rawdas, which are depressions with shallow groundwater, have typically been the most popular sites of settlement throughout the peninsula. In Qatar's south, where groundwater is exceedingly difficult to obtain, settlement formation was mostly limited to wadis (dry river valleys) fed by run-off from nearby hills and rawdas.\nEnvironmental agreements.\nQatar is currently party to the following international environmental agreements:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25189", "revid": "50455822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25189", "title": "Demographics of Qatar", "text": "Statistical data relating to the population of Qatar\nNatives of the Arabian Peninsula, many Qataris () are descended from a number of migratory Arab tribes that came to Qatar in the 18th century from mainly the neighboring areas of Nejd and Al-Hasa. Some are descended from Omani tribes. Qatar has about 2.6 million inhabitants as of early 2017, the vast majority of whom (about 92%) live in Doha, the capital. Foreign workers amount to around 88% of the population, the largest of which comprise South Asians, with those from India alone estimated to be around 700,000. Egyptians and Filipinos are the largest non-South Asian migrant group in Qatar. The treatment of these foreign workers has been heavily criticized with conditions suggested to be modern slavery. However the International Labour Organization published report in November 2022 that contained multiple reforms by Qatar for its migrant workers. The reforms included the establishment of the minimum wage, wage protection regulations, improved access for workers to justice, etc. It included data from last 4 years of progress in workers conditions of Qatar. The report also revealed that the freedom to change jobs was initiated, implementation of Occupational safety and health &amp; labor inspection, and also the required effort from the nation's side.\nIslam is the official religion, and Islamic jurisprudence is the basis of Qatar's legal system. A significant minority religion is Hindu due to the large number of Qatar's migrant workers coming from India.\nArabic is the official language and English is the lingua franca of business. Hindi-Urdu and Malayalam are among the most widely spoken languages by the foreign workers. Education in Qatar is compulsory and free for all citizens 6\u201316 years old. The country has an increasingly high literacy rate.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nForeigners.\nForeigners constitute 85% to 90% of Qatar's population of 2.7 million, with migrant workers making up approximately 95% of the workforce. South Asia and the Philippines are the primary regions which migrants come from. Societal divisions exist depending on the origin of the foreigner, with Europeans, North Americans, and Arabs typically securing better job opportunities and social privileges than sub-Saharan Africans and South Asians. Socialization between foreigners and Qataris faces limitations due to language barriers and different religious and cultural customs.\nThe human rights of migrant workers is limited by the country's Kafala system, which stipulates their requirement of a Qatari sponsor and regulates their entry and exit. Prospective migrant workers from origin countries sometimes face exorbitant recruitment fees, surpassing government-set limits, paid to licensed and unlicensed recruitment entities. These charges, ranging from $600 to $5,000, often force workers into debt and compel them to sell family assets. Government-to-government agreements have emerged in recent years to mitigate opaque recruitment practices and worker exploitation. Many companies in Qatar skirt local laws, resulting in workers facing delayed or non-payment of wages. While some employers deposit wages into bank accounts, most workers are paid in cash without detailed pay slips, hindering evidence of payment and complicating remittances. Additionally, the confiscation of passports by employers is a common practice in Qatar which limits the workers' freedom of movement and exposes them to potential exploitation.\nBy nationality.\nA 2011\u20132014 report by the International Organization for Migration recorded 176,748 Nepali Citizens living in Qatar as migrant workers. In 2012 about 7,000 Turkish nationals lived in Qatar and in 2016 about 1,000 Colombian nationals and descendants lived in Qatar. No official numbers are published of the foreign population broken down by nationality, however a firm provided estimates as of 2019:\nUpdated from countries' embassies:\nVital Statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nPopulation by sex and age group.\n(01.VII.2019):\nQatari people.\nNative Qataris can be divided into three ethnic groups: Bedouin Arabs, \"hadar\", and Afro-Arabs. Some hadar are of Bedouin descent, but most are descended from Iranian, Pakistani and Afghan migrants. They are sometimes called \"Irani-Qataris\". The Afro-Arabs are often referred to as \"abd\", literally meaning \"slaves\". They are mostly the descendants of enslaved people brought from east Africa. Qatari citizens comprise 11.6% of the country's population.\nCitizenship.\nTwo distinctions exist between Qatari citizens: those whose families migrated to Qatar before 1930, commonly referred to as \"native\" Qataris, and \"naturalized\", those whose families arrived after. Previously, the 1961 citizenship law defined Qatari citizens as only those families who have been in the country since the 1930s, though this was repealed in the 2005 citizenship law. In 2021, a law was signed by Emir Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani restricting the rights to vote in local elections to native citizens, leading to minor demonstrations and public disapproval. This led Al Thani to later announce that he would amend the law to allow all citizens to vote in future elections. \nChildren of Qatari mothers and foreign fathers are not granted Qatari citizenship; however, as of 2018, they are granted permanent residency status, which entitles them to similar state benefits as Qatari citizens. Nonetheless, the government limits the number of permanency residency visas it issues each year. The 2005 citizenship law allows for revocation of citizenship without appeal, which has been used on a number of families with dual citizenship.\nEthnic groups.\nQatar's population has been historically diverse due to its role as a trading center, a refuge for nomadic tribes, and a hub for the pearling industry. Ethnic groups and the differences among them are considered sensitive topics in Qatari society and are rarely discussed in official contexts.\nBedouins, though constituting approximately 10 percent of the population, hold an outsized role in local culture. Many Qataris descend from tribes that migrated from Najd and Al-Hasa in the 18th century. Commonly called the \"bedu\", they maintain ties, homes, and even passports in Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states. In the early 20th century, bedu migrated from the Arabian interior, with some traveling intermittently between Qatar and Bahrain. During the mid-20th century economic boom, many found work in the oil industry, police, army, and security services. The government settled Bedu families in the 1960s, discouraging the nomadic lifestyle. Today, many live in urban areas but return to the desert to stay connected to their roots. Many Bedu see themselves as noble and \"pure\" Arabs, often looking down on the settled population (hadar) as influenced by urban and Persian elements. Intermarriage between these groups is rare.\nThe \"hadar\", a diverse group of settled Qatari citizens, includes Baharna, Huwala, Ajam (Iranians), and Afro-Arabs. Baharna Arabs, a group native to Qatar and often practicing Shia Muslims, sometimes face discrimination from the Sunni majority. Huwala Arabs, who are Sunni Muslims, migrated through the Persian Gulf to Persia and back to Qatar. Historically wealthier and better educated due to trade and pearling, their advantage has diminished as education became more accessible. The Ajam, ethnic Shia Persians, were active in boat building and still speak Persian. Qatar's Afro-Arab population descends from slaves brought from East Africa for the pearling industry. While some Arabs may view this group as \"less\" Qatari, most consider them full citizens. Despite occasional tensions, these groups are well integrated into Qatari society. Intermarriage is increasing, and Persian and African influences are evident in local culture.\nGenetic studies.\nA 2023 study focusing on the Y-chromosome, which is passed down paternally, analyzed DNA samples from 379 unrelated Qatari men to investigate their genetic heritage and connections to other populations in the Arabian Peninsula, the Middle East, and Africa. This research utilized 23 Y-STR markers, highly variable segments of DNA, to create genetic profiles and assess diversity within the Qatari male population.\nThe study revealed a high level of genetic diversity within the Qatari male population, with the marker DYS458 showing the most variation. Analysis of these genetic markers allowed for the prediction of Y-chromosome haplogroups, which are branches on the human Y-chromosome phylogenetic tree. The most prevalent haplogroup found in the Qatari sample was J1, accounting for approximately 49% of the individuals tested. This haplogroup is known to be common in the Arabian Peninsula and is associated with populations of Semitic origin, particularly Arabic speakers. The prominence of J1 in Qatar, forming a \"star-like expansion cluster\" in genetic networks, suggests a significant ancestral component linked to the broader Arabian region and potentially a more recent population expansion. Other haplogroups found in notable frequencies included J2, R1a, E1b1b, E1b1a, T, and L.\nTo understand Qatar's genetic placement within the region, the study compared Qatari Y-STR data with that of 38 other Middle Eastern populations. This analysis revealed that Qataris are genetically closest to Iraqi Arabs, followed by Saudi Arabian populations. Conversely, they showed the greatest genetic distance from groups like Kurdish Iraqis, Turkish populations from Dogukoy, and Palestinian Christian Arabs. These relationships were visualized using multidimensional scaling (MDS) plots, which graphically represent genetic distances between populations. The MDS analysis placed Qatar within a cluster of populations from the upper Arabian Peninsula, including Iraq, Jordan, and Palestine, suggesting shared genetic affinities within this broad geographical area. Further analysis using phylogenetic trees and population structure analysis (STRUCTURE) corroborated these findings, consistently grouping Qatar with Iraqi Arabs and highlighting its distinctiveness from other Arabian Peninsula populations in some analyses, while also showing broader connections within the Middle East.\nThe study also investigated gene flow, or migration patterns, using Bayesian statistical methods. The analysis suggested that the primary migration route influencing the Qatari population was from Yemen to Kuwait, passing through Qatar. This finding aligns with a model of coastal migration within the Arabian Peninsula. While there was evidence of bidirectional migration between Qatar and neighboring countries like Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq, and the UAE, the strongest signal pointed towards this Yemen-Kuwait axis. This genetic evidence supports historical understandings of tribal movements and trade routes along the Arabian Gulf coast.\nReligions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nQatar is an Islamic state with multi-religious minorities like most of the Persian Gulf countries with waves of migration over the last 30 years. The official state religion is Sunni Islam. The community is made up of Sunni and Shi'a Muslims, Christians, Hindus, and small groups of Buddhists and Baha'is. Muslims form 65.5% of the Qatari population, followed by Christians at 15.4%, Hindus at 14.2%, Buddhists at 3.3% and the rest 1.9% of the population follow other religions or are unaffiliated. Qatar is also home to numerous other religions mostly from the Middle East and Asia.\nLanguages.\nArabic.\nArabic is the official language of Qatar according to Article 1 of the Constitution. Arabic in Qatar not only serves as a symbol of national identity but is also the medium of official communication, legislation, and education. The government has instituted policies to reinforce the use of Arabic, including the Arabic Language Protection Law enacted in 2019, which mandates the use of Arabic in governmental and public functions and penalizes non-compliance. Arabic speakers constitute a minority of the 2.8 million population, at around 11%.\nQatari Arabic, a dialect of Gulf Arabic, is the primary dialect spoken. As the prestige dialect within the nation, Qatari Arabic not only functions in everyday communication but also plays a significant role in maintaining cultural identity and social cohesion among the Qatari people. The vocabulary of Qatari Arabic incorporates a plethora of loanwords from Aramaic, Persian, Turkish, and more recently, English. Phonetically, it conserves many classical Arabic features such as emphatic consonants and interdental sounds, which distinguish it from other Arabic dialects that have simplified these elements. Syntactically, Qatari Arabic exhibits structures that align with other Gulf dialects but with unique adaptations, such as specific verb forms and negation patterns.\nIn Qatari Arabic, like many Arabic dialects, there is a significant phonological distinction between long and short vowels. This distinction is crucial for both pronunciation and meaning. Long vowels in Qatari Arabic are generally held for approximately twice the duration of their short counterparts. This length distinction can affect the meaning of words, making vowel length phonemically significant. Qatari Arabic typically includes five long vowels: , , , , and . These long vowels are integral to maintaining the clarity and meaning of words. Short vowels in Qatari Arabic are , , and . These vowels are shorter in duration and can be less emphasized in casual speech. In some dialectical variations, short vowels may even be dropped entirely in certain environments, a process known as vowel reduction. This feature is common in rapid, informal speech and can lead to significant variations in pronunciation from the standard forms of the language. The distinction between long and short vowels in Qatari Arabic not only affects pronunciation but also plays a role in the grammatical structure of words, influencing verb conjugations, noun cases, and the definiteness of nouns through the use of the definite article /al-/.\nAs English is considered the prestige lingua franca in Qatar, bilingual locals have incorporated elements of English into Qatari Arabic when communicating on an informal level. This mixture of English terms and phrases in Qatari Arabic speech is colloquially known as \"Qatarese\". The practice of interchanging English and Arabic words is known as code-switching and is mostly seen in urban areas and among the younger generation.\nAs a result of mass migration, a South Asian pidgin form of Qatari Arabic has emerged in modern times.\nEnglish.\nEnglish is the de facto second language of Qatar, and is very commonly used in business. Because of Qatar's varied ethnic landscape, English has been recognized as the most convenient medium for people of different backgrounds to communicate with each other. The history of English use in the country dates back to the mid-19th and early 20th centuries when the British Empire would frequently draft treaties and agreements with the emirates of the Persian Gulf. One such treaty was the 1916 protectorate treaty signed between Abdullah bin Jassim Al Thani and the British representative Percy Cox, under which Qatar would be placed under British administration in exchange for protection. Another agreement drafted in English came in 1932 and was signed between the Qatari government and the Anglo-Persian Oil Company. These agreements were mainly facilitated by foreign interpreters due to neither party possessing the required language skills for such complex arrangements. For instance, a translator and native Arabic speaker named A. A. Hilmy interpreted the 1932 agreement for Qatar.\nFrench.\nDespite Qatar's population comprising only 1% French speakers, the country was admitted to the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie as an associate member in 2012. It was not required to join as an observer state prior to its full admittance.\nOther languages.\nQatar's linguistic diversity is significantly shaped by its large expatriate population from South Asia and the Philippines. The most common Asian languages among migrants are Hindi, Urdu, Tagalog, Bengali, Tamil, Telugu and Malayalam. Hindi and Malayalam are particularly prevalent, with large communities of speakers from India. For example, Malayalam is spoken by a significant portion of the Indian community originating from the southern state of Kerala, who make up the majority of the country's Indian diaspora. Similarly, the widespread presence of languages such as Bengali, Tamil, and Urdu is attributed to a large portion of expatriates from Bangladesh, Pakistan, and other parts of India.\nIn 2015, there were more newspapers printed by the government in Malayalam than in Arabic or English.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic in Qatar, the importance of these languages was particularly recognized in public health communications. The Qatari government utilized Asian languages extensively in its awareness campaigns to ensure that critical health information reached all population segments, including those who might not speak Arabic or English proficiently. This multilingual approach involved disseminating information through various channels such as radio, printed pamphlets, and digital media.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25190", "revid": "36873810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25190", "title": "Politics of Qatar", "text": "The political system of Qatar runs under an authoritarian semi-constitutional monarchy with the emir as head of state and chief executive, and the prime minister as the head of government. Under the Constitution of Qatar, the Consultative Assembly, which is appointed by the emir, has a limited ability to reject legislation and dismiss ministers. The first and last election for the Assembly was held in 2021; though the emir still appointed one third of its members, political parties were banned and all candidates had to run as independents. In 2024 future elections were abolished.\nThe current hereditary emir of Qatar, Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, runs the country in an autocratic manner and holds nearly all executive and legislative authority, as well as controlling the judiciary. He appoints the prime minister and cabinet. Political rights are severely limited in Qatar as per Freedom House.\nLegal system.\nAccording to Qatar's constitution, Sharia is a main source of Qatari legislation. Sharia is believed to constitute a divine revelation conveyed by God to the Prophet Muhammad, the eminent figure in the establishment of Islam, in 570 AD. Consequently, Sharia embodies a religious framework characterized by its origins and regulations. This legal system, seemingly unidirectional, emanates from God to the individual. The Islamic Sharia is regarded as the primary foundation, necessitating the formulation of legislative and judicial frameworks grounded in Islamic legal principles to govern transactions within Qatari law. Sharia is applied to laws pertaining to family law, inheritance, and several criminal acts (including adultery, robbery and murder). In some cases in Sharia-based family courts, a female's testimony is worth half a man's and in some cases a female witness is not accepted at all. Codified family law was introduced in 2006. In practice, Qatar's legal system is a mixture of civil law and Islamic law.\nNo stonings have ever been carried out in Qatar and it has been repealed as a legal sentence. Apostasy is a crime punishable by the death penalty in Qatar. Blasphemy is punishable by up to seven years in prison and proselytizing can be punished by up to 10 years in prison. Homosexuality is a crime punishable by the death penalty for Muslims.\nIn 2014, Qatar launched a modesty campaign to remind tourists of the modest dress code. Female tourists are advised not to wear leggings, miniskirts, sleeveless dresses and short or tight clothing in public. Men are advised against wearing only shorts and singlets.\nCommercial relationships are governed by Qatar's Civil Code.\nQatar's government has been criticized for arresting and threatening anyone who dares to speak out. A report published by the Euro-Med Human Rights Monitor on 13 September 2020 noted that Article 47 in the Constitution of Qatar stipulates that freedom of expression is guaranteed in accordance with the conditions and circumstances set forth in law, but stated that Qatari authorities \"continue to implement some laws and policies, despite violating the Qatari constitution and its international human rights obligations\", and called on them to \"accelerate reforms enabling individuals to peacefully exercise their right of expression and opinion as they wish and the right to freedom of publication, assembly, and association\".\nAlcohol.\nAlcohol consumption is partially legal in Qatar, some five-star luxury hotels are allowed to sell alcohol to their non-Muslim customers. Muslims are not allowed to consume alcohol in Qatar and Muslims caught consuming alcohol are liable to flogging or deportation. Non-Muslim expatriates can obtain a permit to purchase alcohol for personal consumption. The Qatar Distribution Company (a subsidiary of Qatar Airways) is permitted to import alcohol and pork; it operates the one and only liquor store in the country, which also sells pork to holders of liquor licences. Qatari officials had also indicated a willingness to allow alcohol in \"fan zones\" at the 2022 FIFA World Cup.\nUntil recently, restaurants on The Pearl Island (a human-made island near Doha) were allowed to serve alcoholic drinks. In December 2011, however, restaurants on The Pearl were told to stop selling alcohol. No explanation was given for the ban. Speculation about the reason includes the government's desire to project a more pious image in advance of the country's first election of a royal advisory body and rumours of a financial dispute between the government and the resort's developers. Despite the economic consequences of the ban, many believe that it has been a necessary measure in order to ensure the safety and enjoyment of fans at the World Cup. Qatar's World Cup chief executive of the Supreme Committee for Delivery and Legacy, Nasser Al Khater, stated that the purpose of the designated sobering-up areas was to ensure the fans' safety.\nWorkers.\nOn 16 January 2020 Qatar announced that most migrant workers who previously required an exit permit to leave Qatar would no longer require one.\nCases of ill-treatment of immigrant labour have been observed. The Nepalese ambassador to Qatar, Maya Kumari Sharma, described the emirate as an \"open jail\".\nQatar does not have national occupational health standards or guidelines, and workplace injuries are the third highest cause of accidental deaths. In May 2012, Qatari officials declared their intention to allow the establishment of an independent trade union. Qatar also announced it will scrap its sponsor system for foreign labour, which requires that all foreign workers be sponsored by local employers, who in some cases hold workers' passports and can deny them permission to change jobs.\nIn August 2022, 60 migrant workers were arrested and deported for protesting against the non-payment by their employer, Al Bandary International Group, a major construction and hospitality firm. Some of the demonstrators were from Nepal, Bangladesh, India, Egypt and the Philippines had not been paid for seven months. According to a report published by France 24, those protesters were detained for breaching public security laws and minority of protesters were deported by the order of court who failed to remain peaceful and breached Qatar's public security law. Qatar's labour ministry said it will pay Al Bandary workers and will take further action against the company which was already under investigation for failing to pay wages.\nExecutive branch.\nQatar is ruled by the House of Thani as a semi-constitutional hereditary monarchy. The head of state and chief executive is the emir. There is a prime minister (who serves as the head of government) and a cabinet appointed by the emir. Under the Constitution, the partially-elected Consultative Assembly can block legislation with a simple majority vote, and can dismiss ministers with a two-thirds vote. Two-thirds of the members are popularly elected, and the remainder are appointed by the emir.\nPolitically, Qatar is evolving from a traditional society into a modern welfare state. Government departments have been established to meet the requirements of social and economic progress. The Basic Law of Qatar 1970 institutionalized local customs rooted in Qatar's conservative Islamic heritage, granting the Emir preeminent power. The Emir's role is influenced by continuing traditions of consultation, rule by consensus, and the citizen's right to appeal personally to the Emir. The Emir, while directly accountable to no one, cannot violate the Sharia (Islamic law) and, in practice, must consider the opinions of leading notables and the religious establishment. Their position was institutionalized in the Advisory Council, an appointed body that assists the Emir in formulating policy.\nIn February 1972, the heir apparent and Prime Minister, Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani, deposed his cousin, Emir Ahmad, and assumed power. This move was supported by the key members of Al Thani and took place without violence or signs of political unrest,\nOn 27 June 1995, the heir apparent, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, deposed his father, Emir Khalifa, in another bloodless coup. Emir Hamad and his father reconciled in 1996. Increased freedom of the press followed, and the Qatar-based Al Jazeera television channel (founded late 1996) is widely regarded as an example of an uncensored source of news in Arab countries. However, the network has been met with negative responses by the governments of many Arab states. However in May 2022, Al Jazeera network won the award for the best human rights journalism of the year in the eighth annual Amnesty Media Awards. The network was also claimed to be non-biased network by The Week (Washington DC media house) in November 2022.\nOn 25 June 2013, Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani became the Emir of Qatar after his father Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani handed over power in a televised speech.\nConsultative Assembly.\nThe Consultative Assembly (\"Majlis ash-Shura\") is a 45-member unelected legislature made up of 45 members, all appointed by the emir. Majlis ash-shura is the process of gathering community opinions, facilitated by knowledgeable individuals who provide their perspectives and ideas on significant questions, problems, or decisions associated with the social, economic, or political aspects of people's lives. Elections were repeatedly delayed after the 2003 constitutional referendum introduced this framework. In 2006, Deputy Prime Minister Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber Al Thani announced that elections would be held in 2007. However, only municipal elections were held. Due to voting laws, those who did not have family in the country pre-1930 were not allowed to vote. This excluded 75% of the population. The same was true of the first legislative election, which was eventually held in October 2021. In may 2024, the 2021 legislative election officially became the last one, with future elections being abolished.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nQatar held a constitutional referendum in 2003, which was overwhelmingly supported. The first municipal elections with men and women voters and candidates were held in 1999 Central Municipal Council. The first legislative election, for two thirds of the legislative council's 45 seats, were planned for 2016 after previously being postponed in 2013. In June 2016 they were effectively postponed to at least 2019. That election was eventually held in 2021, but in 2024 all future legislative elections were indefinitely abolished.\nSuffrage is currently limited to municipal elections, with the voting age set at 18. Expatriate residents, who make up around 90% of Qatar's population, are excluded from participation. The elected Municipal Council has no executive powers but may offer advice to the Minister.\nPolitical parties are banned by law. In 2024, Qatar held a constitutional referendum that introduced amendments to end elections for the Shura Council and allow naturalized citizens to be appointed as members and government ministers by removing the requirement of \"original\" nationality. The changes were presented as measures to promote national unity and stability while maintaining the Emir's authority over appointments. AP called it \"yet another rollback in the hereditarily ruled Gulf Arab states of halting steps to embrace representational rule\".\nAdministrative divisions.\nThere are 8 municipalities (\"baladiyat\" (plural), \"baladiyah\" (singular)) of Qatar; Ad Dawhah, Al Daayen, Al Khor, Al Wakrah, Al Rayyan, Al-Shahaniya, Al Shamal, and Umm Salal. Each municipality assumes administrative responsibilities over zones (cities and districts) within their boundaries.\nForeign relations.\nQatar's core foreign policy objective according to The Middle East Journal is \"state survival\" and the \"desire for international prestige\". Qatar became notable in international politics; and a key figure in the Arab affairs within two decades of its independent foreign policy. It has an \"open-door\" foreign policy where it maintain ties to all parties and regional players in the region, including with organizations such as Taliban and Hamas.\nIts position in the Middle East and close links with terrorist groups is seen as a great asset to western intelligence community and diplomatic relations. Qatar has also cultivated close foreign relationships with Western powers, particularly the United States and the United Kingdom. Al Udeid Air Base hosts American and British air forces.\nOn October 10, 2005, for the first time, Qatar was elected to a two-year term on the UN Security Council for 2006\u20132007.\nAccording to BBC, in April 2006 Qatar announced that it will give US$50 million (\u00a328 million) to the new Hamas-led Palestinian government.\nIn May 2006, Qatar pledged more than $100 million to Hurricane Katrina relief to colleges and universities in Louisiana affected by the hurricane. Some of this money was also distributed to families looking to repair damaged homes by Neighborhood Housing Services of New Orleans, Inc.\nThere were some allegations on Qatar for supporting rebels group in Syria and association with al- Nusra front also persisted in country's profile for a long time. However, the Public Policy and Democracy studies research think tank recognized the nation for its execution of current peace against conflicts strategies and policy upgrades. Other discoveries from the research claimed that Qatar supported the US against the Assad government. Additionally, the nation supported efforts to mediate a conflict-ending political transition in Syria. In March 2021, Qatar, Russia, and Turkey also started a different track of talks on the Syrian peace process.\nThe government and royal family of Qatar funds the Al Jazeera television network. The Emir of Qatar Sheikh Hamad bin Khalfia provided a loan of QAR 500 million (USD 137 million) to start the channel. The network has been accused of being biased and taking an active role in the affairs of other countries specifically during the Arab Spring in 2011. Numerous countries have complained about allegedly biased reporting in support of Qatar policy. On 11 January 2015, The Week published a report in which,Al jazeera network was revealed to be non biased and non terrorist network.\nMost of the developed countries (plus Brunei and Indonesia) are exempt from visa requirements. Citizens of exempted countries can also request a joint visa that allows them to travel to Oman as well.\nQatar is member of ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDB, IFAD, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WHO, WIPO, WMO, and WTO.\nQatar may suffer significant geopolitical losses if there is a global transition to renewable energy. It is ranked 152 out of 156 countries in the index of Geopolitical Gains and Losses after energy transition (GeGaLo).\nIn September, 2014. QFFD contributed in enhancing stability for Syrian refugees. Qatar Charity facilitated access to quality education through the rehabilitation of 6 Formal schools in Turkey, Gaziantep, Urfa, Kilis, targeting a total number of 13,540 beneficiaries and 12,860 girls and boys.\nOn July 10, 2017, according to documents obtained by Al Arabiya, Qatar agreed to quit supporting the Muslim Brotherhood. In order to avoid undermining relations with the Gulf, it also removed non-citizens from Qatar and refused to provide shelter to anyone from a GCC nation.\nQatar claims that \"since 2017, Qatar feels it has been the victim of a media attack orchestrated by Abu Dhabi, with false documents and fake news.\" The Qatari Government stated that they were being \"exclusively criticised and attacked\" by Belgian authorities and conveyed disappointment that the Belgian government \"made no effort to engage with our government to establish the facts\".\nIn January 2021 the United States, represented by the United States Department of Defense, awarded Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al Thani with the Department of Defense Medal for Distinguished Public Service, one of the highest honors bestowed by the US to officials. The then US National Security Adviser Robert C. O'Brien gave the medal to the Ambassador of Qatar to the US Sheikh Meshaal bin Hamad Al Thani, on behalf of Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al Thani.\nThis award was in recognition of his exemplary diplomatic efforts to strengthen relations between the State of Qatar and the United States, to support and advance peace efforts in Afghanistan (including the signing of the US\u2013Taliban peace deal on February 29, 2020, as well as the launch of the Afghan peace process on September 12, 2020), to promote stability and prosperity in the Middle East North Africa region, and to resolve the Gulf Crisis through diplomacy.\nQatar mediated a deal between the United States and Iran, which in September 2023 saw the release of five prisoners in each country and the unfreezing of US$6 billion of Iranian funds, which had been frozen due to sanctions imposed by the U.S. The U.S. citizens were flown to Doha and greeted by U.S. ambassador to Qatar Timmy T. Davis and Qatar Airways CEO Akbar Al Baker before boarding a plane to Washington, D.C.. U.S. President Biden thanked Sheikh Tamim and Qatari officials for their role in the mediation as well as establishing a \"Humanitarian channel\" for Iran. The US$6 billion were released to banks in Doha under the condition that Iran could use the funds only for humanitarian purposes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25191", "revid": "14593153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25191", "title": "Economy of Qatar", "text": "The economy of Qatar is one of the highest in the world based on GDP per capita, ranking generally among the top ten richest countries on world rankings for 2015 and 2016 data compiled by the World Bank, the United Nations, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Qatar advocates for a mixed economy system. The country's economy has grown despite sanctions by its neighbors, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Mainly because the country exports primarily to Japan, South Korea, India and China, making the sanctions effectively redundant as neither Saudi Arabia nor the United Arab Emirates have imposed trading penalties such as tariffs or embargoes on any of these countries for trading with Qatar, or offering incentives such as discounts for their own energy exports to reduce Qatari exports.\nPetroleum and natural gas are the cornerstones of Qatar's economy and account for more than 70% of total government revenue, more than 60% of gross domestic product, and roughly 85% of export earnings. Qatar has the world's third largest proven natural gas reserve and is the third-largest exporter of natural gas.\nQatar\u2019s economy has been shaped by a unique development model that leverages revenues from its natural gas and oil sectors to drive modernization and economic diversification. Through initiatives like Qatar National Vision 2030, the country aims to reduce its reliance on hydrocarbons while promoting sustainability, human development, and private sector growth. This strategy includes significant investment in state-led projects, such as infrastructure development and sovereign wealth funds, which have supported diversification and global competitiveness. Qatar\u2019s approach distinguishes it from traditional resource-dependent states by prioritizing strategic investments and fostering a diversified, knowledge-based economy. This model emphasizes sustainability, innovation, and global competitiveness, reflecting a long-term commitment to development and economic resilience that extends beyond reliance on natural resource wealth.\nEnergy sector.\nBefore the emergence of petrol-based industry, Qatar was a poor pearl diving country. The exploration of oil and gas fields began in 1939. In 1973, oil production and revenues increased dramatically, moving Qatar out of the ranks of the world's poorest countries and providing it with one of the highest per capita incomes in the world.\nQatar's economy was in a downturn from 1982 to 1989. OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) quotas on crude oil production, the lower price for oil, and the generally unpromising outlook on international markets reduced oil earnings. In turn, the Qatari government's spending plans had to be cut to match lower income. The resulting recessionary local business climate caused many firms to lay off expatriate staff. With the economy recovering in the 1990s, expatriate populations, particularly from Egypt and South Asia, have grown again.\nOil production will not long remain at peak levels of 500,000 barrels (80,000 m3) per day, as oil fields are projected to be mostly depleted by 2023. However, large natural gas reserves have been located off Qatar's northeast coast. These offshore gas fields also may contain significant oil and condensate reserves. For example, the state owned QatarEnergy corporation found two offshore oil fields in the 1960s. At the time production was too expensive. However, technological development led to production over 30 years later.\nThe gas condensate can be refined to usual oil products in specialised refineries. The costs are a bit higher but it is normal today for companies to use the gas condensate too. Oil offshore production in 2008 for PS-2 and PS-3 blocks was about 31.1 million barrels (84,995 b/d). Joint Ventures facilities (PS-1, ALK, K &amp; A): Combined oil production from these three joint venture production facilities in 2008 was 57.4 million barrels (156,873 b/d). Like with gas fields there are more offshore blocks which need to be explored and could increase the oil output. So the 500,000 bpd peak and a depletion in 2023 is delayed. With higher oil prices it is expected that the offshore exploration of oil and/or natural gas fields will go on. Oil production in June 2016 seemed to be around 670,000 barrels per day, a bit down from February 2016 production of 692,000 barrels per day. Taking all liquids together Qatar is already far beyond a million barrels per day.\nQatar's proved reserves of gas are the third-largest in the world, exceeding 7000\u00a0km3 (250 trillion cubic feet). The economy was boosted in 1991 by completion of the $1.5-billion Phase I of North Field gas development. In 1996, the Qatargas project began exporting liquefied natural gas (LNG) to Japan. Further phases of North Field gas development costing billions of dollars are in various stages of planning and development.\nQatar's heavy industrial projects, all based in Umm Said, include a refinery with a 50,000 barrels (8,000 m3) per day capacity, a fertilizer plant for urea and ammonia, a steel plant, and a petrochemical plant. All these industries use gas for fuel. Most are joint ventures between European and Japanese firms and the state-owned QatarEnergy corporation (formerly QGPC). The U.S. is the major equipment supplier for Qatar's oil and gas industry, and U.S. companies are playing a major role in North Field gas development.\nQatar pursues a vigorous program of \"Qatarization\", under which all joint venture industries and government departments strive to move Qatari nationals into positions of greater authority. Growing numbers of foreign-educated Qataris, including many educated in the U.S., are returning home to assume key positions formerly occupied by expatriates. In order to control the influx of expatriate workers, Qatar has tightened the administration of its foreign manpower programs over the past several years. Security is the principal basis for Qatar's strict entry and immigration rules and regulations.\nIndustry.\nThe government considers industry to be an integral part of its plan to diversify the economy and maximize its huge natural gas reserves, which serve as the primary feed stock for the sector. Accordingly, careful planning has gone into industrial development. With an eye towards exports, development has been clustered around the ports of Ras Laffan Industrial City and Mesaieed Industrial Area, which are key centers of energy. The result has seen considerable growth over the years. Industries Qatar (IQ), a producer of petrochemicals, fertilizers and steel, is a regional powerhouse, surpassed only in size by Saudi Basic Industries Corporation (SABIC), the Middle East's largest chemical producer. In 2007 the manufacturing sector made the third-largest contribution to GDP among non-oil and gas sectors, equivalent to about 7.5% of GDP. Industry in Qatar is regulated by the Ministry of Business and Trade.\nPetrochemicals and fertilizers supply make up a large portion of the industrial base, along with steel and other construction materials, through Qatar Steel and Qatar Primary Material Company (QPMC). Indeed, over the past few years, demand for construction materials experienced a major surge as the development boom swept the Persian Gulf region. The 2008 financial crisis reduced demand in the region, as project credit lines dry up and investor sentiment remains cautious. The crisis impacted the whole of the industrial sector \u2013 IQ saw its net profit drop in the fourth quarter of 2008 more than 90% over the same period the previous year. But in relative terms, the sector has fared better than most and IQ still managed to post an annual profit of $2bn. Large profit chunks from years past have been channeled into capital investments, which should help the sector ride out the storm. IQ, for example, is pushing several major expansion projects, worth almost $6bn, ahead. \nNorth Field LNG project.\nOn 8 February 2021, the world's largest LNG supplier, Qatar Petroleum (now QatarEnergy), signed an EPC-contract with Chiyoda and Technip for the North Field East (NFE) expansion project to increase QE's annually LNG output by 40% until 2026. For the $28.7 billion NFE expansion project, QatarEnergy has partnered with five global energy companies that have acquired 25% stake in the project. These include Shell, TotalEnergies and ExxonMobil, each with 6.25%, and Eni and ConocoPhillips, each with 3.125% stakes. In a first phase, LNG export capacity is expected to increase from 77 million tons per year to 110 million tons per year by 2026.\nOn 20 June 2022, Minister of State for Energy Saad Sherida Al-Kaabi said at a press conference at the QatarEnergy that the expected production increase from this project will be 32.6 million tonnes annually. Ethane produced from the project would be 1.5 million tonnes per year, LPG 4 million tonnes per year, 250.000 barrels of condensate and 5.000 tonnes of helium per day.\nIn a second phase, the North Field South (NFS) project, Shell and TotalEnergies have each acquired 9.375% and ConocoPhillips 6.25% stakes. QatarEnergy plans to increase LNG production with the NFS project to 126 million tons per year beginning in 2028.\nIn April 2023, Sinopec acquired a 5% stake in an 8 million tonnes per year LNG train.\nFinancial sector.\nThe Qatari banking sector managed to escape the direct impact of the global subprime fallout, but was not altogether unscathed by its aftershocks. Overall, it was the best performing of the Gulf Cooperation Council markets in the last quarter of 2008 and most banks posted substantial profits for 2008. But the sector is also facing issues of liquidity, declining customer confidence and a forced reluctance to lend. In a bid to strengthen the banks\u2019 positions, the Qatar Investment Authority (QIA) announced in early 2009 that it was willing to take a 10-20% stake in any interested local listed banks by way of a capital injection, although this was later reduced to 5% stakes and an additional 5% at the end of 2009.\nThe Qatari government also announced in March 2009 that it was planning to buy the investment portfolio of the banks in the hope this would encourage them to continue lending. Cautious sector sentiment has also been compounded by the Qatar Central Bank's (QCB's) lending restrictions, which demand a loan-to-deposit ratio of 90%. Given the high level of integration between Qatar's economy and the Persian Gulf region, as well as the wider world, a slowdown in business and banking activity seemed inevitable. Nevertheless, Qatar's banking sector has been faring relatively well, considering the strife experienced in other countries, and insiders are confident that activity will return to its previous brisk pace in the second half of 2009 as confidence slowly rebuilds around the globe.\nThe International Monetary Fund in its spring assessment 2019 said that Qatar has \"successfully absorbed the shocks\" of the blockade imposed in 2017 and the dropped oil prices from 2014 to 2016. S&amp;P Global had marked Qatar's outlook to negative in 2017, but changed it to stable in 2019.\nIn August 2019, Qatar Central Bank stated that the country's economic growth will see a boost over the next two years amid expectations of stable oil prices and continued strong exports. The GDP is expected to grow at an average rate of 2.8% between 2018 and 2020, with the budget surplus falling to 4.35 billion riyals in 2019, from a surplus of 15.1 billion riyals in 2018.\nQatar's GDP is anticipated to scale up to $208 billion in 2024 from $162 billion in 2022, according to a report by FocusEconomics. The World Bank has projected Qatar's economy to be the fastest growing in the GCC in 2023 and 2024.\nIslamic finance.\nThe Islamic finance sector enjoyed increased activity in 2008 and is expected to continue to grow into 2009 as more sophisticated financial instruments spark the interest of investors. In addition to Islamic banks, such as Qatar Islamic Bank (QIB), Qatar International Islamic Bank (QIIB) and newcomer Masraf Al Rayyan, conventional banks have also been entering the sharia-compliant sector and are coming to view an Islamic subsidiary as a virtual necessity in order to maintain market standing. Islamic banks currently take the lion's share of sharia-compliant business, though the conventional banks are working hard to take a greater share of market activity. Both Islamic banks and Islamic subsidiaries did remarkably well in the first three quarters of 2008, during which overall financing activity increased by 70.6% compared to the same period in the previous year. The 2008 financial crisis slowed this growth. Poor market conditions have contributed to a marked slowdown of Islamic bond, or sukuk, activity in 2008 throughout the Persian Gulf. But other segments, such as Islamic insurance, or takaful, have not seen a similar downturn. Overall, challenges to further growth remain, including a lack of qualified staff to meet the growing demand for sharia-compliant banking services.\nCapital market.\nThe stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Qatar was valued at $95,487 million in 2007 by the World Bank. As 2008 drew to a close, no capital markets around the globe, including Qatar's, were immune to the effects of the sub-prime fallout. That said, there is considerable optimism that Qatar's bourse, the Doha Securities Market (DSM), will remain relatively resilient to the ongoing international turbulence. It has followed the same peak-trough trajectory as many others around the globe, hitting record highs in mid-2008, before diving in late 2008 and early 2009. Between December 2006 and July 2008 the DSM Index rose about 117% before the 2008 financial crisis wiped out most of these gains. In the first few months of 2009, the DSM lost about 40% of its value. In an effort to stave off further losses, the government announced in February 2009 that it would step in to buy up shares of troubled banks amounting to about 10% of the market's capitalisation. The move improved investor optimism and is hoped to prevent the market from falling further. The proposal to create a single unified regulator as early as 2010 to oversee all banking and financial services is viewed as another promising development that will transform the financial sector for the better.\nTravel and tourism.\nUnder the ambitious five-year development plan of the Qatar Tourism and Exhibitions Authority (QTEA), the government aimed to boost the number of visitors from 964,000 as of 2007 to 1.5m by 2010. The funding required to meet this goal was present in sufficient amounts; in 2008 the state allocated some $17bn for tourism development through 2014, most of which was allocated towards hotels, exhibition space and infrastructure. In order to keep up with a rising number of visitors, the government set a goal of increasing hotel capacity 400% by 2012. In addition to financial support, the government has also worked to ease business regulations in a bid to increase private sector activity. A major aspect of expansion plans is the Hamad International Airport, which has the capacity to handle up to 24m passengers.\nQatar Airways is an airline owned by the Qatar government and was founded in 1993. It travels to over a hundred destinations.\nOther niche tourism segments receiving special focus include cultural tourism on the back of the high publicity opening of Doha's Museum of Islamic Art, and sports tourism, initially spurred by the Asian Games, to which Qatar played host in 2006. Qatar hosted the 2022 FIFA World cup, \nTransport.\nWith a fast-expanding population and substantial economic growth over the past decade, a reliable and extensive transportation network is becoming increasingly necessary within Qatar. So far the government, the primary transport developer, has done well in terms of keeping up with demand for new transportation options. In 2008 the Public Works Authority (Ashghal), one of the bodies that oversees infrastructure development, underwent a major reorganisation in order to streamline and modernise the authority in preparation for major project expansions across all segments in the near future. Ashghal works in tandem with the Urban Planning and Development Authority (UPDA), the body that designed the transportation master plan, instituted in March 2006 and running to 2025.\nAs driving is the primary mode of transport in Qatar, the road network is a major focus of the plan. Project highlights in this segment include the multibillion-dollar Doha Expressway and the Qatar Bahrain Causeway, which will connect Qatar to Bahrain and Saudi Arabia and is considered a milestone in regional interconnectivity. Mass-transit options, such as a Doha metro, light-rail system and more extensive bus networks, are also under development to ease road congestion. In addition, the railway system is being significantly expanded and could eventually form an integral part of a GCC-wide network linking all of the six member states. The airport, too, is expanding capacity to keep up with rising visitor numbers. The New Doha International Airport is one of the largest projects in Qatar today and will boast a capacity of 50m passengers upon completion in 2015. Finally, port infrastructure is seen as an integral part of Qatar's economic development as it focuses on LNG and industrial exports. The port at Mesaieed is undergoing expansion. While the 2008 financial crisis may present challenges to infrastructure development, once all projects are completed Qatar will have one of the most advanced and modern transport infrastructures in the region.\nMacro-economic trend.\nQatar is now among the richest countries in the world, on a per person basis. Current GDP per capita registered a world record-breaking peak growth of 1,156% in the 70s. This became quickly unsustainable due to the 1980s oil glut, and Qatar's current GDP per capita contracted 53% in the 80s. But rising global oil demand helped current GDP per capita to expand 94% in the 90s. Despite efforts to promote the non-hydrocarbon sectors and diversify the economy from hydrocarbons to knowledge-based sectors, the oil and gas sector has consistently contributed to at least 80 percent of the government of Qatar\u2019s total revenues since 2014, as well as 90 percent of Qatar\u2019s total exports.\nIn 2020 GDP PPP ~260 billion dollars.\nThis table is of Qatar's gross domestic product at market prices as estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Qatari Rials.\nFor purchasing power parity comparisons only, the US Dollar is exchanged at 3.67 Qatari Riyals. Mean wages were $59.99 per man-hour in 2009.\nIn February 2012, the International Bank of Qatar reported that GDP grew by 19.9% in 2011, but estimated that 2012 growth would slow to 9.8%\nAccording to the International Monetary Fund, Qatar's economic performance improved in 2018 despite the economic embargo. The GDP growth is expected to increase to 2.6% in 2019 from 2.2% in 2018.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132024. Inflation below 2% is in green.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nhttps://www.worlddata.info/asia/qatar/index.php#:~:text=With%20a%20Human%20Development%20Index,richest%20countries%20in%20the%20world."}
{"id": "25192", "revid": "14593153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25192", "title": "Telecommunications in Qatar", "text": " \nTelephones - main lines in use:\n327,000 (2012)\nTelephones - mobile cellular:\n2,600,000 (2012)\nTelephone system:\nmodern system centered in Doha\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\"\nNA\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\"\ntropospheric scatter to Bahrain; microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia and UAE; submarine cable to Bahrain and UAE; satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean) and 1 Arabsat\nRadio broadcast stations:\nAM 6, FM 5, shortwave 1 (1998)\nRadios:\n256,000 (1997)\nTelevision broadcast stations:\n1 (plus three repeaters) (1997)\nTelevisions:\n230,000 (1997)\nHistorical development.\nSatellite communications.\nIn 1977, Qatar commissioned its first satellite earth station, located about west of Doha, at a cost of approximately QR 20 million. The facility featured a 270-ton antenna linked to the Indian Ocean satellite, enabling global multi-hop communication. This provided capacity for 30 international telephone circuits, supported 5,000 simultaneous calls, and transmitted two color television channels.\nTelex and telephone network expansion.\nAn automated telex exchange was introduced in 1976, with Doha transmitting about 380,000 messages the year prior. In 1977, a QR 21 million expansion contract was awarded to increase Doha's central telephone exchange capacity to 16,200 lines, with construction of 11 rural exchanges. Once completed, the network was expected to support 30,000 lines nationwide.\nInternet.\nAs of 2015, there are two ISPs in Qatar: Ooredoo (formerly Q-Tel) and Vodafone Qatar. There were 563,800 internet users in 2009. The country code (top level domain) is QA. ADSL was launched in 2002 in Qatar by Ooredoo. There were 25,000 ADSL users in 2005.\nA 2015 report by the UN Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development ranked Qatar in first place among the developing countries by their respective percentage population using internet. The country also ranked second globally for percentage of households with internet. \n5G.\nAs of February 2023, 5G coverage in Qatar is at 70%. Ooredoo and Vodafone Qatar, the two major mobile operators in Qatar, have both announced plans to expand their 5G networks to cover the entire country by the end of 2023. The bandwidth of a 5G network in Qatar can be up to 100 MHz in frequency range 1 (FR1: 450 MHz to 6 GHz).\n5G is expected to have a major impact on the economy of Qatar. It is expected to boost the country's GDP by $16 billion by 2025 and create over 100,000 jobs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25193", "revid": "14593153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25193", "title": "Transport in Qatar", "text": " \nTransport in Qatar is primarily centered around the Doha Metropolitan Area (DMA), where approximately 2 million people reside and work. Doha, the capital city, serves as the national hub for government, business, and tourism, but significant development occurs outside the city as part of the government's diversification strategy.\nQatar has experienced remarkable economic and population growth in recent years, with the population surging from 1.7 million in 2008 to over 2.7 million by 2017, primarily in Greater Doha. Emerging development areas outside Doha, such as Lusail and Al Wakrah, coupled with new Economic and Logistic Zones, reflect the country's steady economic growth. To sustain this growth, Qatar is investing in enhancing its transportation system, including constructing expressways and freeways and a comprehensive public transport system comprising the Doha Metro, Lusail Light Rail Transit (LRT), and bus network upgrades.\nGovernment initiatives.\nExpressway Programme.\nThe Expressway Programme aims to supply approximately 800 kilometers of secure and efficient roadways by executing over 30 projects dispersed across 46 contracts. Furthermore, the Programme aims to establish an integrated infrastructure network with modern, dependable underground utilities such as stormwater systems, electricity services, and advanced transportation systems. The initiative will also focus on enhancing the aesthetics of roads and providing better amenities for cyclists and pedestrians.\n2008 Transport Master Plan for Qatar (TMPQ).\nIn 2008, Qatar introduced its first Transportation Master Plan (TMPQ 2008), outlining a comprehensive strategy for land transportation, encompassing various initiatives and projects to meet current and future transport needs. Recognizing the evolving challenges and opportunities, the Ministry of Transport (MOT) initiated a significant update to the plan in 2017 to align with the objectives of Qatar National Vision 2030.\nPublic transport.\nIn 2002, the Qatari government launched Mowasalat, a company 100% owned by the government, managed and operated by the state authorities to ensure the smooth provision of integrated ground-transport services for the entire country. Previously, 3,000 privately owned orange taxicabs used to rule the streets of Qatar but the government took them off the roads as they saw them as a threat to the new Mowasalat taxis. There has been much controversy over this move, as it is now very hard to find a taxi in Doha.\nPublic buses now service over 35 routes covering most locations of Doha with minimal fares making public transport in Qatar an inexpensive solution to the problems of rush hours and parking difficulties.\nMowasalat, under the brand-name Karwa, now operates more than 3,000 new taxi sedans including the recently acquired airport taxis with spacious cabins using 2007 Ford Freestars and more than 120 public buses, school buses, and private-hire coaches. In 2009, the Mowasalat created a world record for the largest parade of buses numbering 300 in all. In addition, its Doha Limousine Service has 100 standard limousines and 200 Jaguar XJ VIP units that are mostly placed at the Doha International Airport and at major hotels. In 2021, 'Karwa' acquired a fleet of diesel vehicles with Euro 5 standard in order to remove particulate matter from exhausts, reducing it to the equivalent of one gram of sand per kilometer driven.\nHowever, those without personal transportation still face difficulties to move around since the number of taxis is much lower than the actual need of the population. All buses operate only on specific assigned lines based at the Central Bus Stations at Al-Ghanem area of the old city.\nThe Ministry of Transport and Communications stated that Public bus ridership has increased by 40% between 2015 and 2018.\nRailways.\nIn August 2008, Qatari Diar Real Estate Investment created a joint venture with Deutsche Bahn of Germany, Qatar Railway Development Company to plan a railway network in Qatar.\nOn 22 November 2009, Deutsche Bahn and Qatari signed a memorandum of Agreement to build high-speed railway lines and underground transport networks in Qatar and Bahrain. This agreement has never been executed.\nThe Qatar Railways Development Company (QRDC) was created in 2011, and soon after it was decided that Qatar Rail would be the sole owner and manager of Qatar's rail network and would be responsible for the design, construction, commissioning, operation and maintenance of the entire rail network and systems. However,\nQatar Rail consists of:\nThe total length of the Qatar Rail network consists of approximately: \nDoha Metro.\nIn June 2013, Qatar Rail awarded four design and build contracts worth approximately $8.2 billion for phase one of the Doha metro. The project included four rail lines and an underground section in the center of the capital Doha, and links to stadiums for the 2022 FIFA World Cup soccer tournament. The contracts were for the Red Line North project, the Red Line South project, the Green Line project and another one to design and build the metro's major stations. The projects are expected to employ more than 20,000 workers at its peak, construction is scheduled to begin later this year for completion by 2019. Metro construction was originally planned to start in the first quarter of 2010.\nDoha Metro's Red Line became the first line officially opened to the public on 8 May 2019. This was followed by the launch of the Gold Line on 21 November 2019, and the opening of the Green Line on 10 December 2019.\nHighways.\nMost of the main roads have been updated to multilane, double carriageway motorways, including the following:\nPedestrian infrastructure.\nIn a bid to improve pedestrian accessibility in congested areas, the Prime Minister of Qatar, Abdullah bin Nasser Al Thani, announced the inauguration of the Pedestrian Crossings Master Plan in 2018. This comprehensive plan details 50 pedestrian crossings to be built throughout Qatar, mainly in Doha, and includes 26 pedestrian bridges and tunnels, and 24 crosswalks.\nPipelines.\nCrude Oil 235\u00a0km; Natural Gas 400\u00a0km\nPorts and harbours.\nOverview.\nUntil the mid-1960s, Qatar's only deepwater port was the oil terminal at Mesaieed. Large vessels could not reach Doha due to a coral bar lying offshore. In 1970, Japanese company Penta-Ocean undertook dredging works to create a 27-foot-deep, 350-foot-wide channel extending 3.5 miles to the waterfront. Doha Port was completed in 1971 at a cost of about QR 144 million, after which maritime trade through the capital expanded rapidly. Between 1975 and 1976, cargo volumes at the port rose from 430,000 to 1.2 million tons. Doha Port remained the country's main commercial port until 2016, when its operations were transferred to the newly-opened Hamad Port in Umm Al Houl, south of Doha.\nAirports.\nOverview.\nThere are 5 airports in Qatar, the largest of which and main one being Hamad International Airport in Doha which is the only international passenger airport in Qatar, spanning 22 km2\u00a0and with a 600,000m\u00b2 terminal which serves 30 million passengers per year.\nThe first aviation authority was formed in 1973 as the Civil Aviation Department. This would be replaced by the Qatar Civil Aviation Authority in 2001.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "25194", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25194", "title": "Qatar Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Qatar\nThe Qatar Armed Forces () are the military forces of the State of Qatar. Since 2015, Qatar has implemented mandatory military conscription with an average of 2,000 graduates per year. As of 2010, Qatar's defence expenditures added up to a total of $1.913 billion, about 1.5% of the national GDP, according to the SIPRI. Qatar has recently signed defence pacts with the United States in 2002 &amp; 2013, with the United Kingdom in 2020, and with France in 1994.\nQatar plays an active role in the collective defense efforts of the Gulf Cooperation Council; the other five members are Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, the UAE, and Oman. Qatar also hosts the largest American military base in the Middle East and in 2017 inaugurated a military attache office in Washington.\nSIPRI states that Qatar's plans to transform and significantly enlarge its armed forces have accelerated in 2014, and in 2010-14 Qatar was the 46th largest arms importer in the world. Orders in 2013 for 562 tanks and 75 self-propelled guns from Germany were followed in 2014 by a number of other contracts, including 34 combat helicopters and 3 AEW aircraft from the US, and 6 tanker aircraft from Spain. As of 2016, Qatar maintains advanced anti air and anti ship capabilities with deliveries of Patriot PAC-3 MSE Batteries, Exocet MM40 Block 3 and Marte ER anti-ship missiles.\nReports indicate that between 2014 and 2024, Qatar significantly enhanced its military capabilities, with defense spending rising by 434%. These accounts also suggest that a substantial portion of the arms trade during this period was marred by corruption, including instances of bribery.\nOn 8 November 2024, for the first time a NATO military committee visited Qatar's military education and training facilities.\nHistory.\nThe armed forces were founded in 1971 after the country gained independence from the United Kingdom.\nWith a personnel strength of 16,500, Qatar's armed forces are the second-smallest in the Middle East. France has provided approximately 80% of Qatar's arms inventory. \nQatar took part in the Gulf War of 1991, with a battalion at the Battle of Khafji. It also hosted the U.S. 614th Tactical Fighter Squadron and the Canadian Air Task Group with 26 CF-18s both at Doha.\nSince the Gulf War, Qatar has pursued a limited program of force modernization. Qatar has spent $12 billion to buy MIM-104 Patriot surface to air missiles. In July 2008, the US Defense Security Cooperation Agency announced Qatar's official request for logistics support, training, and associated equipment and services. The total value of the support arrangements could be as high as $400 million.\nIn March 2011, Qatar announced the participation of its Air Force in the enforcement of the Libyan no-fly zone.\nSaudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen.\nAccording to Aljazeera news, in December 2016, Qatar deployed 1,000 ground troops in Yemen to fight on behalf of the ousted president Abdrabbuh Mansur Hadi. Qatari soldiers, backed by 200 armoured vehicles and 30 Apache helicopters, headed to Yemen's Marib province.\nThe Armed Forces of Qatar have suffered 4 killed and 2 wounded during their deployment in Yemen.\nHumanitarian Aid.\nGaza\nFollowing the start of Israeli military operations in the enclave after the October 7 attacks, a significant number of Palestinians in Gaza, estimated at 2.2 million, are now confronted with the imminent risk of famine. The Qatari Armed Forces have played a significant role in offering assistance to the Palestinians in Gaza. Thus far, a grand total of 91 aircraft have been dispatched, each laden with numerous tons of much-needed assistance. In a significant development, on April 8, 2024, they accomplished the successful evacuation of the 22nd group of injured Palestinians, marking a significant milestone since the commencement of the Israel-Hamas conflict.\nAfghanistan\nOn May 16, 2024, a Qatar Armed Forces aircraft delivered 42 tons of food and shelter from the Qatar Red Crescent Society and Qatar Charity to Mazar-i-Sharif, Afghanistan.Qatar Charity (QC) also sent three aircraft delivering sixty tons of relief goods to Balkh flood victims via the Qatar Emiri Air Force airlift. Additionally, Qatar Red Crescent Society (QRCS) will build 10 health centers in Afghanistan to serve hundreds of thousands of women and children.\nSudan\nOn August 14, 2024, two Qatari Armed Forces aircraft arrived at Port Sudan Airport, delivering 27 tons of relief aid and shelter supplies to support flood victims in Sudan. The aid was provided by the Qatar Fund for Development (QFFD), Qatar Charity, and the Qatar Red Crescent Society. This is part of Qatar's ongoing humanitarian air bridge to Sudan, initiated in May 2023 in response to the country's ongoing conflict and natural disasters.\nMilitary branches.\nQatari Emiri Land Force.\nThe Qatar Emiri Land Force is the largest land service branch of the Qatar Armed Forces.\nInitially outfitted with British weaponry, Qatar shifted much of its procurement to France during the 1980s in response to French efforts to develop closer relations. The tank battalion was equipped with French-built AMX-30 main battle tanks, before later being replaced by German Leopard 2A7's. Other armored vehicles include French AMX-10P APCs and the French VAB, adopted as the standard wheeled combat vehicle. The artillery unit has a few French 155\u00a0mm self-propelled howitzers. The principal antitank weapons are French MILAN and HOT wire-guided missiles.\nQatar had also illicitly acquired a few Stinger shoulder-fired SAMs, possibly from Afghan rebel groups, at a time when the United States was trying to maintain tight controls on Stingers in the Middle East. When Qatar refused to turn over the missiles, the United States Senate in 1988 imposed a ban on the sale of all weapons to Qatar. The ban was repealed in late 1990 when Qatar satisfactorily accounted for its disposition of the Stingers.\nQatari tank battalion fought in the Gulf war in 1991, their AMX-30s took part in the battle of Khafji. Qatari contingent, composed mostly of Pakistani recruits, acquitted itself well during the war.\nQatar signed a contract with the German defence company Krauss-Maffei Wegmann (KMW) for the delivery of 24 artillery systems PzH 2000 and 62 LEOPARD 2 main battle tanks.\nThe US DSCA announces that Qatar wants to join its neighbor the UAE, and field 2 medium-range THAAD batteries of its own.\nTheir request is worth up to $6.5 billion, and includes up to 12 THAAD Launchers, 150 THAAD missiles, 2 THAAD Fire Control and Communications units, 2 AN/TPY-2 THAAD Radars, and 1 Early Warning Radar (EWR). The USA would also sell them the required trucks, generators, electrical power units, trailers, communications equipment, fire unit test &amp; maintenance equipment, system integration and checkout, repair and return, training, and other support.\nQatari Emiri Navy.\nThe Qatari Emiri Navy (QEN), also called the Qatari Emiri Naval Forces (QENF), is the naval branch of the armed forces of the State of Qatar.\nQatar Emiri Air Force.\nThe Qatar Emiri Air Force was formed in 1974, three years after achieving independence from Great Britain in 1971. Initially equipped with ex-RAF Hawker Hunters, the air force soon began expansion with six Dassault/Dornier Alpha Jets in 1979. Fourteen Dassault Mirage F1 were delivered between 1980 and 1984. After the Gulf War, Qatar's air force infrastructure was upgraded by France for $200 million, leading to the order of nine single seat Mirage 2000-5DEA multi-role combat aircraft and three two seat Mirage 2000-5DDA combat trainers in August 1994. Deliveries started in December 1997, and involved the buy back of the remaining 11 Mirage F1s by France that were later sold on to Spain. The current commander of the Qatar Emiri Air Force is Brigadier General Mubarak Mohammed Al Kumait Al Khayarin.\nBritish pilots in Oman remain on duty with the air force, and French specialists are employed in a maintenance capacity. Nevertheless, an increasing number of young Qataris have been trained as pilots and technicians. The past decade saw Qatar increase its air force with 96 planes from three different countries: the F-15 from the US, France's Rafale, and the Eurofighter Typhoon from the UK.\nIts units include:\nRank structure.\nThe rank insignia of commissioned officers.\nThe rank insignia of non-commissioned officers and enlisted personnel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25195", "revid": "42975076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25195", "title": "Foreign relations of Qatar", "text": "Foreign relations of Qatar is conducted through its Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Arab states were among the first to recognize Qatar, and the country gained admittance to the United Nations and the Arab League after achieving independence in 1971. The country was an early member of OPEC and a founding member of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). Diplomatic missions to Qatar are based in its capital, Doha.\nQatar's regional relations and foreign policies are characterized by strategy of balancing and alliance building among regional and great powers. It maintains independent foreign policy and engages in regional balancing to secure its strategic priorities and to have recognition on the regional and international level. As a small state in the gulf, Qatar has an \"open-door\" foreign policy where Qatar maintain ties to all parties and regional players in the region, including with organizations such as Taliban and Hamas. However, Washington Institute published a report in August 2021 stating Qatar's connections with the Taliban have made the country a potential contact for regions seeking negotiations with Afghanistan. Qatar has also been key to negotiating cease-fires between Israel and Hamas that have restored calm after four wars, last seen in 2021. At the same time, Qatar was one of the main supporters of Hamas, both economically and in terms of propaganda. Qatar used to express support for movements associated with the Muslim Brotherhood.\nMultilateral relations.\nSheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, the emir of Qatar from 1995 to 2013, helped establish Qatar's reputation as an influential player in Middle East politics. The first major move in this regard was the founding of Al Jazeera, a state-owned news media company.\nQatar has also cultivated close relationships with Western powers, particularly the United States and the United Kingdom. Al Udeid Air Base hosts American and British air forces. Qatar has invested extensively in London real estate, and the country has also made donations to prominent research centers in the United States. At the same time, Qatar maintains ties to Western adversaries, including Iran, Hamas, the Muslim Brotherhood, and extremist elements in Syria. Although according to a report by The Economist in December 2021, Qatar has modified its anti-Islamist policies and demanded Brotherhood activists leave.\nIn an attempt to quell the mounting criticism, Qatar announced sweeping labour reforms in 2019. This included ending \"kafala\", the system that made it illegal for migrant workers to change jobs or leave the country without their employer's permission, effectively trapping workers who were being exploited and abused. Other reforms included the first minimum wage for migrant workers in the region and harsher penalties for companies that did not comply with the new labour laws. When they came into force in September 2020, the reforms were met with wide acclaim. Fifa called them groundbreaking. The UN said they marked a new era. An international trade union referred to them as a game changer.\nIt is also one of the few countries in which citizens do not have to pay any taxes. \nOn 16 October 2019, the Council of Ministers of the State of Qatar unanimously endorsed end to such practice in the country by abolishment of the Kafala system. \nQatar is a strategic ally of China, with relationship between the two countries growing stronger. Qatar is a member of Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, Gulf Cooperation Council, OPEC and the Council of Arab Economic Unity.\nRegional relations.\nIn September 2014. QFFD contributed in enhancing stability for Syrian refugees. Qatar Charity facilitated access to quality education through the rehabilitation of 6 Formal schools in Turkey, Gaziantep, Urfa, Kilis, targeting a total number of 13,540 beneficiaries and 12,860 girls and boys.\nOn 10 July 2017, according to documents obtained by Al Arabiya, Qatar agreed to quit supporting the Muslim Brotherhood. In order to avoid undermining relations with the Gulf, it also removed non-citizens from Qatar and refused to provide shelter to anyone from a GCC nation.\nOn 27 March 2022, The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) and Qatar on their fourth high-level strategic discussion, discussed strategic priorities and worked together to ensure that the UN effectively supports member states in their efforts to combat terrorism. Out of a total of 35 other contributors, the state of Qatar is the second greatest contributor to the UN trust fund for counter-terrorism.\nSome financial economists have interpreted the 2014 Saudi-Qatari rift as the tangible political sign of a growing economic rivalry between oil and natural gas producers, which could \"have deep and long-lasting consequences\" beyond the Middle East.\nIn March 2014 Qatar made overtures to Oman in order to counteract the influence of Saudi Arabia on politics in the region.\nIn May 2017, an alleged hack of state media led to stories quoting the Emir as enquiring US resentment towards Iran and remarking on Hamas. Doha reported it as false and gave no indication on where it originated. However, news organizations in the region reported the emir's comments as fact. This led to Saudi Arabia, UAE, Egypt and Bahrain cutting diplomatic ties with Qatar on 5 June 2017.\nQatar voiced support for the Turkish invasion of northern Syria aimed at ousting U.S.-backed Syrian Kurds from the enclave of Afrin. Spokeswoman of Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Lulwah Rashif Al-Khater said that: \"The launching of the Turkish military operation last Saturday was motivated by legitimate concerns related to its national security and the security of its borders, in addition to protecting Syria's territorial integrity from the danger of secession. Turkey, a NATO member, has always been a stabilizing factor in the region.\"\nIn 2022, four people were arrested for corruption in the European Parliament. This came to be known as the Qatar corruption scandal at the European Parliament.\nIn mid-March 2024, the Emir of Qatar, HH Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani and President of the European Council, HE Charles Michel, discussed about enhancing cooperation between Qatar and the European Union, as well as addressing key regional and global issues, with specific focus on the situation in the Gaza Strip and the Occupied Palestinian Territories.\nPeace brokering and peacekeeping activities.\nThe onset of the Arab Spring in January 2011 complicated Qatar's ability to mediate having forced Gulf leaders to side with revolutionaries or the longstanding autocratic regimes. Sheikh Hamad stated in that Qatar would support the uprisings, a position that clashed with neighboring Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Qatar provided extensive support, in funding and weapons, to Libyan revolutionaries and aided in the removal of Muammar Gaddafi by mobilising Arab support behind NATO airstrikes. In Egypt, Qatar supported President Mohamed Morsi and has suffered from strained relations with President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi following Morsi's removal.\nIn Syria, Qatar has provided arms and funding to various opposition groups. Other discoveries from the research claimed that Qatar supported the US against the Assad government. Additionally, the nation supported efforts to mediate a conflict-ending political transition in Syria. In March 2021, Qatar, Russia, and Turkey also started a different track of talks on the Syrian peace process.\nAccording to the Royal United Services Institute, Qatar plays an important role in Syria and Iraq as an interlocutor between Western powers and resistant groups that cannot be engaged directly. This role is consistent with Qatar's efforts as an interlocutor with the Taliban in Afghanistan, hosting a small embassy in Doha where US officials are able to meet with the Taliban behind closed doors.\nPrior to the abdication of Emir Sheikh Hamad, Qatar's mediation was fronted by the Qatari Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Ahmad Abdullah Al Mahmud. On 4 May 2009, the Qatari Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Ahmad Abdullah Al Mahmud announced that Chad and Sudan had agreed to end hostilities against each other and to normalize relations during Qatari-mediated talks in Doha; however the agreement quickly broke down. Qatar also brokered an agreement between the Sudanese government and the strongest Darfur rebel group, the Justice and Equality Movement, in Doha in February 2010. The agreement fell apart in May 2010 and the conflict is ongoing.\nQatar hosted a donors conference to help rebuild war-ravaged Darfur in April 2013.\nIn June 2010, Qatari peacekeeping forces deployed in the disputed Ras Doumeira area on the border between Djibouti and Eritrea after the latter withdrew from the area. The intention was to help start bilateral negotiations and solve the territorial dispute which had turned violent. Qatar withdrew its 450 troops from the Djibouti-Eritrea border in June 2017 after the two countries severed ties with Qatar.\nOn 1 February 2023, in an interview, Qatar's foreign minister, Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al-Thani, stated that his country is actively utilizing its established communication channels with both Washington and Tehran in order to foster a greater alignment of their respective perspectives.\nIn September 2023, it was reported that Iran expressed its readiness to execute a Qatar-mediated agreement with the United States. The Iranian foreign minister made this announcement on 14 September 2023. According to the terms of the agreement, both Washington and Tehran would release five prisoners, while $6 billion worth of Iranian assets held in South Korea would be released.\nThe broad outlines of the U.S.-Iran deal, which pertain to the potential release of U.S. citizens detained by Iran, were publicly disclosed on 10 August. As part of this agreement, it has been proposed that the funds be transferred to banks in Qatar while simultaneously releasing five Iranians who are currently held in the United States.\nIn June, it was reported that secret talks took place between Venezuela and the United States, with Qatar serving as the host for these discussions. Qatar has been known for its significant involvement in supporting the United States during delicate negotiations, which notably encompassed a recent prisoner exchange with Iran and facilitated backchannel communications between the U.S. and the Taliban.\nOn 7 October 2023, Israel and Hamas started an extensive armed conflict. Due to its escalation, On 9 October 2023, Qatari mediators made urgent talks to attempt to arrange the release of 36 Palestinian women and children from Israeli prisons in exchange for the release of Israeli women and children held by the militant group that were being detained in Gaza. Positive progress is being made in the ongoing negotiations, which Qatar has been undertaking in collaboration with the United States. Qatar has played a crucial role in facilitating the release of American and Australian hostages who were stranded in Israel and Palestine.\nIn October 2023, Qatar's mediation efforts led to the reunion of four Ukrainian children with their families. By December 2023, an additional six Ukrainian children were scheduled to be repatriated from Russia to Ukraine under a Qatar-brokered agreement. In February 2024, a third group of 11 children was successfully returned to their Ukrainian families with the assistance of Qatar's mediation. On 21 March 2024, a new batch of children exchange between Moscow and Kyiv took place at Qatar's Embassy in Moscow, facilitated by Qatar and attended by Ambassador \"Sheikh Ahmed bin Nasser bin Jassim Al Thani\", as confirmed by Russian Children's Ombudswoman \"Maria Lvova-Belova\". Furthermore, the ambassador \"Sheikh Ahmed\" expressed gratitude to Russian President Vladimir Putin and Qatari Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani for their support throughout this process.\nQatar has actively extended its role as a global mediator under the leadership of Prime Minister Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al\u202fThani. In May 2025 interview with \"The Washington Post\", Sheikh Mohammed emphasized Qatar\u2019s \u201ctechnocratic\u201d approach to negotiations, citing successful mediation in high\u2011profile conflicts such as the release of over 130 hostages from Gaza, talks involving Hamas and Israel, negotiations in Afghanistan and the war in Ukraine, and reunification of Ukrainian children taken to Russia.\nCultural and religious activities.\nQatar is an Islamic state with multi-religious minorities like most of the Persian Gulf countries with waves of migration over the last 30 years. The official state religion is Wahhabi Sunni Islam. The community is made up of Sunni and Shi'a Muslims, Christians, Hindus, and small groups of Buddhists and Baha'is. Muslims form 65.5% of the Qatari population, followed by Hindus at 15.4%, Christians at 14.2%, Buddhists at 3.3% and the rest 1.9% of the population follow other religions or are unaffiliated. Qatar is also home to numerous other religions mostly from the Middle East and Asia.\nThe country has also hosted numerous interfaith dialogue conferences.\nThe culture of Qatar is strongly influenced by traditional Bedouin culture, with less acute influence deriving from India, East Africa and elsewhere in the Persian Gulf. The peninsula's harsh climatic conditions compelled its inhabitants to turn to the sea for sustenance. Thus, there is a distinct emphasis placed on the sea in local culture. Literature and folklore themes are often related to sea-based activities. Oral arts such as poetry and singing were historically more prevalent than figurative art because of the restrictions placed by Islam on depictions of sentient beings; however, certain visual art disciplines such as calligraphy, architecture and textile arts were widely practiced. Figurative arts were gradually assimilated into the country's culture during the oil era.\nForeign aid.\nQatar's international aid program has expanded dramatically since the beginning of 2010, and focuses heavily on the Arab world, most notably in the humanitarian crises in Syria and Gaza.\nAccording to the UN OCHA's Financial Tracking Service, Qatar's international aid increased from less than $10 million annually in the pre-Arab Spring period to the hundreds of millions following the event.\nFor example, in 2012, according to the Qatari Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the country donated more than QAR3 billion (or c. \u00a3524 million) through governmental and non-governmental aid to nearly 100 countries across the globe.\nQatari leadership has since pledged publicly to reduce suffering of victims and to achieve and support global partnerships for the achievement of foreign countries' Millennium Development Goals. The state is engaged in investments in a wide range of humanitarian and developmental sectors. Qatar pledged $50 million in support to United Nations humanitarian response plan as well as the regional refugee plan for Sudan, during a donor conference in Geneva on 19 June 2023. \"Based on our fraternal responsibility and our moral and human duty towards our brothers in Sudan, and as a continuation of our continuous humanitarian and development efforts in brotherly Sudan, we announce the State of Qatar's pledge of $50 million to support the efforts of the Humanitarian Response Plan and the Regional Refugee Plan,\" Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al Thani announced.\nOn 24 September 2023, Qatar dispatched a significant quantity of humanitarian and relief aid, amounting to 58 tonnes, to assist the city of Derna in Libya, which had been severely impacted by flooding. This recent contribution elevates the total amount of aid provided by Qatar to support those affected by the floods to an impressive 267 tonnes. Aid typically encompasses a range of essential provisions, including but not limited to shelter essentials, electricity generators, food, and medical commodities.\nRecently, Qatar Charity (QC) launched the 'Libya Appeal' campaign, aimed at providing aid to the Libyan population grappling with the consequences of severe floods. These floods have resulted in the loss of numerous lives and the displacement of a significant number of individuals.\nSheikh Tamim Bin Hamad Al Thani also conveyed his heartfelt condolences to the victims affected by the catastrophic floods in Libya through a message posted on the social media platform Twitter. \"I extend to our brothers in Libya my sincere condolences and sympathy for the victims of the catastrophic floods, and we in Qatar declare our complete solidarity with the Libyan people to overcome this painful ordeal, and we ask God to have mercy on the dead, bring back the missing, and heal the wounded,\". He wrote.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Qatar maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "25196", "revid": "8551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25196", "title": "Cities of Qatar", "text": ""}
{"id": "25198", "revid": "50436820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25198", "title": "Quaternary", "text": "Third and current period of the Cenozoic Era, from 2.58 million years ago to the present\nThe Quaternary ( , ) is the current and most recent of the three periods of the Cenozoic Era in the geologic time scale of the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS), as well as the current and most recent of the twelve periods of the Phanerozoic eon. It follows the Neogene Period and spans from 2.6\u00a0million years ago to the present. The Quaternary Period is divided into two epochs: the Pleistocene (2.6\u00a0million years ago to 12 thousand years ago) and the Holocene (12 thousand years ago to today); a proposed third epoch, the Anthropocene, was rejected in 2024 by IUGS, the governing body of the ICS.\nThe Quaternary is typically defined by the Quaternary glaciation, the cyclic growth and decay of continental ice sheets related to the Milankovitch cycles and the associated climate and environmental changes that they caused.\nResearch history.\nIn 1759 Giovanni Arduino proposed that the geological strata of northern Italy could be divided into four successive formations or \"orders\" (). The term \"quaternary\" was introduced by Jules Desnoyers in 1829 for sediments of France's Seine Basin that clearly seemed to be younger than Tertiary Period rocks.\nThe Quaternary Period follows the Neogene Period and extends to the present. The Quaternary covers the time span of glaciations classified as the Pleistocene, and includes the present interglacial time-period, the Holocene.\nThis places the start of the Quaternary at the onset of Northern Hemisphere glaciation approximately 2.6\u00a0million years ago (mya). Prior to 2009, the Pleistocene was defined to be from 1.805\u00a0million years ago to the present, so the current definition of the Pleistocene includes a portion of what was, prior to 2009, defined as the Pliocene.\nQuaternary stratigraphers usually worked with regional subdivisions. From the 1970s, the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) tried to make a single geologic time scale based on GSSP's, which could be used internationally. The Quaternary subdivisions were defined based on biostratigraphy instead of paleoclimate.\nThis led to the problem that the proposed base of the Pleistocene was at 1.805\u00a0million years ago, long after the start of the major glaciations of the northern hemisphere. The ICS then proposed to abolish use of the name Quaternary altogether, which appeared unacceptable to the International Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA).\nIn 2009, it was decided to make the Quaternary the youngest period of the Cenozoic Era with its base at 2.588\u00a0mya and including the Gelasian Stage, which was formerly considered part of the Neogene Period and Pliocene Epoch. This was later revised to 2.58\u00a0mya. \nThe Anthropocene was proposed as a third epoch as a mark of the anthropogenic impact on the global environment starting with the Industrial Revolution, or about 200 years ago. The Anthropocene was rejected as a geological epoch in 2024 by the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS), the governing body of the ICS.\nGeology.\nThe 2.58\u00a0million years of the Quaternary represents the time during which recognisable humans existed. Over this geologically short time period there has been relatively little change in the distribution of the continents due to plate tectonics.\nThe Quaternary geological record is preserved in greater detail than that for earlier periods.\nThe major geographical changes during this time period included the emergence of the straits of Bosphorus and Skagerrak during glacial epochs, which respectively turned the Black Sea and Baltic Sea into fresh water lakes, followed by their flooding (and return to salt water) by rising sea level; the periodic filling of the English Channel, forming a land bridge between Britain and the European mainland; the periodic closing of the Bering Strait, forming the land bridge between Asia and North America; and the periodic flash flooding of Scablands of the American Northwest by glacial water.\nThe current extent of Hudson Bay, the Great Lakes and other major lakes of North America are a consequence of the Canadian Shield's readjustment since the last ice age; different shorelines have existed over the course of Quaternary time.\nClimate.\nThe climate was one of periodic glaciations with continental glaciers moving as far from the poles as 40 degrees latitude. Glaciation took place repeatedly during the Quaternary Ice age\u00a0\u2013 a term coined by Schimper in 1839 that began with the start of the Quaternary about 2.58 Mya and continues to the present day.\nIn 1821, a Swiss engineer, Ignaz Venetz, presented an article in which he suggested the presence of traces of the passage of a glacier at a considerable distance from the Alps. This idea was initially disputed by another Swiss scientist, Louis Agassiz, but when he undertook to disprove it, he ended up affirming his colleague's hypothesis. A year later, Agassiz raised the hypothesis of a great glacial period that would have had long-reaching general effects. This idea gained him international fame and led to the establishment of the Glacial Theory.\nIn time, thanks to the refinement of geology, it has been demonstrated that there were several periods of glacial advance and retreat and that past temperatures on Earth were very different from today.\nIn particular, the Milankovitch cycles of Milutin Milankovitch are based on the premise that variations in incoming solar radiation are a fundamental factor controlling Earth's climate.\nDuring this time, substantial glaciers advanced and retreated over much of North America and Europe, parts of South America and Asia, and all of Antarctica.\nFlora and fauna.\nThere was a major extinction of large mammals globally during the Late Pleistocene Epoch. Many forms such as sabre-toothed cats, mammoths, mastodons, glyptodonts, etc., became extinct worldwide. Others, including horses, camels and American cheetahs became extinct in North America.\nThe Great Lakes formed and giant mammals thrived in parts of North America and Eurasia not covered in ice. These mammals became extinct when the glacial period ended about 11,700 years ago. Modern humans evolved about 315,000 years ago. During the Quaternary Period, mammals, flowering plants, and insects dominated the land.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25199", "revid": "28979433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25199", "title": "Quotation", "text": "Repetition of one expression as part of another one\nA quotation or quote is the repetition of a sentence, phrase, or passage from speech or text that someone has said or written. In oral speech, it is the representation of an utterance (i.e. of something that a speaker actually said) that is introduced by a quotative marker, such as a verb of saying. For example: John said: \"I saw Mary today\". Quotations in oral speech are also signaled by special prosody in addition to quotative markers. In written text, quotations are signaled by quotation marks. Quotations are also used to present well-known statement parts that are explicitly attributed by citation to their original source; such statements are marked with (punctuated with) quotation marks.\nAs a form of transcription, direct or quoted speech is spoken or written text that reports speech or thought in its original form phrased by the original speaker. In narrative, it is usually enclosed in quotation marks, but it can be enclosed in guillemets (\u00ab \u00bb) in some languages. The cited speaker either is mentioned in the tag (or attribution) or is implied. Direct speech is often used as a literary device to represent someone's point of view. Quotations are also widely used in spoken language when an interlocutor wishes to present a proposition that they have come to know via hearsay.\nComparison between direct, indirect, and free indirect speech.\n\"Direct speech\" and \"indirect speech\" can also refer to the difference between speech acts where the illocutionary force is conveyed directly and indirectly, respectively. Thus, \"What time is it?\" is a direct speech act that might also be expressed by the indirect speech act \"Do you know what time it is?\"\nHe laid down his bundle and thought of his misfortune. \"And just what pleasure have I found since I came into this world?\" he asked.\nHe laid down his bundle and thought of his misfortune. He asked himself what pleasure he had found since he came into the world.\nHe laid down his bundle and thought of his misfortune. And just what pleasure had he found since he came into this world?\nA crucial semantic distinction between direct and indirect speech is that direct speech purports to report the exact words that were said or written, whereas indirect speech is a representation of speech in one's own words.\nThe distinction between indirect speech and free indirect speech is mostly one of style, hence free indirect speech is sometimes described as a free indirect style.\nAs a literary device.\nA quotation can also refer to the repeated use of units of any other form of expression, especially parts of artistic works: elements of a painting, scenes from a movie or sections from a musical composition.\nReasons for using.\nQuotations are used for a variety of reasons: to illuminate the meaning or to support the arguments of the work in which it is being quoted, to provide direct information about the work being quoted (whether in order to discuss it, positively or negatively), to pay homage to the original work or author, to make the user of the quotation seem well-read, and/or to comply with copyright law. Quotations are also commonly printed as a means of inspiration and to invoke philosophical thoughts from the reader. Pragmatically speaking, quotations can also be used as language games (in the Wittgensteinian sense of the term) to manipulate social order and the structure of society.\nCommon sources.\nFamous quotations are frequently collected in books that are sometimes called quotation dictionaries or treasuries. Of these, \"Bartlett's Familiar Quotations\", \"The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations\", \"The Columbia Dictionary of Quotations\", \"The Yale Book of Quotations\" and \"The Macmillan Book of Proverbs, Maxims, and Famous Phrases\" are considered among the most reliable and comprehensive sources. Diaries and calendars often include quotations for entertainment or inspirational purposes, and small, dedicated sections in newspapers and weekly magazines\u2014with recent quotations by leading personalities on current topics\u2014have also become commonplace.\nMisquotations.\nMany quotations are routinely incorrect or attributed to the wrong authors, and quotations from obscure or unknown writers are often attributed to far more famous writers. Examples of this are Winston Churchill, to whom many political quotations of uncertain origin are attributed, and Oscar Wilde, to whom anonymous humorous quotations are sometimes attributed.\nSome quotations commonly believed to be quotations from literature, film, etc. do not actually appear in the source material, but are paraphrases of phrases that do. The \"Star Trek\" catchphrase \"Beam me up, Scotty\" did not appear in that form in the original series. Other misquotations include \"Just the facts, ma'am\" (attributed to Jack Webb's character of Joe Friday on \"Dragnet\"), \"Heavy lies the crown\" from Shakespeare's Play Henry IV, Part 2, \"Elementary, my dear Watson\" (attributed to Sherlock Holmes; it was, however, said in the films \"The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes\" and \"The Return of Sherlock Holmes\"), \"Luke, I am your father\" (attributed to Darth Vader in Star Wars), \"Play it again, Sam\" (attributed to Ilsa in \"Casablanca\"), \"Do you feel lucky, punk?\" (attributed to Harry Callahan in \"Dirty Harry\") and \"We don't need no stinkin' badges!\" (attributed to Gold Hat in \"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre\").\nQuotative inversion.\nQuotative inversion occurs in sentences where the direct quotation can occur before a verb of saying or after a verb of saying. It can trigger inversion of the verb and the verb's subject. Subject-verb inversion occurs most often in written works, being rare in speech. Quotations may appear before the inverted verb, but can also appear after the subject, such as: \"\"I am going to follow you all the rest of my life,\" declared the man\" and \"Said the woman: \"I see you with both my eyes.\"\"\nAlso referred to as inverted quotations, this technique of reversing the sequence of an existing phrase or formulation is commonly found in biblical texts, particularly the Hebrew Bible and the New Testament. It serves to evoke various emotional and rhetorical effects, mainly to draw extra attention from the reader or listener. By reversing a previously established sequence, authors can introduce surprise, emphasize key points, or create contrasts that highlight the text's significance and its connections to other biblical passages.\nSyntax.\nIn syntactic terms, these direct quotations can be presented in two forms. The first is as the complement of a quotative verb (e.g. Marie said: \"My brother has arrived\"), and the second being as a head clause with a quotative adjunct (e.g. \"My brother has arrived\", Marie announces). The verb phrase can be further expanded to include a complement, such as: \"They'll never make it!\" cried John \"to Mary\". Subjects must precede the complement, otherwise the structure formed will be ungrammatical (e.g. *\"They'll never make it!\" cried \"to Mary\" John). Quotative inversion is only allowed when the verb is in the simple present or the simple past. The most common pairing is the verb \"said\" with a nominal subject, such as: \"That's the whole trouble,\" said Gwen. Additionally, noun phrases are not permitted in addition to the subject when inversion takes place. They are allowed only when there is no subject-verb inversion, or when part of a preposition phrase.\n a. \"Why?\" Gabrielle asked the attendant. - \n b. \"Why?\" asked Gabrielle of the attendant. - \n c. \"*\"\"Why?\" asked Gabrielle the attendant. - \nIn English, both verb-subject and subject-verb word orders are permitted:\n a. \"Don't turn back!\" warned Marcel. - \n b. \"Who's on first?\" Swami demanded. - \nThis however, is not the case in all languages. For example, in Peninsular Spanish, this inversion is not allowed. Quotatives must follow verb-subject order:\n a. \"\u00abNo, no es un enanito\u00bb, rectifica el viejo.\" - \n\"No, he is not a gnome\", corrects the old man.\n b. \"*\u00abNo, no es un enanito\u00bb, el viejo rectifica.\" - \n\"No, he is not a gnome\", the old man corrects.\nBrackets in quotes in English language.\nBrackets are used to indicate an addition or a modification from the original quote. Various uses of brackets in quotes are:\nWhen \"[\"sic\"]\" is added, it means that errors are present in the original text. For example,\n\"Domestic cats are valued by hoomans [\"sic\"] for companionship.\"\nIn spoken discourse.\nTraditionally, quotations\u2014more specifically known as direct quotations\u2014have been distinguished from indirect quotations. Direct quotations differ from indirect quotations in that they are reported from the perspective of the experiencer, while indirect quotations are reported from the perspective of the reporting speaker (e.g. \"He said: 'I am leaving now'\" versus \"He said (that) he was leaving immediately\"); are free in their syntactic form, while indirect quotations are subject to language-specific structural requirements (e.g. indirect quotations in many Indo-European languages are required to have the syntactic form of a well-formed declarative subordinate clause); incorporate extralinguistic material and pragmatic markers, while indirect quotations do not. Crucially, direct quotations have a performative aspect (i.e. occur simultaneously with re-enactments of previous behaviours), which indirect quotations lack.\nBoth direct and indirect quotations in spoken discourse are not intended to be verbatim reproductions of an utterance that has been produced. Instead, direct quotations convey the approximative meaning of such an utterance along with the way in which that utterance was produced. From a sociolinguistic perspective, a direct quotation in spoken discourse can therefore also be defined as \"a performance whereby speakers re-enact previous behaviour (speech/thought/sound/voice effect and gesture) while assuming the dramatic role of the original source of this reported behaviour\". Indirect quotations are simply paraphrases of something that a reporting speaker heard.\nReasons for using.\nQuotations are employed in spoken discourse for many reasons. They are often used by speakers to depict stories and events that have occurred in the past to other interlocutors. The speaker does not necessarily have to have been an original participant in the story or event. Therefore, they can quote something that they did not hear firsthand. Quotations are also used to express thoughts that have never been uttered aloud prior to being quoted. For example, while telling a story, a speaker quotes inner thoughts that they had during a specific situation. Finally, speakers use quotations to propose future dialogue for participants in a situation that may take place in the future. For example, two friends talk about their 10-year high school reunion that will take place in the future and propose what they would say. While future dialogue can be proposed for a situation that will likely happen, it can also be based on a situation that will not actually take place. In the latter usage, the proposed dialogue only exists in the conversational context.\nThe quoted material is usually not a verbatim replication of an utterance that someone originally said. Instead, quotations in spoken discourse reproduce what a speaker wishes to communicate to their recipients; quotations demonstrate something that someone said, the manner in which that person said it, and the current speaker\u2019s feelings about what was said. In this way, quotations are an especially effective storytelling device; the speaker is able to give a voice to the protagonists in their stories themselves, which allows the speaker\u2019s audience to experience the situation in the way that the speaker themselves experienced it.\nForm.\nIn most languages, quotations in spoken discourse are introduced by a verb of saying and a pronoun. For example, a quotation in English can be introduced by \"She said\". In some languages, there is a discourse marker in addition to the verb of saying that functions as verbal quotation marks. For example, Japanese uses the quotative particle (a type of quotative marker) \"to\" along with the conjugated verb of saying \"itta\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVerbs of saying (known as quotative verbs when used to introduce quotations) and quotative particles are used as quotative markers, which signal quotations in utterances. Quotative evidentials are also used in some languages to indicate quoted speech (e.g. Cusco Quechua spoken in Peru, Nanti spoken in lowland southeastern Peru, Laal spoken in Chad).\nQuotative markers.\nQuotative markers are used to mark a section of an utterance as quoted speech (i.e. a quotation). In oral speech, quotative markers act as quotation marks and often include a verb of saying (e.g. \"say\"). A quotative marker usually appears either before or after the reported speech or thought, depending on the syntax of the language. For example, compare the following languages:\nEnglish.\nIn English, the quotative verb \"say\" occurs before the quotation:\n a. She said \"Will you answer the phone, will you answer the phone\"\nIn American English, verbs such as \"be like\", \"go\", and \"be all\" are non-standard quotatives that are commonly used in colloquial speech. They are observed in the speech of young people not only in American English, but in other varieties of English as well (e.g. \"be like\" in New Zealand English, \"be like\" and \"go\" in Glasgow English). Though not semantically considered verbs of saying, they are used to convey the same meaning as such verbs. Like \"say\", \"be like\", \"go\", and \"be all\" occur before the quotation:\n b. I'm like \"I'm so sorry you had to wait\"\n c. She went \"Who are you going with?\"\n d. He's all \"Okay, come with me come with me\"\nIn conversational speech, the use of \"say\" and \"be like\" occurs at about the same frequency, though \"say\" tends to be used in more formal contexts (e.g. office hours between professors and students) and \"be like\" tends to occur in more informal contexts (e.g. a conversation between two young people).\nIn African American Vernacular English, \"talkin' 'bout\" occurs as a verb of quotation, introducing both direct and indirect quotes, as in:\n e. They come talkin' 'bout they is scared of \"me\"!\nJapanese.\nIn Japanese, the quotative particle \"to\" along with the verb of saying \"iu\" (say) occur after the quotation; the conjugated form of \"iu\" (say) is \"itta\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe quotative particle \"to\" can also occur with verbs of thinking, such as \"omou\" (think). Like \"to\" and \"iu\" (say), \"to\" and \"omou\" occur after the quotation.\nLaal.\nIn Laal, the quotative evidential \"m\u0268\u0301\" is used for non-self quotation (i.e. quotation in which the speaker quotes someone else, not themself); it is used with a quotative verb \"\u0253\u0268\u0301l\u00e1\". The use of \"m\u0268\u0301\" results in an indirect quotation translation. The quotative verb \"b\u0268\u0301l\u00e1\" occurs before the quotation, while the quotative evidential \"m\u0268\u0301\" occurs within the quoted speech \"j\u00e1 m\u0268\u0301 ny\u00e0g t\u0101\u0101 w\u00f3\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs the above sentence involves a non-self quotation, \"\u00e0\" (he) and \"j\u00e1\" (I) have different indices to show that they refer to different referents; only this interpretation is well-formed. The interpretation in which they share identical indices is ill-formed (i.e. ungrammatical), as indicated by the asterisk.\nIn addition to quotative markers, speakers also use prosodic shifts, pauses, pronominal choices, and tense to detect the occurrence and boundaries of quotations in spoken utterances.\nSyntax.\nDifferent versions of quotative verbs, particles, and evidentials can be used to express the same idea with varying nuances, often to frame how the primary speaker, or the person who is quoting, feels about a quotation. The syntax of quotations varies cross-linguistically. A primary speaker may use the tense and linguistic idiosyncrasies of the speech at the time it was uttered in a quotation, independent from the tense in the main clause in some languages, or use the same tense in both the main clause and quotation in other languages. They will also use coreferenced pronouns to the direct quotation's first-person subject in the main clause: Shex said, \"Ix...\"; theyy said \"wey ...\" In many languages, the primary speaker may also attempt to quote an utterance in the same language the original speaker used, even if an interlocutor does not understand it; however, it is mainly context-dependent such as when telling stories.\nQuotative verbs.\nQuotative verbs are lexical verbs that indicate the speech, thoughts, or perceptions of the original speaker.\nQuotations can be introduced as the complement to a quotative verb or as the head phrase to an adjunct phrase containing a quotative verb in some languages like English and French.\nEnglish also displays verb-second (V2) order vestige only in quotation contexts (quotative inversion), requiring the finite verb to appear in the second position of a clause. For example: \"No no no\" \"says\" Harry.\nDirect and indirect quotations are sometimes not distinguishable. Traditionally, English uses an overt complementizer \"that\" after a quotative verb to indicate indirect quotation, but it is also seen to prompt direct quotation in some English varieties like Indian English, Hong Kong English, and Kenyan English.\nThe newer quotative verb \"be like\" in English is used to only introduce direct quotations. \"Be like\" includes the use of the demonstrative \"that\", which is null in most English varieties, but can be optionally overt in some varieties like Glasgow English. Dutch's quotative verb \"hebben zoiets van\" has a similar structure to Standard American English in that it has a null demonstrative that precedes the quotation. It differs from the English structures in that it uses an overt quantifier \"zoiets\" to be well-formed.\nQuotative particles.\nQuotative or hearsay particles are grammatical markers equivalent to full lexical verbs with meanings of \"say, mention, tell, etc.\" In many languages, they are grammaticalized to different extremes from their previously lexical form. Common patterns of grammaticalization trajectories include verb to complementizer in many African and Asian languages and verb to tense-aspect-mood markers primarily in African languages, but also in Australian languages and multiple other language families.\nJapanese, for example, uses a sentence-final quotative particle \"tte\" verbally to mean \"I heard (quote)\" with some uncertainty. In sentence-medial position, \"tte\" is sometimes regarded along with \"to\" to be either a quotative particle or complementizer meaning \"I heard (quote)\" with less uncertainty and often more knowledge of the origin of the quote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVerbs of saying are highly restricted in Australian languages and almost always immediately proceed the complement verb.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nQuotative evidentials.\nQuotative or hearsay evidentials provide knowledge of who or where information originated from in speech based on logical assumption. Languages indicate this in various ways: through grammatical marking, additional words and phrases, prosody, gestures, or systematic affixes of verbs. Quotative readings of evidentials are typologically rare. For example, English can express evidentials with an optional adverb, \"\"Allegedly\", Annie pulled the trigger.\" The interlocutor then knows the source of the quotation is from elsewhere, but this is not a quotative reading as there is no direct performative quoting or verbs of saying. Languages including Cusco Quechua, Kham, Tagalog, and Kaalallisut are documented as containing quotative evidentials. In languages with \"true\" quotative evidentials (which usually introduce quoted statements), it is also possible for them to occur with interrogatives and imperatives, yielding quoted interrogatives and quoted imperatives. Similar to quotative particles, quotative evidentials are usually grammaticalized from full lexical verbs.\nNh\u00eaengat\u00fa, a Tup\u00ed-Guaran\u00ed lingua franca of North-West Amazonia, has a reported evidential marker \"pa\u00e1\". An example scenario is as follows: X saw John go fishing. Mary then and asks X where John went. X replies \"u-s\u00fa u-piniatika\" (he went fishing). Later, Peter asks Mary where John went. She replies to Peter that she did not see John go herself, but rather heard it from a different source using the evidential marker \"u-s\u00fa u-piniatika \"pa\u00e1.\"\" \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTagalog's quotative evidentials are used with imperative quotations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCusco Quechua's quotative evidential comes as a derivation of a clitic, \"=si\", for interrogative quotations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHand gesture.\nHand gesturing a quotation in a conversation can be done with air quotes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25201", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25201", "title": "Quotient set", "text": ""}
{"id": "25202", "revid": "12530063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25202", "title": "Quantum mechanics", "text": "Description of physical properties at the atomic and subatomic scale\nQuantum mechanics is the fundamental physical theory that describes the behavior of matter and of light; its unusual characteristics typically occur at and below the scale of atoms. It is the foundation of all quantum physics, which includes quantum chemistry, quantum biology, quantum field theory, quantum technology, and quantum information science.\nQuantum mechanics can describe many systems that classical physics cannot. Classical physics can describe many aspects of nature at an ordinary (macroscopic and (optical) microscopic) scale, but is not sufficient for describing them at very small submicroscopic (atomic and subatomic) scales. Classical mechanics can be derived from quantum mechanics as an approximation that is valid at ordinary scales.\nQuantum systems have bound states that are quantized to discrete values of energy, momentum, angular momentum, and other quantities, in contrast to classical systems where these quantities can be measured continuously. Measurements of quantum systems show characteristics of both particles and waves (wave\u2013particle duality), and there are limits to how accurately the value of a physical quantity can be predicted prior to its measurement, given a complete set of initial conditions (the uncertainty principle).\nQuantum mechanics arose gradually from theories to explain observations that could not be reconciled with classical physics, such as Max Planck's solution in 1900 to the black-body radiation problem, and the correspondence between energy and frequency in Albert Einstein's 1905 paper, which explained the photoelectric effect. These early attempts to understand microscopic phenomena, now known as the \"old quantum theory\", led to the full development of quantum mechanics in the mid-1920s by Niels Bohr, Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, Paul Dirac and others. The modern theory is formulated in various specially developed mathematical formalisms. In one of them, a mathematical entity called the wave function provides information, in the form of probability amplitudes, about what measurements of a particle's energy, momentum, and other physical properties may yield.\nOverview and fundamental concepts.\nQuantum mechanics allows the calculation of properties and behaviour of physical systems. It is typically applied to microscopic systems: molecules, atoms and subatomic particles. It has been demonstrated to hold for complex molecules with thousands of atoms, but its application to human beings raises philosophical problems, such as Wigner's friend, and its application to the universe as a whole remains speculative. Predictions of quantum mechanics have been verified experimentally to an extremely high degree of accuracy. For example, the refinement of quantum mechanics for the interaction of light and matter, known as quantum electrodynamics (QED), has been shown to agree with experiment to within 1 part in 1012 when predicting the magnetic properties of an electron.\nA fundamental feature of the theory is that it usually cannot predict with certainty what will happen, but only gives probabilities. Mathematically, a probability is found by taking the square of the absolute value of a complex number, known as a probability amplitude. This is known as the Born rule, named after physicist Max Born. For example, a quantum particle like an electron can be described by a wave function, which associates to each point in space a probability amplitude. Applying the Born rule to these amplitudes gives a probability density function for the position that the electron will be found to have when an experiment is performed to measure it. This is the best the theory can do; it cannot say for certain where the electron will be found. The Schr\u00f6dinger equation relates the collection of probability amplitudes that pertain to one moment of time to the collection of probability amplitudes that pertain to another.\nOne consequence of the mathematical rules of quantum mechanics is a tradeoff in predictability between measurable quantities. The most famous form of this uncertainty principle says that no matter how a quantum particle is prepared or how carefully experiments upon it are arranged, it is impossible to have a precise prediction for a measurement of its position and also at the same time for a measurement of its momentum.\nAnother consequence of the mathematical rules of quantum mechanics is the phenomenon of quantum interference, which is often illustrated with the double-slit experiment. In the basic version of this experiment, a coherent light source, such as a laser beam, illuminates a plate pierced by two parallel slits, and the light passing through the slits is observed on a screen behind the plate. The wave nature of light causes the light waves passing through the two slits to interfere, producing bright and dark bands on the screen \u2013 a result that would not be expected if light consisted of classical particles. However, the light is always found to be absorbed at the screen at discrete points, as individual particles rather than waves; the interference pattern appears via the varying density of these particle hits on the screen. Furthermore, versions of the experiment that include detectors at the slits find that each detected photon passes through one slit (as would a classical particle), and not through both slits (as would a wave). However, such experiments demonstrate that particles do not form the interference pattern if one detects which slit they pass through. This behavior is known as wave\u2013particle duality. In addition to light, electrons, atoms, and molecules are all found to exhibit the same dual behavior when fired towards a double slit.\nAnother non-classical phenomenon predicted by quantum mechanics is quantum tunnelling: a particle that goes up against a potential barrier can cross it, even if its kinetic energy is smaller than the maximum of the potential. In classical mechanics this particle would be trapped. Quantum tunnelling has several important consequences, enabling radioactive decay, nuclear fusion in stars, and applications such as scanning tunnelling microscopy, tunnel diode and tunnel field-effect transistor.\nWhen quantum systems interact, the result can be the creation of quantum entanglement: their properties become so intertwined that a description of the whole solely in terms of the individual parts is no longer possible. Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger called entanglement \"...the characteristic trait of quantum mechanics, the one that enforces its entire departure from classical lines of thought\". Quantum entanglement enables quantum computing and is part of quantum communication protocols, such as quantum key distribution and superdense coding. Contrary to popular misconception, entanglement does not allow sending signals faster than light, as demonstrated by the no-communication theorem.\nAnother possibility opened by entanglement is testing for \"hidden variables\", hypothetical properties more fundamental than the quantities addressed in quantum theory itself, knowledge of which would allow more exact predictions than quantum theory provides. A collection of results, most significantly Bell's theorem, have demonstrated that broad classes of such hidden-variable theories are in fact incompatible with quantum physics. According to Bell's theorem, if nature actually operates in accord with any theory of local hidden variables, then the results of a Bell test will be constrained in a particular, quantifiable way. Many Bell tests have been performed and they have shown results incompatible with the constraints imposed by local hidden variables.\nIt is not possible to present these concepts in more than a superficial way without introducing the mathematics involved; understanding quantum mechanics requires not only manipulating complex numbers, but also linear algebra, differential equations, group theory, and other more advanced subjects. Accordingly, this article will present a mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics and survey its application to some useful and oft-studied examples.\nMathematical formulation.\nIn the mathematically rigorous formulation of quantum mechanics, the state of a quantum mechanical system is a vector formula_1 belonging to a (separable) complex Hilbert space formula_2. This vector is postulated to be normalized under the Hilbert space inner product, that is, it obeys formula_3, and it is well-defined up to a complex number of modulus 1 (the global phase), that is, formula_1 and formula_5 represent the same physical system. In other words, the possible states are points in the projective space of a Hilbert space, usually called the complex projective space. The exact nature of this Hilbert space is dependent on the system\u00a0\u2013 for example, for describing position and momentum the Hilbert space is the space of complex square-integrable functions formula_6, while the Hilbert space for the spin of a single proton is simply the space of two-dimensional complex vectors formula_7 with the usual inner product.\nPhysical quantities of interest\u00a0\u2013 position, momentum, energy, spin\u00a0\u2013 are represented by observables, which are Hermitian (more precisely, self-adjoint) linear operators acting on the Hilbert space. A quantum state can be an eigenvector of an observable, in which case it is called an eigenstate, and the associated eigenvalue corresponds to the value of the observable in that eigenstate. More generally, a quantum state will be a linear combination of the eigenstates, known as a quantum superposition. When an observable is measured, the result will be one of its eigenvalues with probability given by the Born rule: in the simplest case the eigenvalue formula_8 is non-degenerate and the probability is given by formula_9, where formula_10 is its associated unit-length eigenvector. More generally, the eigenvalue is degenerate and the probability is given by formula_11, where formula_12 is the projector onto its associated eigenspace. In the continuous case, these formulas give instead the probability density.\nAfter the measurement, if result formula_8 was obtained, the quantum state is postulated to collapse to formula_10, in the non-degenerate case, or to formula_15, in the general case. The probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics thus stems from the act of measurement. This is one of the most difficult aspects of quantum systems to understand. It was the central topic in the famous Bohr\u2013Einstein debates, in which the two scientists attempted to clarify these fundamental principles by way of thought experiments. In the decades after the formulation of quantum mechanics, the question of what constitutes a \"measurement\" has been extensively studied. Newer interpretations of quantum mechanics have been formulated that do away with the concept of \"wave function collapse\" (see, for example, the many-worlds interpretation). The basic idea is that when a quantum system interacts with a measuring apparatus, their respective wave functions become entangled so that the original quantum system ceases to exist as an independent entity (see \"Measurement in quantum mechanics\").\nTime evolution of a quantum state.\nThe time evolution of a quantum state is described by the Schr\u00f6dinger equation:\nformula_16\nHere formula_17 denotes the Hamiltonian, the observable corresponding to the total energy of the system, and formula_18 is the reduced Planck constant. The constant formula_19 is introduced so that the Hamiltonian is reduced to the classical Hamiltonian in cases where the quantum system can be approximated by a classical system; the ability to make such an approximation in certain limits is called the correspondence principle.\nThe solution of this differential equation is given by\nformula_20\nThe operator formula_21 is known as the time-evolution operator, and has the crucial property that it is unitary. This time evolution is deterministic in the sense that\u00a0\u2013 given an initial quantum state formula_22 \u2013 it makes a definite prediction of what the quantum state formula_23 will be at any later time.\nSome wave functions produce probability distributions that are independent of time, such as eigenstates of the Hamiltonian. Many systems that are treated dynamically in classical mechanics are described by such \"static\" wave functions. For example, a single electron in an unexcited atom is pictured classically as a particle moving in a circular trajectory around the atomic nucleus, whereas in quantum mechanics, it is described by a static wave function surrounding the nucleus. For example, the electron wave function for an unexcited hydrogen atom is a spherically symmetric function known as an \"s\" orbital (Fig. 1).\nAnalytic solutions of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation are known for very few relatively simple model Hamiltonians including the quantum harmonic oscillator, the particle in a box, the dihydrogen cation, and the hydrogen atom. Even the helium atom\u00a0\u2013 which contains just two electrons\u00a0\u2013 has defied all attempts at a fully analytic treatment, admitting no solution in closed form.\nHowever, there are techniques for finding approximate solutions. One method, called perturbation theory, uses the analytic result for a simple quantum mechanical model to create a result for a related but more complicated model by (for example) the addition of a weak potential energy. Another approximation method applies to systems for which quantum mechanics produces only small deviations from classical behavior. These deviations can then be computed based on the classical motion.\nUncertainty principle.\nOne consequence of the basic quantum formalism is the uncertainty principle. In its most familiar form, this states that no preparation of a quantum particle can imply simultaneously precise predictions both for a measurement of its position and for a measurement of its momentum. Both position and momentum are observables, meaning that they are represented by Hermitian operators. The position operator formula_24 and momentum operator formula_25 do not commute, but rather satisfy the canonical commutation relation:\nformula_26\nGiven a quantum state, the Born rule lets us compute expectation values for both formula_27 and formula_28, and moreover for powers of them. Defining the uncertainty for an observable by a standard deviation, we have\nformula_29\nand likewise for the momentum:\nformula_30\nThe uncertainty principle states that\nformula_31\nEither standard deviation can in principle be made arbitrarily small, but not both simultaneously. This inequality generalizes to arbitrary pairs of self-adjoint operators formula_32 and formula_33. The commutator of these two operators is\nformula_34\nand this provides the lower bound on the product of standard deviations:\nformula_35\nAnother consequence of the canonical commutation relation is that the position and momentum operators are Fourier transforms of each other, so that a description of an object according to its momentum is the Fourier transform of its description according to its position. The fact that dependence in momentum is the Fourier transform of the dependence in position means that the momentum operator is equivalent (up to an formula_36 factor) to taking the derivative according to the position, since in Fourier analysis differentiation corresponds to multiplication in the dual space. This is why in quantum equations in position space, the momentum formula_37 is replaced by formula_38, and in particular in the non-relativistic Schr\u00f6dinger equation in position space the momentum-squared term is replaced with a Laplacian times formula_39.\nComposite systems and entanglement.\nWhen two different quantum systems are considered together, the Hilbert space of the combined system is the tensor product of the Hilbert spaces of the two components. For example, let A and B be two quantum systems, with Hilbert spaces formula_40 and formula_41, respectively. The Hilbert space of the composite system is then\nformula_42\nIf the state for the first system is the vector formula_43 and the state for the second system is formula_44, then the state of the composite system is\nformula_45\nNot all states in the joint Hilbert space formula_46 can be written in this form, however, because the superposition principle implies that linear combinations of these \"separable\" or \"product states\" are also valid. For example, if formula_43 and formula_48 are both possible states for system formula_32, and likewise formula_44 and formula_51 are both possible states for system formula_33, then\nformula_53\nis a valid joint state that is not separable. States that are not separable are called entangled.\nIf the state for a composite system is entangled, it is impossible to describe either component system A or system B by a state vector. One can instead define reduced density matrices that describe the statistics that can be obtained by making measurements on either component system alone. This necessarily causes a loss of information, though: knowing the reduced density matrices of the individual systems is not enough to reconstruct the state of the composite system. Just as density matrices specify the state of a subsystem of a larger system, analogously, positive operator-valued measures (POVMs) describe the effect on a subsystem of a measurement performed on a larger system. POVMs are extensively used in quantum information theory.\nAs described above, entanglement is a key feature of models of measurement processes in which an apparatus becomes entangled with the system being measured. Systems interacting with the environment in which they reside generally become entangled with that environment, a phenomenon known as quantum decoherence. This can explain why, in practice, quantum effects are difficult to observe in systems larger than microscopic.\nEquivalence between formulations.\nThere are many mathematically equivalent formulations of quantum mechanics. One of the oldest and most common is the \"transformation theory\" proposed by Paul Dirac, which unifies and generalizes the two earliest formulations of quantum mechanics\u00a0\u2013 matrix mechanics (invented by Werner Heisenberg) and wave mechanics (invented by Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger). An alternative formulation of quantum mechanics is Feynman's path integral formulation, in which a quantum-mechanical amplitude is considered as a sum over all possible classical and non-classical paths between the initial and final states. This is the quantum-mechanical counterpart of the action principle in classical mechanics.\nSymmetries and conservation laws.\nThe Hamiltonian formula_17 is known as the \"generator\" of time evolution, since it defines a unitary time-evolution operator formula_55 for each value of formula_56. From this relation between formula_57 and formula_17, it follows that any observable formula_32 that commutes with formula_17 will be conserved: its expectation value will not change over time. This statement generalizes, as mathematically, any Hermitian operator formula_32 can generate a family of unitary operators parameterized by a variable formula_56. Under the evolution generated by formula_32, any observable formula_33 that commutes with formula_32 will be conserved. Moreover, if formula_33 is conserved by evolution under formula_32, then formula_32 is conserved under the evolution generated by formula_33. This implies a quantum version of the result proven by Emmy Noether in classical (Lagrangian) mechanics: for every differentiable symmetry of a Hamiltonian, there exists a corresponding conservation law.\nExamples.\nFree particle.\nThe simplest example of a quantum system with a position degree of freedom is a free particle in a single spatial dimension. A free particle is one which is not subject to external influences, so that its Hamiltonian consists only of its kinetic energy:\nformula_70\nThe general solution of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is given by\nformula_71\nwhich is a superposition of all possible plane waves formula_72, which are eigenstates of the momentum operator with momentum formula_73. The coefficients of the superposition are formula_74, which is the Fourier transform of the initial quantum state formula_75.\nIt is not possible for the solution to be a single momentum eigenstate, or a single position eigenstate, as these are not normalizable quantum states. Instead, we can consider a Gaussian wave packet:\nformula_76\nwhich has Fourier transform, and therefore momentum distribution\nformula_77\nWe see that as we make formula_78 smaller the spread in position gets smaller, but the spread in momentum gets larger. Conversely, by making formula_78 larger we make the spread in momentum smaller, but the spread in position gets larger. This illustrates the uncertainty principle.\nAs we let the Gaussian wave packet evolve in time, we see that its center moves through space at a constant velocity (like a classical particle with no forces acting on it). However, the wave packet will also spread out as time progresses, which means that the position becomes more and more uncertain. The uncertainty in momentum, however, stays constant.\nParticle in a box.\nThe particle in a one-dimensional potential energy box is the most mathematically simple example where restraints lead to the quantization of energy levels. The box is defined as having zero potential energy everywhere inside a certain region, and therefore infinite potential energy everywhere outside that region. For the one-dimensional case in the formula_80 direction, the time-independent Schr\u00f6dinger equation may be written\nformula_81\nWith the differential operator defined by\nformula_82the previous equation is evocative of the classic kinetic energy analogue,\nformula_83\nwith state formula_1 in this case having energy formula_85 coincident with the kinetic energy of the particle.\nThe general solutions of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for the particle in a box are\nformula_86\nor, from Euler's formula,\nformula_87\nThe infinite potential walls of the box determine the values of formula_88 and formula_89 at formula_90 and formula_91 where formula_1 must be zero. Thus, at formula_90,\nformula_94\nand formula_95. At formula_91,\nformula_97\nin which formula_98 cannot be zero as this would conflict with the postulate that formula_1 has norm 1. Therefore, since formula_100, formula_101 must be an integer multiple of formula_102,\nformula_103\nThis constraint on formula_89 implies a constraint on the energy levels, yielding\nformula_105\nA finite potential well is the generalization of the infinite potential well problem to potential wells having finite depth. The finite potential well problem is mathematically more complicated than the infinite particle-in-a-box problem as the wave function is not pinned to zero at the walls of the well. Instead, the wave function must satisfy more complicated mathematical boundary conditions as it is nonzero in regions outside the well. Another related problem is that of the rectangular potential barrier, which furnishes a model for the quantum tunneling effect that plays an important role in the performance of modern technologies such as flash memory and scanning tunneling microscopy.\nHarmonic oscillator.\nAs in the classical case, the potential for the quantum harmonic oscillator is given by\nformula_106\nThis problem can either be treated by directly solving the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, which is not trivial, or by using the more elegant \"ladder method\" first proposed by Paul Dirac. The eigenstates are given by\nformula_107\nformula_108\nwhere \"Hn\" are the Hermite polynomials\nformula_109\nand the corresponding energy levels are\nformula_110\nThis is another example illustrating the discretization of energy for bound states.\nMach\u2013Zehnder interferometer.\nThe Mach\u2013Zehnder interferometer (MZI) illustrates the concepts of superposition and interference with linear algebra in dimension 2, rather than differential equations. It can be seen as a simplified version of the double-slit experiment, but it is of interest in its own right, for example in the delayed choice quantum eraser, the Elitzur\u2013Vaidman bomb tester, and in studies of quantum entanglement.\nWe can model a photon going through the interferometer by considering that at each point it can be in a superposition of only two paths: the \"lower\" path which starts from the left, goes straight through both beam splitters, and ends at the top, and the \"upper\" path which starts from the bottom, goes straight through both beam splitters, and ends at the right. The quantum state of the photon is therefore a vector formula_111 that is a superposition of the \"lower\" path formula_112 and the \"upper\" path formula_113, that is, formula_114 for complex formula_115. In order to respect the postulate that formula_116 we require that formula_117.\nBoth beam splitters are modelled as the unitary matrix formula_118, which means that when a photon meets the beam splitter it will either stay on the same path with a probability amplitude of formula_119, or be reflected to the other path with a probability amplitude of formula_120. The phase shifter on the upper arm is modelled as the unitary matrix formula_121, which means that if the photon is on the \"upper\" path it will gain a relative phase of formula_122, and it will stay unchanged if it is in the lower path.\nA photon that enters the interferometer from the left will then be acted upon with a beam splitter formula_33, a phase shifter formula_28, and another beam splitter formula_33, and so end up in the state\nformula_126\nand the probabilities that it will be detected at the right or at the top are given respectively by\nformula_127\nformula_128\nOne can therefore use the Mach\u2013Zehnder interferometer to estimate the phase shift by estimating these probabilities.\nIt is interesting to consider what would happen if the photon were definitely in either the \"lower\" or \"upper\" paths between the beam splitters. This can be accomplished by blocking one of the paths, or equivalently by removing the first beam splitter (and feeding the photon from the left or the bottom, as desired). In both cases, there will be no interference between the paths anymore, and the probabilities are given by formula_129, independently of the phase formula_122. From this we can conclude that the photon does not take one path or another after the first beam splitter, but rather that it is in a genuine quantum superposition of the two paths.\nApplications.\nQuantum mechanics has had enormous success in explaining many of the features of our universe, with regard to small-scale and discrete quantities and interactions which cannot be explained by classical methods. Quantum mechanics is often the only theory that can reveal the individual behaviors of the subatomic particles that make up all forms of matter (electrons, protons, neutrons, photons, and others). Solid-state physics and materials science are dependent upon quantum mechanics.\nIn many aspects, modern technology operates at a scale where quantum effects are significant. Important applications of quantum theory include quantum chemistry, quantum optics, quantum computing, superconducting magnets, light-emitting diodes, the optical amplifier and the laser, the transistor and semiconductors such as the microprocessor, medical and research imaging such as magnetic resonance imaging and electron microscopy. Explanations for many biological and physical phenomena are rooted in the nature of the chemical bond, most notably the macro-molecule DNA.\nRelation to other scientific theories.\nClassical mechanics.\nThe rules of quantum mechanics assert that the state space of a system is a Hilbert space and that observables of the system are Hermitian operators acting on vectors in that space\u00a0\u2013 although they do not tell us which Hilbert space or which operators. These can be chosen appropriately in order to obtain a quantitative description of a quantum system, a necessary step in making physical predictions. An important guide for making these choices is the correspondence principle, a heuristic which states that the predictions of quantum mechanics reduce to those of classical mechanics in the regime of large quantum numbers. One can also start from an established classical model of a particular system, and then try to guess the underlying quantum model that would give rise to the classical model in the correspondence limit. This approach is known as quantization.\nWhen quantum mechanics was originally formulated, it was applied to models whose correspondence limit was non-relativistic classical mechanics. For instance, the well-known model of the quantum harmonic oscillator uses an explicitly non-relativistic expression for the kinetic energy of the oscillator, and is thus a quantum version of the classical harmonic oscillator.\nComplications arise with chaotic systems, which do not have good quantum numbers, and quantum chaos studies the relationship between classical and quantum descriptions in these systems.\nQuantum decoherence is a mechanism through which quantum systems lose coherence, and thus become incapable of displaying many typically quantum effects: quantum superpositions become simply probabilistic mixtures, and quantum entanglement becomes simply classical correlations. Quantum coherence is not typically evident at macroscopic scales, though at temperatures approaching absolute zero quantum behavior may manifest macroscopically.\nMany macroscopic properties of a classical system are a direct consequence of the quantum behavior of its parts. For example, the stability of bulk matter (consisting of atoms and molecules which would quickly collapse under electric forces alone), the rigidity of solids, and the mechanical, thermal, chemical, optical and magnetic properties of matter are all results of the interaction of electric charges under the rules of quantum mechanics.\nSpecial relativity and electrodynamics.\nEarly attempts to merge quantum mechanics with special relativity involved the replacement of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation with a covariant equation such as the Klein\u2013Gordon equation or the Dirac equation. While these theories were successful in explaining many experimental results, they had certain unsatisfactory qualities stemming from their neglect of the relativistic creation and annihilation of particles. A fully relativistic quantum theory required the development of quantum field theory, which applies quantization to a field (rather than a fixed set of particles). The first complete quantum field theory, quantum electrodynamics, provides a fully quantum description of the electromagnetic interaction. Quantum electrodynamics is, along with general relativity, one of the most accurate physical theories ever devised.\nThe full apparatus of quantum field theory is often unnecessary for describing electrodynamic systems. A simpler approach, one that has been used since the inception of quantum mechanics, is to treat charged particles as quantum mechanical objects being acted on by a classical electromagnetic field. For example, the elementary quantum model of the hydrogen atom describes the electric field of the hydrogen atom using a classical formula_131 Coulomb potential. Likewise, in a Stern\u2013Gerlach experiment, a charged particle is modeled as a quantum system, while the background magnetic field is described classically. This \"semi-classical\" approach fails if quantum fluctuations in the electromagnetic field play an important role, such as in the emission of photons by charged particles.\nQuantum field theories for the strong nuclear force and the weak nuclear force have also been developed. The quantum field theory of the strong nuclear force is called quantum chromodynamics, and describes the interactions of subnuclear particles such as quarks and gluons. The weak nuclear force and the electromagnetic force were unified, in their quantized forms, into a single quantum field theory (known as electroweak theory), by the physicists Abdus Salam, Sheldon Glashow and Steven Weinberg.\nRelation to general relativity.\nEven though the predictions of both quantum theory and general relativity have been supported by rigorous and repeated empirical evidence, their abstract formalisms contradict each other and they have proven extremely difficult to incorporate into one consistent, cohesive model. Gravity is negligible in many areas of particle physics, so that unification between general relativity and quantum mechanics is not an urgent issue in those particular applications. However, the lack of a correct theory of quantum gravity is an important issue in physical cosmology and the search by physicists for an elegant \"Theory of Everything\" (TOE). Consequently, resolving the inconsistencies between both theories has been a major goal of 20th- and 21st-century physics. This TOE would combine not only the models of subatomic physics but also derive the four fundamental forces of nature from a single force or phenomenon.\nOne proposal for doing so is string theory, which posits that the point-like particles of particle physics are replaced by one-dimensional objects called strings. String theory describes how these strings propagate through space and interact with each other. On distance scales larger than the string scale, a string looks just like an ordinary particle, with its mass, charge, and other properties determined by the vibrational state of the string. In string theory, one of the many vibrational states of the string corresponds to the graviton, a quantum mechanical particle that carries gravitational force.\nAnother popular theory is loop quantum gravity (LQG), which describes quantum properties of gravity and is thus a theory of quantum spacetime. LQG is an attempt to merge and adapt standard quantum mechanics and standard general relativity. This theory describes space as an extremely fine fabric \"woven\" of finite loops called spin networks. The evolution of a spin network over time is called a spin foam. The characteristic length scale of a spin foam is the Planck length, approximately 1.616\u00d710\u221235 m, and so lengths shorter than the Planck length are not physically meaningful in LQG.\nPhilosophical implications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in physics\nIs there a preferred interpretation of quantum mechanics? How does the quantum description of reality, which includes elements such as the \"superposition of states\" and \"wave function collapse\", give rise to the reality we perceive?\nMore unsolved problems in physics\nSince its inception, the many counter-intuitive aspects and results of quantum mechanics have provoked strong philosophical debates and many interpretations. The arguments centre on the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics, the difficulties with wavefunction collapse and the related measurement problem, and quantum nonlocality. Perhaps the only consensus that exists about these issues is that there is no consensus. Richard Feynman once said, \"I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics.\" According to Steven Weinberg, \"There is now in my opinion no entirely satisfactory interpretation of quantum mechanics.\"\nThe views of Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg and other physicists are often grouped together as the \"Copenhagen interpretation\". According to these views, the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics is not a temporary feature which will eventually be replaced by a deterministic theory, but is instead a final renunciation of the classical idea of \"causality\". Bohr in particular emphasized that any well-defined application of the quantum mechanical formalism must always make reference to the experimental arrangement, due to the complementary nature of evidence obtained under different experimental situations. Copenhagen-type interpretations were adopted by Nobel laureates in quantum physics, including Bohr, Heisenberg, Schr\u00f6dinger, Feynman, and Zeilinger as well as 21st-century researchers in quantum foundations.\nAlbert Einstein, himself one of the founders of quantum theory, was troubled by its apparent failure to respect some cherished metaphysical principles, such as determinism and locality. Einstein's long-running exchanges with Bohr about the meaning and status of quantum mechanics are now known as the Bohr\u2013Einstein debates. Einstein believed that underlying quantum mechanics must be a theory that explicitly forbids action at a distance. He argued that quantum mechanics was incomplete, a theory that was valid but not fundamental, analogous to how thermodynamics is valid, but the fundamental theory behind it is statistical mechanics. In 1935, Einstein and his collaborators Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen published an argument that the principle of locality implies the incompleteness of quantum mechanics, a thought experiment later termed the Einstein\u2013Podolsky\u2013Rosen paradox. In 1964, John Bell showed that EPR's principle of locality, together with determinism, was actually incompatible with quantum mechanics: they implied constraints on the correlations produced by distance systems, now known as Bell inequalities, that can be violated by entangled particles. Since then several experiments have been performed to obtain these correlations, with the result that they do in fact violate Bell inequalities, and thus falsify the conjunction of locality with determinism.\nBohmian mechanics shows that it is possible to reformulate quantum mechanics to make it deterministic, at the price of making it explicitly nonlocal. It attributes not only a wave function to a physical system, but in addition a real position, that evolves deterministically under a nonlocal guiding equation. The evolution of a physical system is given at all times by the Schr\u00f6dinger equation together with the guiding equation; there is never a collapse of the wave function. This solves the measurement problem.\nEverett's many-worlds interpretation, formulated in 1956, holds that all the possibilities described by quantum theory simultaneously occur in a multiverse composed of mostly independent parallel universes. This is a consequence of removing the axiom of the collapse of the wave packet. All possible states of the measured system and the measuring apparatus, together with the observer, are present in a real physical quantum superposition. While the multiverse is deterministic, we perceive non-deterministic behavior governed by probabilities, because we do not observe the multiverse as a whole, but only one parallel universe at a time. Exactly how this is supposed to work has been the subject of much debate. Several attempts have been made to make sense of this and derive the Born rule, with no consensus on whether they have been successful.\nRelational quantum mechanics appeared in the late 1990s as a modern derivative of Copenhagen-type ideas, and QBism was developed some years later.\nHistory.\nQuantum mechanics was developed in the early decades of the 20th century, driven by the need to explain phenomena that, in some cases, had been observed in earlier times. Scientific inquiry into the wave nature of light began in the 17th and 18th centuries, when scientists such as Robert Hooke, Christiaan Huygens and Leonhard Euler proposed a wave theory of light based on experimental observations. In 1803 English polymath Thomas Young described the famous double-slit experiment. This experiment played a major role in the general acceptance of the wave theory of light.\nDuring the early 19th century, chemical research by John Dalton and Amedeo Avogadro lent weight to the atomic theory of matter, an idea that James Clerk Maxwell, Ludwig Boltzmann and others built upon to establish the kinetic theory of gases. The successes of kinetic theory gave further credence to the idea that matter is composed of atoms, yet the theory also had shortcomings that would only be resolved by the development of quantum mechanics. While the early conception of atoms from Greek philosophy had been that they were indivisible units\u00a0\u2013 the word \"atom\" deriving from the Greek for 'uncuttable'\u00a0\u2013 the 19th century saw the formulation of hypotheses about subatomic structure. One important discovery in that regard was Michael Faraday's 1838 observation of a glow caused by an electrical discharge inside a glass tube containing gas at low pressure. Julius Pl\u00fccker, Johann Wilhelm Hittorf and Eugen Goldstein carried on and improved upon Faraday's work, leading to the identification of cathode rays, which J. J. Thomson found to consist of subatomic particles that would be called electrons.\nThe black-body radiation problem was discovered by Gustav Kirchhoff in 1859. In 1900, Max Planck proposed the hypothesis that energy is radiated and absorbed in discrete \"quanta\" (or energy packets), yielding a calculation that precisely matched the observed patterns of black-body radiation. The word \"quantum\" derives from the Latin, meaning \"how great\" or \"how much\". According to Planck, quantities of energy could be thought of as divided into \"elements\" whose size (\"E\") would be proportional to their frequency (\"\u03bd\"):\nformula_132,\nwhere \"h\" is the Planck constant. Planck cautiously insisted that this was only an aspect of the processes of absorption and emission of radiation and was not the physical reality of the radiation. In fact, he considered his quantum hypothesis a mathematical trick to get the right answer rather than a sizable discovery. However, in 1905 Albert Einstein interpreted Planck's quantum hypothesis realistically and used it to explain the photoelectric effect, in which shining light on certain materials can eject electrons from the material. Niels Bohr then developed Planck's ideas about radiation into a model of the hydrogen atom that successfully predicted the spectral lines of hydrogen. Einstein further developed this idea to show that an electromagnetic wave such as light could also be described as a particle (later called the photon), with a discrete amount of energy that depends on its frequency. In his paper \"On the Quantum Theory of Radiation\", Einstein expanded on the interaction between energy and matter to explain the absorption and emission of energy by atoms. Although overshadowed at the time by his general theory of relativity, this paper articulated the mechanism underlying the stimulated emission of radiation, which became the basis of the laser.\nThis phase is known as the old quantum theory. Never complete or self-consistent, the old quantum theory was rather a set of heuristic corrections to classical mechanics. The theory is now understood as a semi-classical approximation to modern quantum mechanics. Notable results from this period include, in addition to the work of Planck, Einstein and Bohr mentioned above, Einstein and Peter Debye's work on the specific heat of solids, Bohr and Hendrika Johanna van Leeuwen's proof that classical physics cannot account for diamagnetism, and Arnold Sommerfeld's extension of the Bohr model to include special-relativistic effects.\nIn the mid-1920s quantum mechanics was developed to become the standard formulation for atomic physics. In 1923, the French physicist Louis de Broglie put forward his theory of matter waves by stating that particles can exhibit wave characteristics and vice versa. Building on de Broglie's approach, modern quantum mechanics was born in 1925, when the German physicists Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, and Pascual Jordan developed matrix mechanics and the Austrian physicist Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger invented wave mechanics. Born introduced the probabilistic interpretation of Schr\u00f6dinger's wave function in July 1926. Thus, the entire field of quantum physics emerged, leading to its wider acceptance at the Fifth Solvay Conference in 1927.\nBy 1930, quantum mechanics had been further unified and formalized by David Hilbert, Paul Dirac and John von Neumann with greater emphasis on measurement, the statistical nature of our knowledge of reality, and philosophical speculation about the 'observer'. It has since permeated many disciplines, including quantum chemistry, quantum electronics, quantum optics, and quantum information science. It also provides a useful framework for many features of the modern periodic table of elements, and describes the behaviors of atoms during chemical bonding and the flow of electrons in computer semiconductors, and therefore plays a crucial role in many modern technologies. While quantum mechanics was constructed to describe the world of the very small, it is also needed to explain some macroscopic phenomena such as superconductors and superfluids.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe following titles, all by working physicists, attempt to communicate quantum theory to lay people, using a minimum of technical apparatus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMore technical:\nExternal links.\n Course material \n Philosophy "}
{"id": "25203", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25203", "title": "Quilting", "text": "Process of sewing layers of fabric together to make a padded material\nQuilting is the process of joining a minimum of three layers of fabric together either through stitching manually using a needle and thread, or mechanically with a sewing machine or specialised longarm quilting system. An array of stitches is passed through all layers of the fabric to create a three-dimensional padded surface. The three layers are typically referred to as the top fabric or quilt top, batting or insulating material, and the backing.\nQuilting varies from a purely functional fabric joinery technique to highly elaborate, decorative three dimensional surface treatments. A wide variety of textile products are traditionally associated with quilting, including bed coverings, home furnishings, garments and costumes, wall hangings, artistic objects, and cultural artifacts.\nA quilter can employ a wide range of effects that contribute to the quality and utility of the final quilted material. To create these effects, the quilter manipulates elements such as material type and thickness, stitch length and style, pattern design, piecing, and cutting. Two-dimensional effects such as optical illusions can be achieved through aesthetic choices regarding colour, texture, and print. Three-dimensional and sculptural components of quilted material can be manipulated and enhanced further by embellishment, which may include appliqu\u00e9, embroidery techniques such as shisha mirror work, and the inclusion of other objects or elements such as pearls, beads, buttons, and sequins. Some quilters create or dye their own fabrics. In contemporary artistic quilting, quilters sometimes use new and experimental materials such as plastics, paper, natural fibers, and plants.\nQuilting can be considered one of the first examples of upcycling, as quilters have historically made extensive use of remnants and offcuts for the creation of new products.\nHistory.\nEarly quilting.\nThe origin of the term 'quilt' is linked to the Latin word \"culcita\", meaning a bolster, cushion, or stuffed sack. The word came into the English language from the French word \"cuilte\". The first use of the term seems to have been in England in the 13th century.\nThe sewing techniques of piecing, appliqu\u00e9, and quilting have been used to create clothing and furnishings in various parts of the world for several millennia, and a wide range of unique quilting styles and techniques have evolved around the globe.\nThe earliest known quilted garment is depicted on the carved ivory figure of a Pharaoh dating from the ancient Egyptian First Dynasty. In 1924 archaeologists discovered a quilted floor covering in Mongolia, estimated to date between 100\u00a0BC and 200\u00a0AD.\nIn Europe, quilting has been part of the needlework tradition since about the fifth century. Early objects contained Egyptian cotton, which may indicate that Egyptian and Mediterranean trade provided a conduit for the technique. However, quilted objects were relatively rare in Europe until approximately the twelfth century, when quilted bedding and other items appeared after the return of the Crusaders from the Middle East. The medieval quilted gambeson, aketon and arming doublet were garments worn under or instead of chain mail or plate armor. These later developed into the quilted doublet worn as part of European male clothing from the fourteenth to seventeenth century. The earliest known surviving European bed quilt is the Tristan quilt, which was made in late-fourteenth century Italy from linen padded with wool. The blocks across its center are scenes from the legend of Tristan. The quilt is and is in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.\nAmerican quilts.\nIn American Colonial times, quilts were predominantly whole-cloth quilts\u2014a single piece of fabric layered with batting and backing held together with fine needlework quilting. Broderie perse quilts were popular during this time and the majority of pierced or appliqued quilts made during the 1770\u20131800 period were medallion-style quilts (quilts with a central ornamental panel and one or more borders). Patchwork quilting in America dates to the 1770s, the decade the United States gained its independence from England. These late-eighteenth- and nineteenth-century patchwork quilts often mixed wool, silk, linen, and cotton in the same piece, as well as mixing large-scale (often chintz) and small-scale (often calico) patterns. In North America, some worn-out blankets were utilized to create a new quilt from worn-out clothes, and in these quilts the internal batting layer was made up of old blankets or older quilts. \nDuring American pioneer days, foundation piecing became popular. Paper was cut into shapes and used as a pattern; each individual piece of cut fabric was basted around the paper pattern. Paper was a scarce commodity in the early American west so women would save letters from home, postcards, newspaper clippings, and catalogs to use as patterns. The paper not only served as a pattern but as an insulator. Paper found between these old quilts has become a primary source of information about pioneer life.\nQuilts made without any insulation or batting were referred to as summer quilts. They were not made for warmth, but to keep the chill off during cooler summer evenings.\nAfrican-American quilts.\nThere is a long tradition of African-American quilting beginning with quilts made by enslaved Africans, both for themselves and for the people who enslaved them. The style of these quilts was determined largely by time period and region, rather than race, and the documented slave-made quilts generally resemble those made by white women in their region. After 1865 and the end of slavery in the United States, African-Americans began to develop their own distinctive style of quilting.\nHarriet Powers, an African American woman born into slavery, made two famous \"story quilts\" and was one of the many African-American quilters who contributed to the development of quilting in the United States. This style of African-American quilts was categorized by its bright colors, organization in a strip arrangement, and asymmetrical patterns. \nThe first nationwide recognition of African-American quilt-making came when the Gee's Bend quilting community of Alabama was celebrated in an exhibition that opened in 2002 and traveled to many museums, including the Smithsonian. Gee's Bend is a small, isolated community of African-Americans in southern Alabama with a quilt-making tradition that goes back several generations and is characterized by pattern improvisation, multiple patterning, bright and contrasting colors, visual motion, and a lack of rules. The contributions made by Harriet Powers and other quilters of Gee's Bend, Alabama have been recognized by the US Postal Service with a series of stamps. Many of the quilters of Gee\u2019s Bend also participated in the Freedom Quilting Bee. A quilting co-op created by some of the African American women of Wilcox County, Alabama.Some of the founding and influential members include Estelle Witherspoon, Willie Abrams, Lucy Mingo, Minder Pettway Coleman, and Aolar Mosely. The \"communal\" nature of the quilting process (and how it can bring together women of varied races and backgrounds) was honored in the series of stamps. Themes of community and storytelling are common themes in African-American quilts.\nBeginning with the children's story \"Sweet Clara and the Freedom Quilt\" (1989), a legend has developed that enslaved people used quilts as a means to share and transmit secret messages to escape slavery and travel the Underground Railroad. Consensus among historians is that there is no sound basis for this belief, and no documented mention among the thousands of slave narratives or other contemporary records.\nContemporary quilters such as Faith Ringgold utilize quilt making to tell stories and make political statements about the African-American experience. Ringgold, originally a painter, began quilting in order to stray away from Western art practices. Her famous \"story quilts\" utilize mixed media, painting, and quilting. One of her most famous quilts, \"Tar Beach 2\" (1990), depicts the story of a young African-American girl flying around Harlem in New York City.\nBisa Butler, another modern African-American quilter, celebrates Black life with her vibrant, quilted portraits of both everyday people and notable historical figures. Her quilts are now preserved in the permanent collections at the National Museum of African American History and Culture, the Art Institute of Chicago, and about a dozen other art museums.\nAmish quilts.\nAnother American group to develop a distinct style of quilting were the Amish. Typically, these quilts use only solid fabrics, are pieced from geometric shapes, do not contain appliqu\u00e9, and construction is simple (corners are butted, rather than mitered, for instance) and done entirely by hand. Amish quilters also tend to use simple patterns: Lancaster County Amish are known for their Diamond-in-a-Square and Bars patterns, while other communities use patterns such as Brick, Streak of Lightning, Chinese Coins, and Log Cabins, and midwestern communities are known for their repeating block patterns. Borders and color choice also vary by community. For example, Lancaster quilts feature wide borders with lavish quilting. Midwestern quilts feature narrower borders to balance the fancier piecing.\nNative American quilts.\nSome Native Americans are thought to have learned quilting through observation of white settlers; others learned it from missionaries who taught quilting to Native American women along with other homemaking skills. Native American women quickly developed their own unique style, the Lone Star design (also called the Star of Bethlehem), a variation on Morning Star designs that had been featured on Native American clothing and other items for centuries. These quilts often featured floral appliqu\u00e9 framing the star design. Star quilts have become an important part of many Plains Indian ceremonies, replacing buffalo robes traditionally given away at births, marriages, tribal elections, and other ceremonies. Pictorial quilts, created with appliqu\u00e9, were also common.\nAnother distinctive style of Native American quilting is Seminole piecing, created by Seminoles living in the Florida Everglades. The style evolved out of a need for cloth (the closest town was often a week's journey away). Women would make strips of sewing the remnants of fabric rolls together, then sew these into larger pieces to make clothing. Eventually the style began to be used not just for clothing but for quilts as well. In 1900, with the introduction of sewing machines and readily available fabric in Seminole communities, the patterns became much more elaborate and the style continues to be in use today, both by Seminole women and by others who have copied and adapted their designs and techniques.\nHawaiian quilting.\n\"Hawaiian quilting was well established by the beginning of the twentieth century. Hawaiian women learned to quilt from the wives of missionaries from New England in the 1820s. Though they learned both pieced work and applique, by the 1870s they had adapted applique techniques to create a uniquely Hawaiian mode of expression. The classic Hawaiian quilt design is a large, bold, curvilinear appliqu\u00e9 pattern that covers much of the surface of the quilt, with the symmetrical design cut from only one piece of fabric.\"\nSouth Asian quilting.\nThere are two primary forms of quilting that originate in South Asia: Nakshi Kantha and Ralli. Nakshi Kantha quilts originated in India and are typically made of scraps and worn-out fabric stitched together with old sari threads using kantha embroidery stitches. \"The layers of cloth were spread on the ground, held in place with weights at the edges, and sewn together with rows of large basting stitches. The cloth was then folded and worked on whenever there was time.\" The first recorded kantha are more than 500 years old.\nRalli quilts are traditionally made in Pakistan, western India, and the surrounding area. They are made by every sector of society including Hindu and Muslim women, women of different castes, and women from different towns or villages or tribes with the colors and designs varying among these groups. The name comes from \"ralanna\", a word meaning to mix or connect. Quilts tops were designed and pieced by one woman using scraps of hand-dyed cotton. This cotton often comes from old dresses or shawls. Once pieced, the quilt top is placed on a reed mat with the other layers and sewn together using thick, colored thread in straight parallel lines by members of the designer's family and community.\nEast Asian quilting.\nQuilting in Japan, until the 20th century, generally covered local bast fibers with more valuable cotton cloth. The rectangular nature of Japanese cloth articles encouraged rectangle-based patterns. Sashiko stitching has now also developed purely decorative forms.\nSwedish quilting.\nQuilting originated in Sweden in the fifteenth century with heavily stitched and appliqu\u00e9d quilts made for the very wealthy. These quilts, created from silk, wool, and felt, were intended to be both decorative and functional and were found in churches and in the homes of nobility. Imported cotton first appeared in Sweden in 1870, and began to appear in Swedish quilts soon after along with scraps of wool, silk, and linen. As the availability of cotton increased and its price went down, quilting became widespread among all classes of Swedish society. Wealthier quilters used wool batting while others used linen scraps, rags, or paper mixed with animal hair. In general, these quilts were simple and narrow, made by both men and women. The biggest influence on Swedish quilting in this time period is thought to have come from America as Swedish immigrants to the United States returned to their home country when conditions there improved.\nArt quilting.\nDuring the late 20th century, art quilts became popular for their aesthetic and artistic qualities rather than for functionality; these quilts may be displayed on a wall or table instead of being used on a bed. \"It is believed that decorative quilting came to Europe and Asia during the Crusades (A.D. 1100\u20131300), a likely idea because textile arts were more developed in China and India than in the West.\"\nAmerican artist Judy Chicago stated in a 1981 interview that were it not for sexism in the visual arts, the art world, and broader society, quilting would be more widely regarded as a form of high art:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Abstract patterns by men are \"art\"; abstract patterns by women in fabric are \"decorative\"; they're called quilts. So there's all these kind of double standards and all these kind of words that prevent women's experience from entering\u2014even when they express it\u2014from entering the mainstream of art.\nModern quilting.\nIn the early 21st century, modern quilting became a more prominent area of quilting. Modern quilting follows a distinct aesthetic style which draws on inspiration from modern style in architecture, art, and design using traditional quilt making techniques. Modern quilts are different from art quilts in that they are made to be used. Modern quilts are also influenced by the Quilters of Gee's Bend, Amish quilts, Nancy Crow, Denyse Schmidt, Gwen Marston, Yoshiko Jinzenji, Bill Kerr and Weeks Ringle.\nThe Modern Quilt Guild has attempted to define modern quilting. The characteristics of a modern quilt may include: the use of bold colors and prints, high contrast and graphic areas of solid color, improvisational piecing, minimalism, expansive negative space, and alternate grid work.\nThe Modern Quilt Guild, a non-profit corporation, with 14,000 members in more than 200 members guilds in 39 countries, fosters modern quilting via local guilds, workshops, webinars, and Quiltcon\u2014an annual modern quilting conference and convention. The founding Modern Quilt Guild formed in October 2009 in Los Angeles.\nQuiltCon features a quilt show with 400+ quilts, quilt vendors, lectures, and quilting workshops and classes. The first QuiltCon was February 21\u201324, 2013 in Austin, TX. QuiltCon 2020 was held in Austin, Texas, February 20\u201323, 2020 and featured 400 juried modern quilts from quilters around the world.\nQuilt blocks.\nThe quilt block is traditionally a sub-unit composed of several pieces of fabric sewn together. The quilt blocks are repeated, or sometimes alternated with plain blocks, to form the overall design of a quilt. Barbara Brackman has documented over 4000 different quilt block patterns from the early 1830s to the 1970s in the \"Encyclopedia Of Pieced Quilt Patterns\". Some of the simpler designs for quilt blocks include the Nine-Patch, Shoo Fly, Churn Dash, and the Prairie Queen.\nMost geometric quilt block designs fit into a \"grid\", which is the number of squares a pattern block is divided into. The five categories into which most square patterns fall are Four Patch, Nine Patch, Five-Patch, Seven-Patch, and Eight-Pointed Star. Each block can be subdivided into multiples: a Four-Patch can be constructed of 16 or 64 squares, for example.\nA simple Nine Patch is made by sewing five patterned or dark pieces (patches) to four light square pieces in alternating order. These nine sewn squares make one block.\nThe Shoo Fly varies from this Nine Patch by dividing each of the four corner pieces into a light and dark triangle.\nAnother variation develops when one square piece is divided into two equal rectangles in the basic Nine Patch design. The Churn Dash block combines the triangles and rectangle to expand the Nine Patch.\nThe Prairie Queen block combines two large scale triangles in the corner section with the middle section using four squares. The center piece is one full size square. Each of the nine sections does have the same overall measurement and fits together.\nThe number of patterns possible by subdividing Four-, Five-, Seven-, Nine-Patches and Eight-Pointed Stars and using triangles instead of squares in the small subdivisions is almost endless.\nQuilting techniques.\nMany types of quilting exist today. The two most widely used are hand-quilting and machine quilting.\nHand quilting is the process of using a needle and thread to sew a running stitch by hand across the entire area to be quilted. This binds the layers together. A quilting frame or hoop is often used to assist in holding the piece being quilted off the quilter's lap. A quilter can make one stitch at a time by first driving the needle through the fabric from the right side, then pushing it back up through the material from the wrong side to complete the stitch; this is called a stab stitch. Another option is called a rocking stitch, where the quilter has one hand, usually with a finger wearing a thimble, on top of the quilt, while the other hand is located beneath the piece to push the needle back up. A third option is called \"loading the needle\" and involves doing four or more stitches before pulling the needle through the cloth. Hand quilting is still practiced by the Amish and Mennonites within the United States and Canada, and is enjoying a resurgence worldwide.\nMachine quilting is the process of using a home sewing machine or a longarm machine to sew the layers together. With the home sewing machine, the layers are tacked together before quilting. This involves laying the top, batting, and backing out on a flat surface and either pinning (using large safety pins) or tacking the layers together. Longarm quilting involves placing the layers to be quilted on a special frame. The frame has bars on which the layers are rolled, keeping these together without the need for tacking or pinning. These frames are used with a professional sewing machine mounted on a platform. The platform rides along tracks so that the machine can be moved across the layers on the frame. A longarm machine is moved across the fabric. In contrast, the fabric is moved through a home sewing machine.\nTying is another technique of fastening the three layers together. This is done primarily on quilts that are made to be used and are needed quickly. The process of tying the quilt is done with yarns or multiple strands of thread. Square knots are used to finish off the ties so that the quilt may be washed and used without fear of the knots coming undone. This technique is commonly called \"tacking.\" In the Midwest, tacked bed covers are referred to as comforters.\nQuilting is now taught in some American schools. It is also taught at senior centers around the U.S., but quilters of all ages attend classes. These forms of workshops or classes are also available in other countries in guilds and community colleges.\nQuilting tools.\nContemporary quilters use a wide range of quilting designs and styles, from ancient and ethnic to post-modern futuristic patterns. There is no one single school or style that dominates the quilt-making world.\nSewing machines can be used in the process of piecing together a quilt top. Some quilters also use a home sewing machine for quilting together the layers of the quilt, as well as binding the final product. While most home sewing machines can be used to quilt layers together, having a wide throat (the space to the right of the needle mechanism) is useful to manipulate a bulky quilt through the machine when the throat is both high and long.\nFabric markers can be used to mark where cuts should be made in the fabric. Marks from specialist fabric marker wash out of fabrics.\nQuilting rulers are usually square or rectangular measuring instruments with length measurement and degree angle markings along multiple edges.\nLongarm quilting machines can be used to make larger quilts. Larger machines can be leveraged so that the quilter does not have to hold the fabric. Some specialist quilt shops offer longarm services.\nMachine quilting needles are very sharp in order to readily pierce layers of quilt and properly sew together the quilt top, batting and backing.\nHand quilting needles are traditionally called \"betweens\" and are generally smaller and stronger than normal sewing needles. They have a very small eye which prevents any extra bump at the head of the needles when you are pulling through the thread.\nPins can be used in many different combinations to achieve similar results.\nThimbles provide protection to fingertips.\nSpecialist quilting threads come in many types, including different weights of thread and different materials. Cotton, polyester, and nylon threads are used in different forms of quilting.\nRotary cutters revolutionized quilt-making when they appeared in the late 1970s. Rotary cutters simplify the process of cutting even slices of fabric.\nBasting spray is a temporary aerosol glue that can be used to spray the layers of a quilt together, so it stays in place whilst being sewn. It is a specially formulated glue that will not clog a sewing machine, and is a much quicker basting method than hand basting.\nQuilting templates/patterns come in many varieties and are generally considered the basis of the structure of the quilt, like a blueprint for a house.\nBias binding or bias tape can be made from strips of quilt fabric or purchased as quilt binding. It is used in the last stage of making a quilt, and is a method of covering the edges of the quilt.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25204", "revid": "50832578", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25204", "title": "Qt (software)", "text": "Object-oriented framework for software development\nQt ( pronounced \"cute\") is a cross-platform application development framework for creating graphical user interfaces as well as cross-platform applications that run on various software and hardware platforms such as Linux, Windows, macOS, Android or embedded systems with little or no change in the underlying codebase while still being a native application with native capabilities and speed.\nQt is currently being developed by The Qt Company, a publicly listed company, and the Qt Project under open-source governance, involving individual developers and organizations working to advance Qt. Qt is available under both commercial licenses and open-source GPL 2.0, GPL 3.0, and LGPL 3.0 licenses.\nPurposes and abilities.\nQt is used for developing graphical user interfaces (GUIs) and multi-platform applications that run on all major desktop platforms and mobile or embedded platforms.\nMost GUI programs created with Qt have a native-looking interface, in which case Qt is classified as a \"widget toolkit\". Non-GUI programs can also be developed, such as command-line tools and consoles for servers. An example of such a non-GUI program using Qt is the Cutelyst web framework.\nQt supports various C++ compilers, including the GCC and Clang C++ compilers and the Visual Studio suite. It supports other languages with bindings or extensions, such as Python via Python bindings and PHP via an extension for PHP5, and has extensive internationalization support. Qt also provides Qt Quick, that includes a declarative scripting language called QML that allows using JavaScript to provide the logic. With Qt Quick, rapid application development for mobile devices became possible, while logic can still be written with native code as well to achieve the best possible performance.\nOther features include SQL database access, XML parsing, JSON parsing, thread management and network support.\nReleases.\nThe latest version of the Qt Framework is Qt 6.10, which was released on 7 October 2025. \nAlso still supported are versions 6.9 until 31 May 2026 and 6.8 LTS until 8 October 2029. Version 6.5 LTS is supported for commercial users only until 30 May 2026. Additionally, extended support for all versions 5.0 (released in 2012) and newer is available for commercial users.\nMinor versions of Qt are typically released twice a year and are supported until one year after release date under standard support conditions. Typically, every third minor version becomes a long-term support version which gets additional patches. LTS versions are supported for commercial users until five years after their release date (three years prior to version 6.8). \nQt in use.\nIn 2017, the Qt Company estimated a community of about 1 million developers worldwide in over 70 industries.\nDesktop UIs.\nGraphical user-interfaces and desktop environments that utilize Qt/QML as widget toolkit:\nApplications using Qt.\nMany notable open-source or proprietary cross-platform software are using Qt or QML: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOrganizations using Qt.\nQt is utilized by a wide range of companies and organizations such as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nQt software architecture.\nQt concepts.\nQt is built on these key concepts:\nComplete abstraction of the GUI.\nWhen first released, Qt used its own paint engine and controls, emulating the look of the different platforms it runs on when it drew its widgets. This made the porting work easier because very few classes in Qt really depended on the target platform; however, this occasionally led to slight discrepancies where that emulation was imperfect. Recent versions of Qt use the native style APIs of the different platforms, on platforms that have a native widget set, to query metrics and draw most controls, and do not suffer from such issues as often. On some platforms (such as MeeGo and KDE) Qt \"is\" the native API. Some other portable graphical toolkits have made different design decisions; for example, wxWidgets uses the toolkits of the target platform for its implementations.\nSignals and slots.\nSignals and slots are a language construct introduced in Qt for communication between objects which makes it easy to implement the observer pattern while avoiding boilerplate code. The concept is that GUI widgets can send signals containing event information which can be received by other controls using special functions known as slots.\nMetaobject compiler.\nThe metaobject compiler, termed \"moc\", is a tool that is run on the sources of a Qt program. It interprets certain macros from the C++ code as annotations, and uses them to generate added C++ code with meta information about the classes used in the program. This meta information is used by Qt to provide programming features not available natively in C++: signals and slots, introspection and asynchronous function calls.\nQt moc does not recognise modules in its preprocessor currently.\nLanguage bindings.\nQt can be used in several programming languages other than C++, such as Python, JavaScript, C# and Rust via language bindings; many languages have bindings for Qt 5 and bindings for Qt 4.\nQt modules.\nStarting with Qt 4.0 the framework was split into individual modules. With Qt 5.0 the architecture was modularized even further. Qt is now split into \"essential\" and \"add-on\" modules.\nQt classes by default do not reside in any namespace, but all classes are prefixed with the letter Q. Qt can be configured to be compiled to reside in a user-defined namespace. Qt is entirely provided through header files, and does not currently support C++ modules.\nEditions.\nThere are four editions of Qt available: \"Community\", \"Indie Mobile\", \"Professional\" and \"Enterprise\". The Community version is under the open source licenses, while the Indie Mobile, Professional and Enterprise versions, which contain additional functionality and libraries, e.g. Enterprise Controls are commercially sold by The Qt Company.\nSupported platforms.\nQt works on many different platforms; the following are officially supported:\nAfter Nokia opened the Qt source code to the community on Gitorious, various ports appeared. There are also some ports of Qt that may be available, but are not supported anymore. These platforms are listed in List of platforms supported by Qt. See also there for current community support for other lesser known platforms, such as SailfishOS.\nLicensing.\nQt is available under the following free software licenses: GPL 2.0, GPL 3.0, LGPL 3.0 and LGPL 2.1 (with Qt special exception). Note that some modules are available only under a GPL license, which means that applications which link to these modules need to comply with that license.\nIn addition, Qt has always been available under a commercial license, like the Qt Commercial License, that allows developing proprietary applications with no restrictions on licensing.\nQt tools.\nQt comes with its own set of tools to ease cross-platform development, which can otherwise be cumbersome due to different set of development tools.\nQt Creator is a cross-platform IDE for C++ and QML. Qt Designer's GUI layout/design functionality is integrated into the IDE, although Qt Designer can still be started as a standalone tool.\nIn addition to Qt Creator, Qt provides qmake, a cross-platform build script generation tool that automates the generation of Makefiles for development projects across different platforms.\nThere are other tools available in Qt, including the Qt Designer interface builder and the Qt Assistant help browser (which are both embedded in Qt Creator), the Qt Linguist translation tool, uic (user interface compiler), and moc (Meta-Object Compiler).\nHistory of Qt.\nEarly developments.\nIn the summer of 1990, Haavard Nord and Eirik Chambe-Eng (the original developers of Qt and the CEO and President, respectively, of The Qt Company) were working together on a database application for ultrasound images written in C++ and running on Mac OS, Unix, and Microsoft Windows. They began development of \"Qt\" in 1991, three years before the company was incorporated as Quasar Technologies, then changed the name to Troll Tech and then to Trolltech.\nThe toolkit was called Qt because the letter Q looked appealing in Haavard's Emacs typeface, and \"t\" was inspired by Xt, the X toolkit.\nThe first two versions of Qt had only two flavors: Qt/X11 for Unix and Qt/Windows for Windows.\nOn 20 May 1995 Trolltech publicly released Qt 0.90 for X11/Linux with the source code under the \"Qt Free Edition License\". This license was viewed as not compliant with the free software definition by Free Software Foundation because, while the source was available, it did not allow the redistribution of modified versions. Trolltech used this license until version 1.45. Controversy erupted around 1998 when it became clear that the K Desktop Environment was going to become one of the leading desktop environments for Linux. As it was based on Qt, many people in the free software movement worried that an essential piece of one of their major operating systems would be proprietary.\nThe Windows platform was available only under a proprietary license, which meant free/open source applications written in Qt for X11 could not be ported to Windows without purchasing the proprietary edition.\nBecoming free software\u2013friendly.\nWith the release of version 2.0 of the toolkit in mid-1999, the license was changed to the Q Public License (QPL), a free software license, but one regarded by the Free Software Foundation as incompatible with the GPL. Compromises were sought between KDE and Trolltech whereby Qt would not be able to fall under a more restrictive license than the QPL, even if Trolltech was bought out or went bankrupt. This led to the creation of the KDE Free Qt foundation, which guarantees that Qt would fall under a BSD-style license should no free/open source version of Qt be released during 12 months.\nIn 2000, Qt/X11 2.2 was released under the GPL v2, ending all controversy regarding GPL compatibility.\nAt the end of 2001, Trolltech released Qt 3.0, which added support for Mac OS X (now known as macOS). The Mac OS X support was available only in the proprietary license until June 2003, when Trolltech released Qt 3.2 with Mac OS X support available under the GPL.\nIn 2002, members of the KDE on Cygwin project began porting the GPL licensed Qt/X11 code base to Windows. This was in response to Trolltech's refusal to license Qt/Windows under the GPL on the grounds that Windows was not a free/open source software platform. The project achieved reasonable success although it never reached production quality.\nThis was resolved when Trolltech released Qt 4.0 also for Windows under the GPL in June 2005. Qt\u00a04 supported the same set of platforms in the free software/open source editions as in the proprietary edition, so it is possible, with Qt 4.0 and later releases, to create GPL-licensed free/open source applications using Qt on all supported platforms. The GPL v3 with special exception was later added as an added licensing option. The GPL exception allows the final application to be licensed under various GPL-incompatible free software/open source licenses such as the Mozilla Public License 1.1.\nAcquisition by Nokia.\nNokia acquired Trolltech ASA on 17 June 2008 and changed the name first to Qt Software, then to Qt Development Frameworks.\nNokia focused on turning Qt into the main development platform for its devices, including a port to the Symbian S60 platform. Version 1.0 of the Nokia Qt SDK was released on 23 June 2010. The source code was made available over Gitorious, a community oriented git source code repository, with a goal of creating a broader community using and improving Qt.\nOn 14 January 2009, Qt version 4.5 added another option, the LGPL, to make Qt more attractive for both non-GPL open source projects and closed applications.\nIn February 2011, Nokia announced its decision to drop Symbian technologies and base their future smartphones on the Windows Phone platform instead (and since then support for that platform has also been dropped). One month later, Nokia announced the sale of Qt's commercial licensing and professional services to Digia, with the immediate goal of taking Qt support to Android, iOS and Windows 8 platforms, and to continue focusing on desktop and embedded development, although Nokia was to remain the main development force behind the framework at that time.\nMerging and demerging with Digia.\nIn March 2011, Nokia sold the commercial licensing part of Qt to Digia, creating Qt Commercial. In August 2012, Digia announced that it would acquire Qt from Nokia. The Qt team at Digia started their work in September 2012. They released Qt 5.0 within a month and newer versions every six months with new features and additional supported platforms.\nIn September 2014, Digia transferred the Qt business and copyrights to their wholly owned subsidiary, The Qt Company, which owns 25 brands related to Qt. In May 2016, Digia and Qt demerged completely into two independent companies.\nThe Qt Project and open governance.\nQt 5 was officially released on 19 December 2012. This new version marked a major change in the platform, with hardware-accelerated graphics, QML and JavaScript playing a major role. The traditional C++-only QWidgets continued to be supported, but did not benefit from the performance improvements available through the new architecture. Qt 5 brings significant improvements to the speed and ease of developing user interfaces.\nFramework development of Qt 5 moved to open governance at qt-project.org, which made it possible for developers outside Digia to submit patches for review.\nQt contributors.\nAside from The Qt Company, many organizations and individuals using Qt as their development platform participate in the open development of Qt via the Qt Project.\nOne such Qt contributor is Klar\u00e4lvdalens Datakonsult AB, a Swedish Qt consulting company. KDAB is involved in many areas, including maintenance of several components.\nTogether with RIM/BlackBerry, KDAB is maintaining the QNX and BlackBerry 10 ports of Qt.\nAnother participator is Intel, contributing for example Wayland support. AudioCodes maintains IBM ClearCase support in Qt Creator.\nAs a heavy user of Qt, the KDE project submits many patches and features from its developer library KDE Frameworks back to Qt.\nBibliography.\nQt Wiki provides a comprehensive list of English books about Qt. This is a list of notable books:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25207", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25207", "title": "QuakeC", "text": "Compiled language\nQuakeC is a compiled language developed in 1996 by John Carmack of id Software to program parts of the video game \"Quake\". Using QuakeC, a programmer is able to customize \"Quake\" to great extents by adding weapons, changing game logic and physics, and programming complex scenarios. It can be used to control many aspects of the game itself, such as parts of the AI, triggers, or changes in the level. The \"Quake\" engine was the only game engine to use QuakeC. Following engines used DLL game modules for customization written in C, and C++ from id Tech 4 on.\nOverview.\nThe QuakeC source to the original id Software \"Quake\" game logic was published in 1996 and used as the basis for modifications like capture the flag and others. QuakeC source code is compiled using a tool called qcc into a bytecode kept in a file called progs.dat. The programmers of \"Quake\" modifications could then publish their progs.dat bytecode without revealing their source code. Most \"Quake\" mods were published this way.\nQuakeC allowed the \"Quake\" engine to dominate the direction of the first-person shooter genre. Thanks to Carmack's idea of extending video game life by adding unlimited expandability (extensibility already played a big role in \"Doom\"), an enormous Internet community of gamers and programmers alike has arisen and many modern multiplayer games are extensible in some form.\nQuakeC is known as interpreted because as \"Quake\" runs, it is continually interpreting the progs.dat file.\nLimitations and subsequent solutions.\nThe syntax of QuakeC is based on that of the C programming language, explaining its name, but it does not support the implementation of new types, structures, arrays, or any kind of referencing other than the \"entity\" type (which is always a reference). QuakeC also suffers from the fact that many built-in functions (functions prototyped in the QuakeC code but actually defined within the game engine and written in C) return strings in a temporary string buffer, which can only hold one string at any given time. In other words, a construct such as\ncodice_1\nwill fail because the second call to codice_2 (which converts a floating-point value to a string) overwrites the string returned by the first call before SomeFunction can do something with it. QuakeC does not contain any string handling functions or file handling functions, which were simply not needed by the original game.\nMost video games at the time had their game logic written in plain C/C++ and compiled into the executable, which is faster. However, this makes it harder for the community to create mods and it makes the process of porting the game to another platform (such as Linux) more costly.\nDespite its advantages, the choice of implementing game logic using a custom scripting language and interpreter was dropped from the next generation Quake II engine in favor of compiled C code due to the overall inflexibility of QuakeC, the increasingly complex game logic, the performance to be gained by packaging game logic into a native dynamic link library, and the advantage of leveraging an already established programming language's community, tools, educational materials, and documentation.\nDistributing native code created new security and portability concerns. QuakeC bytecode afforded little opportunity for mischief, while native code has access to the whole machine. QuakeC bytecode also worked on any machine that could run Quake. Compiling to native code added an additional barrier to entry for novice mod developers, because they were being asked to set up a more complicated programming environment. The eventual solution, implemented by the Quake III engine, was to combine the advantages of original QuakeC with the advantages of compiling C to native code. LCC was extended to compile standard C into bytecode, which could be interpreted by a virtual machine in a manner similar to QuakeC. This addressed the security, portability, and tool chain problems, but lost the performance advantage of native code. That was solved by further compiling the bytecode into native code at run time on supported machines.\nModified compilers and language extensions.\nA decompiler and a recompiler were released by Armin Rigo (called codice_3 and codice_4 respectively). These programs were made through the process of reverse engineering, and were most likely published before the release of codice_5.\nid Software released the source of codice_5, their QuakeC compiler, along with the original QuakeC code in 1996. Modified versions soon sprung up, including Jonathan Roy's codice_7 and Ryan \"FrikaC\" Smith's FrikQCC. These added functionality, optimizations, and compiling speed boosts.\nIn 1999, when id Software released the code from Quake's engine under the GNU General Public License (GPL), the workings of the bytecode interpreter were examined and new QuakeC compilers were released, such as J.P. Grossman's codice_8 and a new version of FrikQCC. These compilers took advantage of newly discovered features in a backwards-compatible way so that the bytecode could still be properly interpreted by unmodified Quake engines. New features include arrays, pointers, integers, for loops and string manipulation.\nWith the \"Quake\" engine source code now able to be changed, further features were added to QuakeC in the form of new built-in functions. Features long yearned for by QuakeC coders finally reached realization as QuakeC now had file and string handling functions, enlarged string buffers, more math functions, and so on. However, programmers taking advantage of these changes lost backwards compatibility with the unmodified Quake engine.\n\"Xonotic\" since version 0.7 uses the https:// compiler.\nClient-side QuakeC.\nSome enhanced \"Quake\" engines (notably DarkPlaces and FTEQW) have support for an extension of regular QuakeC (now commonly referred to as server-side QuakeC) that allows client-side-only scripting of the \"Quake\" engine, also abbreviated as CSQC (client-side QuakeC). This is especially useful for GUIs, HUDs and any visually heavy effects that do not need to be simulated on the server and transferred over the network.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25208", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25208", "title": "Quad Cities", "text": "The Quad Cities is a region of five cities (originally Tri-Cities, later four; see ) in the U.S. states of Iowa and Illinois: Davenport and Bettendorf (the fifth to be included) in southeastern Iowa, and Rock Island, Moline, and East Moline (the fourth to be included) in northwestern Illinois. These cities are the center of the Quad Cities metropolitan area, a region within the Mississippi River Valley, which as of 2023, had a population estimate of 467,817 and a Combined Statistical Area (CSA) population of 474,019, making it the 90th-largest CSA in the nation.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nBefore European settlers came to inhabit the Quad Cities, the confluence of rivers had attracted many varying cultures of indigenous peoples, who used the waterways and riverbanks for their settlements for thousands of years. At the time of European encounter, it was a home and principal trading place of the Sauk and Fox tribes of Native Americans. Saukenuk was the principal village of the Sauk tribe and birthplace of its 19th-century war chief, Black Hawk. In 1832, Sauk chief Keokuk and General Winfield Scott signed a treaty in Davenport after the US defeated the Sauk and their allies in the Black Hawk War. The treaty resulted in the Native Americans ceding of land to the United States in exchange for a much smaller reservation elsewhere. Black Hawk State Historic Site in Rock Island preserves part of historic Saukenuk and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nThe history of urban settlements in the Quad Cities was stimulated by riverboat traffic. For between LeClaire, Iowa, and Rock Island, the Mississippi River flowed across a series of finger-like rock projections protruding from either bank. These rapids were difficult for steamboats to traverse. As demand for river-based transportation increased along the upper Mississippi, the navigability of the river throughout the \"Rock Island Rapids\" became a greater concern. Over time, a minor industry grew up in the area to meet the steamboats' needs. Boat crews needed rest areas to stop before encountering the rapids, places to hire expert pilots such as Phillip Suiter, who was the first licensed pilot on the upper Mississippi River, to guide the boat through the rocky waters, or, when the water was low, places where goods could be removed and transported by wagon on land past the rapids. Today, the rocks are submerged six feet underwater by a lake formed by two locks and dams.\nAs the Industrial Revolution developed in the United States, many enterprising industrialists looked to the Mississippi River as a promising source of power generation. The combination of energy and easy access to river transportation attracted entrepreneurs and industrialists to the Quad Cities for development. In 1848, John Deere moved his plough business to Moline. His business was incorporated in 1868. John Deere is the largest employer today in the Quad Cities.\nThe first railroad bridge built across the Mississippi River connected Davenport and Rock Island in 1856. It was built by the Rock Island Railroad Company and replaced the slow seasonal ferry service and winter ice bridges as the primary modes of transportation across the river. Steamboaters saw the nationwide railroads as a threat to their business. On May 6, 1856, just weeks after completion of the bridge, an angry steamboater crashed the \"Effie Afton\" into it. John Hurd, the owner of the \"Effie Afton\", filed a lawsuit against the Rock Island Railroad Company in \"Hurd v. Rock Island Bridge Company\". The Rock Island Railroad Company selected Abraham Lincoln as their trial lawyer and won after he took the case to the US Supreme Court. Expert riverboat pilot Phillip Suiter was one of his witnesses. It was a pivotal trial in Lincoln's career.\nEvolution of an identity.\nAfter the Civil War, the region began to gain a common identity. The river towns that were thoughtfully planned and competently led flourished, while other settlements, usually get-rich-quick schemes for speculators, failed to pan out. By World War I, the towns of Davenport, Rock Island, and Moline had begun to style themselves as the \"Tri-Cities\", a cluster of three more-or-less equally-sized river communities growing around the small bend of the Mississippi River where it flows west. But with the growth of Rock Island County, during the 1930s the term \"Quad Cities\" came into vogue, as East Moline was given \"equal status\". Despite the fact that the region had earned the name \"Quad Cities\", the National Basketball League and then the National Basketball Association had a franchise in Moline, Illinois, from 1946 to 1951 called the \"Tri-Cities Blackhawks\". Then, with the opening of an Alcoa (now Arconic) plant east of Davenport in 1948, the town of Bettendorf underwent so much growth that many people in the community discussed the adoption of the name \"Quint Cities\", but by this time, the name \"Quad Cities\" had become known well beyond the area, and \"Quint Cities\" never caught on, despite the efforts of WOC-TV (now KWQC-TV) and others. Consequently, when Bettendorf passed East Moline in size, there was some debate about whether Bettendorf had \"displaced\" East Moline. Instead, local officials, such as the Chamber of Commerce, have chosen an inclusive approach, maintaining the name \"Quad Cities\" yet including all five cities.\n1980s\u2013current.\nBeginning in the late 1970s, economic conditions caused major industrial restructuring, which disrupted the basis of the region's economy. The major companies, agricultural manufacturers, ceased or scaled back operations in the Quad Cities. Factories which closed included International Harvester (Navistar) in Rock Island and Case IH in Bettendorf. Moline-based John Deere cut its labor headcount by one half. Later in the 1980s, Caterpillar Inc. closed its factories at Mount Joy and Bettendorf.\nSince the 1990s, the Quad Cities governments, businesses, non-profits and residents have worked hard to redevelop the region. They have achieved national attention for their accomplishments.\nExamples of revitalization and rebirth include:\nProposed mergers.\nOver the years, several communities in the Quad Cities region have proposed or performed mergers. As it grew, Davenport annexed the communities of Rockingham, Nahant, Probstei, East Davenport, Oakdale, Cawiezeel, Blackhawk, Mt. Joy, Green Tree, and others. Bettendorf annexed portions of Pleasant Valley in the 1970s. In 1987, Rock Island, Moline, East Moline, Milan, Carbon Cliff, Hampton, Coal Valley and Silvis considered a super-city merger which would have seen the Illinois cities become the second-largest city in the state, but the proposal ultimately failed. Moline and East Moline considered a merger in 1997. That same year, Green Rock and Colona did merge. Bettendorf and Riverdale also considered a merger.\nGeography.\nThe Quad Cities is located at the confluence of the Rock and Mississippi rivers, approximately west of Chicago, and forms the largest metropolitan area along the Mississippi River between Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul and the St. Louis metropolitan area. Interstate 80 crosses the Mississippi River here. The Quad Cities Metropolitan Area consists of three counties: Scott County in Iowa, and Rock Island County and Henry County in Illinois. The Quad Cities Metropolitan Area is also considered part of the Great Lakes Megalopolis. \nThe Quad Cities area is distinctive because the Mississippi River flows from east to west as it passes through the heart of the area; the Iowa cities of Davenport and Bettendorf are located due north of Rock Island and Moline, respectively.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2010 United States census Count, the metropolitan area grew to 471,551. As of the 2000 census, a total of 96,495 households and 60,535 families resided in the area.\nRace and ethnicity.\nThe racial makeup of the area is 90.6% White (410,861), 3.7% Black or African American (27,757), 0.6% American Indian and Alaskan Native (1,255), 1.0% Asian (6,624), 0.03% Pacific Islander (156), and 2.0% from two or more races (11,929). 7.1% of the population is Hispanic or Latino of any race (37,070). The predominant ethnicities in the Quad Cities are of northern European descent, including German, Irish, and English, as well Scandinavian (Mostly Swedish and Norwegian) and Dutch. The primary minority groups in the area are African-Americans, which in Davenport make up the third largest black population in the state of Iowa, a community dating back to the 1830s when Iowa was a free territory. Many of the metro area's African-American residents have roots in the Southern and Border states of the U.S., including Mississippi, Arkansas, Alabama, Missouri, Kentucky and Virginia. The most significant Asian-American populations are South Asian and Vietnamese American.\nReligion.\nAccording to resources, Christianity is the largest religion practiced in the area. However, the two states have a different population of Christian groups. In Davenport and Bettendorf, Catholics make up an 18.5% plurality, but Protestants with 15.1% Mainline and 11.6% Evangelical make up large minorities as well. The Black Protestants on the Iowa side comes in at 1.2%. On the Illinois side, between Rock Island, Moline, and East Moline, Catholicism is less prevalent at 12.4%, and at 12.5% Evangelical and 11.0% Mainline have smaller declines.\nThe Jewish population is about 500\u2013600, which is down from about 1,800\u20132,000 in the 1950s and 1960s.\nMetropolitan area.\nThe Quad Cities metropolitan area, more formally known as the Davenport\u2013Moline\u2013Rock Island Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA), is the metropolitan area associated with the Quad Cities in the U.S. states of Iowa and Illinois. The Davenport\u2013Moline\u2013Rock Island MSA consists of four counties \u2013 Scott County in Iowa and Henry, Mercer, and Rock Island counties in Illinois \u2013 and had an estimated population of 384,324 as of 2020.\nThe Quad Cities metropolitan area is also considered part of the Great Lakes Megalopolis, and is the largest metropolitan area along the Mississippi River in Iowa and between Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul and the St. Louis metropolitan area.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the Quad Cities Chamber of Commerce website, the top employers in the Quad Cities area are:\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCulture.\nSince 1916, the region has supported the Quad City Symphony Orchestra, which presents a year-round schedule of concerts at the Adler Theatre in Davenport and Centennial Hall in Rock Island. The Handel Oratorio Society, dating to 1880, is the second-oldest organization of its kind in the nation and presents annual performances of \"Messiah\" along with another major work for choir and orchestra. The Augustana Choir, founded at Rock Island's Augustana College in 1934, is one of the nation's leading collegiate choruses. Major outdoor summer music festivals include the Bix Beiderbecke Memorial Jazz Festival, Mississippi Valley Blues Festival, and River Roots Live.\nThe Quad Cities' three traditional community theaters \u2013 Playcrafters Barn Theatre (founded in 1920, comedies and dramas) and Quad City Music Guild (1948, musicals) in Moline, and Genesius guild (1957, outdoor Shakespeare and Greek comedies and tragedies) in Rock Island \u2013 were joined in 1976 by Circa '21 Dinner Playhouse, a professional dinner theater in downtown Rock Island's historic Fort Theatre. Ballet is performed at Ballet Quad Cities. ComedySportz provides improv comedy. Bluebox Limited is a Bettendorf-based film production company, and many outside productions companies have filmed movies in the Quad Cities in recent years. Historic buildings and sites listed on state and the National Register of Historic Places interpret the history of people's settlement and lives in the area.\nMedia.\nThe Quad Cities is the 151st largest radio market in the United States. It is ranked 97th by Nielsen Media Research for the 2008\u201309 television season with 309,600 television households.\nThe area is served by over 13 commercial radio stations, 8 non-commercial radio stations, 3 low power FM radio stations, 8 TV stations and 3 daily newspapers.\nIn 2012, the Mississippi Valley Fair that is held in Davenport served as the film location for Rodney Atkins' music video \"Just Wanna Rock N' Roll\".\nAlso in 2012, the PBS \"Frontline\" documentary \"Poor Kids\" was filmed in and around the Quad Cities showing poverty from a child's perspective.\nTransportation.\nFour interstate highways serve the Quad Cities: Interstate 80, Interstate 280, Interstate 74 serve both states while Interstate 88 serves just Illinois. United States highways include U.S. Route 6 and U.S. Route 67 which run through both Iowa and Illinois, while U.S. Route 61 serves just Iowa and U.S. Route 150 serves just Illinois.\nA total of five bridges accessible by automobiles connect Iowa with Illinois in the Quad Cities across the Mississippi River. The Fred Schwengel Memorial Bridge carries Interstate 80 and connects Le Claire, Iowa, with Rapids City, Illinois. Continuing downstream, the I-74 Bridge connects Bettendorf, Iowa, with Moline, Illinois, and is the busiest bridge with an average of 70,400 cars a day. The Government Bridge connects Downtown Davenport with the Rock Island Arsenal. Three bridges connect Davenport with Rock Island, Illinois; The Rock Island Centennial Bridge, The Crescent Rail Bridge, and the furthest downstream bridge, the Sergeant John F. Baker, Jr. Bridge which carries I-280.\nSeveral state highways also serve the area. Iowa Highway 22 is on Davenport's southwest side and runs west through the county, while Iowa Highway 130 runs along Northwest Boulevard on Davenport's north edge. Illinois Route 5 (John Deere Road) runs from Rock Island east till it runs into Interstate 88. Illinois Route 92 runs along the Mississippi River, while Illinois Route 84 runs along the east side of Rock Island County. Illinois Route 192 connects Highway 92 with Illinois Route 94 near Taylor Ridge. The Chicago \u2013 Kansas City Expressway also serves the area along Interstates 74, 80, and 88.\nThere are three transit operators in the Quad Cities with limited interconnection between them. Rock Island County Metropolitan Mass Transit District (Quad Cities MetroLINK) serves the Illinois cities of Rock Island, Moline, East Moline, Milan, Silvis, Carbon Cliff, Hampton and Colona. It has 12 routes and a fleet of about 52 buses. It operates a river craft during summer months. In Iowa, Davenport Citibus has 10 fixed routes and operates 20 buses, seven days a week and Bettendorf Transit operates three routes, Monday\u2013Saturday, and has eight buses.\nIntercity bus service to the Quad Cities is provided by Burlington Trailways and Greyhound Lines.\nAmtrak currently does not serve the Quad Cities. The closest station is about away in Galesburg, Illinois. In 2008, United States Senators Tom Harkin, Chuck Grassley, Dick Durbin, and Barack Obama sent a letter to Amtrak asking them to begin plans to bring rail service to the Quad Cities. In October 2010, a $230\u00a0million federal fund was announced that will bring Amtrak service to the Quad Cities, with a new line running from Moline to Chicago. They hoped to have the line completed in 2015, and offer two round trips daily to Chicago.\nIn December 2011, the federal government awarded $177 million in funding for the Amtrak connection. Budgetary and logistical issues have delayed the completion of all necessary track improvements, but the project is still in development. The multi-modal Moline Q Station building was completed in early 2018, with the attached Westin Element hotel opening in February. When the full project is completed, it will establish passenger rail through the Quad Cities, for the first time since the 1970s.\nThe Quad Cities is served by the Quad Cities International Airport, Illinois' third-busiest airport, located in Moline. The airport is marketed as a regional alternative to the larger airports in Chicago, nearly away. The smaller Davenport Municipal Airport is the home of the Quad City Air Show.\nSports.\nFrom 1907 to 1926, Rock Island was home to the NFL's Rock Island Independents. The franchise was a charter member of the National Football League (NFL) in 1920. The first NFL game ever was played by the Independents at Douglas Park in September 1920. Football legend Jim Thorpe was a member of the team in 1924.\nThe Tri-Cities Blackhawks, named in honor of the Sauk war chief Black Hawk, was the next top-level professional sports franchise. The club played in the National Basketball League (NBL) from 1946 until its merger in 1949 with the Basketball Association of America to become the National Basketball Association (NBA). Hall of famer Red Auerbach coached the Blackhawks during their first NBA season.\nAfter the 1950\u201351 basketball season, the team moved to Milwaukee, where they were renamed the Hawks. After additional moves to St. Louis and Atlanta, the team is now the Atlanta Hawks.\nProfessional basketball returned to the Quad Cities during the 1980s and 1990s with the Quad City Thunder of the Continental Basketball Association. The CBA served as the NBA's premier developmental league and produced many highly regarded NBA stars. From 1987 through the 1992\u201393 season, the Thunder played at Wharton Field House in Moline. Starting with the 1993\u201394 season, the team played at The MARK of the Quad Cities (now the Vibrant Arena at The MARK). After the CBA folded in 2001, the Thunder franchise ceased operations permanently. Vibrant Arena at The MARK occasionally hosts NCAA Division I college basketball conference tournaments as well as NBA and NHL exhibitions.\nThe Quad Cities has hosted minor league baseball teams since the Davenport Brown Stockings first played in 1878. The Rock Island Islanders and Moline Plowboys each fielded teams for many seasons. The Islanders began play in 1901 and played primarily at Douglas Park. The Plowboys were founded in 1914. Their home was Browning Field.\nThe Davenport franchise has been a member of the Midwest League since 1960. They have played at Modern Woodmen Park since 1931. Today, the Quad Cities River Bandits are High Class A affiliate of the Kansas City Royals\nThe PGA Tour makes an annual stop in the Quad Cities. The golf tournament is currently known as the John Deere Classic. It has drawn dozens of top PGA players over the years, including Tiger Woods, Vijay Singh, and Payne Stewart.\nThe Quad Cities Marathon has run annually in late September since 1998. Roughly 400-500 participants race through the four cities, beginning and ending in Moline. The race weekend also offers a half marathon and a 5K as well as races for children. Kenyan Kiplangat Terer holds the men's record with a 2:14:04, run in 2013. Kenyan Damaris Areba holds the woman's record at 2:30:29, from her 2022 win.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25210", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25210", "title": "Quantuum chemistry", "text": ""}
{"id": "25211", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25211", "title": "Quantum chemistry", "text": "Chemistry based on quantum physics\nQuantum chemistry, also called molecular quantum mechanics, is a branch of physical chemistry focused on the application of quantum mechanics to chemical systems, particularly towards the quantum-mechanical calculation of electronic contributions to physical and chemical properties of molecules, materials, and solutions at the atomic level. These calculations include systematically applied approximations intended to make calculations computationally feasible while still capturing as much information about important contributions to the computed wave functions as well as to observable properties such as structures, spectra, and thermodynamic properties. Quantum chemistry is also concerned with the computation of quantum effects on molecular dynamics and chemical kinetics. \nChemists rely heavily on spectroscopy through which information regarding the quantization of energy on a molecular scale can be obtained. Common methods are infra-red (IR) spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, and scanning probe microscopy. Quantum chemistry may be applied to the prediction and verification of spectroscopic data as well as other experimental data. \nMany quantum chemistry studies are focused on the electronic ground state and excited states of individual atoms and molecules as well as the study of reaction pathways and transition states that occur during chemical reactions. Spectroscopic properties may also be predicted. Typically, such studies assume the electronic wave function is adiabatically parameterized by the nuclear positions (i.e., the Born\u2013Oppenheimer approximation). A wide variety of approaches are used, including semi-empirical methods, density functional theory, Hartree\u2013Fock calculations, quantum Monte Carlo methods, and coupled cluster methods. \nUnderstanding electronic structure and molecular dynamics through the development of computational solutions to the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is a central goal of quantum chemistry. Progress in the field depends on overcoming several challenges, including the need to increase the accuracy of the results for small molecular systems, and to also increase the size of large molecules that can be realistically subjected to computation, which is limited by scaling considerations \u2014 the computation time increases as a power of the number of atoms. \nHistory.\nSome view the birth of quantum chemistry as starting with the discovery of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation and its application to the hydrogen atom. However, a 1927 article of Walter Heitler (1904\u20131981) and Fritz London is often recognized as the first milestone in the history of quantum chemistry. This was the first application of quantum mechanics to the diatomic hydrogen molecule, and thus to the phenomenon of the chemical bond. However, prior to this a critical conceptual framework was provided by Gilbert N. Lewis in his 1916 paper \"The Atom and the Molecule\", wherein Lewis developed the first working model of valence electrons. Important contributions were also made by Yoshikatsu Sugiura and S.C. Wang. A series of articles by Linus Pauling, written throughout the 1930s, integrated the work of Heitler, London, Sugiura, Wang, Lewis, and John C. Slater on the concept of valence and its quantum-mechanical basis into a new theoretical framework. Many chemists were introduced to the field of quantum chemistry by Pauling's 1939 text \"The Nature of the Chemical Bond and the Structure of Molecules and Crystals: An Introduction to Modern Structural Chemistry\", wherein he summarized this work (referred to widely now as valence bond theory) and explained quantum mechanics in a way which could be followed by chemists. The text soon became a standard text at many universities. In 1937, Hans Hellmann appears to have been the first to publish a book on quantum chemistry, in the Russian and German languages. \nIn the years to follow, this theoretical basis slowly began to be applied to chemical structure, reactivity, and bonding. In addition to the investigators mentioned above, important progress and critical contributions were made in the early years of this field by Irving Langmuir, Robert S. Mulliken, Max Born, J. Robert Oppenheimer, Hans Hellmann, Maria Goeppert Mayer, Erich H\u00fcckel, Douglas Hartree, John Lennard-Jones, and Vladimir Fock.\nElectronic structure.\nThe electronic structure of an atom or molecule is the quantum state of its electrons. The first step in solving a quantum chemical problem is usually solving the Schr\u00f6dinger equation (or Dirac equation in relativistic quantum chemistry) with the electronic molecular Hamiltonian, usually making use of the Born\u2013Oppenheimer (B\u2013O) approximation. This is called determining the electronic structure of the molecule. An exact solution for the non-relativistic Schr\u00f6dinger equation can only be obtained for the hydrogen atom (though exact solutions for the bound state energies of the hydrogen molecular ion within the B-O approximation have been identified in terms of the generalized Lambert W function). Since all other atomic and molecular systems involve the motions of three or more \"particles\", their Schr\u00f6dinger equations cannot be solved analytically and so approximate and/or computational solutions must be sought. The process of seeking computational solutions to these problems is part of the field known as computational chemistry.\nValence bond theory.\nAs mentioned above, Heitler and London's method was extended by Slater and Pauling to become the valence-bond (VB) \nmethod. In this method, attention is primarily devoted to the pairwise interactions between atoms, and this method therefore correlates closely with classical chemists' drawings of bonds. It focuses on how the atomic orbitals of an atom combine to give individual chemical bonds when a molecule is formed, incorporating the two key concepts of orbital hybridization and resonance.\nMolecular orbital theory.\nAn alternative approach to valence bond theory was developed in 1929 by Friedrich Hund and Robert S. Mulliken, in which electrons are described by mathematical functions delocalized over an entire molecule. The Hund\u2013Mulliken approach or molecular orbital (MO) method is less intuitive to chemists, but has turned out capable of predicting spectroscopic properties better than the VB method. This approach is the conceptual basis of the Hartree\u2013Fock method and further post-Hartree\u2013Fock methods.\nDensity functional theory.\nThe Thomas\u2013Fermi model was developed independently by Thomas and Fermi in 1927. This was the first attempt to describe many-electron systems on the basis of electronic density instead of wave functions, although it was not very successful in the treatment of entire molecules. The method did provide the basis for what is now known as density functional theory (DFT). Modern day DFT uses the Kohn\u2013Sham method, where the density functional is split into four terms; the Kohn\u2013Sham kinetic energy, an external potential, exchange and correlation energies. A large part of the focus on developing DFT is on improving the exchange and correlation terms. Though this method is less developed than post Hartree\u2013Fock methods, its significantly lower computational requirements (scaling typically no worse than \"n\"3 with respect to \"n\" basis functions, for the pure functionals) allow it to tackle larger polyatomic molecules and even macromolecules. This computational affordability and often comparable accuracy to MP2 and CCSD(T) (post-Hartree\u2013Fock methods) has made it one of the most popular methods in computational chemistry.\nChemical dynamics.\nA further step can consist of solving the Schr\u00f6dinger equation with the total molecular Hamiltonian in order to study the motion of molecules. Direct solution of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is called \"quantum dynamics\", whereas its solution within the semiclassical approximation is called \"semiclassical dynamics.\" Purely classical simulations of molecular motion are referred to as \"molecular dynamics (MD)\". Another approach to dynamics is a hybrid framework known as \"mixed quantum-classical dynamics;\" yet another hybrid framework uses the Feynman path integral formulation to add quantum corrections to molecular dynamics, which is called path integral molecular dynamics. Statistical approaches, using for example classical and quantum Monte Carlo methods, are also possible and are particularly useful for describing equilibrium distributions of states.\nAdiabatic chemical dynamics.\nIn adiabatic dynamics, interatomic interactions are represented by single scalar potentials called potential energy surfaces. This is the Born\u2013Oppenheimer approximation introduced by Born and Oppenheimer in 1927. Pioneering applications of this in chemistry were performed by Rice and Ramsperger in 1927 and Kassel in 1928, and generalized into the RRKM theory in 1952 by Marcus who took the transition state theory developed by Eyring in 1935 into account. These methods enable simple estimates of unimolecular reaction rates from a few characteristics of the potential surface.\nNon-adiabatic chemical dynamics.\nNon-adiabatic dynamics consists of taking the interaction between several coupled potential energy surfaces (corresponding to different electronic quantum states of the molecule). The coupling terms are called vibronic couplings. The pioneering work in this field was done by Stueckelberg, Landau, and Zener in the 1930s, in their work on what is now known as the Landau\u2013Zener transition. Their formula allows the transition probability between two adiabatic potential curves in the neighborhood of an avoided crossing to be calculated. Spin-forbidden reactions are one type of non-adiabatic reactions where at least one change in spin state occurs when progressing from reactant to product.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25213", "revid": "50456058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25213", "title": "QWERTY", "text": "Keyboard layout for Latin-script alphabets\nQWERTY ( ) is a keyboard layout for Latin-script alphabets; the name comes from the order of the first six keys on the top letter row of the keyboard: . The design evolved for the quick typing of English on typewriters.\nThe QWERTY design is based on a layout included on the Sholes and Glidden typewriter sold by E. Remington and Sons from 1874. The layout became popular with the success of the Remington No. 2 of 1878 and remains in widespread use as a \"de facto\" standard on computers, as of 2025. Two prominent alternatives, Dvorak and Colemak, have been developed. In Europe, two types of modified layouts, QWERTZ and AZERTY, are used predominantly for German and French, respectively.\nHistory.\nThe QWERTY layout was devised and created in the early 1870s by Christopher Latham Sholes, a newspaper editor and printer who lived in Kenosha, Wisconsin. In October 1867, Sholes filed a patent application for his early writing machine he developed with the assistance of his friends Carlos Glidden and Samuel W. Soul\u00e9.\nThe first model constructed by Sholes used a piano-like keyboard with two rows of characters arranged alphabetically as shown below:\nSholes struggled for the next five years to perfect his invention, making many trial-and-error rearrangements of the original machine's alphabetical key arrangement. The study of bigram (letter-pair) frequency by educator Amos Densmore, brother of the financial backer James Densmore, was believed to have influenced the array of letters. Others consider this conjecture to be unfounded, suggesting instead that the letter groupings evolved from American Morse telegraph operators' feedback (noting the adjacency of \u27e8e\u27e9 and \u27e8r\u27e9, a very common pairing in English). \nIn November 1868 he changed the arrangement of the latter half of the alphabet, N to Z, right-to-left. In April 1870 he arrived at a four-row, upper case keyboard approaching the modern QWERTY standard, moving six vowel letters, A, E, I, O, U, and Y, to the upper row as follows:\nIn 1873 Sholes's backer, James Densmore, successfully sold the manufacturing rights for the Sholes &amp; Glidden Type-Writer to E. Remington and Sons. The keyboard layout was finalized within a few months by Remington's mechanics and was ultimately presented:\nAfter they purchased the device, Remington made several adjustments, creating a keyboard with essentially the modern QWERTY layout. These adjustments included placing the \"R\" key in the place previously allotted to the period key. Supposedly, this change was made to let salesmen impress customers by pecking out the brand name \"TYPE WRITER QUOTE\" from one keyboard row, but this is not formally substantiated. Vestiges of the original alphabetical layout remained in the \"home row\" sequence DFGHJKL.\nThe modern ANSI layout is:\nThe QWERTY layout became popular with the success of the Remington No. 2 of 1878, the first typewriter to include both upper and lower case letters, using a key.\nOne popular but possibly invented (or even incorrect) explanation for the QWERTY arrangement is that it was designed to reduce the likelihood of internal clashing of typebars by placing commonly used combinations of letters farther from each other inside the machine.\nDifferences from modern layout.\nSubstituting characters.\nThe QWERTY layout depicted in Sholes's 1878 patent is slightly different from the modern layout, most notably in the absence of the numerals 0 and 1, with each of the remaining numerals shifted one position to the left of their modern counterparts. The letter M is located at the end of the third row to the right of the letter L, rather than on the fourth row to the right of the N, the letters X and C are reversed, and most punctuation marks are in different positions or are missing entirely. 0 and 1 were omitted to simplify the design and reduce the manufacturing and maintenance costs; they were chosen specifically because they were \"redundant\" and could be recreated using other keys. Typists who learned on these machines learned the habit of using the uppercase letter I (or lowercase letter L) for the digit one, and the uppercase O for the zero.\nThe 0 key was added and standardized in its modern position early in the history of the typewriter, but the 1 and exclamation point were left off some typewriter keyboards into the 1970s.\nCombined characters.\nIn early designs, some characters were produced by printing two symbols with the carriage in the same position. For instance, the exclamation point, which shares a key with the numeral 1 on post-mechanical keyboards, could be reproduced by using a three-stroke combination of an apostrophe, a backspace, and a period. A semicolon (;) was produced by printing a comma (,) over a colon (:). As the backspace key is slow in simple mechanical typewriters (the carriage was heavy and optimized to move in the opposite direction), a more professional approach was to block the carriage by pressing and holding the space bar while printing all characters that needed to be in a shared position. To make this possible, the carriage was designed to advance only after releasing the space bar.\nIn the era of mechanical typewriters, combined characters such as \"\u00e9\" and \"\u00f5\" were created by the use of dead keys for the diacritics (\"\u2032, ~\"), which did not move the paper forward. Thus, the \"\u2032\" and \"e\" would be printed at the same location on the paper, creating \"\u00e9\".\nContemporaneous alternatives.\nThere were no particular technological requirements for the QWERTY layout, since at the time there were ways to make a typewriter without the \"up-stroke\" typebar mechanism that had required it to be devised. Not only were there rival machines with \"down-stroke\" and \"front stroke\" positions that gave a visible printing point, the problem of typebar clashes could be circumvented completely: examples include Thomas Edison's 1872 electric print-wheel device which later became the basis for Teletype machines; Lucien Stephen Crandall's typewriter (the second to come onto the American market in 1883) whose type was arranged on a cylindrical sleeve; the Hammond typewriter of 1885 which used a semi-circular \"type-shuttle\" of hardened rubber (later light metal); and the Blickensderfer typewriter of 1893 which used a type wheel. The early Blickensderfer's \"Ideal\" keyboard was also non-QWERTY, instead having the sequence \"DHIATENSOR\" in the home row, these 10 letters being capable of composing 70% of the words in the English language.\nProperties.\nAlternating hands while typing is a desirable trait in a keyboard design. While one hand types a letter, the other hand can prepare to type the next letter, making the process faster and more efficient. In the QWERTY layout many more words can be spelled using only the left hand than the right hand. Thousands of English words can be spelled using only the left hand, while only a couple of hundred words can be typed using only the right hand (the three most frequent letters in the English language, , are all typed with the left hand). In addition, more typing strokes are done with the left hand in the QWERTY layout. This is helpful for left-handed people but disadvantageous for right-handed people.\nContrary to popular belief, the QWERTY layout was not designed to slow the typist down, but rather to speed up typing. Indeed, there is evidence that, aside from the issue of jamming, placing often-used keys farther apart increases typing speed, because it encourages alternation between the hands. (On the other hand, in the German keyboard the has been moved between the and the to help type the frequent digraphs TZ and ZU in that language.) Almost every word in the English language contains at least one vowel letter, but on the QWERTY keyboard only the vowel letter is on the home row, which requires the typist's fingers to leave the home row for most words.\nA feature much less commented on than the order of the keys is that the keys do not form a rectangular grid, but rather each column slants diagonally. This is because of the mechanical linkages \u2013 each key is attached to a lever, and hence the offset prevents the levers from running into each other \u2013 and has been retained in most electronic keyboards. Some keyboards, such as the Kinesis or TypeMatrix, retain the QWERTY layout but arrange the keys in vertical columns, to reduce unnecessary lateral finger motion.\nComputer keyboards.\nThe first computer terminals such as the Teletype were typewriters that could produce and be controlled by computer codes. These used the QWERTY layouts but added keys such as escape , added ASCII punctuation like less-than and greater-than signs, and often moved the shift combinations for punctuation to simplify the electronics. Later keyboards copied punctuation arrangements from the IBM Selectric and other typewriters.\nDiacritical marks.\nQWERTY was designed for English, a language without accents ('diacritics') except for a few words of foreign origin. The standard US keyboard has no provision for accents at all; the need was later met by the so-called \"US-International\" keyboard mapping, which uses a \"dead key\" technique to type accents without having to add more physical keys. (The same principle is used in the standard US keyboard layout for macOS, but in a different way). Most European (including UK) keyboards for PCs have an key ('Alternative Graphics' key, replaces the right Alt key) that enables easy access to the most common diacritics used in the territory where sold. For example, default keyboard mapping for the UK/Ireland keyboard has the diacritics used in Irish but these are rarely printed on the keys; but to type the accents used in Welsh and Scots Gaelic requires the use of a \"UK Extended\" keyboard mapping and the dead key or compose key method. This arrangement applies to Windows, ChromeOS and Linux; macOS computers have different techniques. The US International and UK Extended mappings provide many of the diacritics needed for students of other European languages.\nOther keys and characters.\nSome QWERTY keyboards have alt codes, in which holding while inputting a sequence of numbers on a numeric keypad allows the entry of special characters. For example, + results in \u00fa (a Latin lowercase letter u with an acute accent).\nSpecific language variants.\nThere are a large number of QWERTY keyboard layouts used for languages written in the Latin script, the most popular layouts include English, Czech, Danish, Dutch, Estonian, Faroese, Icelandic, Irish, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, Vietnamese languages.\nMinor changes to the arrangement are made for other languages. There are a large number of different keyboard layouts used for different languages written in Latin script. They can be divided into three main families according to where the , , , , and keys are placed on the keyboard. These are usually named after the first six letters, for example this QWERTY layout and the AZERTY layout.\nMultilingual variants.\nMultilingual keyboard layouts, unlike the default layouts supplied for one language and market, try to make it possible for the user to type in any of several languages using the same number of keys. Mostly this is done by adding a further virtual layer in addition to the -key by means of (or 'right ' reused as such), which contains a further repertoire of symbols and diacritics used by the desired languages.\nThis section also tries to arrange the layouts in ascending order by the number of possible languages and not chronologically according to the Latin alphabet as usual.\nUnited Kingdom (Extended) Layout.\nWindows.\nFrom Windows XP SP2 onwards, Microsoft has included a variant of the British QWERTY keyboard (the \"United Kingdom Extended\" keyboard layout) that can additionally generate several diacritical marks. This supports input on a standard physical UK keyboard for many languages without changing positions of frequently used keys, which is useful when working with text in Welsh, Scots Gaelic and Irish \u2014 languages native to parts of the UK (Wales, parts of Scotland and Northern Ireland respectively).\nIn this layout, the grave accent key () becomes, as it also does in the US International layout, a dead key modifying the character generated by the next key pressed. The apostrophe, double-quote, tilde and circumflex (caret) keys are not changed, becoming dead keys only when 'shifted' with . Additional precomposed characters are also obtained by shifting the 'normal' key using the key. The extended keyboard is software installed from the Windows control panel, and the extended characters are not normally engraved on keyboards.\nThe UK Extended keyboard uses mostly the AltGr key to add diacritics to the letters a, e, i, n, o, u, w and y (the last two being used in Welsh) as appropriate for each character, as well as to their capitals. Pressing the key and then a character that does not take the specific diacritic produces the behaviour of a standard keyboard. The key presses followed by spacebar generate a stand-alone mark.:\nSome other languages commonly studied in the UK and Ireland are also supported to some extent:\nThe and letter method used for acutes and cedillas does not work for applications which assign shortcut menu functions to these key combinations.\nThese combinations are intended to be mnemonic and designed to be easy to remember: the circumflex accent (e.g. \u00e2) is similar to the free-standing circumflex (caret) (codice_1), printed above the key; the diaeresis/umlaut (e.g. \u00f6) is visually similar to the double-quote (codice_2) above on the UK keyboard; the tilde (codice_3) is printed on the same key as the .\nThe UK Extended layout is almost entirely transparent to users familiar with the UK layout. A machine with the extended layout behaves exactly as with the standard UK, except for the rarely used grave accent key. This makes this layout suitable for a machine for shared or public use by a user population in which some use the extended functions.\nDespite being created for multilingual users, UK-Extended in Windows does have some gaps \u2014 there are many languages that it cannot cope with, including Romanian and Turkish, and all languages with different character sets, such as Greek and Russian. It also does not cater for thorn (\u00fe, \u00de) in Old English, the \u00df in German, the \u0153 in French, nor for the \u00e5, \u00e6, \u00f8, \u00f0, \u00fe in Nordic languages.\nChromeOS.\nThe UK-Extended \"input method\" in Chrome OS provides all the same combinations as with Windows, but adds many more symbols and dead keys via AltGr. \n \u25cc&lt;br&gt;] \u25cc\nNotes: \nDead keys\nFinally, any arbitrary Unicode glyph can be produced given its hexadecimal code point: , release, then the hex value, then space bar or \u21a9 Return. For example (release) produces the Ethiopic syllable SEE, \u1234.\nUS-International.\nWindows provides an alternative layout for a US keyboard to type diacritics, called the US-International layout. Linux and ChromeOS (which calls it the International/Extended keyboard) also provide this layout with slight modifications such as many more combinations.\nThe layout is installed from the settings panel. The additional functions (shown in blue) may or may not be engraved on the keyboard, but are always functional. It can be used to type most major languages from Western Europe: Afrikaans, Danish, Dutch, English, Faroese, Finnish, German, Icelandic, Irish, Italian, Norwegian, Portuguese, Scots Gaelic, Spanish, and Swedish. It is not sufficient for French because it lacks the grapheme \u201c\u0153/\u0152\u201d (as does every keyboard layout provided by Windows except the Canadian multilingual standard keyboard). Some less common western and central European languages (such as Welsh, Maltese, Czech and Hungarian), are not fully supported. If the keyboard does not have an key, the right-hand is used. If that key does not exist (which is true of many laptops) the combination works as well.\nThis layout uses keys , , , and as dead keys to generate characters with diacritics by pressing the appropriate key, then the letter on the keyboard. Only certain letters such as vowels and \"n\", work, otherwise the symbol is produced followed by the typed letter. To get only the symbol ', `, \", ^ and ~, press the after the key.\nThe layout is not entirely transparent to users familiar with the conventional US layout as the dead keys act different (they don't appear immediately and produce accented letters depending on what letter is typed next). This could be disconcerting on a machine for shared or public use. There are alternatives, such as requiring to be held down to get the dead-key function.\nUS-International in the Netherlands.\nThe Dutch layout is historical, and keyboards with this layout are rarely used. Instead, the standard keyboard layout in the Netherlands is US-International, as the Dutch language heavily relies on diacritics and the US-International keyboard provides easy access to diacritics using dead keys. While many US keyboards do not have or extra US-International characters engraved on them, Dutch keyboards typically have the engraved at the location of the right key, and have the euro sign \u20ac engraved next to the key.\nApple International English Keyboard.\nThere are three kinds of Apple Keyboards for English: the United States, the United Kingdom and International English. The International English version features the same changes as the United Kingdom version, only without substituting for the symbol on , and as well lacking visual indication for the symbol on (although this shortcut is present with all Apple QWERTY layouts).\nDifferences from the US layout are:\nCanadian Multilingual Standard.\nThe Canadian Multilingual Standard keyboard layout is used by some Canadians. Though the caret (^) is missing, it is easily inserted by typing the circumflex accent followed by a space.\nFinnish multilingual.\nThe visual layout used in Finland is basically the same as the Swedish layout. This is practical, as Finnish and Swedish share the special characters \u00c4/\u00e4 and \u00d6/\u00f6, and while the Swedish \u00c5/\u00e5 is unnecessary for writing Finnish, it is needed by Swedish-speaking Finns and to write Swedish family names which are common.\nAs of 2008, there is a new standard for the Finnish multilingual keyboard layout, developed as part of a localization project by CSC. All the engravings of the traditional Finnish\u2013Swedish visual layout have been retained, so there is no need to change the hardware, but the functionality has been extended considerably, as additional characters (e.g., \u00c6/\u00e6, \u018f/\u0259, \u01b7/\u0292) are available through the key, as well as dead keys, which allow typing a wide variety of letters with diacritics (e.g., \u00c7/\u00e7, \u01e4/\u01e5, \u01ee/\u01ef).\nBased on the Latin letter repertory included in the Multilingual European Subset No. 2 (MES-2) of the Unicode standard, the layout has three main objectives. First, it provides for easy entering of text in both Finnish and Swedish, the two official languages of Finland, using the familiar keyboard layout but adding some advanced punctuation options, such as dashes, typographical quotation marks, and the non-breaking space (NBSP).\nSecond, it is designed to offer an indirect but intuitive way to enter the special letters and diacritics needed by the other three Nordic national languages (Danish, Norwegian and Icelandic) as well as the regional and minority languages (Northern S\u00e1mi, Southern S\u00e1mi, Lule S\u00e1mi, Inari S\u00e1mi, Skolt S\u00e1mi, Romani language as spoken in Finland, Faroese, Kalaallisut also known as Greenlandic, and German).\nAs a third objective, it allows for relatively easy entering of particularly names (of persons, places or products) in a variety of European languages using a more or less extended Latin alphabet, such as the official languages of the European Union (excluding Bulgarian and Greek). Some letters, like \u0141/\u0142 needed for Slavic languages, are accessed by a special \"overstrike\" key combination acting like a dead key.\nInitially the Romanian letters \u0218/\u0219 and \u021a/\u021b (S/s and T/t with comma below) were not supported (the presumption was that \u015e/\u015f and \u0162/\u0163 (with cedilla) would suffice as surrogates), however the layout was updated in 2019 to include the letters with the commas as well.\nEurKEY.\nEurKEY, a multilingual keyboard layout intended for Europeans, programmers and translators which uses the US-standard QWERTY layout as base and adds a third and fourth layer available through the key and +. These additional layers provide support for many Western European languages, special characters, the Greek alphabet (via dead keys), and many common mathematical symbols.\nUnlike most of the other QWERTY layouts, which are formal standards for a country or region, EurKEY is not an EU, EFTA or any national standard.\nTo address the ergonomics issue of QWERTY, EurKEY Colemak-DH was also developed as a Colmak-DH version with the EurKEY design principles.\nAlternatives.\nSeveral alternatives to QWERTY have been developed over the years, claimed by their designers and users to be more efficient, intuitive, and ergonomic. Nevertheless, none have seen widespread adoption, partly due to the sheer dominance of available keyboards and training. Although some studies have suggested that some of these may allow for faster typing speeds, many other studies have failed to do so, and many of the studies claiming improved typing speeds were severely methodologically flawed or deliberately biased, such as the studies administered by August Dvorak himself before and after World War II. Economists Stan Liebowitz and Stephen Margolis have noted that rigorous studies are inconclusive as to whether they actually offer any real benefits, and some studies on keyboard layout have suggested that, for a skilled typist, layout is largely irrelevant\u00a0\u2013 even randomized and alphabetical keyboards allow for similar typing speeds to QWERTY and Dvorak keyboards\u00a0\u2013 and that switching costs always outweigh the benefits of further training with a keyboard layout a person has already learned.\nThe most widely used such alternative is the Dvorak keyboard layout; another alternative is Colemak, which is based partly on QWERTY and is claimed to be easier for an existing QWERTY typist to learn while offering several supposed optimisations. Most modern computer operating systems support these and other alternative mappings with appropriate special mode settings, with some modern operating systems allowing the user to map their keyboard in any way they like, but few keyboards are made with keys labeled according to any other standard.\nComparison to other keyboard input systems.\nComparisons have been made between Dvorak, Colemak, QWERTY, and other keyboard input systems, namely stenotype or its electronic implementations. However, stenotype is a fundamentally different system, which relies on phonetics and simultaneous key presses or chords. Although Shorthand (or 'stenography') has long been known as a faster and more accurate typing system, adoption has been limited, possibly due to the historically high cost of equipment, steeper initial learning curve, and low awareness of the benefits within primary education and in the general public.\nThe first typed shorthand machines appeared around 1830, with English versions gaining popularity in the early 1900s. Modern electronic stenotype machines or programs produce output in written language, which provides an experience similar to other keyboard setups that immediately produce legible work.\nHalf QWERTY.\nA half QWERTY keyboard is a combination of an alpha-numeric keypad and a QWERTY keypad, designed for mobile phones. In a half QWERTY keyboard, two characters share the same key, which reduces the number of keys and increases the surface area of each key, useful for mobile phones that have little space for keys. It means that 'Q' and 'W' share the same key and the user must press the key once to type 'Q' and twice to type 'W'.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
