{"id": "23362", "revid": "50154027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23362", "title": "History of Pakistan", "text": "Pre-independence history of Pakistan\nThe history of Pakistan preceding the country's independence in 1947 is shared with that of Afghanistan, India, and Iran. Spanning the western expanse of the Indian subcontinent and the eastern borderlands of the Iranian plateau, the region of present-day Pakistan served both as the fertile ground of a major civilization and as the gateway of South Asia to Central Asia and the Near East.\nSituated on the first coastal migration route of \"Homo sapiens\" out of Africa, the region was inhabited early by modern humans. The 9,000-year history of village life in South Asia traces back to the Neolithic (7000\u20134300 BCE) site of Mehrgarh in Pakistan, and the 5,000-year history of urban life in South Asia to the various sites of the Indus Valley Civilization, including Mohenjo Daro and Harappa.\nThe ensuing millennia saw the region of present-day Pakistan absorb many influences\u2014represented among others in the ancient, mainly Hindu-Buddhist, sites of Taxila, and Takht-i-Bahi, the 14th-century Islamic-Sindhi monuments of Thatta, and the 17th-century Mughal monuments of Lahore. Dynasties emerging from the region encompassing modern day Pakistan during this period included the Soomra dynasty, Samma dynasty, Sayyid dynasty, Kalhora dynasty, Talpurs, Langah Sultanate, Sultanate of Swat, Sial dynasty and the Shah Mir Dynasty. In the first half of the 19th century, the region was appropriated by the East India Company, followed, after 1857, by 90 years of direct British rule, and ending with the creation of Pakistan in 1947, through the efforts, among others, of its future national poet Allama Iqbal and its founder, Muhammad Ali Jinnah. Since then, the country has experienced both civilian-democratic and military rule, resulting in periods of significant economic and military growth as well those of instability; significant during the latter, was the secession of East Pakistan as the new nation of Bangladesh.\nPrehistory.\nPaleolithic period.\nThe Soanian is archaeological culture of the Lower Paleolithic, Acheulean. It is named after the Soan Valley in the Sivalik Hills, near modern-day Islamabad and is dated between c.774,000 and c.11,700 BCE.\nNeolithic period.\nMehrgarh is an important Neolithic site discovered in 1974, which shows early evidence of farming and herding, and dentistry. The site dates back to 7000\u20135500 BCE and is located on the Kachi Plain of Balochistan. The residents of Mehrgarh lived in mud brick houses, stored grain in granaries, fashioned tools from copper, cultivated barley, wheat, jujubes and dates, and herded sheep, goats and cattle. As the civilisation progressed (5500\u20132600 BCE) residents began to engage in crafts, including flint knapping, tanning, bead production, and metalworking. The site was occupied continuously until 2600 BCE, when climatic changes began to occur. Between 2600 and 2000 BCE, region became more arid and Mehrgarh was abandoned in favour of the Indus Valley, where a new civilisation was in the early stages of development.\nBronze Age.\nIndus Valley Civilisation.\nThe Bronze Age in the Indus Valley began around 3300\u00a0BCE with the Indus Valley Civilization. Along with Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, it was one of three early civilisations of the Old World, and of the three the most widespread, covering an area of 1.25\u00a0million km2. It flourished in the basins of the Indus River, in what is today the Pakistani provinces of Sindh, Punjab and Balochistan, and along a system of perennial, mostly monsoon-fed, rivers that once coursed in the vicinity of the seasonal Ghaggar-Hakra River in parts of north-west India. At its peak, the civilisation hosted a population of approximately 5 million spread across hundreds of settlements extending as far as the Arabian Sea to present-day southern and eastern Afghanistan, and the Himalayas. Inhabitants of the ancient Indus river valley, the Harappans, developed new techniques in metallurgy and handicraft (carneol products, seal carving), and produced copper, bronze, lead, and tin.\nThe Mature Indus civilisation flourished from about 2600 to 1900\u00a0BCE, marking the beginning of urban civilisation in the Indus Valley. The civilisation included urban centres such as Harappa, Ganeriwala and Mohenjo-daro as well as an offshoot called the Kulli culture (2500\u20132000 BCE) in southern Balochistan and was noted for its cities built of brick, roadside drainage system, and multi-storeyed houses. It is thought to have had some kind of municipal organisation as well.\nDuring the late period of this civilisation, signs of a gradual decline began to emerge, and by around 1700\u00a0BCE, most of the cities were abandoned. However, the Indus Valley Civilisation did not disappear suddenly, and some elements of the Indus Civilisation may have survived. Aridification of this region during the 3rd millennium BCE may have been the initial spur for the urbanisation associated with the civilisation, but eventually also reduced the water supply enough to cause the civilisation's demise, and to scatter its population eastward. The civilisation collapsed around 1700 BCE, though the reasons behind its fall are still unknown. Through the excavation of the Indus cities and analysis of town planning and seals, it has been inferred that the Civilization had high level of sophistication in its town planning, arts, crafts, and trade.\nEarly history \u2013 Iron Age.\nVedic period.\nThe Vedic Period (c.\u20091500\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009500 BCE) is postulated to have formed during the 1500 BCE to 800 BCE. As Indo-Aryans migrated and settled into the Indus Valley, along with them came their distinctive religious traditions and practices which fused with local culture. The Indo-Aryans religious beliefs and practices from the Bactria\u2013Margiana Culture and the native Harappan Indus beliefs of the former Indus Valley Civilisation eventually gave rise to Vedic culture and tribes. Early Indo-Aryans were a Late Bronze Age society centred in the Punjab, organised into tribes rather than kingdoms, and primarily sustained by a pastoral way of life. During this period the Vedas, the oldest scriptures of Hinduism, were composed.\nAncient history.\nAchaemenid Empire.\nThe main Vedic tribes remaining in the Indus Valley by 550 BCE were the \"Kamboja\", \"Sindhu\", \"Taksas\" of Gandhara, the \"Madras\" and \"Kathas\" of the River Chenab, \"Mallas\" of the River Ravi and \"Tugras\" of the River Sutlej. These several tribes and principalities fought against one another to such an extent that the Indus Valley no longer had one powerful Vedic tribal kingdom to defend against outsiders and to wield the warring tribes into one organised kingdom. King Pushkarasarin of Gandhara was engaged in power struggles against his local rivals and as such the Khyber Pass remained poorly defended. King Darius I of the Achaemenid Empire took advantage of the opportunity and planned for an invasion. The Indus Valley was fabled in Persia for its gold and fertile soil and conquering it had been a major objective of his predecessor Cyrus the Great. In 542 BCE, Cyrus had led his army and conquered the Makran coast in southern Balochistan. However, he is known to have campaigned beyond Makran (in the regions of Kalat, Khuzdar and Panjgur) and lost most of his army in the \"Gedrosian Desert\" (speculated today as the Kharan Desert).\nIn 518 BCE, Darius led his army through the Khyber Pass and southwards in stages, eventually reaching the Arabian Sea coast in Sindh by 516 BCE. Under Persian rule, a system of centralised administration, with a bureaucratic system, was introduced into the Indus Valley for the first time, establishing several satrapies: Gand\u0101ra around the general region of Gandhara, Hindush around Punjab and Sindh, Arachosia, encompassing parts of present-day Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and Balochistan, Sattagydia around the Bannu basin, and Gedrosia covering much of the Makran region of southern Balochistan.\nWhat is known about the easternmost satraps and borderlands of the Achaemenid Empire is alluded to in the Darius inscriptions and from Greek sources such as the \"Histories\" of Herodotus and the later \"Alexander Chronicles\" (Arrian, Strabo et al.). These sources list three Indus Valley tributaries or conquered territories that were subordinated to the Persian Empire and made to pay tributes to the Persian Kings.\nMacedonian Empire.\nBy spring of 326 BCE, Alexander began on his Indus expedition from Bactria, leaving behind 3500 horses and 10,000 soldiers. He divided his army into two groups. The larger force would enter the Indus Valley through the Khyber Pass, just as Darius had done 200 years earlier, while a smaller force under the personal command of Alexander entered through a northern route, possibly through Broghol or Dorah Pass near Chitral. Alexander was commanding a group of shield-bearing guards, foot-companions, archers, Agrianians, and horse-javelin-men and led them against the tribes of the former Gandhara satrapy.\nThe first tribe they encountered were the Aspasioi tribe of the Kunar Valley, who initiated a fierce battle against Alexander, in which he himself was wounded in the shoulder by a dart. However, the Aspasioi eventually lost and 40,000 people were enslaved. Alexander then continued in a southwestern direction where he encountered the Assakenoi tribe of the Swat and Buner valleys in April 326 BCE. The Assakenoi fought bravely and offered stubborn resistance to Alexander and his army in the cities of Ora, Bazira (Barikot) and Massaga. So enraged was Alexander about the resistance put up by the Assakenoi that he killed the entire population of Massaga and reduced its buildings to rubble \u2013 similar slaughters followed in Ora. A similar slaughter then followed at Ora, another stronghold of the Assakenoi. The stories of these slaughters reached numerous Assakenians, who began fleeing to Aornos, a hill-fort located between Shangla and Kohistan. Alexander followed close behind their heels and besieged the strategic hill-fort, eventually capturing and destroying the fort and killing everyone inside. The remaining smaller tribes either surrendered or like the Astanenoi tribe of Pushkalavati (Charsadda) were quickly neutralised where 38,000 soldiers and 230,000 oxen were captured by Alexander. Eventually Alexander's smaller force would meet with the larger force which had come through the Khyber Pass met at Attock. With the conquest of Gandhara complete, Alexander switched to strengthening his military supply line, which by now stretched dangerously vulnerable over the Hindu Kush back to Balkh in Bactria.\nAfter conquering Gandhara and solidifying his supply line back to Bactria, Alexander combined his forces with the King Ambhi of Taxila and crossed the River Indus in July 326 BCE to begin the Archosia (Punjab) campaign. His first resistance would come at the River Jhelum near Bhera against King Porus of the Paurava tribe. The famous Battle of the Hydaspes (Jhelum) between Alexander (with Ambhi) and Porus would be the last major battle fought by him. After defeating Porus, his battle weary troops refused to advance into India to engage the army of Nanda Dynasty and its vanguard of trampling elephants. Alexander, therefore proceeded south-west along the Indus Valley. Along the way, he engaged in several battles with smaller kingdoms in Multan and Sindh, before marching his army westward across the Makran desert towards what is now Iran. In crossing the desert, Alexander's army took enormous casualties from hunger and thirst, but fought no human enemy. They encountered the \"Fish Eaters\", or Ichthyophagi, primitive people who lived on the Makran coast, who had matted hair, no fire, no metal, no clothes, lived in huts made of whale bones, and ate raw seafood.\nMauryan Empire.\nThe Maurya Empire was a geographically extensive Iron Age historical power in South Asia based in Magadha, having been founded by Chandragupta Maurya in 322 BCE, and existing in loose-knit fashion until 185 BCE. The Maurya Empire was centralised by the conquest of the Indo-Gangetic Plain, and its capital city was located at Pataliputra (modern Patna). Outside this imperial centre, the empire's geographical extent was dependent on the loyalty of military commanders who controlled the armed cities sprinkling it. During Ashoka's rule (ca. 268\u2013232 BCE) the empire briefly controlled the major urban hubs and arteries of the Indian subcontinent excepting the deep south. It declined for about 50\u00a0years after Ashoka's rule, and dissolved in 185\u00a0BCE with the assassination of Brihadratha by Pushyamitra Shunga and foundation of the Shunga Empire in Magadha.\nChandragupta Maurya raised an army, with the assistance of Chanakya, author of Arthasastra, and overthrew the Nanda Empire in c.\u2009322 BCE. Chandragupta rapidly expanded his power westwards across central and western India by conquering the satraps left by Alexander the Great, and by 317 BCE the empire had fully occupied northwestern India. The Mauryan Empire then defeated Seleucus I, a diadochus and founder of the Seleucid Empire, during the Seleucid\u2013Mauryan war, thus acquiring territory west of the Indus River.\nUnder the Mauryas, internal and external trade, agriculture, and economic activities thrived and expanded across South Asia due to the creation of a single and efficient system of finance, administration, and security. The Maurya dynasty built a precursor of the Grand Trunk Road from Patliputra to Taxila. After the Kalinga War, the Empire experienced nearly half a century of centralised rule under Ashoka. Ashoka's embrace of Buddhism and sponsorship of Buddhist missionaries allowed for the expansion of that faith into Sri Lanka, northwest India, and Central Asia.\nThe population of South Asia during the Mauryan period has been estimated to be between 15 and 30 million. \nThe empire's period of dominion was marked by exceptional creativity in art, architecture, inscriptions and produced texts.\nClassical history.\nIndo-Greek Kingdom.\nThe Indo-Greek Menander I (reigned 155\u2013130 BCE) drove the Greco-Bactrians out of Gandhara and beyond the Hindu Kush, becoming king shortly after his victory. His territories covered Panjshir and Kapisa in modern Afghanistan and extended to the Punjab region, with many tributaries to the south and east, possibly as far as Mathura. The capital Sagala (modern Sialkot) prospered greatly under Menander's rule and Menander is one of the few Bactrian kings mentioned by Greek authors.\nThe classical Buddhist text Milinda Pa\u00f1ha praises Menander, saying there was \"none equal to Milinda in all India\". His empire survived him in a fragmented manner until the last independent Greek king, Strato II, disappeared around 10 CE. Around 125 BCE, the Greco-Bactrian king Heliocles, son of Eucratides, fled from the Yuezhi invasion of Bactria and relocated to Gandhara, pushing the Indo-Greeks east of the Jhelum River. The last known Indo-Greek ruler was Theodamas, from the Bajaur area of Gandhara, mentioned on a 1st-century CE signet ring, bearing the Kharo\u1e63\u1e6dh\u012b inscription \"Su Theodamasa\" (\"Su\" was the Greek transliteration of the Kushan royal title \"Shau\" (\"Shah\" or \"King\")). Various petty kings ruled into the early 1st century CE, until the conquests by the Scythians, Parthians and the Yuezhi, who founded the Kushan dynasty.\nIt is during this period that the fusion of Hellenistic and Asiatic mythological, artistic and religious elements becomes most apparent, especially in the region of Gandhara, straddling western Pakistan and southern Afghanistan. Detailed, humanistic representations of the Buddha begin to emerge, depicting the figure with a close resemblance to the Hellenic god Apollo; Greek mythological motifs such as centaurs, Bacchanalian scenes, Nereids and deities such as Tyche and Heracles are prominent in the Buddhistic art of ancient Pakistan and Afghanistan.\nIndo-Scythian Kingdom.\nThe Indo-Scythians were descended from the Sakas (Scythians) who migrated from southern Central Asia into Pakistan and Arachosia from the middle of the 2nd century BCE to the 1st century BCE. They displaced the Indo-Greeks and ruled a kingdom that stretched from Gandhara to Mathura. The power of the Saka rulers started to decline in the 2nd century CE after the Scythians were defeated by the south Indian Emperor Gautamiputra Satakarni of the Satavahana dynasty. Later the Saka kingdom was completely destroyed by Chandragupta II of the Gupta Empire from eastern India in the 4th century.\nIndo-Parthian Kingdom.\nThe Indo-Parthian Kingdom was ruled by the Gondopharid dynasty, named after its eponymous first ruler Gondophares. They ruled parts of present-day Afghanistan, Pakistan, and northwestern India, during or slightly before the 1st century CE. For most of their history, the leading Gondopharid kings held Taxila (in the present Punjab province of Pakistan) as their residence, but during their last few years of existence the capital shifted between Kabul and Peshawar. These kings have traditionally been referred to as Indo-Parthians, as their coinage was often inspired by the Arsacid dynasty, but they probably belonged to a wider groups of Iranic tribes who lived east of Parthia proper, and there is no evidence that all the kings who assumed the title \"Gondophares\", which means \"Holder of Glory\", were even related. Christian writings claim that the Apostle Saint Thomas \u2013 an architect and skilled carpenter \u2013 had a long sojourn in the court of king Gondophares, had built a palace for the king at Taxila and had also ordained leaders for the Church before leaving for Indus Valley in a chariot, for sailing out to eventually reach Malabar Coast.\nKushan Empire.\nThe Kushan Empire expanded out of what is now Afghanistan into the northwest of the subcontinent under the leadership of their first emperor, Kujula Kadphises, about the middle of the 1st century CE. They were descended from an Indo-European, Central Asian people called the Yuezhi, a branch of which was known as the Kushans. By the time of his grandson, Kanishka the Great, the empire spread to encompass much of Afghanistan and the northern parts of the Indian subcontinent at least as far as Saketa and Sarnath near Varanasi (Benares).\nEmperor Kanishka was a great patron of Buddhism; however, as Kushans expanded southward, the deities of their later coinage came to reflect its new Hindu majority. The monumental Kanishka stupa is believed to have been established by the king near the outskirts of modern-day Peshawar, Pakistan.\nThe Kushan dynasty played an important role in the establishment of Buddhism in India and its spread to Central Asia and China. Historian Vincent Smith said about Kanishka in particular:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe empire linked the Indian Ocean maritime trade with the commerce of the Silk Road through the Indus valley, encouraging long-distance trade, particularly between China and Rome. The Kushans brought new trends to the budding and blossoming Gandharan Art, which reached its peak during Kushan Rule.\nH.G. Rowlinson commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Kushan period is a fitting prelude to the Age of the Guptas.\nBy the 3rd century, their empire in India was disintegrating and their last known great emperor was Vasudeva I.\nAlchon Huns.\nThe Alchon Empire was the third of four major Huna states established in Central and South Asia. The Alchon were preceded by the Kidarites and succeeded by the Hephthalites in Bactria and the Nezak Huns in the Hindu Kush. The names of the Alchon kings are known from their extensive coinage, Buddhist accounts, and a number of commemorative inscriptions throughout the Indian subcontinent. Toramana's son Mihirakula, a Saivite Hindu, moved up to near Pataliputra to the east and Gwalior to central India. Hiuen Tsiang narrates Mihirakula's merciless persecution of Buddhists and destruction of monasteries, though the description is disputed as far as the authenticity is concerned. The Alchons have long been considered as a part or a sub-division of the Hephthalites, or as their eastern branch, but now tend to be considered as a separate entity. The Huns were defeated by the alliance of Indian rulers, Maharaja (Great King) Yasodharman of Malwa and Gupta Emperor Narasimhagupta in the 6th century. Some of them were driven out of India and others were assimilated in the Indian society.\nMedieval period.\nArab Caliphate.\nAfter conquering the Middle East from the Byzantine Empire and the Sasanian Empire, the Rashidun Caliphate reached the coastal region of Makran in present-day Balochistan. In 643, the second caliph Umar (r.\u2009634\u00a0\u2013\u00a0644) ordered an invasion of Makran against the Rai dynasty. Following the Rashidun capture of Makran, Umar restricted the army to not pass beyond and consolidated his position in Makran. During the reign of the fourth caliph Ali (r.\u2009656\u00a0\u2013\u00a0661), the Rashidun army conquered the town of Kalat in the heart of Balochistan.\nDuring the reign of the sixth Umayyad caliph al-Walid I (r.\u2009705\u00a0\u2013\u00a0715), the Arab military general Muhammad ibn al-Qasim commanded the Umayyad incursion into Sindh. In 712, he defeated the army of the Hindu \"maharaja\" Dahir of Aror (r.\u2009695\u00a0\u2013\u00a0712) and established the caliphal province of Sind. The historic town of al-Mansura was administered as the capital of the province. Afterward, Ibn al-Qasim proceeded to conquer Multan, which subsequently became a prominent centre of Islamic culture and trading. In 747, the anti-Umayyad rebel Mansur ibn Jumhur al-Kalbi seized Sind and was defeated by Musa ibn Ka'b al-Tamimi of the succeeding Abbasid Caliphate. In the 9th-century, Abbasid authority gradually declined in Sind and Multan. The tenth Abbasid caliph al-Mutawakkil (r.\u2009847\u00a0\u2013\u00a0861) assigned the governorship of Sind to Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz al-Habbari, who founded the hereditary Habbarid dynasty and became the autonomous ruler of Sind in 854. Around the same time, the Banu Munnabih established the Emirate of Multan while Ma'danids reigned over Sultanate of Makran. There was gradual conversion to Islam in the south, especially amongst the native Hindu and Buddhist majority, but in areas north of Multan, Hindus and Buddhists remained numerous. By the end of the 10th century CE, the region was ruled by several Hindu kings.\nOdi Shahis.\nThe Turk Shahis ruled Gandhara from the decline of the Kushan Empire in the 3rd century until 870, when they were overthrown by the Hindu Shahis. The Hindu Shahis are believed to belong to the U\u1e0di/O\u1e0di tribe, namely the people of Oddiyana in Gandhara.\nThe first king Kallar had moved the capital into Udabandhapura from Kabul, in the modern village of Hund for its new capital. At its zenith, the kingdom stretched over the Kabul Valley, Gandhara and western Punjab under Jayapala. Jayapala saw a danger in the consolidation of the Ghaznavids and invaded their capital city of Ghazni both in the reign of Sebuktigin and in that of his son Mahmud, which initiated the Muslim Ghaznavid and Hindu Shahi struggles. Sebuk Tigin, however, defeated him, and he was forced to pay an indemnity. Jayapala defaulted on the payment and took to the battlefield once more. Jayapala however, lost control of the entire region between the Kabul Valley and Indus River.\nHowever, the army was defeated in battle against the western forces, particularly against the Mahmud of Ghazni. In the year 1001, soon after Sultan Mahmud came to power and was occupied with the Qarakhanids north of the Hindu Kush, Jaipal attacked Ghazni once more and upon suffering yet another defeat by the powerful Ghaznavid forces, near present-day Peshawar. After the Battle of Peshawar, he died because of regretting as his subjects brought disaster and disgrace to the Shahi dynasty.\nJayapala was succeeded by his son Anandapala, who along with other succeeding generations of the Shahiya dynasty took part in various unsuccessful campaigns against the advancing Ghaznvids but were unsuccessful. The Hindu rulers eventually exiled themselves to the Kashmir Siwalik Hills.\nGhaznavid dynasty.\nIn 997 CE, the Turkic ruler Mahmud of Ghazni, took over the Ghaznavid dynasty empire established by his father, Sebuktegin, a Turkic origin ruler. Starting from the city of Ghazni (now in Afghanistan), Mehmood conquered the bulk of Khorasan, marched on Peshawar against the Hindu Shahis in Kabul in 1005, and followed it by the conquests of Punjab (1007), deposed the Shia Ismaili rulers of Multan, (1011), Kashmir (1015) and Qanoch (1017). By the end of his reign in 1030, Mahmud's empire briefly extended from Kurdistan in the west to the Yamuna river in the east, and the Ghaznavid dynasty lasted until 1187. Contemporary historians such as Abolfazl Beyhaqi and Ferdowsi described extensive building work in Lahore, as well as Mahmud's support and patronage of learning, literature and the arts.\nMahmud's successors, known as the Ghaznavids, ruled for 157 years. Their kingdom gradually shrank in size, and was racked by bitter succession struggles. The Hindu Rajput kingdoms of western India reconquered the eastern Punjab, and by the 1160s, the line of demarcation between the Ghaznavid state and the Hindu kingdoms approximated to the present-day boundary between India and Pakistan. The Ghurid Empire of central Afghanistan occupied Ghazni around 1160, and the Ghaznavid capital was shifted to Lahore. Later Muhammad Ghori conquered the Ghaznavid kingdom, occupying Lahore in 1187.\nGhurid dynasty.\nThe Ghaznavids under either Khusrau Shah or his son Khusrau Malik lost their control over Ghazni to the Ghuzz Turks along with some other territories. In the 1170s, Ghurid prince Muhammad of Ghor raided their territory and captured Ghazni from them and was crowned there by his brother Ghiyath al-Din Muhammad in 1173. Muhammad of Ghor marched from Gomal Pass into Pakistan and captured Multan and Uch before being rebuffed by Gujarat's Hindu Chaulukya (Solanki) rulers, which forced him to press upon the trumbling Ghaznavids. By 1186\u201387, he deposed the last Ghaznavid ruler Khusrau Malik, bringing the last of Ghaznevid territory under his control and ending the Ghaznavid empire. The Ghurids were overthrown in 1215, although their conquests in the Indian Subcontinent survived for several centuries under the Delhi Sultanate established by the Ghurid Mamluk Qutb ud-Din Aibak.\nDelhi Sultanate.\nThe Turkic origin Mamluk Dynasty, seized the throne of the Sultanate in 1211. Several dynasties ruled their empires from Delhi: the Mamluk (1211\u201390), the Khalji (1290\u20131320), the Tughlaq (1320\u20131413), the Sayyid (1414\u20131451) and the Lodhi (1451\u20131526). Although some kingdoms remained independent of Delhi, almost all of the Indus plain came under the rule of these large sultanates.\nThe sultans (emperors) of Delhi enjoyed cordial relations with rulers in the Near East but owed them no allegiance. While the sultans ruled from urban centres, their military camps and trading posts provided the nuclei for many towns that sprang up in the countryside. Close interaction with local populations led to cultural exchange and the resulting \"Indo-Islamic\" fusion has left a lasting imprint and legacy in South Asian architecture, music, literature, life style and religious customs. In addition, the language of Urdu (literally meaning \"horde\" or \"camp\" in various Turkic dialects, but more likely \"city\" in the South Asian context) was born during the Delhi Sultanate period, as a result of the mingling of speakers of native Prakrits, Persian, Turkish and Arabic languages.\nPerhaps the greatest contribution of the Sultanate was its temporary success in insulating South Asia from the Mongol invasion from Central Asia in the 13th century; nonetheless the sultans eventually lost western Pakistan to the Mongols (see the Ilkhanate dynasty). The Sultanate declined after the invasion of Emperor Timur, who founded the Timurid Empire, and was eventually conquered in 1526 by the Mughal Emperor Babar.\nThe Delhi Sultanate and later Mughal Empire attracted Muslim refugees, nobles, technocrats, bureaucrats, soldiers, traders, scientists, architects, artisans, teachers, poets, artists, theologians and Sufis from the rest of the Muslim world and they migrated and settled in the South Asia. During the reign of Sultan Ghyasuddin Balban (1266\u20131286) thousands of Central Asian Muslims sought asylum including more than 15 sovereigns and their nobles due to the Mongol invasion of Khwarezmia and Eastern Iran. At the court of Sultan Iltemish in Delhi the first wave of these Muslim refugees escaping from the Central Asian genocide by the Mongol armies of Genghis Khan, brought administrators from Iran, painters from China, theologians from Samarkand, Nishapur and Bukhara, divines and saints from the rest of Muslim world, craftsmen and men and maidens from every region, notably doctors adept in Greek medicine and philosophers from everywhere.\nKingdom of Sindh.\nSoomra dynasty.\nThe Soomra dynasty was a local Sindhi Muslim dynasty that ruled between the early 11th century and the 14th century.\nLater chroniclers like Ali ibn al-Athir (c. late 12th c.) and Ibn Khaldun (c. late 14th c.) attributed the fall of Habbarids to Mahmud of Ghazni, lending credence to the argument of Hafif being the last Habbarid. The Soomras appear to have established themselves as a regional power in this power vacuum.\nThe Ghurids and Ghaznavids continued to rule parts of Sindh, across the eleventh and early twelfth centuries, alongside the Soomrus. The precise delineations are not yet known, but Sommrus were probably centred in lower Sindh.\nSome of them were adherents of Isma'ilism. One of their kings, Shimuddin Chanisar, had submitted to Iltutmish, the Sultan of Delhi, and was allowed to continue on as a vassal.\nSamma dynasty.\nThe Samma dynasty was a Sindhi dynasty that ruled in Sindh, and parts of Kutch, Punjab and Balochistan from c. 1351 to c. 1524\u00a0CE, with their capital at Thatta.\nThe Sammas overthrew the Soomra dynasty soon after 1335 and the last Soomra ruler took shelter with the governor of Gujarat, under the protection of Muhammad bin Tughluq, the sultan of Delhi. Mohammad bin Tughlaq made an expedition against Sindh in 1351 and died at Sondha, possibly in an attempt to restore the Soomras. With this, the Sammas became independent. The next sultan, Firuz Shah Tughlaq attacked Sindh in 1365 and 1367, unsuccessfully, but with reinforcements from Delhi he later obtained Banbhiniyo's surrender. For a period the Sammas were therefore subject to Delhi again. Later, as the Sultanate of Delhi collapsed they became fully independent. Jam Unar was the founder of Samma dynasty mentioned by Ibn Battuta.\nThe Samma civilisation contributed significantly to the evolution of the Indo-Islamic architectural style. Thatta is famous for its necropolis, which covers 10 square km on the Makli Hill. It has left its mark in Sindh with magnificent structures including the Makli Necropolis of its royals in Thatta.\nEarly Modern Period.\nMughal Empire.\nIn 1526, Babur, a Timurid descendant of Timur and Genghis Khan from Fergana Valley (modern-day Uzbekistan), swept across the Khyber Pass and founded the Mughal Empire, covering parts of modern-day eastern- Afghanistan, much of what is now Pakistan, parts of India and Bangladesh. The Mughals were descended from Central Asian Turks (with significant Mongol admixture).\nHowever, his son and successor Humayun was defeated by Sher Shah Suri of Sasaram, in the year 1540, and Humayun was forced to retreat to Kabul. After Sher Shah died, his son Islam Shah Suri became the ruler, on whose death his prime minister, Hemu ascended the throne and ruled North India from Delhi for one month. He was defeated by Emperor Akbar's forces in the Second Battle of Panipat on 6 November 1556.\nAkbar, was both a capable ruler and an early proponent of religious and ethnic tolerance and favoured an early form of multiculturalism. For example, he declared \"Amari\" or non-killing of animals in the holy days of Jainism and rolled back the \"jizya\" tax imposed upon non-Islamic mainly Hindu people. The Mughal dynasty ruled most of the South Asia by 1600. The Mughal emperors married local royalty and allied themselves with local \"maharajas\". Akbar was succeeded by Jahangir who was succeeded by Shah Jahan. Shah Jahan was replaced by Aurangzeb following the Mughal war of succession (1658\u20131659).\nAfter the death of Aurangzeb in 1707, different regions of modern Pakistan and India began asserting independence. The empire went into a rapid decline and by about 1720 only really controlled a small region around Delhi. The emperors continued have lip service paid to them as \"Emperor of India\" by the other powers in South Asia until the British finally abolished the empire in 1858.\nFor a short time in the late 16th century, Lahore was the capital of the empire. The architectural legacy of the Mughals includes the Lahore Fort, Wazir Khan Mosque, Shalimar Gardens, Tomb of Jahangir, Tomb of Nur Jahan, Akbari Sarai, Hiran Minar, Shah Jahan Mosque and the Badshahi Mosque. The Mughal Empire had a great impact on the culture, cuisine, and architecture of Pakistan.\n18th Century Punjabi Muslim states.\nChattha State (1750\u20131797).\nThe Chatthas under their leader Nur Muhammad Chattha declared independence from Mughal Empire in 1750 and formed the Chattha State.After Pir Muhammad Chattha's death his son Ghulam Muhammad Chattha inherited the Chattha state and the hatred of Sukerchakias. The rivalry was passed down to Mahan Singh and Ghulam Muhammad Chattha.\nUnder his leadership the Chathas gained several successes over the Sikhs,and it at one time looked as if the progress of the Sikh arms had been arrested and their dominion in the Doab annihilated.\nChattha State was annexed when Jan muhammad Chattha was killed in a siege led by Ranjit Singh when the latter recovered the lost Chattha state with Afghan aid.\nPakpattan state (1692\u20131810 CE).\nFollowing the disintegration of the Mughal Empire, the shrine's \"D\u012bw\u0101n\" was able to forge a political independent state centered on Pakpattan. In 1757, \"D\u012bw\u0101n\" 'Abd as-Sub\u1e25\u0101n gathered an army of his Jat mur\u012bds, attacked the Raja of Bikaner, and thereby expanded the shrine's territorial holdings for the first time east of the Sutlej. Around 1776, the \"D\u012bw\u0101n\", supported mainly by his Wattu mur\u012bds, successfully repelled an attack by the Sikh Nakai Misl, resulting in the death of the Nakai leader, Heera Singh Sandhu.\nSial State (1723\u20131816).\nSial state was established by the 13th Sial Chief Nawab Walidad Khan Sial in 1723. He gradually gained control of the lower Rachna doab, including the cities of Chiniot, Pindi Bhattian, Jhang and Mankera.\nNext chief, Inayatullah Khan (r.\u20091747\u2013 1787) was a successful general who won 22 battles against Bhangi Misl and the Multan chiefs.\nSikh Empire invaded Jhang multiple times from 1801 to 1816. Sial state was annexed by Sikh Empire and Ahmad Khan Sial was awarded a Jagir by Ranjit Singh.\nMaratha Empire.\nBy early 18th century, the Mughal empire declined. In 1749, the Mughals were induced to cede Sindh, the Punjab region and the important trans Indus River to Ahmad Shah Durrani in order to save his capital from Afghan attack. Ahmad Shah sacked Delhi in 1757 but permitted the Mughal dynasty to remain in nominal control of the city as long as the ruler acknowledged Ahmad Shah's suzerainty over Punjab, Sindh, and Kashmir. Leaving his second son Timur Shah to safeguard his interests, Ahmad Shah left India to return to Afghanistan.\nIn 1751\u201352, \"Ahamdiya\" treaty was signed between the Marathas and Mughals, when Balaji Bajirao was the Peshwa. Through this treaty, the Marathas controlled whole of India from their capital at Pune and the Mughal rule was restricted only to Delhi (the Mughals remained the nominal heads of Delhi). Marathas were now straining to expand their area of control towards the Northwest of India. Ahmad Shah sacked the Mughal capital and withdrew with the booty he coveted. To counter the Afghans, Peshwa Balaji Bajirao sent Raghunathrao. He defeated the Rohillas and Afghan garrisons in Punjab and succeeded in ousting Timur Shah and his court from India and brought Lahore, Multan, Kashmir and other subahs on the Indian side of Attock under Maratha rule. Thus, upon his return to Kandahar in 1757, Ahmad was forced to return to India and face the Maratha Confederacy.\nIn 1758, the Maratha Empire's general Raghunath Rao attacked and conquered Punjab, frontier regions and Kashmir and drove out Timur Shah Durrani, the son and viceroy of Ahmad Shah Abdali. In 1759, the Marathas and its allies won the Battle of Lahore, defeating the Durranis, hence, Lahore, Dera Ghazi Khan, Multan, Peshawar, Kashmir, and other subahs on the south eastern side of Afghanistan's border fell under the Maratha rule.\nAhmad Shah declared a jihad (or Islamic holy war) against the Marathas, and warriors from various Afghan tribes joined his army. Early skirmishes were followed by decisive victory for the Afghans against the much larger Maratha garrisons in Northwest India and by 1759 Ahmad Shah and his army reached Lahore and were poised to confront the Marathas. By 1760, the Maratha groups had coalesced into a big enough army under the command of Sadashivrao Bhau. Once again, Panipat was the scene of a confrontation between two warring contenders for control of northern India. The Third Battle of Panipat (14 January 1761), fought between largely Muslim and largely Hindu armies was waged along a twelve-kilometer front. Although the Durrani's army decisively defeated the Marathas, they suffered heavily in the battle.\nThe victory at Panipat was the high point of Ahmad Shah's\u2014and Afghan\u2014power. However, even prior to his death, the empire began to face challenges in the form of a rising Sikhs in Punjab. In 1762, Ahmad Shah crossed the passes from Afghanistan for the sixth time to subdue the Sikhs. From this time and on, the domination and control of the Empire began to loosen, and by the time of Durrani's death he had completely lost Punjab to the Sikhs, as well as earlier losses of northern territories to the Uzbeks, necessitating a compromise with them.\nSikh Empire.\nGuru Nanak (29 November 1469 \u2013 22 September 1539), Sikhism's founder, was born into a Hindu Khatri family in the village of \"R\u0101i Bh\u014di d\u012b Talwand\u012b (\"present day Nankana, near Sial in modern-day Pakistan). He was an influential religious and social reformer in north India and the saintly founder of a modern monotheistic order and first of the ten divine Gurus of Sikh religion. At the age of 70, he died at Kartarpur, Punjab of modern-day Pakistan.\nThe Sikh Empire (1799\u20131849) was formed on the foundations of the Sikh Khalsa Army by Maharaja Ranjit Singh who was proclaimed \"Sarkar-i-Khalsa\", and was referred to as the \"Maharaja of Lahore\". It consisted of a collection of autonomous Punjabi Misls, which were governed by Misldars, mainly in the Punjab region. The empire extended from the Khyber Pass in the west, to Kashmir in the north, to Multan in the south and Kapurthala in the east. The main geographical footprint of the empire was the Punjab region. The formation of the empire was a watershed and represented formidable consolidation of Sikh military power and resurgence of local culture, which had been dominated for hundreds of years by Indo-Afghan and Indo-Mughal hybrid cultures.\nThe foundations of the Sikh Empire, during the time of the Sikh Khalsa Army, could be defined as early as 1707, starting from the death of Aurangzeb. The fall of the Mughal Empire provided opportunities for the Sikh army to lead expeditions against the Mughals and Pashtuns. This led to a growth of the army, which was split into different Sikh armies and then semi-independent \"misls\". Each of these component armies were known as a misl, each controlling different areas and cities. However, in the period from 1762 to 1799, Sikh rulers of their misls appeared to be coming into their own. The formal start of the Sikh Empire began with the disbandment of the Sikh Khalsa Army by the time of coronation of Ranjit Singh in 1801, creating a unified political state. All the misl leaders who were affiliated with the Army were from Punjab's nobility.\nColonial period.\nBritish conquest and organisation.\nNone of the territory of modern Pakistan was ruled by the British, or other European powers, until 1839, when Karachi, then a small fishing village with a mud fort guarding the harbour, was taken, and held as an enclave with a port and military base for the First Afghan War that soon followed. The rest of Sindh was taken in 1843, and in the following decades, first the East India Company, and then after the post-Sepoy Mutiny (1857\u20131858) direct rule of Queen Victoria of the British Empire, took over most of the country partly through wars, and also treaties. The main wars were that against the Baloch Talpur dynasty, ended by the Battle of Miani (1843) in Sindh, the Anglo-Sikh Wars (1845\u20131849) and the Anglo-Afghan Wars (1839\u20131919). By 1893, all modern Pakistan was part of the British Indian Empire, and remained so until independence in 1947.\nUnder the British, modern Pakistan was mostly divided into the Sind Division, Punjab Province, and the Baluchistan Agency. There were various princely states, of which the largest was Bahawalpur. Sindh was part of the Bombay Presidency, and there were many complaints over the years that it was neglected by its distant rulers in modern Mumbai, although there was usually a Commissioner based in Karachi.\nThe Punjab (which included the modern Indian state) was instead technically ruled from even more distant Calcutta, as part of the Bengal Presidency, but in practice most matters were devolved to local British officials, who were often among the most energetic and effective in India. At first there was a \"Board of Administration\" led by Sir Henry Lawrence, who had previously worked as British Resident at the Lahore Durbar and also consisted of his younger brother John Lawrence and Charles Grenville Mansel. Below the Board worked a group of acclaimed officers collectively known as Henry Lawrence's \"Young Men\". After the Mutiny, Sir John Lawrence became the first Governor of Punjab. The Punjab Canal Colonies were an ambitious and largely successful project, begun in the 1880s, to create new farmland through irrigation, to relieve population pressure elsewhere (most of the areas involved are now in Pakistan).\nThe Baluchistan Agency largely consisted of princely states and tribal territories, and was governed with a light touch, although near the Afghan border Quetta was built up as a military base, in case of invasion by either the Afghans or the Russians. The 1935 Quetta earthquake was a major disaster. From 1876 the sensitive far north was made a \"Chief Commissioner's Province\". The border with Afghanistan, which remains the modern border of Pakistan, was finally fixed on the Durand Line in 1893.\nRailway construction began in the 1850s, and most of the network (some now discontinued) was completed by 1900. Karachi expanded enormously under British rule, followed to a lesser extent by Lahore and the other larger cities.\nDifferent regions of Pakistan were conquered by East India Company as below:\n\u2022Sindh was conquered by Battle of Hyderabad and Battle of Miani in 1843.\n\u2022Punjab and eastern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa were conquered during Second Anglo-Sikh War in 1849.\nRegions conquered by British Raj are as below:\n\u2022Southern Balochistan came under control by Treaty of Kalat in 1876.\n\u2022Western Balochistan was conquered by British empire in Second Anglo-Afghan War through Treaty of Gandamak, in 1879.\nEarly period of Pakistan Movement.\nIn 1877, Syed Ameer Ali had formed the \"Central National Muhammadan Association\" to work towards the political advancement of the Indian Muslims, who had suffered grievously in 1857, in the aftermath of the failed Sepoy Mutiny against the East India Company; the British were seen as foreign invaders. But the organisation declined towards the end of the 19th century.\nIn 1885, the Indian National Congress was founded as a forum, which later became a party, to promote a nationalist cause. Although the Congress attempted to include the Muslim community in the struggle for independence from the British rule \u2013 and some Muslims were very active in the Congress \u2013 the majority of Muslim leaders, including the influential Sir Syed Ahmed Khan, did not trust the party.\nA turning point came in 1900, when the British administration in the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh acceded to Hindu demands and made Hindi, the version of the Hindustani language written in the Devanagari script, the official language. The proselytisation conducted in the region by the activists of Arya Samaj, a Hindu reformist movement also stirred Muslim concerns about their faith. Eventually, the Muslims feared that the Hindu majority would seek to suppress the rights of Muslims in the region following the departure of the British.\nMuslim League.\nThe All-India Muslim League was founded by Shaiiq-e-Mustafa on 30 December 1906, in the aftermath of division of Bengal, on the sidelines of the annual All India Muhammadan Educational Conference in Shahbagh, Dhaka East Bengal. The meeting was attended by three thousand delegates and presided over by Nawab Viqar-ul-Mulk. It addressed the issue of safeguarding interests of Muslims and finalised a programme. A resolution, moved by Nawab Salimullah and seconded by Hakim Ajmal Khan. Nawab Viqar-ul-Mulk (conservative), declared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe constitution and principles of the League were contained in the \"Green Book\", written by Maulana Mohammad Ali. Its goals at this stage did not include establishing an independent Muslim state, but rather concentrated on protecting Muslim liberties and rights, promoting understanding between the Muslim community and other Indians, educating the Muslim and Indian community at large on the actions of the government, and discouraging violence. However, several factors over the next thirty years, including sectarian violence, led to a re-evaluation of the League's aims. Among those Muslims in the Congress who did not initially join the League was Jinnah, a prominent statesman and barrister in Bombay. This was because the first article of the League's platform was \"To promote among the Mussalmans (Muslims) of India, feelings of loyalty to the British Government\". The League remained loyal to the British administration for five years until the British decided to reverse the partition of Bengal. The Muslim League saw this British decision as partial to Hindus.\nIn 1907, a vocal group of Hindu hard-liners within the Indian National Congress movement separated from it and started to pursue a pro-Hindu movement openly. This group was spearheaded by the famous triumvirate of Lal-Bal-Pal \u2013 Lala Lajpat Rai, Bal Gangadhar Tilak and Bipin Chandra Pal of Punjab, Bombay and Bengal provinces respectively. Their influence spread rapidly among other like minded Hindus \u2013 they called it Hindu nationalism \u2013 and it became a cause of serious concern for Muslims.\nHowever, Jinnah did not join the League until 1913, when the party changed its platform to one of Indian independence, as a reaction against the British decision to reverse the 1905 Partition of Bengal, which the League regarded it as a betrayal of the Bengali Muslims. After vociferous protests of the Hindu population and violence engineered by secret groups, such as Anushilan Samiti and its offshoot Jugantar of Aurobindo and his brother etc., the British had decided to reunite Bengal again. Till this stage, Jinnah believed in Mutual co-operation to achieve an independent, united 'India', although he argued that Muslims should be guaranteed one-third of the seats in any Indian Parliament.\nThe League gradually became the leading representative body of Indian Muslims. Jinnah became its president in 1916, and negotiated the Lucknow Pact with the Congress leader, Bal Gangadhar Tilak, by which Congress conceded the principle of separate electorates and weighted representation for the Muslim community. However, Jinnah broke with the Congress in 1920 when the Congress leader, Mohandas Gandhi, launched a law violating Non-Cooperation Movement against the British, which a temperamentally law-abiding barrister Jinnah disapproved of. Jinnah also became convinced that the Congress would renounce its support for separate electorates for Muslims, which indeed it did in 1928. In 1927, the British proposed a constitution for India as recommended by the Simon Commission, but they failed to reconcile all parties. The British then turned the matter over to the League and the Congress, and in 1928 an All-Parties Congress was convened in Delhi. The attempt failed, but two more conferences were held, and at the Bombay conference in May, it was agreed that a small committee should work on the constitution. The prominent Congress leader Motilal Nehru headed the committee, which included two Muslims, Syed Ali Imam and Shoaib Quereshi; Motilal's son, Pt Jawaharlal Nehru, was its secretary. The League, however, rejected the committee's report, the so-called Nehru Report, arguing that its proposals gave too little representation (one quarter) to Muslims \u2013 the League had demanded at least one-third representation in the legislature. Jinnah announced a \"parting of the ways\" after reading the report, and relations between the Congress and the League began to sour.\nMuslim homeland \u2013 \"Now or Never\".\nThe general elections held in the United Kingdom had already weakened the leftist Labour Party led by Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald. Furthermore, the Labour Party's government was already weakened by the outcomes of World War I, which fuelled new hopes for progress towards self-government in British India. In fact, Mohandas K. Gandhi travelled to London to press the idea of \"self-government\" in British India, and claimed to represent all Indians whilst duly criticising the Muslim League as being sectarian and divisive. After reviewing the report of the Simon Commission, the Indian Congress initiated a massive Civil Disobedience Movement under Gandhi; the Muslim League reserved their opinion on the Simon Report declaring that the report was not final and the matters should be decided after consultations with the leaders representing all communities in India.\nThe Round-table Conferences were held, but these achieved little, since Gandhi and the League were unable to reach a compromise. Witnessing the events of the Round Table Conferences, Jinnah had despaired of politics and particularly of getting mainstream parties like the Congress to be sensitive to minority priorities. During this time in 1930, notable writer and poet, Muhammad Iqbal called for a separate and autonomous nation-state, who in his presidential address to the 1930 convention of the Muslim League said that he felt that a separate Muslim state was essential in an otherwise Hindu-dominated South Asia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;India is a continent of human groups belonging to different races, speaking different languages, and professing different religions [...] Personally, I would like to see the Punjab, North-West Frontier Province, Sind and Baluchistan amalgamated into a single state. Self-government within the British Empire, or without the British Empire, the formation of a consolidated North-West Indian Muslim State appears to me to be the final destiny of the Muslims, at least of North-West India.\u2014\u200a\nThe name of the nation-state was coined by the Cambridge University's political science student and Muslim nationalist Rahmat Ali, and was published on 28 January 1933 in the pamphlet \"Now or Never\". After coining the name of the nation-state, Ali noticed that there is an acronym formed from the names of the \"homelands\" of Muslims in northwest India:\nAfter the publication of the pamphlet, the Hindu Press vehemently criticised it, and the word 'Pakstan' used in it. Thus this word became a heated topic of debate. With the addition of an \"i\" to improve the pronunciation, the name of Pakistan grew in popularity and led to the commencement of the Pakistan Movement, and consequently the creation of Pakistan.\nIn Urdu and Persian languages, the name encapsulates the concept of \"Pak\" (\"pure\") and \"stan\" (\"land\") and hence a \"Pure Land\". In 1935, the British government proposed to hand over substantial power to elected Indian provincial legislatures, with elections to be held in 1937. After the elections the League took office in Bengal and Punjab, but the Congress won office in most of the other provinces, and refused to devolve power with the League in provinces with large Muslim minorities citing technical difficulties. The subsequent Congress Rule was unpopular among Muslims and seen as a reign of Hindu tyranny by Muslim leaders. Mohammad Ali Jinnah declared 22 December 1939, a \"Day of Deliverance\" for Indian Muslims. It was meant to celebrate the resignation of all members of the Congress party from provincial and central offices.\nMeanwhile, Muslim ideologues for independence also felt vindicated by the presidential address of V.D. Savarkar at the 19th session of the famous Hindu nationalist party Hindu Mahasabha in 1937. In it, this legendary revolutionary \u2013 popularly called Veer Savarkar and known as the iconic father of the Hindu fundamentalist ideology \u2013 propounded the seminal ideas of his Two Nation Theory or ethnic exclusivism, which influenced Jinnah profoundly.\n1940 Resolution.\nIn 1940, Jinnah called a general session of the Muslim League in Lahore to discuss the situation that had arisen due to the outbreak of World War II and the Government of India joining the war without consulting Indian leaders. The meeting was also aimed at analysing the reasons that led to the defeat of the Muslim League in the general election of 1937 in the Muslim majority provinces. In his speech, Jinnah criticised the Indian Congress and the nationalists, and espoused the Two-Nation Theory and the reasons for the demand for separate homelands. Sikandar Hayat Khan, the Chief Minister of Punjab, drafted the original resolution, but disavowed the final version, that had emerged after protracted redrafting by the Subject Committee of the Muslim League. The final text unambiguously rejected the concept of a United India because of increasing inter-religious violence and recommended the creation of independent states. The resolution was moved in the general session by \"Shere-Bangla\" Bengali nationalist, AKF Haq, the Chief Minister of Bengal, supported by Chaudhry Khaliquzzaman and other leaders and was adopted on 23 March 1940. The Resolution read as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFinal phase of the Pakistan Movement.\n Islamic scholars debated over whether it was possible for the proposed Pakistan to truly become an Islamic state.\nWhile the Congress' top leadership had been in prison following the 1942 Quit India Movement, there was intense debate among Indian Muslims over the creation of a separate homeland. The majority of Barelvis and Barelvi ulema supported the creation of Pakistan and \"pirs\" and Sunni ulema were mobilised by the Muslim League to demonstrate that India's Muslim masses wanted a separate country. The Barelvis believed that any co-operation with Hindus would be counter productive. On the other hand, most Deobandis, who were led by Maulana Husain Ahmad Madani, were opposed to the creation of Pakistan and the two-nation theory. According to them Muslims and Hindus could be one nation and Muslims were only a nation of themselves in the religious sense and not in the territorial sense. At the same time some Deobandi ulema such as Maulana Ashraf Ali Thanvi, Mufti Muhammad Shafi and Maulana Shabbir Ahmad Usmani were supportive of the Muslim League's demand to create a separate Pakistan.\nMuslims who were living in provinces where they were demographically a minority, such as the United Provinces where the Muslim League enjoyed popular support, were assured by Jinnah that they could remain in India, migrate to Pakistan or continue living in India but as Pakistani citizens.\nIn the Constituent Assembly elections of 1946, the Muslim League won 425 out of 496 seats reserved for Muslims (polling 89.2% of total votes). The Congress had hitherto refused to acknowledge the Muslim League's claim of being the representative of Indian Muslims but finally acquiesced to the League's claim after the results of this election. The Muslim League's demand for Pakistan had received overwhelming popular support from India's Muslims, especially those Muslims who were living in provinces such as UP where they were a minority.\nThe British had neither the will, nor the financial resources or military power, to hold India any longer but they were also determined to avoid partition and for this purpose they arranged the Cabinet Mission Plan. According to this plan India would be kept united but would be heavily decentralised with separate groupings of Hindu and Muslim majority provinces. The Muslim League accepted this plan as it contained the 'essence' of Pakistan but the Congress rejected it. After the failure of the Cabinet Mission Plan, Jinnah called for Muslims to observe Direct Action Day to demand the creation of a separate Pakistan. The Direct Action Day morphed into violent riots between Hindus and Muslims in Calcutta, with the violence displaying elements of ethnic cleansing. The riots in Calcutta were followed by intense communal rioting elsewhere, including in Noakhali (where Hindus were attacked by Muslims) and Bihar (where Hindus attacked Muslims) in October, resulting in large-scale displacement. In March 1947, such violence reached Punjab, where Sikhs and Hindus were massacred and driven out by Muslims in the Rawalpindi Division.\nThe British Prime Minister Attlee appointed Lord Louis Mountbatten as India's last viceroy, to negotiate the independence of Pakistan and India and immediate British withdrawal. British leaders including Mountbatten did not support the creation of Pakistan but failed to convince Jinnah otherwise. Mountbatten later confessed that he would most probably have sabotaged the creation of Pakistan had he known that Jinnah was dying of tuberculosis.\nIn early 1947, the British had announced their desire to grant India its independence by June 1948. However, Lord Mountbatten decided to advance the date. In a meeting in June, Nehru and Abul Kalam Azad representing the Congress, Jinnah representing the Muslim League, B. R. Ambedkar representing the Untouchable community, and Master Tara Singh representing the Sikhs, agreed to partition India along religious lines.\nIndependence from the British Empire.\nOn 14 August 1947, Pakistan gained independence. India gained independence the following day. The two provinces of British India, Punjab and Bengal, were divided along religious lines by the Radcliffe Commission. Mountbatten is alleged to have influenced the Radcliffe Commission to draw the line in India's favour. Punjab's mostly Muslim western part went to Pakistan and its mostly Hindu/Sikh eastern part went to India but there were significant Muslim minorities in Punjab's eastern section and likewise there were many Hindus and Sikhs living in Punjab's western areas.\nIntense communal rioting in the Punjab forced the governments of India and Pakistan to agree to a forced population exchange of Muslim and Hindu/Sikh minorities living in Punjab. After this population exchange only a few thousand low-caste Hindus remained in Pakistan's side of Punjab and only a tiny Muslim population remained in the town of Malerkotla in India's part of Punjab. Political scientist Ishtiaq Ahmed says that although Muslims started the violence in Punjab, by the end of 1947 more Muslims had been killed by Hindus and Sikhs in East Punjab than the number of Hindus and Sikhs who had been killed by Muslims in West Punjab.\nMore than ten million people migrated across the new borders and between 200,000 and 2,000,000 people died in the spate of communal violence in the Punjab in what some scholars have described as a 'retributive genocide' between the religions. The Pakistani government claimed that 50,000 Muslim women were abducted and raped by Hindu and Sikh men and similarly the Indian government claimed that Muslims abducted and raped 33,000 Hindu and Sikh women. The two governments agreed to repatriate abducted women and thousands of Hindu, Sikh and Muslim women were repatriated to their families in the 1950s. The dispute over Kashmir escalated into the first war between India and Pakistan. The conflict remains unresolved.\nFor the history after independence, see History of Pakistan (1947\u2013present).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23363", "revid": "50971689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23363", "title": "Geography of Pakistan", "text": "The Geography of Pakistan () encompasses a wide variety of landscapes varying from plains to deserts, forests, and plateaus ranging from the coastal areas of the Arabian Sea in the south to the mountains of the Karakoram, Hindukush, Himalayas ranges in the north. Pakistan geologically overlaps both with the Indian and the Eurasian tectonic plates where its Sindh and Punjab provinces lie on the north-western corner of the Indian plate while Balochistan, most of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and Gilgit-Baltistan lie within the Eurasian plate which mainly comprises the Iranian Plateau and the Tibetan Plateau in the north.\nPakistan is bordered by Iran to the west, Afghanistan to the northwest\n, India to the east, and the Arabian sea to the south. Geopoltically, the nation is situated within some of the most hostile regional boundaries, characterized by territorial disputes and historical tensions, particularly the Kashmir conflict with India, which has led to multiple military confrontations between the two countries. \nPakistan's western borders include the Khyber Pass and Bolan Pass that have served as traditional migration and trade routes between Central Eurasia and South Asia, serving as conduits for cultural exchanges, military invasions, and commercial activity for centuries.\n* total: \n**\"country rank in the world:\" 33rd\n* land: \n* water: \n* Australia comparative: approximately half the size of Queensland\n* Canada comparative: approximately times the size of Alberta\n* United Kingdom comparative: approximately times the size of the United Kingdom\n* United States comparative: approximately four times the size of Utah\n* EU comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Italy\nArea and boundaries.\nInternational boundaries.\nPakistan shares its borders with four neighboring countries\u2014People's Republic of China, Afghanistan, India, and Iran\u2014while Tajikistan is separated by the narrow Wakhan Corridor. Additionally, Pakistan shares maritime boundaries with India and Iran and has close maritime proximity with Oman across the Arabian Sea, which plays a crucial role in its trade and maritime connectivity. In total, Pakistan's land borders span approximately 7,307 km (4,540.4 mi), excluding its coastline along the Arabian Sea.\nAfghanistan\u2013Pakistan border.\nThe border with Afghanistan which is known as the Durand Line, , which runs from the Hindu Kush and the Pamir Mountains. A narrow strip of Afghanistan territory called the Wakhan Corridor extends between Pakistan and Tajikistan.\nChina\u2013Pakistan border.\nThe eastern tip of the Wahan Corridor starts the Sino-Pak border between the People's Republic of China and Pakistan spanning about . It carries on south-eastward and ends near the Karakoram Pass. This line was determined from 1961 to 1965 in a series of agreements between China and Pakistan and finally on 2 March 1963 both the governments, of Karachi and Beijing, formally agreed. It is understood that if the dispute over Kashmir is resolved, the border would need to be discussed again.\nIndia\u2013Pakistan border.\nThe Northern Areas has fifth of the world's seventeen highest peaks along with highest range of mountains the Karakoram and Himalayas. It also has such extensive glaciers that it has sometimes been called the \"Third Pole\". The international border-line has been a matter of pivotal dispute between Pakistan and India ever since 1947, and the Siachen Glacier in northern Kashmir has been an important arena for fighting between the two sides since 1984, although far more soldiers have died of exposure to the cold than from any skirmishes in the conflict between their National Armies facing each other.\nThe Pakistan\u2013India ceasefire line runs from the Karakoram Pass west-southwest to a point about 130 kilometres northwest of Lahore. This line, about 740 kilometres long, was arranged with United Nations (UNO) assistance at the end of the Indo-Pakistani War of 1947\u201348. The ceasefire line came into effect on 1 January 1949, after eighteen months of fighting between Indian forces and Pakistani forces and was last adjusted and agreed upon by the two countries according to the Shimla Agreement of 2 July 1972 between Indira Gandhi and Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. Since then, it has been generally known as the Line of Control or the (LoC).\nThe India\u2013Pakistan border continues irregularly southward for about 1,280 kilometers, following the Radcliffe line, named for Sir Cyril Radcliffe, the head of the British Boundary Commission on the division of the Punjab and Bengal provinces of British India on 13 August 1947.\nThe southern borders are far less contentious than those in northern Pakistan (Kashmir). The Thar Desert in the province of Sindh is separated in the south from the salt flats of the Rann of Kachchh (Kutch) by a boundary that was first delineated in 1923\u20131924. After independence and dissolution of Empire, Independent and free Pakistan contested the southern boundary of Sindh, and a succession of border incidents resulted. They were less dangerous and less widespread, however, than the conflict that erupted in Kashmir in the Indo-Pakistani War of August 1965, which started with this decisive core of issues. These southern hostilities were ended by British mediation during Harold Wilson's era, and both sides accepted the award of the Indo-Pakistan Western Boundary Case Tribunal designated by the UN secretary general himself. The tribunal made its award on 19 February 1968; delimiting a line of 403 kilometres that was later demarcated by joint survey teams, of its original claim of some 9,100 square kilometres, Pakistan was awarded only about 780 square kilometers. Beyond the western terminus of the tribunal's award, the final stretch of Pakistan's border with India is about 80 kilometres long, running east and southeast of Sindh to an inlet of the Indian Ocean. The village of Punjwarian is one of the villages close to the border of Indo-Pakistan.\nIran\u2013Pakistan border.\nThe boundary with Iran, , was first delimited by a British commission in the same year as the Durand Line was demarcated, separating Iran from what was then British India's Baluchistan province. Modern Iran has a province named Sistan va Baluchistan that borders Pakistan and has Baluchis in an ethnic majority. In 1957 Pakistan signed a frontier agreement with Iran in Rawalpindi according to which the border was officially declared and the two countries have not had this border as a subject of serious dispute at all.\n , or to the edge of the continental margin\nGeographical regions.\nPakistan is divided into three major geographic areas: the northern highlands; the Indus River plain, with two major subdivisions corresponding roughly to the provinces of Punjab and Sindh; and the Balochistan Plateau. Some geographers designate additional major regions. For example, the mountain ranges along the western border with Afghanistan are sometimes described separately from the Balochistan Plateau, and on the eastern border with India, south of the Sutlej River, the Thar Desert may be considered separately from the Indus Plain. Nevertheless, the country may conveniently be visualized in general terms as divided in three by an imaginary line drawn eastward from the Khyber Pass and another drawn southwest from Islamabad down the middle of the country. Roughly, then, the northern highlands are north of the imaginary east\u2013west line; the Balochistan Plateau is to the west of the imaginary southwest line; and the Indus Plain lies to the east of that line. \nThe Northern Highlands.\nThe northern highlands include parts of the Hindu Kush, the Karakoram Range, and the Himalayas. This area includes such famous peaks as K2 (Mount Godwin Austen, at 8,611 meters the second highest peak in the world). More than one-half of the summits are over 4,500 meters, and more than fifty peaks reach above 6,500 meters. Travel through the area is difficult and dangerous, although the government is attempting to develop certain areas into tourist and trekking sites. Because of their rugged topography and the rigors of the climate, the northern highlands and the Himalayas to the east have been formidable barriers to movement into Pakistan throughout history.\nSouth of the northern highlands and west of the Indus River plain are the Safed Koh Range along the Afghanistan border and the Suleiman Range and Kirthar Range, which define the western extent of the province of Sindh and reach almost to the southern coast. The lower reaches are far more arid than those in the north, and they branch into ranges that run generally to the southwest across the province Balochistan. North-south valleys in Balochistan and Sindh have restricted the migration of peoples along the Makran Coast on the Indian Ocean east toward the plains.\nSeveral large passes cut the ranges along the border with Afghanistan. Among them are the Khojak Pass, about eighty kilometres northwest of Quetta in Balochistan; the Khyber Pass, forty kilometres west of Peshawar and leading to Kabul; and the Broghol Pass in the far north, providing access to the Wakhan Corridor.\nLess than one-fifth of Pakistan's land area has the potential for intensive agricultural use. Nearly all of the arable land is actively cultivated, but outputs are low by world standards. Cultivation is sparse in the northern mountains, the southern deserts, and the western plateaus, but the Indus River basin in Punjab and northern Sindh has fertile soil that enables Pakistan to feed its population under usual climatic conditions.\nThe Indus plain.\nThe name Indus comes from the Sanskrit word \u0938\u093f\u0902\u0927\u0941 (\"Sindhu\"), as mentioned, one of the Rigvedic rivers, from which also come the words Sindh, Hindu, and India. The Indus, one of the great rivers of the world, rises in southwestern Tibet only about 160 kilometres west of the source of the Sutlej River, which then itself flows through Punjab, India and joins the Indus in Pakistani Punjab. The catchment area of the Indus is estimated at almost 1 million square kilometres, and all of Pakistan's major rivers\u2014the Kabul, Jhelum, and Chenab\u2014flow into it. The Indus River basin is a large, fertile alluvial plain formed by silt from the Indus. This area has been inhabited by agricultural civilizations for at least 5,000 years.\nBalochistan.\nBalochistan (or Baluchistan) is located at the eastern edge of the Iranian plateau and in the border region between Southwest, Central, and South Asia. It is geographically the largest of the four provinces at of Pakistani territory; and composes 48% of the total land area of Pakistan. The population density is very low due to the mountainous terrain and scarcity of water. The southern region is known as Makran. The central region is known as Kalat.\nThe Sulaiman Mountains dominate the northeast corner and the Bolan Pass is a natural route into Afghanistan towards Kandahar. Much of the province south of the Quetta region is sparse desert terrain with pockets of inhabitable towns mostly near rivers and streams. The largest desert is the Kharan Desert which occupies the most of Kharan District.\nThis area is subject to frequent seismic disturbances because the tectonic plate under the Indian plate hits the plate under Eurasia as it continues to move northward and to push the Himalayas ever higher. The region surrounding Quetta is highly prone to earthquakes. A severe quake in 1931 was followed by one of more destructive force in 1935. The small city of Quetta was almost completely destroyed, and the adjacent military cantonment was heavily damaged. At least 20,000 people were killed. Tremors continue in the vicinity of Quetta. The most recent major earthquakes include the October 2005 Kashmir earthquake in which nearly 10,000 people died and the 2008 Balochistan earthquake occurred in October 2008 in which 215 people were killed. In January 1991 a severe earthquake destroyed entire villages in the Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, but far fewer people were killed in the quake than died in 1935. A major earthquake centered in the Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa's Kohistan District in 1965 also caused heavy damage.\nClimate.\nPakistan lies in the temperate zone, immediately above the tropic of cancer. The climate varies from tropical to temperate. Arid conditions exist in the coastal south, characterized by a monsoon season with adequate rainfall and a dry season with lesser rainfall, while abundant rainfall is experienced by the province of Punjab, and wide variations between extremes of temperature at given locations. Rainfall varies from as little as less than 10\u00a0inches a year to over 150\u00a0inches a year, in various parts of the nation. These generalizations should not, however, obscure the distinct differences existing among particular locations. For example, the coastal area along the Indian Ocean is usually warm, whereas the frozen snow-covered ridges of the Karakoram Range and of other mountains of the far north are so cold year round that they are only accessible by world-class climbers for a few weeks in May and June of each year.\nPakistan has four seasons: a cool, dry winter marked by mild temperatures from December through February; a hot, dry spring from March through May; the summer rainy season, or southwest monsoon period, from June through September; and the retreating monsoon period of October and November. The onset and duration of these seasons vary somewhat according to location.\nThe climate in the capital city of Islamabad varies from an average daily low of in January to an average daily high of in June. Half of the annual rainfall occurs in July and August, averaging about in each of those two months. The remainder of the year has significantly less rain, amounting to about per month. Hailstorms are common in early spring.\nPakistan's largest city, Karachi, which is also the country's industrial center, is more humid than Islamabad but gets significantly lesser rainfall. Only July and August average more than of rainfall in the Karachi area; the remaining months are exceedingly dry with little rainfall. The temperature is also more uniform in Karachi than in Islamabad, ranging from an average daily low of during winter evenings to an average daily high of on summer days. Although the summer temperatures do not get as high as those in Punjab, the high humidity causes the residents a great deal of discomfort.\nWater resources.\nHydrological power is a renewable resource which benefits Pakistan a lot. After the Indus Water Treaty in 1960 World Bank decided that River Sutlej, Ravi and Beas water will be used by India and River Indus, Jhelum and Chenab water will be used by Pakistan. Pakistan was told to build two dams, one tarbela and second Mangla, five barrages, eight link canals, and one gated siphon. For this, India was told to participate 60%, whereas Pakistan, 40%. Pakistan is considering to develop wind turbines to fulfill the demand for electricity. Solar power is now slowly flourishing but it is still installed on a small scale.\nPakistan largest river is known as the Indus River which flows from Tibet/China and enters Pakistan through Gilgit Baltistan. The Indus River system is divided into two plains. The Upper Indus Plain starts from northern Pakistan and ends up at Mithankot. The Indus has tributaries on both western and eastern side. The Indus' eastern tributaries are the Jhelum, Chenab, Sutlej, Ravi and Beas. These four rivers flow in Punjab and meet at Panjnad where they are known as Panjnad river. The Indus' western tributaries are the Swat, Kabul, Kurrram, Tochi, Gomal, Zhob rivers which join the Indus at KPK. At Mithankot these rivers finally meet with the River Indus. After this the Indus flows alone through the Lower Indus Plain. Lower Indus Plain starts from Mithankot up to Thatta where the Indus meets with the Indian Ocean. This place is also known as Indus Delta.\nFuel resources.\nPakistan has extensive energy resources, including fairly sizable natural gas reserves, petroleum oil reserves, coal fields and large hydropower potential.\nAgriculture.\nAbout 26% of Pakistan's total land area is under cultivation and is watered by one of the largest irrigation systems in the world. The most important crops are cotton, wheat, rice, sugarcane, maize, sorghum, millets, pulses, oil seeds, barley, fruits and vegetables, which together account for more than 75% of the value of total crop output.\nFishery.\nFishery and fishing industry plays an important role in the national economy of Pakistan. With a coastline of about 1046\u00a0km, Pakistan has enough fishery resources that remain to be fully developed. It is also a major source of export earning.\nForestry.\nAbout only 4.1% of land in Pakistan is covered with forests. The forests of Pakistan are a main source of food, lumber, paper, fuel wood, latex, medicine as well as used for purposes of wildlife conservation and Eco tourism.\nMining.\nThe Salt Range in the Potwar Plateau has large deposits of rock salt. Pakistan has extensive mineral resources, including fairly sizable reserves of gypsum, limestone, chromites, iron ore, rock salt, silver, gold, precious stones, gems, marbles, tiles, copper, sulfur, fire clay and silica sand.\nEnvironment and conservation.\nThe environmental issues is a great problem for the nature and nation of Pakistan and has been disturbing the balance between economic development and environmental protection. As Pakistan is a large importer of both exhaustible and renewable natural resources and a large consumer of fossil fuels, the Ministry of Environment of Government of Pakistan takes responsibility to conserve and protect the environment.\nCurrent issues: water pollution from raw sewage, industrial wastes, and agricultural runoff; limited natural fresh water resources; a majority of the population does not have access to potable water; deforestation; soil erosion; desertification.\nNatural disasters.\nPakistan is subject to frequent earthquakes which are often severe (especially in north and west) and severe flooding along the Indus after heavy rains (July and August). Landslides are common in the northern mountains.\nProtected areas.\nThere are 35 national parks, 135 wildlife sanctuaries, 160 game reserves, 9 marine and littoral protected areas, 19 protected wetlands and a number of other protected grasslands, shrublands, woodlands and natural monuments.\nTidal Flats.\nA recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 1,575\u00a0km2 of tidal flats in Pakistan, making it the 20th ranked country in terms of how much tidal flat occurs there.\nInternational agreements.\nPakistan is a party to several international agreements related to environment and climate, the most prominent among them are:\nSuffix of regions and towns.\nParts of region and settlement names:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23364", "revid": "51016529", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23364", "title": "Demographics of Pakistan", "text": "Pakistan had a population of 241,499,431 according to the final results of the 2023 census. This figure includes the country's four provinces e.g. Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Balochistan and the Islamabad Capital Territory. Azad Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan's census data is yet to be approved by CCI Council of Pakistan. Pakistan is the world's fifth\u2013most populous country.\nBetween 1951 and 2023, Pakistan's population expanded over sevenfold, going from 33.7\u00a0million to 241.5\u00a0million. The country has a relatively high, although declining, growth rate supported by high birth rates and low death rates. Between 1998 and 2017, the average annual population growth rate stood at +2.40%.\nDramatic social changes have led to urbanization and the emergence of two megacities: Karachi and Lahore. The country's urban population more than tripled between 1981 and 2017 (from 23.8\u00a0million to 75.7\u00a0million), as Pakistan's urbanisation rate rose from 28.2% to 36.4%. Even with this, the nation's urbanisation rate remains one of the lowest in the world, and in 2017, over 130 million Pakistanis (making up nearly 65% of the population) lived in rural areas.\nDue to a high fertility rate, which was estimated at 3.5 in 2022, Pakistan has one of the world's youngest populations. The 2017 census recorded that 40.3% of the country's population was under the age of 15, while only 3.7% of Pakistanis were aged 65 or more. The median age of the country was 19, while its sex ratio was recorded to be 105 males per 100 females.\nThe demographic history of Pakistan from the ancient Indus Valley civilization to the modern era includes the arrival and settlement of many cultures and ethnic groups in the modern region of Pakistan from Eurasia and the nearby Middle East. Because of this, Pakistan has a multicultural, multilinguistic, and multiethnic society. Pakistan is also thought to have the world's fourth-largest refugee population, estimated at 1.4\u00a0million in mid-2021 by the UNHCR.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 2017 census recorded a population of 207,684,626 living in Pakistan's four provinces and the Islamabad Capital Territory. The census also reported that Azad Kashmir's population stood at 4,045,367 and Gilgit-Baltistan's population was 1,492,924. This meant that the total population of Pakistan in 2017 was 213,222,917.\nThe statistics in the graphs below were created by the United Nations in July 2022, and are covered in more detail in the following section. This data includes Azad Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan. For years, the country with a population exceeding 230 million has been grappling to achieve economic stability. The people of Pakistan are living in a precarious situation, with an uncertain future in the country.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nEstimates from the United Nations.\nIn July 2022, the United Nations published its 2022 World Population Prospects, a bi annually-updated database where key demographic indicators are estimated and projected worldwide down to the country level. They prepared estimates of Pakistan's population for every year from 1950 to 2021, as well as projections for future decades. This data includes Azad Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan.\nProjections are highlighted in light yellow, and future figures are taken from the medium fertility variant.\nStructure of population.\nThe table below shows Pakistan's population structure by five-year age group and sex using data from the 2023 census. The country's population structure is relatively young, with a median age of 19. With low death rates and a declining birth rate, the country is in the third stage of its Demographic transition. In 2017, Pakistan's sex ratio stood at 105 males per 100 females, which is much more balanced than South Asia as a whole.\nThe statistics below do not contain Azad Kashmir or Gilgit-Baltistan, which disseminate their census data separately from Pakistan's four provinces and Islamabad.\nPopulation distribution.\nPakistan's population is distributed unevenly, with over half of the country's people living in the Punjab province. On the other hand, Balochistan, which is geographically Pakistan's largest province, is the least-populated. The population is mainly clustered around the most agriculturally fertile areas (which is the reason Punjab has the highest population as it is agriculturally fertile), particularly the Indus River and its tributaries. Most of the country's people live in rural areas, but two large and growing megacities exist: the coastal Karachi and Lahore in eastern Punjab. Numerous smaller cities (such as Faisalabad, Rawalpindi, Peshawar, Gujranwala and the capital Islamabad) dot the rest of the country.\nBy province.\nThe table below shows Pakistan's provinces and territories by their historical population. While every one of Pakistan's administrative units currently has a growing population, the pace of growth is uneven throughout the country due to differing levels of fertility, mortality, as well as domestic and international migration. Populations pertaining to the modern borders of provinces are shown.\nUrbanization.\nThe following table shows how Pakistan has urbanised. As is true with population growth, urbanisation is an uneven and nonlinear process. With an urbanisation rate of 54% as of 2023, Sindh is the country's most urbanised province, just after Punjab. This is largely fuelled by the growth of Karachi, which economically dominates the province and attracts migrants from the rest of the province. On the other hand, the northwestern province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the territory of Gilgit-Baltistan both share very low urbanisation rates.\nLargest cities.\nAs urbanisation has progressed and owing to the country's large population, Pakistan today has many very large urban centers which act as hubs for commerce and culture. The nation has two megacities, Karachi and Lahore. With populations of 18.9\u00a0million and 13\u00a0million respectively (as of 2023), they are among the world's largest metropolises. The country also has eight more cities with more than 1 million residents each: Faisalabad, Rawalpindi, Gujranwala, Multan, Hyderabad, Peshawar, Quetta, and Islamabad. All of them play a significant role in the country, housing nearly 19 million people altogether.\nBelow a list showing Pakistan's cities with a population over 500,000 as of the 2023 census can be found, which not only shows the current populations of the cities, but also their growth rates and locations. The full list can be found on the main article: List of cities in Pakistan by population.\nAll city population figures below include adjacent cantonments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVital statistics.\nAs Pakistan lacks a national vital statistics system that publicly disseminates data, all of the following information is made from estimates, which are constantly being revised. The United Nations estimated that in February 2021, only 42% of births in Pakistan were officially registered, making it the world's most populous country where more than half of births remained unregistered. The United Nations was unable to estimate how many deaths were officially registered.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nSurveys taken by the Pakistani government or intergovernmental organisations are seen as the most reliable method of keeping tabs on birth, death, fertility, and infant mortality rates in a country without a reliable vital registration system. The data recorded in these surveys is used by the United Nations in order to estimate historical and future fertility and mortality figures for Pakistan in the World Population Prospects.\nRegional fertility rates.\nMany of the surveys above also recorded fertility rate data broken down by each of Pakistan's administrative units, while many more surveys have been taken explicitly focusing on a specific province or territory. The fertility rate data recorded in these surveys is displayed in the table below.\nThe MICS surveys above also provide data on the district level, although they come with a far higher margin of error. This margin of error is lessened for larger districts from where larger sample sizes were utilised. In the chart below, the latest fertility rate data for each Pakistani district with a population of over 2 million as of the 2017 census can be found. Although the table is originally ranked by district population size, clicking the headers will allow the reader to sort the table.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEstimates from the United Nations.\nIn July 2022, the United Nations published its 2022 World Population Prospects, a biennially-updated database where key demographic indicators are estimated and projected worldwide down to the country level. They prepared the following estimates of demographic indicators in Pakistan for every year from 1950 to 2021, as well as projections for future decades. This data includes Azad Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nHuman development.\nHuman Development Index.\nPakistan's Human Development Index (HDI) value for 2018 is in the medium human development category with a score of 0.560 (152nd rank out of 189 countries and territories) compared to 0.614 (135th rank) for Bangladesh and 0.647 (129th rank) for India. From 1990 to 2018, Pakistan's HDI increased 38.6% from 0.404 to 0.560.\n2018 Information on Pakistani provinces/regions, compared to other countries, estimated at three decimal places is provided below:\nLiteracy.\nDefinition: A person who can read a newspaper and write a simple letter in any language with understanding and can make simple calculation is treated as literate. Literacy rates for the population over 10 years old as of 2023 are below.\nNationality, ethnicity, and language.\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe major ethnolinguistic groups of Pakistan include Punjabis, Pashtuns, Sindhis, Saraikis, Muhajirs, Balochs, Hindkowans/Hazarewals, Meos, and Kohistanis with significant numbers of Shina, Baltis, Kashmiris, Paharis, Chitralis, Hazaras, Burusho and other various minorities.\nPakistan's census does not include the estimated 2.36 million Afghan citizens, who have been ordered to leave Pakistan or face deportation. Majority of them were born in Pakistan within the last four decades and are ethnically Pashtuns, Tajiks, Uzbeks and others.\nForeign-born population in Pakistan.\nAfter the independence of Pakistan in 1947, millions of Muslims from India migrated to Pakistan and they are the largest group of foreign-born residents. This group is dwindling because of its age. The second-largest group of foreign-born residents consists of Afghans who have been ordered to leave Pakistan or face deportation. There are also smaller groups of Muslim immigrants from countries such as Burma, Bangladesh, Iraq, Somalia, Iran, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, among others.\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPakistan is a multilingual country with dozens of regional languages spoken as first languages by various ethnolinguistic groups. The majority Pakistan's languages belong to the Indo-Iranian group of the Indo-European language family.\nUrdu is the national language and the lingua franca of Pakistan, and while sharing official status with English, it is the preferred and dominant language used for communication between different ethnic groups. Despite Urdu being the country's lingua franca, estimates on how many languages are spoken in the country range from 75 to 85, and in 2023, the country's three largest ethnolinguistic groups were the Punjabis (making up 36.98% of the total population), the Pashtuns (18.15%), and the Sindhis (14.31%). Languages with more than a million speakers each include Punjabi, Pashto, Sindhi, Saraiki, Urdu, Balochi, Hindko, Brahui, Mewati and Kohistani.\nEthnologue lists 74 languages in Pakistan. Of these, 66 are indigenous and 8 are non-indigenous. In terms of their vitality, 7 are classified as 'institutional', 17 are 'developing', 37 are 'vigorous', 10 are 'in trouble', and 3 are 'dying'.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the World Factbook, Library of Congress, Oxford University, over 96% of the population of Pakistan is Muslim and the remaining 4% is Hindu, Christian, and others. Majority of the Muslims practice Sunni with a significant minority of Shi'as.\nNearly all Pakistani Sunni Muslims belong to the Hanafi school, although there are some Hanbalis and Ahl-e-Hadees. The majority of Shia Muslims belong to the Ithn\u0101'Ashariyyah branch, while a smaller number practice Ismailism. There are small non-Muslim religious groups, including Christians, Ahmadis, Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds and Zoroastrians (Parsis),\nRecent changes and detailed demographic data.\nPakistan Bureau of Statistics released religious data of Pakistan Census 2017 on 19 May 2021. 96.47% are Muslims, followed by 2.174% Hindus, 1.27% Christians, 0.09% Ahmadis and 0.02% others.\nThe 2017 census showed marginal increase in the share of Hindus.The census also recorded Pakistan's first Hindu-majority district, called Umerkot District.\nOn the other hand, Christianity in Pakistan, while increasing in raw numbers, has fallen significantly in percentage terms since the last census. Christians are concentrated in the most developed parts of Pakistan, Lahore District (over 5% Christian), Islamabad Capital Territory (over 4% Christian), and Northern Punjab.\nThe Ahmadiyya movement shrunk in size (both raw numbers and percentage) between 1998 and 2017, while remaining concentrated in Lalian Tehsil, Chiniot District, where approximately 13% of the population is Ahmadiyya.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23365", "revid": "48434663", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23365", "title": "Politics of Pakistan", "text": " \nThe Politics of Pakistan (\u0633\u06cc\u0627\u0633\u06cc\u0627\u062a\u0650 \u067e\u0627\u06a9\u0633\u062a\u0627\u0646 ; ALA-LC: \"Siy\u0101siy\u0101t-e-P\u0101kist\u0101n\") takes place within the framework established by the constitution. The country is a federal parliamentary republic in which provincial governments enjoy a high degree of autonomy and residuary powers. Executive power is vested with the national cabinet which is headed by Prime Minister of Pakistan (Shehbaz Sharif since 3 March 2024), who works with the bicameral parliament and the judiciary. Stipulations set by the constitution provide a delicate check and balance of sharing powers between executive, legislative, and judicial branches of the government.\nThe head of state is the president who is elected by the electoral college for a five-year term. Asif Ali Zardari is currently the president of Pakistan (since 2024). The president was a significant authority until the 18th amendment, passed in 2010, stripped the presidency of most of its powers. Since then, Pakistan has shifted from a Semi-presidential system to a purely parliamentary government. Since the amendment, the president's powers include the right to pardon and the ability to suspend or moderate any sentence passed by any court or authority.\nThe government consists of three branches: executive, legislative and judicial. The Executive branch consists of the Cabinet and is led by the Prime Minister. It is totally independent of the legislative branch that consists of a bicameral parliament. The Upper House is the Senate whilst the National Assembly is the lower house. The Judicial branch forms with the composition of the Supreme Court as an apex court, alongside the high courts and other inferior courts. The judiciary's function is to interpret the Constitution and federal laws and regulations.\nPakistan is a multiparty democracy where several political parties compete for seats in the National and Provincial assemblies. However, as an aftermath of the Fall of Dhaka in 1971, a two-party system was developed between the People's Party and Muslim League. There has also been a sharp rise in the popularity of centrist parties such as PML-Q and PTI. The Armed Forces has historically played an influential role in the country's politics, although it has declined in recent years. From the 1950s to 2000s, several coups were staged that overthrew democratic regimes. After the resignation of President Pervez Musharraf in 2008, a sharp line has been drawn between the \"military establishment\" and politics and Pakistan is moving closer to becoming a democracy after general elections in 2013. Imran Khan ascended to leadership in 2018 with the backing of the military, but was subsequently removed from power in 2022 after losing that support. However, he won re-election in 2024. No Prime Minister of Pakistan has ever completed their full length tenure.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Pakistan an \"authoritarian regime\" in . According to the V-Dem Democracy indices Pakistan was autocratizing in 2024. In 2023, according to Freedom in the World, report by Freedom House, Pakistan is categorised as a \"partly free\" country, and it is categorised as \"not free\" in terms of internet freedom.\nExecutive branch.\nThe current and former Presidents of Pakistan, in keeping with the constitutional provision that the state religion is Islam, must be Muslim. Elected for a five-year term by an Electoral College consisting of members of the Senate and National Assembly and members of the provincial assemblies, the president is eligible for re-election. But no individual may hold the office for more than two consecutive terms. The president may resign or be impeached and may be removed from office due to incapacity or gross misconduct by a two-thirds vote of the members of the parliament. The president generally acts on the advice of the prime minister but has important residual powers.\nIn the past one of these powers \u2014a legacy of military dictator General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq\u2014 has included the president's discretionary ability to dissolve the National Assembly when \"a situation has arisen in which the Government of the Federation cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and an appeal to the electorate is necessary.\" This power has twice been granted\u00a0\u2014by the Eighth Amendment in 1985 (under the Zia dictatorship) and by the Seventeenth Amendment in 2003 (under the military rule of General Pervez Musharraf) \u2014and has twice been revoked\u2014 by the Thirteenth Amendment in 1997 (by the Pakistan Muslim League (N)) and under the Eighteenth Amendment in 2010 (by the Pakistan Peoples Party). Despite this most recent power-stripping, the President remains the \"ex officio\" chair of the National Security Council, as per the National Security Act 2004.\nThe prime minister is appointed by the members of the National Assembly through a vote. The prime minister is assisted by the Federal Cabinet, a council of ministers whose members are appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister. The Federal Cabinet consists of ministers, ministers of state, and advisers. As of early 1994, there were thirty-three ministerial portfolios: commerce; communications; culture; defence; defence production; education; environment; finance and economic affairs; food and agriculture; foreign affairs; health; housing; information and broadcasting; interior; Kashmiri affairs and Northern Areas; law and justice; local government; minority affairs; narcotics control; parliamentary affairs; petroleum and natural resources production; planning and development; railways; religious affairs; science and technology; social welfare; special education; sports; state and frontier regions; tourism; water and power; women's development; and youth affairs.\nLegislative branch.\nThe bicameral federal legislature consists of the Senate (upper house) and National Assembly (lower house). According to Article 50 of the Constitution, the National Assembly, the Senate and the President together make up a body known as the Majlis-e-Shoora (Council of Advisers).\nPakistan's democracy has no recall method. However, past governments have been dismissed for corruption by the President's invocation of Article 58 of the Constitution. The President's power to dismiss the Prime Minister and dissolve the National Assembly was removed by the Thirteenth Amendment and partially restored by the Seventeenth Amendment.\nSenate.\nThe Senate is a permanent legislative body with equal representation from each of the four provinces, elected by the members of their respective provincial assemblies. There are representatives from the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and from Islamabad Capital Territory. The chairman of the Senate, under the constitution, is next in line to act as president should the office become vacant and until such time as a new president can be formally elected. Both the Senate and the National Assembly can initiate and pass legislation except for finance bills. Only the National Assembly can approve the federal budget and all finance bills. In the case of other bills, the president may prevent passage unless the legislature in joint sitting overrules the president by a majority of members of both houses present and voting. Unlike the National Assembly, the Senate cannot be dissolved by the President.\nNational Assembly.\nMembers of the National Assembly are elected by universal adult suffrage (formerly twenty-one years of age and older but the seventeenth amendment changed it to eighteen years of age.). Seats are allocated to each of the four provinces, the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, and Islamabad Capital Territory on the basis of population. National Assembly members serve for the parliamentary term, which is five years, unless they die or resign sooner, or unless the National Assembly is dissolved. Although the vast majority of the members are Muslim, about 5 percent of the seats are reserved for minorities, including Christians, Hindus, and Sikhs. Elections for minority seats are held on the basis of separate electorates at the same time as the polls for Muslim seats during the general elections.\nJudicial Branch.\nThe judiciary includes the Supreme Court, provincial high courts, District &amp; sessions Courts, Civil and Magistrate courts exercising civil and criminal jurisdiction. Some federal and provincial courts and tribunals such as Services court, Income tax &amp; excise court, Banking court and Boards of Revenue's Tribunals are as well established in all provinces.\nSupreme Court.\nIn reference of ARTICLE 175 (A) APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES\nThe Supreme Court has original, appellate, and advisory jurisdiction.\n(1) There shall be a Judicial Commission of Pakistan, hereinafter in this Article referred to as the commission, for appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court, High Courts and the Federal Shariat Court, as hereinafter provided.\n(2) For appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court, the Commission shall consist of---\n(i) Chief Justice of Pakistan; Chairman \n(ii) [four] most senior Judges of the Supreme Court;Member \n(iii) a former Chief Justice or a former Judge of the Supreme Court of Pakistan to be nominated by the Chief Justice of Pakistan, in consultation with the [four] member Judges, for a term of two years; Member \n(iv) Federal Minister for Law and Justice;Member \n(v) Attorney-General for Pakistan; and Member \n(vi) a Senior Advocate of the Supreme Court of Pakistan nominated by the Pakistan Bar Council for a term of two years.\n(3) Now withstanding anything contained in clause (1) or clause (2), the President shall appoint the most senior Judge of the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of Pakistan.\nThe chief justice and judges of the Supreme Court may remain in office until age sixty-five: now 68 years and this is also another clause of seventeenth amendment.\nFederal Shariat Court of Pakistan.\nThe Federal Shariat Court (FSC) of Pakistan is a court which has the power to examine and determine whether the laws of the country comply with Shari'a law. It consists of 8 Muslim judges appointed by the President of Pakistan after consulting the Chief Justice of this Court, from amongst the serving or retired judges of the Supreme Court or a High Court or from amongst persons possessing the qualifications of judges of a High Court. Of the eight judges, three are required to be Ulema who are well versed in Islamic law. The judges hold office for a period of three years, which may eventually be extended by the President.\nAppeal against its decisions lie to the Shariat Appellate Bench of the Supreme Court, consisting of three Muslim judges of the Supreme Court and two Ulema, appointed by the President. If any part of the law is declared to be against Islamic law, the government is required to take the necessary steps to amend such law appropriately.\nThe court also exercises revisional jurisdiction over the criminal courts, deciding Hudood cases. The decisions of the court are binding on the High Courts as well as subordinate judiciary. The court appoints its own staff and frames its own rules of procedure.\nEver since its establishment in 1980, the Federal Shariat Court of Pakistan has been the subject of criticism and controversy in society. Created as an Islamisation measure by the military regime and subsequently protected under the controversial 8th Amendment, its opponents question the very rationale and utility of this institution. It is stated that this court merely duplicates the functions of the existing superior courts and also operates as a check on the sovereignty of Parliament. The composition of the court, particularly the mode of appointment of its judges and the insecurity of their tenure, is taken exception to, and it is alleged, that this court does not fully meet the criterion prescribed for the independence of the judiciary. That is to say, it is not immune to pressures and influences from the Executive.\nIn the past, this court was used as a refuge for the recalcitrant judges. And whereas some of its judgments, particularly the ones which rely on the Islamic concept of equity, justice and fair play, expanded and enlarged the scope and contents of individual's rights were commended, others that tend to restrict the rights of women, are severely criticised and deplored.\nProvincial High Courts.\nIn every province, there is one High Court. Currently all four provinces Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan have High courts, respectively called Lahore High Court, Sindh High Court, Peshawar High Court, and Balochistan High Court. After the approval of 18th Constitutional Amendment in April 2010, a new High court is established at Federal Capital Islamabad with the name of Islamabad High Court. In 18th Amendment, judges appointments are proposed by a Parliamentary Commission. Judges of the provincial high courts were, previously appointed (The seventeenth amendment give these powers to the president, previously Prime minister exercised them) by the president after consultation with the chief justice of the Supreme Court, as well as the governor of the province and the chief justice of the high court to which the appointment is being made. High courts have original and appellate jurisdiction.\nIn addition, there are special courts and tribunals to deal with specific kinds of cases, such as drug courts, commercial courts, labour courts, traffic courts, an insurance appellate tribunal, an income tax appellate tribunal, and special courts for bank offences. There are also special courts to try terrorists. Appeals from special courts go to high courts except for labour and traffic courts, which have their own forums for appeal. Appeals from the tribunals go to the Supreme Court.\nOmbudsman/Mohtasib.\nA further feature of the judicial system is the office of Mohtasib (Ombudsman), which is provided for in the constitution. The office of Mohtasib was established in many early Muslim states to ensure that no wrongs were done to citizens. Appointed by the president, the Mohtasib holds office for four years; the term cannot be extended or renewed. The Mohtasib's purpose is to institutionalise a system for enforcing administrative accountability, through investigating and rectifying any injustice done to a person through maladministration by a federal agency or a federal government official. The Mohtasib is empowered to award compensation to those who have suffered loss or damage as a result of maladministration. Excluded from jurisdiction, however, are personal grievances or service matters of a public servant as well as matters relating to foreign affairs, national defence, and the armed services. This institution is designed to bridge the gap between administrator and citizen, to improve administrative processes and procedures, and to help curb misuse of discretionary powers.\nPakistan has been ruled by both democratic and military governments. The first decade was marred with political unrest and instability, with frequent collapses of civilian democratic governments that eventually led to the 1958 military coup. From 1947 until now, Pakistan has been governed by various of both right-wing conservative governments and left-wing socialistic oriented governments, while neither far-right and far-left had failed to achieve enough majority to claim the exclusive mandate. From 1947 to 1958 as many as seven Prime Ministers of Pakistan either resigned or were ousted. On 7 October 1958 Pakistan's civilian and first President Iskander Mirza in collaboration with General Mohammad Ayub Khan abrogated Pakistan's constitution and declared Martial Law.\nGeneral Ayub Khan was the president from 1958 to 1969, and General Yahya Khan from 1969 to 1971, Chief Justice Habib Khan Marvath elected first Chairman Senate of Pakistan. Civilian, yet socialist-oriented autocratic, rule continued from 1972 to 1977 under Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, but he was deposed by General Zia-Ul-Haq. General Zia was killed in a plane crash in 1988, after which Benazir Bhutto, daughter of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, was elected as the Prime Minister of Pakistan. She was the youngest woman ever to be elected the Head of Government and the first woman to be elected as the Head of Government of a Muslim country. Her government was followed by that of Nawaz Sharif, and the two leaders alternated until the military coup by General Pervez Musharraf in 1999. From the resignation of President Rafiq Tarar in 2001, to his own resignation in 2008, Musharraf was the President of Pakistan. In 2008, Asif Ali Zardari was elected president.\nForm of government.\nOfficially a federal Islamic republic, Pakistan has had a long history of alternating periods of electoral democracy and authoritarian military government. Military presidents include General Ayub Khan in the 1960s, General Yahya Khan, General Zia ul Haq in the 1980s, and General Pervez Musharraf from 1999. However, a majority of Pakistan's Heads of State and Heads of Government have been elected civilian leaders. General elections were held in October 2002. After monitoring the elections, the Commonwealth Observer Group stated in conclusion:\n \"We believe that on election day this was a credible election: the will of the people was expressed and the results reflected their wishes. However, in the context of various measures taken by the government we are not persuaded of the overall fairness of the process as a whole.\"\nOn 22 May 2004, the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group re-admitted Pakistan into the Commonwealth, formally acknowledging its progress in returning to democracy.\nKashmir in Pakistani politics.\nKashmir (Azad Kashmir) has its own constitution, the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act of 1974, and a locally chosen parliamentary form of government, as described above. The constitution allows for many of the structures that compose a self-governing state, including a legislative assembly elected through periodic elections, a prime minister who commands the majority in the assembly, an indirectly elected president, an independent judiciary, and local government institutions.\nHowever, an override exists in the form of Section 56 of the Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act (which was drafted by the Federal Ministries of Law and Kashmir Affairs in Islamabad), the Pakistani government can dismiss any elected government in Azad Kashmir irrespective of the support it may enjoy in the AJK Legislative Assembly. The Interim Constitution Act provides for two executive forums\u2014the Azad Kashmir Government in Muzaffarabad and the Azad Kashmir Council in Islamabad.\nThe latter body, presided over by the Prime Minister of Pakistan, exercises paramount authority over the AJK Legislative Assembly, which cannot challenge decisions of the council. The council is under the numerical control of the federal government in Islamabad, as in addition to the Pakistani prime minister it comprises six other federal ministers, the minister of Kashmir affairs as the ex-officio member, the prime minister of Azad Kashmir, and six Azad Kashmir members elected by the Legislative Assembly.38 The interim constitution act lists fifty-two subjects\u2014virtually everything of any importance\u2014that are under the jurisdiction of the Azad Kashmir Council, which has been described as the \"supra power\" by the Azad Kashmir High Court. Its decisions are final and not subject to judicial review.\nThus, Azad Kashmir remains for all intents and purposes under Pakistan's strict control, exercising no real sovereignty of its own. From the outset, the institutional set up in the territory was designed to ensure Pakistan's control of the area's affairs. According to the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan (UNCIP) 39 resolutions, Azad Kashmir is neither a sovereign state nor a province of Pakistan, but rather a \"local authority\" with responsibility over the area assigned to it under the current 2003 ceasefire line agreement. 40 The \"local authority\" or Provisional government of Azad Kashmir as established in October 1947 handed over to Pakistan under the Karachi Agreement of 28 April 1949, matters related to defence, foreign affairs, negotiations with the UNCIP and coordination of all affairs relating to Gilgit and Baltistan (strategically important territories that now constitute Pakistan's \"Northern Areas\").\nProvincial Governments.\nPakistan is subdivided into four provinces, one territory, and one capital territory. Each province has a Provincial Assembly, a directly elected legislature. Members are elected for five-year terms. Each Assembly elects a Chief Minister, who then selects the ministers of his or her cabinet.\nNote: Azad Kashmir is federally administered and is a \"Local authority\".\nMunicipal Governments.\nPakistan's provinces are divided into districts called \"zillas\" in local languages (counterpart to a county in US or UK terminology). A \"zilla\" is further subdivided into \"tehsils\" (roughly equivalent to a borough in an integrated multi-tier (federated) systemic context, such as the one to be found in Montreal (Canada, 2002) and Birmingham (UK, 2001 announcement) or known as arrondissements in French context. Tehsils may contain town or municipalities. Pakistan's system is the one that applies an integrated federated systemic framework most comprehensively, so far.\nThis methodology is not new to the region, as it is similar to what is referred to as the old Panchayat Raj system in India that was introduced by Britain during the colonial era. In the 1890s Britain had become the first nation to adapt the two-tier administrative framework of revolutionary Paris (1790) onto pre-existing parish councils in the urban context (London) and into three tiers in the rural context (county, district, parish councils). In India it was implemented in some regions and not others; and then allowed to lie fallow. It got new life after the very successful West Bengal revival in the 1970s, which eventually inspired the 1990s Constitutional Amendment making it national policy.\nThe main difference is that Pakistan is the only country with an urban framework, as well, in the region today; and Pakistan's system has common-representational framework between tiers (as Montreal and Birmingham also have in two-tier context\u2014even though Birmingham is working on implementing a three-tier system); and, it has a bottom-up representational framework like the Canadian example. Pakistan had the only three-tier integrated bottom-up common-representational local government system, until it was adapted for another country in 2003. UK, the country which first introduced this methodology in the region, also has the urban examples of London and Birmingham (being implemented in the post-2001 era by building on steps first introduced in the 1980s); as does France (where largest cities and smaller units have created such frameworks either by devolution (Marseilles and Lyon, in addition to Paris) or by integration of neighbouring units (such as the Nantes region pursuant to the Marcellin Act of the 1970s); and Canada.\nThis methodology is being increasingly adapted, as it delivers greater systemic productivity, being a more inclusive framework that provides greater regional integration. In the US, the seven county Twin Cities (MN) regional system and Portland (OR) Metro are both the most integrated US examples; but, also those often cited in the US for what they have achieved. These US examples\u00a0\u2014 with their multi-county framework\u00a0\u2014 are similar to what is in place in France after regional unit introduction (making France have a three-tier systemic framework also in the Commune (municipal/lowest tier local unit), Department (county), Regional unit context). Multi-county frameworks are suitable for a very suburbanised system like in the US. After France and Britain, the Indian colony of Britain was the third region to see this methodology implemented.\nThere are over five thousand local governments in Pakistan. Since 2001, the vast majority of these have been led by democratically elected local councils, each headed by a \"Nazim\" (mayor or supervisor.) Council elections are held every four years.\nForeign relations.\nPakistan is the second largest Muslim country in terms of population, and its status as a declared nuclear power, being the only Muslim nation to have that status, plays a part in its international role. It is also an active member of the United Nations. Historically, its foreign policy has encompassed difficult relations with India, a desire for a stable Afghanistan, long-standing close relations with the People's Republic of China, extensive security and economic interests in the Persian Gulf and wide-ranging bilateral relations with the United States and other Western countries. Pakistan is also an important member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). Pakistan has used the OIC as a forum for Enlightened Moderation, its plan to promote a renaissance and enlightenment in the Islamic world.\nWary of Soviet expansion, Pakistan had strong relations with both the United States of America and the People's Republic of China during much of the Cold War.\nIt was a member of the CENTO and SEATO military alliances. Its alliance with the United States was especially close after the Soviets invaded the neighbouring country of Afghanistan.\nIn 1964, Pakistan signed the Regional Cooperation for Development (RCD) Pact with Turkey and Iran, when all three countries were closely allied with the U.S., and as neighbours of the Soviet Union, wary of perceived Soviet expansionism. To this day, Pakistan has a close relationship with Turkey. RCD became defunct after the Iranian Revolution, and a Pakistani-Turkish initiative led to the founding of the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) in 1985. Pakistan's relations with India have improved recently and this has opened up Pakistan's foreign policy to issues beyond security. This development might completely change the complexion of Pakistan's foreign relations. Pakistan joined Non-Aligned Movement in 1979.\nBut Pakistan's non-alignment is highly contested as it shows significant inclination towards China in all spheres, including politics.\nPakistan's relations are further deteriorating with America and its allies due to closeness of Pakistan with China, as the United States and China are competing over several issues including trade, supply chains, geopolitics and military technology development. Pakistan's decades-long rivalry and conflict with U.S. strategic partner India also poses difficulties for the country's efforts to improve relations with the United States.\nInvolvement of foreigners with Pakistani politics and politicians.\nAt times there have been claims of foreigners getting very close to Pakistani political leaderships and deep state dispensations and have had possible indirect influential roles. Nahid Iskander Mirza (1919-2019), also cousin to Nusarat Bhutto, who was allegedly the wife of a military attach\u00e9 at the Iranian embassy in Pakistan, married Iskander Mirza, erstwhile president of Pakistan and claimed to have been instrumental in meeting out boundary concessions to Iran. Joanne Herring, an American socialite, is widely believed to have influenced General Zia Ul Haq's foreign policies. Since the 2010s another American socialite Cynthia D. Ritchie claims her close association with Pakistani establishment. \nIn January 2025, a committee of Pakistan's National Assembly was informed that over 22,000 bureaucrats held dual nationality, prompting concerns regarding potential implications for public service integrity. The revelation emerged during a meeting of the NA Standing Committee on Interior. Committee members questioned why dual citizenship was prohibited for judges and parliamentarians but permitted for bureaucrats and called for legislative measures to restrict such practices. Concerns were also raised about the relaxation of dual nationality rules, citing the example of the chairman of the National Accountability Bureau (NAB). The committee further discussed whether the National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA) maintained comprehensive records of dual nationals and their associated countries. Critics argued that this discrepancy allowed influential individuals to retain foreign affiliations without accountability.\nAllegations against bureaucrats.\nIn August 2025, Defence Minister Khawaja Asif alleged that a significant portion of Pakistan's civil bureaucracy, reportedly more than half, had acquired property in Portugal and was seeking its citizenship, linking the trend to widespread corruption within bureaucratic ranks. Asif's statement, made via his official social media account, drew strong reactions from relevant institutions. Both the Establishment Division and the National Accountability Bureau (NAB) stated that they had no evidence or intelligence supporting the minister\u2019s claims and confirmed that no such investigations were underway. Officials emphasized that while corruption had existed in some segments of the bureaucracy, sweeping generalizations were not supported by available records and had negatively impacted institutional morale.\nSensitive issues.\nJudicial Independence.\nFormer Justice of the Supreme Court Mansoor Ali Shah remarked that the Twenty-Sixth Constitutional Amendment to the Constitution marked the primary step in \"a deliberate campaign to erode judicial independence.\" After resigning over the Twenty-Seventh Amendment, he stated that the new Federal Constitutional Court (FCC) was created \"not by constitutional wisdom, but by political expediency.\" The International Commission of Jurists also expressed concern over judicial independence by arguing that the appointing body should not be under the direct control of the executive. It stated that that requirement was not met in the appointment of the Chief Justice and the first batch of judges of the FCC.\nPolitical neutrality of Military.\nThe influence of the Pakistani military in politics has always been a topic of debate. The Freedom House also commented that the military exerts enormous influence over security and policy issues, intimidates the press, and enjoys impunity for indiscriminate or extralegal use of force.\nIn 2023, political chaos, economic crisis and security threats tested Pakistan\u2019s fragile state as the military sought to retain control. In May, Pakistan witnessed a staggering record inflation rate of 38 per cent compared to the same period the previous year. Between 2022 and 2023, the average inflation rate stood at 30 per cent, significantly impacting the affordability of daily essentials such as food and transportation for the poor and middle-class. The economy teetered on the brink of collapse, attributed to years of financial mismanagement, natural disasters, and political turmoil.\nThroughout Pakistan's history, the military consistently maintained a dominant role over the civilian government, a trend that continued into the 2020s. Historical precedent showed that Pakistan\u2019s military rulers, including President Ayub Khan in the 1960s, General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq in the 1980s, and General Pervez Musharraf in the 2000s, all developed close ties with the United States and were formally received by U.S. presidents only after assuming power as heads of state. This pattern reinforced perceptions of the military as the country\u2019s primary power center. In this context, the elevation of General Asim Munir to the rank of field marshal was viewed by experts as further evidence of military dominance, despite the formal presence of a civilian government. Analysts noted that Munir\u2019s meeting with U.S. President Donald Trump symbolized the continuation of a military-to-military channel that bypassed civilian authorities, raising concerns about democratic backsliding. Critics argued that such developments undermined public participation and transparency in national decision-making, contributing to broader political and societal disillusionment.\nOn 20 June 2025, Defense Minister Khawaja Asif publicly endorsed what he described as a \"hybrid model\" of governance, in which the military held significant influence over the civilian government and state affairs through an informal power-sharing arrangement. \nIn an interview with Dawn, political analyst Dr. Rasul Bakhsh Rais described the Shehbaz Sharif administration as the third iteration of a \"hybrid regime\" following the ouster of Imran Khan. He argued that, unlike past military-led governments under General Zia-ul-Haq and General Pervez Musharraf\u2014which formed political fronts by fragmenting major parties\u2014this model involves the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) voluntarily serving as a political fa\u00e7ade for the military establishment. According to Dr. Rais, this cooperation was driven by the parties\u2019 desire to have corruption cases dismissed and to retain political relevance amid the growing popularity of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI). He further stated that the establishment, by facilitating electoral victories for the PML-N and PPP, had effectively reduced them to \"appendages\" within the broader hybrid framework.\nArticle 243 has been a contentious issue as well. Since Zia-ul Haq's presidency, Pakistan\u2019s Constitution has seen shifts in military control. In 1985, Zia, as president, introduced the Revival of the Constitution Order, giving the president supreme command and the power to appoint military chiefs, sidelining the prime minister. The 13th Amendment in 1997 restored the prime minister\u2019s authority over appointments, but the 17th Amendment in 2003, under General Pervez Musharraf, gave the president more control. The 18th Amendment in 2010 once again made military appointments subject to the prime minister\u2019s advice. \nThe 27th Constitutional Amendment Bill, introduced in Pakistan\u2019s Senate in November 2025, proposed major changes to the military leadership structure by amending Article 243. It abolished the post of Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee and established the Chief of Army Staff as the constitutionally recognized Chief of Defence Forces. The bill also proposed granting life-long constitutional protection, privileges, and immunities to five-star ranked officials such as the Field Marshal Asim Munir, who himself would be subject to a lifetime immunity. Critics argued that it risked further consolidating military authority and diminishing civilian oversight, potentially upsetting the balance of civil-military relations. The bill was passed on 12 November. Opposition politicians, judges, and experts criticized the 27th Amendment as a sign of democratic decline and increased military dominance, with analyst Shuja Nawaz describing Pakistan\u2019s civil-military system as a \"hybrid system\" that is \"a misalliance and destined to the same fate as most unequal marriages.\"\nCensorship and digital crackdown.\nCiting data from the Open Observatory of Network Interference or OONI, a 2025 report by Amnesty International confirmed that just before the 2024 Pakistani general election, several websites were blocked, including the opposition Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) party website, PTI candidates\u2019 websites, and the investigative news outlet Fact Focus. These internet restrictions, which also involved selective blocking and bandwidth throttling, were observed particularly in the lead-up to the elections and during virtual rallies held by PTI.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23366", "revid": "48434663", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23366", "title": "Economy of Pakistan", "text": "The economy of Pakistan is categorized as a developing economy. It ranks as the 26th largest based on GDP using purchasing power parity (PPP) and the 41st largest in terms of nominal GDP. With a population of 255.3 million people as of 2025, Pakistan's position at per capita income ranks 161st by GDP (nominal) and 142nd by GDP (PPP) according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). \nIn its early years, Pakistan's economy relied heavily on private industries. The nationalization of a significant portion of the sector, including financial services, manufacturing, and transportation, began in the early 1970s under Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. During Zia-ul Haq's regime in the 1980s, an \"Islamic\" economy was adopted, outlawing economic practices forbidden in Shar\u012b\u02bfah and mandating traditional religious practices. The economy started privatizing again in the 1990s.\nThe economic growth centers in Pakistan are located along the Indus River; these include the diversified economies of Karachi and major urban centers in Punjab (such as Faisalabad, Lahore, Sialkot, Rawalpindi, and Gujranwala), alongside less developed areas in other parts of the country. In recent decades, regional connectivity initiatives such as the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) have emerged as pivotal contributors to infrastructure and energy development, with long-term implications for economic stability. Pakistan was classified as a semi-industrial economy for the first time in the late 1990s, albeit an underdeveloped country with a heavy dependence on agriculture, particularly the textile industry relying on cotton production. Primary export commodities include textiles, leather goods, sports equipment, chemicals, and carpets/rugs.\nPakistan is presently undergoing economic liberalization, including the privatization of all government corporations, aimed at attracting foreign investment and reducing budget deficits. However, the country continues to grapple with challenges such as rapid population growth, widespread illiteracy, political instability, hostile neighbors and heavy foreign debt.\nEconomic history.\nInception.\nIn the late 1940s, upon its establishment, Pakistan had an agrarian-based economy. Agriculture constituted 53% of the country's GDP in 1947 and slightly increased to 53.2% in 1949\u201350. With a population of approximately 30 million, including around 6 million residing in urban areas, about 65% of the labor force was engaged in agriculture. The agricultural sector played a crucial role, contributing to 99.2% of exports and making up nearly 90% of foreign exchange earnings.\nDespite possessing significant land and mineral resources in both East and West Pakistan, including natural gas, crude oil, coal, limestone, and marble, Pakistan faced numerous challenges. In 1950, its per capita income was around $360 (in 1985 international dollars), and the literacy rate was only 10%. The nation encountered a lack of economic infrastructure, financial resources, and an industrial foundation, particularly with poverty rates ranging from 55% to 60% in the West Pakistan region.\nDue to limited capital in the small private sector, the government opted to focus on the public sector to foster economic and industrial development. In the fiscal year 1949\u201350, Pakistan recorded a national savings rate of 2%, a foreign savings rate of 2%, and an investment rate of 4%. Manufacturing contributed 7.8% to the GDP, while services, trade, and other sectors accounted for a significant 39%, reflecting a policy centered around import-substituting industrialization. The trade balance of payments indicated a deficit of 66 million rupees (Rs) during the period spanning 1949/50 to 1950/51.\n1950s.\nThe 1950s marked the initiation of planned development in Pakistan, with the introduction of the Colombo Plan in 1951 leading to a series of Five-Year Plans from 1955 to 1998. Concurrently, a Ten-Year Perspective Plan was implemented, complemented by a rolling Three-Year Development Plan.\nDuring the 1950s, Pakistan pursued a policy of import-substituting industrialization. Notably, the Korean War (1950\u20131953) brought substantial merchant profits to Pakistan's public and emerging private sectors, fueling industrialization.\nIn 1952, Pakistan imposed bans on the imports of cotton textiles and luxury goods, followed by comprehensive import regulations in 1953, propelling the country into the ranks of the fastest-growing nations. However, biased policies against agriculture and unfavorable trade terms between agriculture and industry led to a decline in the annual growth rate of agriculture.\nBy the late 1950s, Pakistan achieved self-sufficiency in cotton textiles, emphasizing export development. The influx of US military and economic aid amounting to US$500 million during 1955\u201358 contributed to Pakistan's growth reliant on foreign aid.\nIn 1959, after a military coup d'\u00e9tat in 1958, the martial law regime introduced export bonus vouchers as import licenses and exempted certain goods from licensing. During this period, Pakistan faced a worsening trade balance, with deficits increasing from \u2212831 million Rupees in 1950/51 to \u22121043 million rupees in 1959/60.\nEconomically, agriculture grew at an annual rate of 1.6%, while manufacturing expanded impressively at 7.7% per annum during the 1950s. In the fiscal year 1959\u201360, the Per Capita Gross National Product (GNP) stood at Rs. 355 in West Pakistan and Rs. 269 in East Pakistan, indicating a growing economic disparity between the two regions.\n1960s.\nIn the 1960s, amid a substantial influx of American aid, Pakistan enjoyed political stability, fostering robust economic growth. Poverty, measured by the poverty headcount ratio, fluctuated from nearly 50% in the early 1960s to 54% in 1963\u201364.\nDuring the 1960s, Pakistan achieved an impressive annual agricultural growth rate of 5%, driven by substantial investments in water resources, increased farmer incentives, mechanization, greater use of fertilizers and pesticides, and expanded cultivation of high-yielding rice and wheat varieties in the Green Revolution.\nLarge-scale manufacturing experienced significant growth, expanding at a remarkable rate of 16% per annum from 1960/61 to 1964/65, fueled by protective measures for domestic industries, including export subsidies.\nHowever, the Pakistan-India War of 1965 led to reduced foreign economic assistance, impacting the growth rate of large-scale manufacturing. From 1965 to 1970, this sector grew at a comparatively lower rate of 10% per annum.\nDespite challenges, Pakistan achieved an impressive average annual GDP growth rate of 6.7% throughout the 1960s. In the fiscal year 1969\u201370, the poverty incidence rate decreased to 46%. Per Capita GNP was Rs. 504 in West Pakistan and Rs. 314 in East Pakistan, indicating a widening regional economic disparity.\n1970s.\nThe economic landscape in the early 1970s witnessed growing disparities between East and West Pakistan, leading to East Pakistan's declaration of independence and the emergence of Bangladesh in 1971. Subsequently, Pakistan underwent notable transformations in both its political and economic spheres.\nUnder martial law authorities, amidst challenging macroeconomic conditions, the socialist Pakistan People's Party gained empowerment. This period grappled with numerous economic challenges, including a surge in poverty incidence to 55% during 1971\u201372. Pakistan also confronted heightened import costs due to the global oil price shock in October 1973, a severe global recession from 1974 to 1977, cotton sector failures in 1974\u201375, pest infestations affecting crops, and massive floods in 1973, 1974, and 1976\u201377.\nOne significant economic issue during this time was high inflation, with prices increasing by an average of 15% per annum between 1972 and 1977. The fiscal deficit/GDP ratio averaged 8.1% during 1973\u201377, indicating substantial fiscal challenges. Trade imbalances were apparent, with trade deficits rising from US$337 million in 1970\u201371 to US$1,184 million in 1976\u201377.\nThe military coup d'\u00e9tat of 1977, leading to the establishment of a martial law regime that initiated denationalization, deregulation, and privatization policies. Agriculture experienced modest growth at a rate of 2.4% per annum, while large-scale manufacturing expanded at a rate of 5.5% per annum during the 1970s.\nLarge and medium-scale private manufacturing played a significant role, contributing 75% of the total value-added and investment in manufacturing during the 1970s. The remaining 25% of value-added came from small-scale manufacturing.\nOverall, this period was marked by significant political and economic changes, driven by challenges posed by economic disparities, political shifts, and efforts to address issues such as inflation, fiscal deficits, and trade imbalances.\n1980s.\nThe 1980s brought substantial changes to Pakistan's economic landscape, moving away from the nationalization policies of the 1970s and fostering private sector industrial investment, which greatly contributed to robust economic growth. Notable developments in this era included a drop in the poverty headcount ratio to 29.1% in 1986\u201387, showcasing a decline in poverty incidence. The unemployment rate exhibited a positive trend, decreasing from 3.7% in 1980 to 2.6% in 1990.\nBetween 1985 and 1988, the government endeavored to implement an Islamic interest-free banking system, introducing business partnerships based on profit and loss sharing. The national savings/GDP ratio reached a notable 16% in 1986\u201387, largely due to significant worker remittances from the Middle East. Despite this growth, challenges emerged, including negative public savings and a declining public investment/GDP ratio throughout the 1980s.\nTo address increasing budget deficits in the early 1980s, the government heavily relied on non-bank domestic borrowing, resulting in substantial domestic debt growth. Consequently, the public debt/GDP ratio surged to 77.1% in 1988, 81.9% in 1989, and 82.6% in 1990, leading to significant interest payments and persistent fiscal deficits.\nIn 1985, democracy was restored in Pakistan, marking a pivotal political development. The country experienced a commendable average annual GDP growth rate of 6.3% between 1980 and 1990. The 1980s saw a surge in manufacturing exports, with an annual large-scale manufacturing growth rate of 8.8%, and solid growth in agriculture, with an annual agricultural growth rate of 5.4%.\nThese highlights underscore a transformative and recovering economic period in the 1980s, characterized by a shift in economic policies, improved fiscal performance, and substantial progress in poverty reduction and employment. The era also witnessed efforts to align financial practices with Islamic principles and significant economic growth in the manufacturing and agricultural sectors.\n1990s.\nThe 1990s posed a formidable economic landscape for Pakistan, marked by a series of challenges and developments. Declining worker remittances and escalating external deficits set the tone for economic strains. Simultaneously, the decade witnessed the second-worst inflation in Pakistan's history, driven by diminishing GDP growth rates. Unemployment surged, reaching 5.9% in 1991 and escalating further to 7.2% in 2000.\nPakistan's external debt tripled, soaring to US$30 billion by 1995. The external debt/GDP ratio rose from 42% to 50%, accompanied by increases in the external debt/exports ratio (from 209% to 258%) and the debt service ratio (from 18% to 27%). A deteriorating external debt profile led to a rise in domestic debt, reaching Rs. 909 billion, and a domestic debt/GDP ratio of 42%.\nThe late 1990s witnessed a severe debt crisis, with the public debt/GDP ratio skyrocketing from 57.5% in 1975\u201377 to 102% in 1998\u201399. The public debt/revenues ratio surged to 624%, and the interest payments/revenues ratio reached 42.6%, rendering Pakistan's public debt unsustainable. Concerns over external debt default emerged in 1996 and 1998, triggered by Western economic sanctions in response to Pakistan's nuclear tests in May 1998, causing massive capital flight.\nDespite these challenges, Pakistan managed to sustain an agricultural growth rate of 4.4% per annum and a large-scale manufacturing growth rate of 4.8% per annum throughout the 1990s. However, the era witnessed a significant increase in poverty incidence, reaching 30.6% in 1998\u201399. The decade encapsulated a complex economic narrative, as Pakistan navigated external debt burdens, fiscal imbalances, inflation, and rising unemployment. Amid these difficulties, there were positive aspects, including growth in key sectors like agriculture and manufacturing. Nonetheless, the 1990s also brought forth a looming threat of debt default, magnified by economic sanctions in response to nuclear tests.\n2000s.\nThe 2000s witnessed a period of substantial economic challenges and transformations for Pakistan. The impact of high public debt gained prominence, identified by the official Debt Reduction and Management Committee in 2001, contributing to a decline in the growth rate to less than 4% per annum. Despite an initial upturn in the growth rate, the decade unfolded with persistent macroeconomic crises. Although achieving a noteworthy growth rate of 8.6% in 2004\u201305, subsequent years were marred by a series of setbacks, including a growth slowdown, low growth, high inflation, an energy crisis, and worsening fiscal and balance of payments positions.\nThe economic landscape reflected the complexities faced by the population, illustrated by a rise in poverty incidence to 34.5% in 2000\u201301. However, a subsequent decrease to 22.3% in 2005\u201306 offered a nuanced perspective on the decade's economic trajectory. The unemployment rate saw fluctuations, rising to 7.8% in 2002 but later declining to 5% by 2008.\nEfforts to enhance education and literacy rates were evident as adult literacy stood at 55% in 2007\u201308. Nevertheless, challenges persisted, and economic crises hit Pakistan in 2008, primarily influenced by the 2008 financial crisis. Despite these adversities, economic growth in 2009\u20132010 reached a respectable 4.1%, with positive contributions from various sectors, including a 2% growth in agriculture, 4.9% growth in industrial output, 4.4% growth in large-scale manufacturing, and a 4.6% expansion in the services sector.\nBy March 2010, public debt had accumulated to Rs. 8,160 billion, with a total public debt/GDP ratio of 56% and a foreign-currency denominated debt/GDP ratio of 25%. Amid these economic dynamics, Pakistan underwent a structural transition. The GDP share of agriculture declined from 53% in 1947 to 21.2% in 2010, while the GDP share of industry rose from 9.6% in 1949\u201350 to 25.4% in 2010. Additionally, the GDP share of the services sector increased from 37.2% in 1950 to 53.4% in 2010. The 2000s encapsulated a multifaceted economic narrative for Pakistan, marked by challenges, crises, and significant structural shifts, reflecting the nation's resilience and adaptability.\nData.\nGross domestic product (GDP).\nThe table below displays key economic indicators from 1980 to 2025. Inflation rates below 5% are highlighted in green.\nStock market.\nIn the first four years of the twenty-first century, Pakistan's KSE 100 Index was declared the best-performing stock market index in the world by the international magazine \"Business Week\". The stock market capitalization of listed companies in Pakistan was valued at $5,937 million in 2005 by the World Bank. On 11 January 2016, with the aim of reducing market fragmentation and creating a strong case for attracting strategic partnerships necessary for providing technological expertise, all three stock exchanges, including Karachi Stock Exchange, Lahore Stock Exchange, and Islamabad Stock Exchange, were inducted into a unified Pakistan Stock Exchange.\nIn May 2017, the American provider of stock market indexes and analysis tools, MSCI, confirmed that the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX) had been reclassified from Frontier Markets to Emerging Markets in its semi-annual index review. The Pakistan Stock Exchange also successfully navigated through the initial COVID-19 induced economic downturn and earned the title of being the 'best Asian stock market and fourth best-performing market across the world in 2020.' The PSE-100 index continued to climb throughout the year. Nearly 40 percent growth in the PSE-100 Index in FY 2021 was driven by the government's large stimulus package, the central bank's stable policy rate, an uptick in large scale manufacturing, improvement in external accounts, and reforms introduced by the Security and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP) and PSX in the wake of the COVID-19.\nPSX 100 index growth rate over the previous years is as follows:\nThe sales of all non-financial companies surged to Rs 16,815 billion in the fiscal year 2023, marking a substantial increase of Rs 1,864 billion compared to the preceding year. However, the net profit margin of all companies declined to 5.98% in FY23 from 6.34% in FY22. Return on assets (ROA) and return on equity (ROE) of all companies also dropped to 6.05 percent and 17.76 percent respectively in FY23. The key statistics for the last six years of all public and private non-financial companies listed at the Pakistan Stock Exchange are provided in the following table:\nMiddle class.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], according to the \"Wall Street Journal\", citing estimates largely based on income and the purchase of consumption goods, had suggested that as many as 42% of Pakistan's population may now belong to the upper and middle classes. If these numbers are correct, or even indicative in any broad sense, then 87 million Pakistanis belong to the middle and upper classes, a population size which is larger than that of Germany. Official figures also show that the proportion of households that own a motorcycle and washing machines has grown impressively over the past 15 years. Furthermore, the IBA-SBP Consumer Confidence Index recorded its highest-ever level of 174.9 points in January 2017, showing an increase of 17 points from July 2016.\nSeparately, consumer financing recorded at Rs. 179 billion during FY 2022. Auto finance continued to be the dominant segment, followed by house building, which showed remarkable growth after the \"Mera Pakistan Mera Ghar\" scheme initiated by the State Bank of Pakistan in December 2020.\nPoverty alleviation expenditures.\nThe Pakistan government spent over 1 trillion rupees (about $16.7 billion) on poverty alleviation programs during the past four years, reducing poverty from 35% in 2000\u201301 to 29.3% in 2013 and further to 17% in 2015. Rural poverty remains a pressing issue, as development in those areas has been significantly slower than in major urban areas.\nHowever, according to a World Bank report released in June 2025, around 45% of Pakistan's population was living below the poverty line. The updated figure was based on revised poverty thresholds and survey data from 2018 to 2019. The report also noted a sharp rise in extreme poverty, with the proportion increasing from 4.9% to 16.5%. As of 2025, the World Bank cautioned that over 10 million additional individuals in Pakistan faced the looming threat of descending into poverty.\nEmployment.\nThe high population growth in the past few decades has led to a significant number of young people entering the labor market. Although Pakistan is among the six most populous Asian nations, excessive red tape in the past made firing from jobs, and consequently hiring, difficult. Significant progress in taxation and business reforms has ensured that many firms are no longer compelled to operate in the underground economy.\nGovernment revenues and expenditures.\nAlthough the country is a Federation with constitutional division of taxation powers between the Federal Government and the four provinces, the revenue department of the Federal Government, the Federal Board of Revenue, collects more than 80% of the entire national tax collection. The government's revenue streams primarily stem from two sources: taxation and non-tax revenue. Taxation, which includes income tax, sales tax, and customs duties, constitutes a substantial portion of revenues, bolstering both federal and provincial government finances. Non-tax revenue sources, such as mark-up from state enterprises, surplus profits from the State Bank of Pakistan, and royalties on oil and gas, further contribute significantly to the fiscal framework.\nConversely, government expenditures are strategically allocated across multiple sectors, including defense, social services, infrastructure development, and debt servicing. Current expenditures, covering operational costs, interest payments, pensions, and other obligations, are carefully balanced against development expenditures aimed at fostering long-term growth and progress. The challenge of achieving equilibrium between revenue generation and expenditure allocation leads to budgetary deficits that can necessitate borrowing to bridge the gap.\nThe data has been sourced from the Ministry of Finance.\nCurrency system.\nRupee.\nThe basic unit of currency is the rupee, ISO code PKR, and abbreviated Rs, which is divided into 100 paisas. Currently, the 5,000 rupee note is the largest denomination in circulation. From 13 August 2005, the SBP started introducing its fifth generation design of banknotes with additional security features, with the Rs. 20 note being the first issuance. New designs of Rs. 5 (July 2008, later replaced by a coin), 10 (May 2006), Rs. 20 (March 2008, new color scheme), Rs. 50 (July 2008), Rs. 100 (November 2006), Rs. 500 (January 2010), Rs. 1000 (February 2007), and Rs. 5000 (May 2006) were gradually introduced.\nThe Pakistani rupee was pegged to the pound sterling until 1982, when the government of General Zia-ul-Haq, changed it to a managed float regime. As a result, the rupee devalued by 38.5% between 1982/83, and many of the industries built by his predecessor suffered a huge surge in import costs. After years of appreciation under Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and despite huge increases in foreign aid, the rupee depreciated.\nForeign exchange rate.\nThe Pakistani rupee depreciated against the US dollar until around the start of the 21st century, when Pakistan's large current-account surplus pushed the value of the rupee up versus the dollar. Pakistan's central bank then stabilized by lowering interest rates and buying dollars, in order to preserve the country's export competitiveness.\nForeign exchange reserves.\nPakistan maintains foreign reserves with the State Bank of Pakistan. The currency of the reserves was solely the US dollar, incurring speculated losses after the dollar prices fell during 2005, forcing the then Governor SBP Ishrat Hussain to step down. In the same year, the SBP issued an official statement proclaiming diversification of reserves in currencies including Euro and Yen, withholding the ratio of diversification.\nFollowing the international credit crisis and spikes in crude oil prices, Pakistan's economy could not withstand the pressure, and on 11 October 2008, the State Bank of Pakistan reported that the country's foreign exchange reserves had gone down by $571.9 million to $7,749.7 million. The foreign exchange reserves had declined by more than $10 billion to a level of $6.59 billion. In June 2013, Pakistan was on the brink of default on its financial commitments. The country's forex reserves were at a historic low, covering only two weeks' worth of imports. In January 2020, Pakistan's foreign exchange reserves stood at US$11.503 billion.\nStructure of economy.\nAgriculture accounted for about 53% of the GDP in 1947. While per-capita agricultural output has grown since then, it has been outpaced by the growth of the non-agricultural sectors, and the share of agriculture has dropped to roughly one-fifth of Pakistan's economy. In recent years, the country has seen rapid growth in industries, such as apparel, textiles, and cement, and services, such as telecommunications, transportation, advertising, and finance.\nMajor sectors.\nAgriculture.\nThe majority of the population, directly or indirectly, is dependent on this sector, contributing about 23.0% of the gross domestic product (GDP) and accounting for 37.4% of the employed labor force in 2021. It is the largest source of foreign exchange earnings. The most important crops are wheat, sugarcane, cotton, and rice, accounting for more than 75% of the value of total crop output. Pakistan's largest food crop is wheat. In 2017, Pakistan produced 26,674,000 tonnes of wheat, almost equal to all of Africa (27.1 million tonnes) and more than all of South America (25.9 million tonnes), according to the FAOSTAT. In the market year of 2018/19, Pakistan exported a record 4.5 million tonnes of rice.\nPakistan is a net food exporter, except in occasional years when its harvest is adversely affected by droughts. Pakistan exports rice, cotton, fish, fruits (especially Oranges and Mangoes), and vegetables and imports vegetable oil, wheat, pulses, and consumer foods. The economic importance of agriculture has declined since independence when its share of GDP was around 53%.\nPakistan's principal natural resources are arable land and water. About 25% of Pakistan's total land area is under cultivation and is watered by one of the largest irrigation systems in the world. Pakistan irrigates three times more acres than Russia. Pakistan agriculture also benefits from year-round warmth. Zarai Taraqiati Bank Limited is the largest financial institution geared towards the development of the agriculture sector through the provision of financial services and technical expertise.\nIndustry.\nPakistan's industrial sector accounts for approximately 19.12% of GDP. In 2021, it recorded a growth of 7.81%, compared to the negative 5.75% in 2020. The government is privatizing large-scale industrial units, and the public sector accounts for a shrinking proportion of industrial output, while growth in overall industrial output (including the private sector) has accelerated. Government policies aim to diversify the country's industrial base and bolster export industries. Large Scale Manufacturing is the fastest-growing sector in the Pakistani economy. Major industries include textiles, fertiliser, cement, oil refineries, dairy products, food processing, beverages, construction materials, clothing, paper products, and shrimp.\nIn Pakistan, SMEs have a significant contribution to the total GDP of Pakistan. According to SMEDA and Economic survey reports, the share in the annual GDP is 40%, with SMEs generating significant employment opportunities for skilled workers and entrepreneurs. Small and medium-scale firms represent nearly 90% of all enterprises in Pakistan and employ 80% of the non-agricultural labor force. These figures indicate the potential and further growth in this sector.\nManufacturing.\nManufacturing is the largest of Pakistan's industrial sectors, accounting for approximately 12.13% of GDP. The manufacturing sub-sector is further divided into three components: large-scale manufacturing (LSM) with a share of 79.6% in the manufacturing sector, small-scale manufacturing with a share of 13.8% in the manufacturing sector, while slaughtering contributes 6.5% to manufacturing. Major sectors in industries include cement, fertiliser, edible oil, sugar, steel, tobacco, chemicals, machinery, food processing, and medical instruments, primarily surgical. Pakistan is one of the largest manufacturers and exporters of surgical instruments.\nPakistan's largest corporations are primarily engaged in utilities such as oil, gas, electricity, automobile, cement, food, chemicals, fertilizer, civil aviation, textile, and telecommunication.\nTheir assets, sales, and profit/loss for the year 2023 are listed below:\nCement industry.\nIn 1947, Pakistan inherited four cement plants with a total capacity of 0.5 million tons. Some expansion occurred in 1956\u201366 but couldn't keep pace with economic development. The country resorted to cement imports in 1976\u201377, continuing until 1994\u201395. The cement sector, comprising 27 plants, contributes over Rs 30 billion to the national exchequer in taxes. By 2013, Pakistan's cement industry grew rapidly, driven by demand from Afghanistan and countries boosting the real estate sector. In April 2020, the government introduced an incentive package for the construction industry, including an amnesty scheme, tax exemptions, and a Rs 36 billion subsidy for Naya Pakistan Housing Scheme. Additionally, banks were directed to increase construction sector loans to 5 percent of their total loan book, and FED reduction on cement from Rs 2/kg to Rs 1.5/kg provided further impetus to the industry.\nFertilizer industry.\nThere are nine urea manufacturing plants, one DAP, three NP, four SSP, two CAN, one SOP, and two plants of blended NPKs with a total production capacity of 9,172 thousand tonnes per annum in 2021. Urea is the main fertilizer, holding a 70 percent share in total production. The installed production capacity of 6,307 thousand tonnes per annum is sufficient to meet local demand, subject to the availability of uninterrupted gas and RLNG supply.\nDefence industry.\nThe defence industry of Pakistan, under the Ministry of Defence Production, was established in September 1951 to promote and coordinate the array of military production facilities that have emerged since independence. It is actively engaged in numerous joint production projects, such as the Al Khalid 2 tank, advanced trainer aircraft, combat aircraft, artillery systems like MRLS, combat and surveillance drones like GIDS Shahpar-1 and Shahpar-2, battle management and surveillance radars, electronic warfare systems, navy ships, and submarines.\nPakistan manufactures and sells weapons to over 40 countries, including European customers, generating $620 million annually. The country's sophisticated arms imports increased by 119 percent between 2004\u20132008 and 2009\u201313, with China providing 54 percent and the USA 27 percent of Pakistan's imports.\nTextiles industry.\nMost of the textile industry is concentrated in Punjab. However, before 1990, the industry was predominantly located in Karachi.\nPresently, the textile industry comprises two main segments: a highly organized large-scale sector and a considerably fragmented cottage/small-scale sector. The organized sector mainly includes integrated Textile Mills, housing numerous spinning units and a limited number of shuttle-less loom units. Conversely, the unorganized sector encompasses downstream industries like Weaving, Finishing, Garment, Towels, and Hosiery, all of which possess significant export potential. Within this sector, certain enterprises have expanded to an international scale and exhibit progressive business philosophies.\nAs of June 2021, the Pakistani textile industry comprised 517 textile units, including 40 composite units and 477 spinning units. This landscape also included 28,500 shuttle-less looms and 375,000 conventional looms. The growth of the spinning sector has been fueled by export demands and cotton production, with subsequent growth observed in the weaving and processing sector. Notably, independent air-jet weaving units have emerged, both as standalone entities and in conjunction with spinning or processing units.\nA notable trend is the ongoing backward integration of some clothing units, while spinning units are actively developing weaving, finishing, and assembly capabilities to create a comprehensive supply chain. This symbiotic relationship between the textile and clothing sectors is leading to horizontal and vertical integration, often managed by the same entities or through business collaborations.\nThis sector contributes nearly one-fourth of industrial value-added and provides employment to about 40 percent of the industrial labor force. Excluding seasonal and cyclical fluctuations, textile products have maintained an average share of about 60 percent in national exports.\nAutomobile industry.\nThe auto sector constituted about 7 percent of LSM in 2021, contributing significantly to the country's industrial output. Given government support and the removal of obstacles, the industrial expansion is expected to yield positive results soon. Many new investors have joined with commercial production, while existing players have already made substantial investments, with more in the pipeline. Among the automakers yet to start production, Proton, MG, and Volkswagen are poised to make a significant impact in the local passenger vehicle market. Meanwhile, KIA, Hyundai, Changan, and Prince DFSK have already commenced productions in Pakistan.\nNote: These figures do not include the production/sale of companies which are not members of the Pakistan Automotive Manufacturers Association (PAMA).\nAfter the entry of new models and brands by new entrants and due to the significantly low benchmark interest rate of 7%, consumer financing hit an all-time high in 2021. This trend started when a new Automotive Development Policy (2016\u20132021) was first approved by the ECC in its meeting held on 18 March 2016.\nSuch growth in demand for car financing was last seen during President Pervez Musharraf's regime (2001\u20132008) when banks, having ample liquidity, lent a significant amount for cars without checking borrowers' capabilities to repay the debt. Later, the car financing bubble burst when a large number of people defaulted on paying off the car financing.\nMining.\nPakistan is endowed with significant mineral resources and is emerging as a very promising area for prospecting/exploration for mineral deposits. In the wake of the 18th amendment to the constitution, all the provinces are free to exploit and explore the mineral resources within their jurisdiction.\nMining and quarrying contribute 13.19% to the industrial sector, with its share in GDP being 2.4%.\nIn the recent past, exploration by government agencies as well as multinational mining companies presents ample evidence of the occurrences of sizeable mineral deposits. Recent discoveries of a thick oxidised zone underlain by sulphide zones in the shield area of the Punjab province, covered by thick alluvial cover, have opened new vistas for metallic minerals exploration. Pakistan has a large base for industrial minerals. The discovery of coal deposits with over 175 billion tonnes of reserves at Thar in the Sindh province has given an impetus to develop it as an alternative source of energy. There is vast potential for precious and dimension stones.\nExtraction of principal minerals in the last 10 fiscal years is given in the table below:\nEnergy.\nThe main sources of Pakistan's primary energy supplies are gas, oil, coal, liquefied natural gas (LNG), and hydroelectricity, with shares of 29%, 24%, 15%, 10%, and 11% respectively in 2022. Since coal mining began in the Thar desert and LNG imports from Qatar, coal and imported LNG increased their shares manyfold in just five years in the primary energy supplies of the country. The share of gas has decreased from 50% in 2005 to 24% in 2022, and oil, since 2015, from 35% to 27% in 2022, being largely replaced by coal and LNG. As Pakistan intends to generate around 8,800 megawatts of nuclear power by 2030, its share is also increasing gradually.\n(CPPA-G) procures electricity from power producers, and the National Transmission and Despatch Company (NTDC) transmits this electricity via its transmission lines to Distribution Companies (DISCOs), which then distribute this electricity via their distribution lines to end consumers. Balancing Pakistan's supply of electricity against the demand has been a longstanding unresolved issue. Since 2018, there has been an improvement in the availability of electricity due to the substantial increase in generation capacity. However, the cost of electricity has risen due to various factors such as circular debt, capacity payments, fuel costs, currency devaluation, low recovery rates, and transmission and distribution losses. Pakistan faces a significant challenge in overhauling its electricity supply network.\nThe total demand for petroleum products remained at 23.1 million tonnes during FY2022. The transport and power sectors are major petroleum consumers, covering approximately 90 percent of the total demand.\nPakistan is an importer of petroleum products and crude oil. Imports of petroleum products during FY2022 amounted to around 12.9 million tonnes, valued at more than US$11.1 billion. The major imported products are motor spirit/gasoline, high-speed diesel, and furnace oil, with import quantities of 6,502 thousand tonnes, 3,950 thousand tonnes, and 2,258 thousand tonnes, respectively.\nThe total production of refineries in Pakistan for fiscal year 2020\u201321 reached 10.66 million tons. Among these refineries, PARCO holds the largest share, accounting for 41%, followed by ARL, BPPL, NRL, and PRL with shares of 17%, 16%, 14%, and 12% respectively. OGRA, founded in March 2002, serves as the regulatory body with the primary goals of promoting competition and enhancing private investment and ownership within the petroleum sector by implementing effective and efficient regulations. Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have established their infrastructure, including storage facilities and retail outlets, to market Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant (POL) products. Motor Spirit (MS) and High-Speed Diesel (HSD) together make up nearly 80% of OMCs' sales. By the conclusion of fiscal year 2021, OMCs had developed a storage capacity of 0.58 million tons for MS and 0.88 million tons for HSD, distributed across various depots throughout the country. Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) operate a total of 9,978 retail outlets nationwide. Among these, Pakistan State Oil (PSO) holds the highest number of retail outlets, boasting 3,158 outlets, which accounts for approximately 31.65 percent of the total.\nIndigenous natural gas supplies accounted for approximately 30 percent of Pakistan's total primary energy supply mix in FY2022. Pakistan maintains an extensive gas network comprising over 13,775 kilometers of transmission pipelines, 157,395 kilometers of main pipelines, and 41,352 kilometers of service pipelines. This network serves the needs of more than 10.7 million consumers throughout the country. During FY 2021\u201322, the natural gas supply in Pakistan reached 3,982 MMCFD. The country relies on several major gas fields, including Sui, Uch, Qadirpur, Sawan, Zamzama, Badin, Bhit, Kandhkot, Mari, and Manzalai, to meet its domestic demand. Additionally, Pakistan has been importing liquefied natural gas (LNG) since 2015, with regasified liquefied natural gas (RLNG) playing a significant role in alleviating natural gas shortages. In the year 2021\u201322, approximately 24 percent of the country's gas supplies were sourced from imported RLNG.\nIn FY 2020\u201321, the primary consumer of natural gas was the power sector, which accounted for more than 30 percent of the total consumption, equivalent to 1,208 MMCFD. Following the power sector, the domestic sector consumed 21 percent, or 850 MMCFD, while the fertilizer sector consumed 20 percent, totaling 834 MMCFD.\nServices.\nPakistan's service sector contributes approximately 61.7% to the GDP. Within this sector, transport, storage, communications, finance, and insurance comprise 24%, while wholesale and retail trade constitute about 30%. Pakistan is actively promoting the growth of the information industry and other modern service industries by offering incentives such as long-term tax holidays.\nTelecommunications.\nAfter the deregulation of the telecommunications industry, the sector has experienced exponential growth. Pakistan Telecommunication Company Ltd (PTCL) has emerged as a successful Forbes 2000 conglomerate with over US$1 billion in sales in 2005. The mobile telephone market has expanded many-fold since 2003, reaching a subscriber base of 140 million users in July 2017, one of the highest mobile teledensities in the world. Pakistan won the prestigious Government Leadership award of GSM Association in 2006.\nIn Pakistan, the following are the top mobile phone operators:\nBy March 2009, Pakistan had 91 million mobile subscribers \u2013 25 million more subscribers than reported in the same period in 2008. In addition to the 3.1 million fixed lines, as many as 2.4 million are using Wireless Local Loop connections. Sony Ericsson, Nokia and Motorola along with Samsung and LG remain the most popular brands among customers.\nSince liberalisation, over the past four years from 2003 to 2007, the Pakistani telecom sector has attracted more than $9 billion in foreign investments. During 2007\u201308, the Pakistani communication sector alone received $1.62 billion in Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) \u2013 about 30% of the country's total foreign direct investment.\nAccording to the PC World, a total of 6.37 billion text messages were sent through Acision messaging systems across Asia Pacific over the 2008/2009 Christmas and New Year period. Pakistan was amongst the top five rankers with one of the highest SMS traffic with 763 million messages.\nOn 14 August 2010, Pakistan became the first country in the world to experience EVDO's RevB 3G technology that offers maximum speeds of 9.3\u00a0Mbit/s.\n3G and 4G were simultaneously launched in Pakistan on 23 April 2014 through a SMRA auction. Three out of five companies got a 3G licence i.e. Ufone, Mobilink and Telenor while China Mobile's Zong got 3G as well as a 4G licence. Whereas the fifth company, Warid Pakistan did not participate in the auction procedure, but they launched 4G LTE services on their existing 2G 1800\u00a0MHz spectrum due to Technology-neutral terms and became the world's first Telecom Company to transform directly from 2G to 4G. With that, Pakistan joined the 3G and 4G world.\nIn December 2017, 3G and 4G subscribers in Pakistan reached 46 million.\nAfter the successful implementation of the Device Identification Registration and Blocking System (DIRBS) in 2019 along with a comprehensive mobile manufacturing policy, it created a favourable environment for mobile device manufacturing in Pakistan. For the first time in the history of Pakistan, local mobile phone manufacturing exceeded the number of mobile phones that were imported in 2021. Mobile device manufacturing licences have been issued to 26 companies, including Samsung, Redmi, Realme, Nokia, Oppo, TECNO, Infinix, Itel, Vgotel, and Q-Mobile.\nTransportation.\nAir linkage.\nThe year 1955 marked the inauguration of the Pakistan airline's first scheduled international service \u2013 to London, via Cairo and Rome. In 1959, the Government of Pakistan appointed Air Commodore Nur Khan as the managing director of PIA. With his visionary leadership, PIA 'took off' and within a short span of 6 years, gained the stature and status of one of the world's frontline carriers. In aviation circles, this period has often been referred to as the \"golden years of PIA\". On 29 April 1964, with a Boeing 720B, PIA earned the distinction of becoming the first airline from a non-communist country to fly into the People's Republic of China. Private sector airlines in Pakistan include Airblue, which serves the main cities within Pakistan in addition to destinations in the Persian Gulf and Manchester in the United Kingdom.\nRailway linkage.\nPakistan Railways (PR) is a major mode of transport in the public sector, contributing to the country's economic growth and providing national integration. 13 May 1861 was a historical day when the first railway line was opened for public between Karachi City and Kotri, a distance of 169\u00a0km. In 1885, the Sindh, Punjab and Delhi Railways were purchased by the Secretary of State for India. On 1 January 1886 this line and other State Railways were integrated and North Western State Railway was formed; this was later renamed as North Western Railways (NWR). At the time of Independence, the NWR was bifurcated with 1,847 route miles lying in India and 5,048 route miles in Pakistan. In 2022, Pakistan Railways comprised a total of 467 locomotives (462 diesel engines and 05 steam engines) for the 7,479\u00a0km route length. Pakistan Railways employed 60,643 people in 2022.\nRoad linkage.\nThe National Highway Authority (NHA) was established in 1991 through an Act of Parliament for the planning, development, operation, repair, and maintenance of National Highways and Strategic Roads specially entrusted to NHA by the Federal Government or by a Provincial Government or other authority concerned. NHA is the custodian of 39 national highways, motorways, expressways, and strategic routes, with a total length of 12,131\u00a0km, constituting 4.6% of the total national roads network, which is 263,775\u00a0km. However, it carries 80% of commercial traffic, and the N-5 National Highway, which is the lifeline of Pakistan, carries 65% of this load in the country.\nMaritime linkage.\nPakistan National Shipping Corporation (PNSC) is a national flag carrier. It was formed through the merger of the National Shipping Corporation and Pakistan Shipping Corporation in 1979. PNSC has had worldwide operations in the dry bulk segment of the shipping market since its inception, and has been involved in the transportation of liquid cargo since 1998, both locally and internationally. The corporation's head office is located in Karachi. Currently, the PNSC fleet comprises eleven vessels of various types and sizes (five bulk carriers, four Aframax tankers, and two LR-1 Clean Product tankers) with a total deadweight capacity (cargo carrying capacity) of 831,711 metric tons, the highest ever carrying capacity since the inception of PNSC.\nFinance.\nPakistan has a large and diverse banking system. In 1974, a nationalization programme led to the creation of six government-owned banks. A privatization programme in the 1990s led to the entry of foreign-owned and local banks into the industry. As of 2010, there were five publicly owned commercial banks in Pakistan, as well as 25 domestic private banks, six multinational banks, and four specialised banks.\nSince 2000, Pakistani banks have begun aggressive marketing of consumer finance to the emerging middle class, allowing for a consumption boom (more than a seven-month waiting list for certain car models) as well as a construction bonanza. Pakistan's banking sector remained remarkably strong and resilient during the 2008 financial crisis, a feature which has served to attract a substantial amount of FDI in the sector. Stress tests conducted in June 2008 data indicate that the large banks are relatively robust, with the medium and small-sized banks positioning themselves in niche markets.\nThe Pakistan Bureau of Statistics provisionally valued this sector at Rs.807,807 million in 2012, thus registering over 510% growth since 2000.\nAn article published in the \"Journal of the Asia Pacific Economy\" by Mete Feridun of the University of Greenwich in London with his Pakistani colleague Abdul Jalil presents strong econometric evidence that financial development fosters economic growth in Pakistan.\nIn recent years, banking through digital channels has been gaining popularity in the country. These channels offer alternatives resulting in faster delivery of financial services to a wide range of customers. Significant progress has been observed in the usage of internet banking and mobile banking channels during the last few years. In the last five years, internet banking transactions saw compound annualised growth of 31%, whereas mobile banking transactions grew by 86%.\nHousing.\nThe property sector has expanded 23-fold since 2001, particularly in metropolises like Lahore. Nevertheless, the Karachi Chamber of Commerce and Industry estimated in late 2006 that the overall production of housing units in Pakistan has to be increased to 0.5 million units annually to address 6.1 million backlog of housing in Pakistan for meeting the housing shortfall in next 20 years. The report noted that the present housing stock is also rapidly aging and an estimate suggests that more than 50% of stock is over 50 years old. It is also estimated that 50% of the urban population now lives in slums and squatter settlements. The report said that meeting the backlog in housing, besides replacement of out-lived housing units, is beyond the financial resources of the government. This necessitates putting in place a framework to facilitate financing in the formal private sector and mobilise non-government resources for a market-based housing finance system. To promote affordable housing and home ownership among low to middle-income group, who currently do not own a house, SBP in 2020 introduced the Government's Mark-Up Subsidy Scheme, through which subsidized financing is provided to individuals for construction or purchase of a new house. Since then, a huge demand for house financing has been witnessed by the commercial banks.\nTourism.\nTourism in Pakistan has been hailed as the tourism industry's \"next big thing\". Pakistan, with its diverse cultures, people, and landscapes, has attracted 90 million tourists to the country, almost double that of a decade ago. Currently, Pakistan ranks 130th in the world by tourist income. Due to the threat of terrorism, the number of foreign tourists has gradually declined, and the shock of the 2013 Nanga Parbat tourist shooting has severely adversely affected the tourism industry. As of 2016[ [update]], tourism has begun to recover in Pakistan, albeit gradually, with a current global rank of 130.\nForeign trade, remittances, aid, and investment.\nInvestment.\nForeign investment significantly declined by 2010, dropping by 54.6% due to Pakistan's political instability and weak law and order, according to the Bank of Pakistan.\nBusiness regulations have been overhauled along liberal lines, especially since 1999. Most barriers to the flow of capital and international direct investment have been removed. Foreign investors do not face any restrictions on the inflow of capital, and investment of up to 100% of equity participation is allowed in most sectors. Unlimited remittance of profits, dividends, service fees or capital is now the rule. However, doing business has been becoming increasingly difficult over the past decade due to political instability, rising domestic insurgency and insecurity and vehement corruption. This can be confirmed by the World Bank's Ease of Doing Business Index report degrading its ratings for Pakistan each year since September 2009.\nThe World Bank (WB) and International Finance Corporation's flagship report Ease of Doing Business Index 2020 ranked Pakistan 108 among 190 countries around the globe, indicating a continuous improvement and taking a jump from 136 last year. The top five countries were New Zealand, Singapore, Denmark, Hong Kong and South Korea.\nWith improvement in ease of doing business ranking and giving an investment friendly road map from government, many new auto sector giants like France's Renault, South Korean's Hyundai and Kia, Chinese JW Forland and German auto giant Volkswagen are considering entry into Pakistan auto market through joint ventures with local manufacturers like Dewan Farooque Motors, Khalid Mushtaq Motors and United Motors. As of March 2022, only the Hyundai Nishat JV materialised.\nUS oil and gas giant Exxon Mobil returned to Pakistan after nearly three decades gap and has acquired 25% shares in offshore drilling in May 2018, with initial survey showing a potential of huge hydrocarbon reserves discovery offshore.\nTo boost Pakistan's unstable foreign-exchange reserves, Qatar announced to invest $3 billion in the form of deposits and direct investments in the country. By the end of June 2019, Qatar sent the first $500 million to Pakistan.\nData is from SBP.\nForeign acquisitions and mergers.\nWith the rapid growth in Pakistan's economy, foreign investors are taking a keen interest in the corporate sector of Pakistan. In recent years, majority stakes in many corporations have been acquired by multinational groups.\nThe foreign exchange receipts from these sales are also helping cover the current account deficit.\nForeign trade.\nPakistan witnessed the highest export of US$25.4 billion in the FY 2011. However, in subsequent years exports have declined considerably. This decline started from the financial year 2015 when an international commodity slump set in. This was compounded by structural supply-side constraints including energy shortages, high input costs, and an overvalued exchange rate. From the financial year 2014 to 2016, exports declined by 12.4 percent. The exports growth trend over this period was similar to the world trade growth patterns. Pakistan's external sector continued facing stress during 2017. Still, Pakistan's merchandise trade exports grew by 0.1 percent during the fiscal year 2017. The imports continued to grow at a much faster rate and grew by a large percentage of 18.0 during the FY 2017 as compared to the previous year.\nNote: This is the trade data (export and import) as released by the SBP. This may differ from the data compiled by Pakistan Bureau of Statistics.\nPakistan's imports are showing a rising trend at a relatively faster rate due to increased economic activity as part of the China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), particularly in the energy sector. The construction projects under CPEC require heavy machinery that has to be imported. It is also observed that the economy is currently being led both by investments as well as consumption, resulting in relatively higher levels of imports. During FY 2018, Pakistan's exports picked up and reached US$24.8 billion, showing a growth of 12.6 percent over the previous year, FY 2017. Imports, on the other hand, also increased by 16.2 percent, reaching the highest figure of US$56.6 billion. As a result, the trade deficit widened to US$31.8 billion, which was the highest in the last ten years. Pakistan's exports of goods recorded their highest level of $25.6 billion during the fiscal year 2021, higher than the $25.3 billion recorded in 2011.\nExports.\nPakistan's major export commodities since fiscal year 2014 are listed in the table below.\nImports.\nPakistan's major import commodities since fiscal year 2014 are listed in the table below.\nExternal imbalances.\nDuring FY 2017, the increase in imports of capital equipment and fuel significantly put pressure on the external account. A reversal in global oil prices led to an increase in POL imports, accompanied by falling exports; as a result, the merchandise trade deficit grew by 39.4 percent to US$26.885 billion in FY 2017. While remittances and Coalition Support Fund inflows both declined slightly over the same period last year, however, the impact was offset by an improvement in the income account, mainly due to lower profit repatriations by oil and gas firms.\nThe current account deficit increased to US$19.2 billion in FY 2018.\nHowever, the impact of high current deficit on foreign exchange reserves was not severe, as financial inflows were available to the country to partially offset the gap; these inflows helped ensure stability in the exchange rate. Net FDI grew by 12.4 percent and reached US$1.6 billion in the nine-month period, whereas net FPI saw an inflow of US$631 million, against an outflow of US$393 million last year. Encouragingly for the country, the period saw the completion of multiple merger and acquisition deals between local and foreign companies. Moreover, multiple foreign automakers announced their intention to enter the Pakistani market, and some also entered into joint ventures with local conglomerates. This indicates that Pakistan is clearly on foreign investors' radar, and provides a positive outlook for FDI inflows going forward. government's successful issuance of a US$1.0 billion Sukuk in the international capital market, at an extremely low rate of 5.5 percent.\nPakistan continued to enjoy support from international financial institutions (IFIs) like the World Bank and Asian Development Bank, and from bilateral partners like China, in the post-EFF period: net official loan inflows of US$1.1 billion were recorded during the period. As a result, the country's FX reserve amounted to US$20.8 billion by 4 May 2017 sufficient to finance around four months of import payments.\nEconomic aid.\nPakistan receives economic aid from several sources as loans and grants. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank (WB), Asian Development Bank (ADB), etc. provide long-term loans to Pakistan. Pakistan also receives bilateral aid from developed and oil-rich countries. Foreign aid has been one of the main sources of money for the Pakistani economy. Collection of foreign aid has been one of the priorities of almost every Pakistani Government with the Prime Minister himself leading delegations on a regular basis to collect foreign aid.\nThe Asian Development Bank will provide close to $6 billion development assistance to Pakistan during 2006\u20139. The World Bank unveiled a lending programme of up to $6.5 billion for Pakistan under a new four-year, 2006\u20132009, aid strategy showing a significant increase in funding aimed largely at beefing up the country's infrastructure. Japan will provide $500 million annual economic aid to Pakistan. In November 2008, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has approved a loan of 7.6 billion to Pakistan, to help stabilise and rebuild the country's economy. Between the 2008 and 2010 fiscal years, the IMF extended loans to Pakistan totalling 5.2 billion dollars. The government decided in 2011 to cut off ties with the IMF. However, the government newly elected in 2013 re-established these ties, and a negotiated a three-year $6.6 billion package which would allow it to deal with ongoing debt issues. In May 2019, Pakistan finalised a US$6 billion foreign aid with IMF. This is Pakistan's 22nd such bailout from the IMF.\nThe China\u2013Pakistan Economic Corridor is being developed with a contribution of mainly concessionary loans from China under the Belt and Road Initiative. Much like BRI, the value of CPEC investments transcends any fiat currency and is only estimated vaguely as it spans over decades of past and future industrial development and global economic influence.\nRemittances.\nThe remittances of Pakistanis living abroad have played an important role in Pakistan's economy and foreign exchange reserves. Pakistanis settled in Western Europe and North America are significant sources of remittances to Pakistan. Since 1973, Pakistani workers in the oil-rich Arab states have been sources of billions of dollars of remittances.\nThe 9 million-strong Pakistani diaspora contributed US$19.3 billion to the economy in FY2017. The major source countries of remittances to Pakistan include UAE, US, Saudi Arabia, GCC countries (including Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, and Oman), Australia, Canada, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, UK, and EU countries.\nRemittances sent home by overseas Pakistani workers saw a negative growth of 3.0% in the fiscal year 2017 compared to the previous year when remittances reached an all-time high of 19.9 billion US dollars. This decline in remittances is mainly due to the adverse economic conditions in Arabian and Gulf countries after the fall in oil prices in 2016. However, recent development activities in the Qatar FIFA World Cup, Dubai Expo, Saudi Arabia's implementation of its Vision 2030, and particularly the recent visit of the PM to Kuwait should all be helpful in opening new avenues for employment in these countries. Going forward, one can expect improvements in the coming years. The SBP's data showed that remittances amounted to $29.4 billion for the year 2021. The government and SBP took measures to incentivise the use of formal channels of sending money home. The orderly foreign exchange market conditions also contributed to the rise in remittances. Remittances helped improve the country's external sector position despite the challenging global economic conditions due to the coronavirus pandemic.\nData is taken from SBP and Ministry of Finance.\nRemittances sent home by overseas Pakistanis in the fiscal year 2020/21 are as follows:\nEconomic issues.\nTaxation Issues.\nIn fiscal year 2023, tax exemptions and concessions granted to influential sectors such as real estate, manufacturing and energy, cost the state 4.61 percent of GDP. \nThe Finance Act 2025.\nThe Finance Act 2025 drew significant controversy due to its stringent taxation measures and expanded enforcement powers granted to the Federal Board of Revenue (FBR). Key provisions, including Sections 37A and 37B, allowed for the arrest of individuals without prior notice, raising concerns over potential misuse and arbitrary enforcement. Additionally, measures such as the disallowance of business expenditures linked to cash transactions, penalties for purchases from non-National Tax Number (NTN) holders, mandatory digital invoicing, and an increased withholding tax on cash withdrawals by non-filers were widely criticized as burdensome and unclear by tax experts and business stakeholders.\nIn response, major business communities across Pakistan staged protests and strikes, describing the measures as \"anti-business.\" On 19 July 2025, a nationwide strike was observed, with complete shutdowns in key markets, including Karachi\u2019s New Sabzi Mandi for the first time. Leading chambers of commerce, including those in Karachi and Lahore, supported the strike, demanding the rollback of the new policies and restoration of previously abolished regimes. While some business groups entered talks with the government, others warned of further action if concerns remained unaddressed.\nCorruption.\nCorruption is an ongoing issue in the government, with claims of initiatives against it, particularly at the government and lower levels of police forces. In 2011, the country consistently ranked poorly on the Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index, with scores of 2.5, 2.3 in 2010, and 2.5 in 2009 out of 10. In 2011, Pakistan ranked 134th on the index, with 42 countries ranking worse.\nIn 2012, Pakistan's ranking dropped further from 134 to 139, making Pakistan the 34th most corrupt country in the world, tied with Azerbaijan, Kenya, Nepal, and Nigeria.\nHowever, during the Sharif regime (2013\u201317), Pakistan improved its ranking to 117th out of 180 countries in 2017 (with an improvement in score from 28, 29, 30, 32, 32 [2013\u201317]), equal to Egypt (better than 59 countries). Due to the adverse effects of corruption on the country, the National Accountability Bureau (NAB) was established in 1999. The primary purpose of NAB was to recover looted money from corrupt elements and deposit it in the national exchequer. From 2018 to 2020, NAB recovered Rs 502 billion from corrupt elements, a record achievement. Since the bureau's inception, NAB has recovered Rs 814 billion directly or indirectly from corrupt elements, exceeding the recovery of other such anti-corruption organizations.\nAccording to the IMF\u2019s 2025 Governance and Corruption Diagnostic Assessment, Pakistan\u2019s economy loses an estimated 5\u20136.5 percent of its GDP to corruption due to entrenched \"elite capture,\" in which influential groups shape public policy for their own benefit. The system has led to market distortions and wastage of public resources.\nInterference by Pakistan Military.\nThe Pakistani military maintains significant influence over the country's economy, as illustrated by a July 2025 meeting between foreign exchange company representatives and a senior intelligence official, Major General Faisal Naseer of the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), to discuss the depreciation of the Pakistani rupee. While monetary policy and currency regulation traditionally fall under civilian institutions such as the State Bank of Pakistan, the involvement of a high-ranking military officer reflects the broader role the military plays in national economic matters.\nAccording to Ayesha Siddiqa's \"Military Inc.: Inside Pakistan\u2019s Military Economy\", Pakistan's military controls a vast commercial network known as \"Milbus,\" comprising businesses run for the personal benefit of military personnel but excluded from the official defense budget. These ventures include banks, factories, real estate, and retail operations, giving the military significant economic power. This financial autonomy strengthens the military's political dominance, distorts markets, and hinders democratic development by entrenching military influence in civilian affairs.\nDespite Pakistan's severe economic crisis marked by hyperinflation, rising debt, and low foreign reserves, the military has remained financially insulated. Military assets grew from A$30 billion in 2016 to over A$39.8 billion, even as state reserves fell to A$5.2 billion and debt surged. In the same period, the military received an increased budget allocation of A$11.27 billion. Senior officers, including Generals Qamar Javed Bajwa and Asim Saleem Bajwa, reportedly amassed significant wealth, while military-run businesses continued to thrive. This resilience is attributed to the military's vast economic network, institutional autonomy, and strong political influence. In 2025 too, for instance, as Pakistan faced 38 percent inflation, low foreign reserves, and widespread poverty, the military elite reportedly remained insulated from the crisis. They maintained affluent lifestyles, exclusive housing, and substantial business interests, in contrast to the hardships faced by the broader population.\nIncome inequality.\nIn 1965, Pakistan\u2019s chief economist Mahbub ul Haq asserted that 22 families dominated the country\u2019s economic and financial sectors. He contended that these families controlled roughly two-thirds of industrial assets, 80 percent of banking, and 79 percent of insurance assets.\nIn 2015, Pakistan's pre-tax income distribution was highly concentrated at the top, with estimates indicating that the richest 1 percent received 30.2 percent of national income, the top 0.1 percent received 13.4 percent, and the top 0.01 percent received 5.1 percent.\nThe UNDP\u2019s National Human Development Report (NHDR) 2020 stated that public spending in Pakistan had not benefited all income groups equally. The poorest category received only 14.2 percent of the overall share of expenditure, while the richest received 37.2 percent. According to NHDR 2021, the richest 20 percent held 49.6 percent of national income, compared with just 7 percent held by the poorest 20 percent. \nLink between remittance inflows and migration trends.\nIn 2024, personal remittance inflows to Pakistan accounted for 9.4% of the country's gross domestic product, a figure notably higher than India's 3.5% and significantly increased from the pre-COVID-19 level of 6%. This economic reliance on remittances reflects underlying challenges in domestic opportunities, which the 2024 report by the National Commission for Human Rights links to a rise in illegal migration. According to the report, over 6,000 Pakistanis undertook illegal journeys to Europe in 2023 alone.\nEase of doing business.\nPakistan's economy faces significant challenges impacting its ease of doing business, including weak macroeconomic indicators, reliance on imports, and low foreign direct investment (FDI). Investors point to high inflation, complex regulations, inconsistent policies, poor intellectual property protection, corruption, political instability, and security concerns as key obstacles. Pakistan's Ease of Doing Business ranking fell from 61st in 2006 to 147th in 2018, before improving to 108th in 2020, after which the World Bank suspended the report. To address these issues, the government secured a $3 billion IMF Stand-By Arrangement in 2023 and established the Special Investment Facilitation Council to attract foreign investment, especially from Gulf Cooperation Council countries.\nSince 2022, a growing number of multinational corporations (MNCs) \u2014 including Eli Lilly, Shell, Microsoft, Uber, and Yamaha \u2014 have exited Pakistan, driven by a combination of sector-specific challenges, weak intellectual property enforcement, shrinking margins, and an unstable economic environment. Former Pakistan Business Council CEO Ehsan Malik cited delays in regulatory approvals, rising local competition, and a depreciating rupee as key reasons behind the retreat. He noted that pharmaceutical multinationals often exit due to prolonged delays in price adjustment approvals and the unethical marketing practices employed by certain local firms. Adding to this trend, in October 2025, Procter &amp; Gamble (P&amp;G) announced its exit after 34 years in the country, winding down the manufacturing and commercial operations of both P&amp;G Pakistan and Gillette Pakistan Ltd. The company opted to shift to a third-party distribution model, citing weak demand, high energy costs, and repatriation restrictions. Gillette's board endorsed the decision and began delisting procedures from the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX). Former Gillette CEO Saad Amanullah Khan stated that such corporate departures should serve as a wake-up call for policymakers, highlighting concerns over high operating costs, poor infrastructure, and regulatory pressures.\nStartup funding in Pakistan dropped sharply from $355 million in 2022 to $43 million in 2024, an 88% decline. Analysts cite rupee depreciation, regulatory hurdles, and tax uncertainty as key factors, with industry performance lagging behind regional peers like India and Bangladesh.\nDebt.\nAccording to the CIA World Factbook, in 2017, Pakistan ranked 57th in the world in terms of public external debt to various international monetary authorities (owing ~$107.527 billion in 2019), accounting for a total of 67.1% of GDP (in 2017).\nGovernment debt and liabilities data is sourced from the State Bank of Pakistan.\nPakistan's external debt servicing includes the repayment of both the principal amount borrowed and the accrued interest.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "23367", "revid": "38506546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23367", "title": "Telecommunications in Pakistan", "text": "Telecommunications in Pakistan describes the overall environment for the mobile telecommunications, telephone, and Internet markets in Pakistan.\nRegulatory environment.\nThe Telecommunications Ordinance of 1994 created the Pakistan Telecommunication Authority (PTA), Pakistan's first independent telecommunications regulator, and the Pakistan Telecommunication Company Ltd (PTCL), a state-owned monopoly.\nDue to a lack of competition, local telephone call rates were high and international call rates were even higher. During the 1990s, a call to United States cost $5 per minute (300PkRs per minute), which was not affordable for the majority of the population. In addition, customer service was poor; fixing a problem may have taken an average of 10 to 15 days. Despite this, consumers had to stick with PTCL, as they had no other options.\nThis prompted the government to take a series of actions to improve the service by opening the telecommunications market. This was critical, but required a fine balance because opening the market and preserving PTCL were both important for the government.\nIn July 2003 the government introduced a \"Deregulation Policy for the Telecommunication Sector\", which allowed and encouraged foreign companies to invest in the Pakistani telecommunications market. The centerpiece of the deregulation was the establishment of two categories of basic services licenses: Local loop (LL), for fixed line telecommunication within the 14 PTCL regions, and Long-distance and International (LDI), for connectivity between regions. Two sets of criteria set by the regulatory authorities must be met before an operator is allowed to start operation: one for the issuance of a license and another for the maintenance of service quality.\nIn 2006, Etisalat International Pakistan, a wholly owned subsidiary of Emirates Telecommunications Corporation, purchased a 26% stake in PTCL and assumed management control of the company.\nIn 2008, Pakistan was the world's third-fastest growing telecommunications market. Pakistan's telecom infrastructure is improving dramatically with foreign and domestic investments into fixed-line and mobile networks; fiber-optic systems are being constructed throughout the country to aid in network growth. The major growth in mobile telephony was triggered by two steps taken by Prof. Atta-ur-Rahman FRS when he was Federal Minister of Science &amp; technology. These were to introduce a \"Calling Party Pays\" (CPP) regime under which no charges are paid by the call receiving party on mobile phone calls. The second was the launching of UFone as a government owned mobile phone company that competitive call rates that led to strong market competition. The impact of these two measures has been the expansion of mobile telephony from 0.3 million mobile phones in 2001 to 160 million mobile phones in 2018.\nPakistan's telecommunications infrastructure includes microwave radio relay, coaxial cable, fiber-optic cable, cellular, and satellite networks. Pakistan is connected to the rest of the world through nine submarine cable systems (SEA-ME-WE-3, SEA-ME-WE-4, SEA-ME-WE-5, I-ME-WE, AAE, TW-1, SRG, PEACE and Africa-1) that provide links to Asia, the Middle East, Africa, Europe; 3 Intelsat satellite earth stations (1 Atlantic Ocean and 2 Indian Ocean); 3 operational international gateway exchanges (2 at Karachi and 1 at Islamabad); and microwave radio relay to neighboring countries.\nPerception survey.\nLIRNEasia's Telecommunications Regulatory Environment (TRE) index summarizes stakeholders\u2019 perception of the regulatory and policy environment and provides insight into how conducive the environment is for further development and progress. The most recent survey was conducted in July 2008 in eight Asian countries, including Pakistan. The tool measured seven dimensions: (i) market entry; (ii) access to scarce resources; (iii) interconnection; (iv) tariff regulation; (v) anti-competitive practices; (vi) universal services; and (vii) quality of service; for the fixed, mobile, and broadband sectors.\nThe survey found that in Pakistan the mobile sector was most active, followed by broadband; while the fixed-line sector remained somewhat static. The parameters that improved compared to the 2006 survey were interconnection, tariff regulation, regulation of anti-competitive practices, and universal service obligation in the mobile sector; and market entry, interconnection, regulation of anti-competitive practices and universal service obligation in the fixed sector. Market entry received a low score in the mobile sector due to the perception that the cost of a new or renewal mobile license was prohibitive, thus posing a serious barrier to entry. However, this conclusion may have been incorrect, as the license fee, at least in the case of renewal by Mobilink GSM, was paid in installments over a period of three years. Thus, lack of complete information on the part of survey participants may have skewed the results.\nMobile telecommunications.\nInstaphone and Paktel were the pioneers in mobile communication in Pakistan during the 1990s. They were joined by Mobilink in 1998 which was owned by Motorola until its sale to ORASCOM. The trio offered AMPS services before switching to GSM in the early 2000s. Ufone joined the mix in 2001. The sector was highly regulated which led to high call rates and poor service quality.\nA new addition in Pakistan telecommunication, the https:// made its debut in Pakistan on the auspicious date of August 14, 2023, during Pakistan Independence Day. Onic SIM number serials start from 0339.\nIn January 2004 the Ministry of Information Technology issued its \"Mobile Cellular Policy\" with objectives to:\nThe deregulation bore fruit as international companies Telenor (Norway) and Warid Pakistan set up operations in the country in 2005.\nSubscriber base.\nThe mobile telecommunications sector is seeing very large year-to-year growth in Pakistan. Approximately 90 percent of Pakistanis live within areas that have cell phone coverage and more than half of all Pakistanis have access to a cell phone. With 194 million mobile subscribers in June 2022, Pakistan has the highest mobile penetration rate in the South Asian region. 3G/4G subscribers stood at 115 million in June 2022.\nAccording to the Pakistan Telecommunication Authority (PTA), Jazz leads the market with 75.00 million subscribers, followed by Telenor with 49.19 million, Zong with 44.80 million and Ufone with 23.47 million. All telecom companies are working to broaden their networks in the Azad Jammu and Kashmir and Northern Areas, which were largely ignored until recently. Five of the seven Agencies of the tribal areas have mobile coverage.\nSMS.\nPakistanis collectively sent over 151 billion text messages during the year 2009. Nokia has cited Pakistan to be producing the third-highest SMS traffic in the world in 2010.\nTelecom Tower Company (TowerCos).\nEngro Connect has acquired all 10,500 telecom towers owned and managed by Jazz in a landmark $560 million deal. This transaction marks the first time a major telecom operator in Pakistan has divested its entire tower infrastructure.\nPakistan currently has around 50,000 telecom towers. The tower company model is gaining popularity globally, allowing multiple telecom operators to share infrastructure and reduce costs. Other tower companies in Pakistan include Engro Enfrashare, Edotco, and Saudi-based TAWAL Pakistan.\nFixed-line telephones.\nFixed-line subscriptions declined from a peak of 5.2 million in 2005\u201306 to 3.4 million in 2009\u201310.\nWhen dialing on landlines, calls made within cities are considered local calls and you just dial the local number. Calls to other cities (e.g. \"Karachi\" to \"Lahore\") are considered long-distance calls, e.g., when dialing to \"Lahore\" from \"Karachi\" you have to dial the code for \"Lahore\" then followed by the number of the destination, therefore you dial 042-XXXX-XXXX. For international calls, you dial \"00\" followed by the country code, e.g., for calls to the UK from Pakistan you dial 00 - 44 - XXXXXX.\nThe country code for Pakistan is 92.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23368", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23368", "title": "Transport in Pakistan", "text": "Transport in Pakistan () is extensive and varied. In recent years, new national highways have been built, with the addition of motorways which have improved trade and logistics within the country. Pakistan's rail network is also undergoing expansion in recent years. Airports and seaports have been built with the addition of foreign and domestic funding. Transportation challenges in Pakistan are escalating due to poor planning, inadequate governance, and corrupt practices.\nHistory.\nThe history of transport in modern-day Pakistan dates back to the Indus Valley civilization.\nThe Grand Trunk Road was a major road commissioned by Sher Shah Suri in the 16th century and used during the Suri and Mughal periods. Trees were planted, and mosques and temples built along the road. Caravanserais were built for travelers to spend the night.\nRailways and Airways were developed during the British Raj. The first railways in Pakistan were built from 1885.\nRoad.\nMotorways.\nThe construction of motorways began in the early 1990s, with the idea of building a world-class road network and reducing the load on the heavily used national highways throughout the country. The M-2 was the first motorway completed in 1998, linking the cities of Islamabad and Lahore. In the past 5 years, many new motorways have opened up, including the M-1 and M-4. The M4 is operational and connects the cities of Pindi Bhatian (M-2), Faisalabad and Multan via Gojra, Toba Tek Singh, Jhang, Shorkot, Pir Mahal and Khanewal. In 2019 M-3 became operational, which connects Lahore with Multan through Abdul Hakeem and the existing M4 near Multan. It terminates at the M5, which became operational in 2019. The M-5 lead to the Sukkur District of Sindh. There, the M-6 (which is proposed with construction work to begin soon) will start; the M6 will end at Hyderabad, where it will meet the existing M9 motorway to Karachi. In addition to this, the M-8 in Baluchistan province, the longest motorway of Pakistan, is half under construction, half operational. In central Punjab, the Lahore-Sialkot Motorway (M-11) opened on 18 March 2020 and in KPK province, the Hakka-Dera Ismail Khan Motorway (M14) is also under construction. Swat Motorway has been completed and operational up to Chakdarra. Hazara Motorway one more expressway under construction in KPK province.\nNational Highways.\nDuring the 1990s, Pakistan began an ongoing project to rebuild all national highways throughout the country specifically to important financial, cargo and textile centers. The National Highway Authority or NHA is responsible for the maintenance of all national highways in Pakistan.\nFlyovers and Underpasses.\nMany flyovers and underpasses are located in major urban areas of the country to regulate the flow of traffic. The highest number of flyovers and under passes are located in Karachi, followed by Lahore. Other cities having flyovers and underpasses for the regulation of flow of traffic includes Islamabad-Rawalpindi, Peshawar, Gujranwala, Multan, Faisalabad, Hyderabad, Quetta, Sargodha, Bahawalpur, Sukkur, Larkana, Rahim Yar Khan and Sahiwal etc.\nBeijing Underpass, Lahore is the longest underpass of Pakistan with a length of about . Muslim Town Flyover, Lahore is the longest flyover of the country with a length of about .\nBuses.\nWithin cities, buses provide a significant role in commuting a large number of travelers from one city to another. Recently, large CNG buses have been put onto the streets of various cities, primarily Karachi and Lahore, and recently Islamabad,Peshawar as the minivans which were originally used were beginning to cause large traffic problems. Private yellow and white minivans have services throughout cities in Pakistan and get commuters from one point of the city to the other at a low cost. Since 2000, however, the government has taken a comprehensive initiative to modernize the existing bus fleets and minimally impact the environment. This public-private enterprise would gradually introduce 8,000 CNG buses throughout the country and 800 buses in Karachi. This venture will ensure high standards of efficiency and cleanliness.\nBus service in urban areas and between cities is well established with services run by both public and private sectors.\nInternational bus services are also well established in Pakistan and connect to various countries:\nTaxis.\nAnother very common form of transport, seen mainly at hotels and airports, are yellow taxis. Drivers charge according to a meter located on the dashboard of the car, but fares can be negotiated if there is no meter. The cab drivers are reliable and will take passengers to any destination required.\nThere are also numerous privately run services that use cars and minibuses of various types throughout Pakistan, providing a reliable and quick means of transport. Recently, the Radio Cab was introduced in Pakistan, which allows riders to call a toll-free number to get in touch with the closest taxi stand. This service is currently offered in Islamabad, Rawalpindi, Karachi, Peshawar and Lahore. Services for Hyderabad and Faisalabad are now being set up. Another local cab service was introduced in August, 2017 with the name iCAB, claiming to be the first cab service of the country with a centralized platform for all kinds of road transportation services, providing app-based services and getting stupendous response from the people of Pakistan. Launched from the capital territory, iCAB will expand its operations to overall 13 cities of the country.\nIn 2025, the Government of Punjab launched the Green E-Taxi Scheme to provide electric vehicles for taxi drivers, aiming to reduce emissions and modernize urban transport.\nCars.\nOver the years, the number of cars on Pakistani roads has tripled. Traffic jams are a common scene in major cities across Pakistan. The most popular cars on Pakistani roads are the Suzuki Mehran, Suzuki Cultus, Suzuki Alto, Suzuki Bolan, Daihatsu Coure, Hyundai Santro, Honda Civic, Honda City, Honda Accord, Toyota Corolla, Daihatsu Mira, Nissan Dayz, Toyota Vitz, Kia Sportage, Kia Picanto, Hyundai Elantra, Toyota Fortuner, Toyota Hilux Revo\nLuxury SUVs and cars are owned by the elite in urban cities and by many large landowners in the villages and rural areas, thus making them a fairly common sight in Pakistan. The most popular models are the Toyota Land Cruiser, Toyota Prado, Land Rover Range Rover, along with several Mercedes-Benzes, BMWs and Audis.\nFuture cars.\nStudents and teachers from the National University of Science and Technology developed Pakistan's first ever hybrid gasoline car, the Devrim II, inspired by the Turkish model Devrim. Before that, students from Naval College Karachi and Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute also made a successful hybrid car, but Devrim II is the most effective one. The group, the Pak-Wheelers, had succeeded in 2011 in developing a car with a fuel efficiency of 450 kilometres per liter, but were trying to improve it to more than 700 by using hybrid technology.\nAuto rickshaws.\nAuto rickshaws are a popular method of travelling in cities and are found in almost every city and town in Pakistan. The fare is usually negotiable before commencing a journey; however, due to the level of pollution contributed by auto-rickshaws, the government has recently begun banning older ones and replacing them with CNG auto rickshaws, which tend to be less noisy, form less pollutants and are much bigger and more comfortable. The Punjab government decided in 2005 to replace two-stroke three-wheelers with CNG-fitted four-stroke rickshaws in Lahore, Multan, Faisalabad, Rawalpindi and Gujranwala. Three manufacturers were ordered to produce 60,000 four-stroke vehicles, but they reportedly supplied 2,000 to the government which are now plying on city roads. Similar ordinances are now being considered in other provinces of Pakistan.\nA new form of transport in Pakistan is the Qing-Qi (pronounced \"ching-chee\"), which is a cross between a motorcycle and auto-rickshaw. It runs just like a motorcycle but has three wheels instead of two and can carry a much heavier load. It is an urban transport vehicle and is used mostly for short distances.\nMotorcycling and ride-hailing.\nMotorcycling is another means of transportation in Pakistan. It is considered to be the most quickest way of getting to areas where vehicles cannot reach. There are also motorcycling operators in the cities. Some of them make use of helmet while others don't. There are also companies such as Bykea that offer ride-hailing services with bikes or motorcycles in Karachi, Lahore, Rawalpindi, Peshawar and others. Ride-hailing services such as Uber and Careem are also available.\nIn 2019, 2 more private ride-sharing services introduced specifically in the city of Karachi named Airlift and SWVL. Airlift is a Pakistan-based company while SWVL is an Egyptian company.\nRail.\nDomestic.\nRail services in Pakistan are provided by the state-run Pakistan Railways, under the supervision of the Ministry of Railways. Pakistan Railways provides an important mode of transportation in Pakistan, catering to the large-scale movement of people and freight. The railway network comprises11,492\u00a0km all of which is gauge, including 286\u00a0km of electrified track. Passenger earnings comprise 50% of the total revenue. During 1999\u20132000 this amounted to Rs. 4.8 billion. Pakistan Railways carry 65 million passengers annually and daily operate 228 mail, express and passenger trains. Pakistan Railways also operate special trains for various occasions. The Freight Business Unit with 12,000 personnel operates over 200 freight stations on the railway network. The FBU serves the Port of Karachi and Port Qasim as well as in various other stations along the network and generates revenue from the movement of agricultural, industrial and imported products such as wheat, coal, fertiliser, cement and sugar. About 39% of the revenue is generated from the transportation of petroleum, 19% from imported wheat, fertiliser and rock phosphate. The remaining 42% is earned from domestic traffic. The freight rate structure is based on market trends in road transport, which is the main competitor to rail transport.\nHigh speed rail.\nPrime Minister Nawaz Sharif said that a high-speed rail network will be built which will connect Peshawar to Karachi via all major cities of Pakistan during his visit to China in June 2016. The Government is making plans for this project.\nRail links with adjacent countries.\n Iran -\nA railway line runs from Zahedan to Quetta, and a line is finished from Zahedan to Kerman in central Iran, linking with the rest of the Iranian rail network. On May 18, 2007, a MOU for rail cooperation was signed by Pakistan and Iran under which the line will be completed by December 2008. Now that the rail systems are linked up at Zahedan, there is a break-of-gauge between the Islamic Republic of Iran Railways tracks and Pakistan Railway's Indian gauge tracks.\n Afghanistan -\nCurrently there is no rail link to Afghanistan since no railway network is present in that country, however Pakistan Rail has proposed to help build an Afghan Rail Network in three phases. The first phase will stretch from the Chaman to Spin Boldak in Afghanistan. The second phase will extend line to Kandahar and the third phase will eventually connect to Herat. From there, the line will be extended to Khushka, Turkmenistan. The final phase would link with Central Asian . It is not clear where the break-of-gauge station will be. The proposed line will also be connected the port town of Gwadar via Dalbadin and Taftan, thus connecting the port town to Central Asia.\n China -\nThere is no link with China however, on 28 February 2007 contracts were awarded for feasibility studies on a proposed line from Havelian via the Khunjerab Pass at 4730\u00a0m above sea level, to the Chinese railhead at Kashgar, a distance of about 750\u00a0km.\n Turkmenistan -\nVia Afghanistan (proposed) \u2013 avoiding intervening.\n Turkey -\nAn Istanbul-Tehran-Islamabad passenger rail service was proposed recently. Meanwhile, a container train service was launched by the former Prime Minister of Pakistan Yousuf Raza Gilani between Islamabad and Istanbul on 14 August 2009. The first train carried 20 containers with a capacity of around &lt;ref name=\"http://www.pakistantimes.net/pt/detail.php?newsId=3343\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and will travel from Islamabad, through Tehran, Iran and on to Istanbul in two weeks' time. According to the Minister for Railways Ghulam Ahmad Bilour, after the trial of the container train service, a passenger train will be launched. There are also hopes the route will eventually provide a link to Europe and Central Asia, and carry passengers.\nHeritage.\nIn Ghangha Pur, a narrow-gauge horse-drawn tramway is operational. It was first opened in 1898, closed in 1998, and re-opened in 2010.\nAir.\nPakistan has 151 airports. The major airports are:\nThere are also several smaller airports which have flights to and from the Gulf because of the large Pakistani diaspora working in the region. There are 91 airports with paved runways, of which 14 have runways longer than 3,047 meters. The remaining 48 airports have unpaved runways including one airport with a runway longer than 3,047 meters. Pakistan also has eighteen heliports.\nDespite PIA's domination in domestic market there are also 4 other carriers in Pakistan. Most notably Airblue which is the second biggest airline based in Pakistan and only airline which has new generation aircraft with 2 Airbus A321neo-LRs. Serene Air is the only other airline in Pakistan that owns wide-body aircraft with three Airbus A330s. Then there are 2 low-cost carriers with both having 5 Airbus A320s in their fleet: fly Jinnah and Air Sial. The most favourite aircraft in Pakistan is the Airbus A320 family with only Serene air having 4 Boeing 737s instead of the Airbuses.\nWater.\nThe waterway network in Pakistan is in its infancy, with Karachi being the only major city situated next to the Arabian Sea. Still, plans are being proposed for the development of the waterways in the country along the Indus River and through the Punjab as it would boost employment opportunities and the economic and social development of Pakistan.\n* Karachi International Container Terminal (KICT)\n* Pakistan International Container Terminal (PICT)\nPipelines.\nThe above information was calculated in 2009.\nChina-Pakistan Economic Corridor.\nThe China-Pakistan Economic Corridor is an under-construction development program to connect Gwadar Port in southern Pakistan to China's northwestern autonomous region of Xinjiang via highways, railways and pipelines to transport oil and gas. Chinese Premier Li Keqiang was among the first advocates of the project; since then General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping, former Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari and Pakistani prime minister Nawaz Sharif have become strong supporters of the project. When the corridor is constructed, it will serve as a primary gateway for trade between China and the Middle East and Africa; in particular, oil from the Middle East could be offloaded at Gwadar, which is located just outside the mouth of the Persian Gulf, and transported to China through the Baluchistan province in Pakistan. Such a link would vastly shorten the 12,000-kilometre route that Mideast oil supplies must now take to reach Chinese ports.\nThe project received a major boost when control of Gwadar was transferred to China's state-owned China Overseas Ports Holding in February 2013. Built by Chinese workers and opened in 2007, Gwadar is undergoing a major expansion to turn it into a full-fledged, deep-water commercial port. On 19 February 2014, the \"South China Morning Post\" reported that Pakistan and China have signed agreements for constructing an international airport at Gwadar, for upgrading a section of the 1,300-kilometre Karakorum Highway connecting to Islamabad, and for a fibre-optic cable to be laid from the Chinese border to the Pakistani city of Rawalpindi.\n According to \"The Diplomat\", with the development of the corridor, Central Asia, traditionally an economically closed region owing to its geography and lack of infrastructure, will have greater access to the sea and to the global trade network. Pak-China Economic Corridor Secretariat was inaugurated in Islamabad on August 27, 2013. The CPEC has put a debt burden on Pakistan, paving the way for China to use its \"debt-trap diplomacy\" and gain access to strategic assets. Therefore, Pakistan is already at high risk due to debt from China. Perhaps, Pakistan would never have imagined that its alliance with China would sink into huge debt. China and Pakistan have both undertaken constructive measures to facilitate the advancement of the CPEC project. However, the ultimate outcome of the corridor's success is intricately tied to Pakistan's internal circumstances. A comprehensive evaluation of the corridor's potential remains challenging until Pakistan addresses its political and security challenges.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23369", "revid": "14876534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23369", "title": "Pakistan Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Pakistan\nThe Pakistan Armed Forces (; ) are the military forces of Pakistan. It is the world's seventh-largest military measured by active military personnel and consists of three uniformed services\u2014the Army, Navy, and the Air Force, which are backed by several paramilitary forces such as the National Guard and the Civil Armed Forces. As of the 2025 reforms, the highest-ranking military officer is the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF), who also serves concurrently as Chief of Army Staff (COAS), holding principal command authority over all three branches and overseeing war strategy, operations, joint force development, and resource allocation. The office of Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee (CJCSC) has been abolished, and many prior responsibilities are now assumed by the CDF, streamlining military command and accelerating decision-making.\nA pivotal part of the 2025 reforms is the formation of the position of Commander of National Strategic Command (CNSC), a four-star army general appointed by the Prime Minister upon the CDF\u2019s recommendation and is responsible for Pakistan\u2019s nuclear and strategic assets. The Strategic Plans Division remains crucial, managing nuclear policy of Pakistan and national deterrent under the CNSC\u2019s supervision. The President of Pakistan is the commander-in-chief of the Pakistan Armed Forces. All branches of Pakistan Armed Forces are now coordinated through the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF), who directs strategic planning, resource allocation, and joint military operations, with the Joint Staff Headquarters (JSHQ) being reorganised to support integrated command across all services from the Joint Staff Headquarters (JSHQ).\nSince the 1963 Sino-Pakistan Agreement, the Pakistani military has had close relations with China, jointly working to develop the JF-17, the K-8, and various other weapon systems. As of 2025,[ [update]] China was the largest foreign supplier of military equipment to Pakistan in major arms. The military cooperation between the Chinese People's Liberation Army and Pakistan have accelerated the pace of joint military exercises, and their increasingly compatible weapon supply chains and network communication systems have accelerated the integration of defense capabilities between the two sides. Both nations also cooperate on the development of their nuclear and space technology programs. Alongside this, the Pakistani military also maintains relations with the United States in history, which gave Pakistan major non-NATO ally status in 2004. Pakistan procures the bulk of its military equipment from China and its own domestic suppliers.\nThe Pakistan Armed Forces were formed in 1947, when Pakistan gained independence from the British Empire. Since then, they have played a decisive role in the modern history of Pakistan, most notably due to fighting major wars with India in 1947\u20131948, 1965 and 1971. The armed forces have seized control of the government on several occasions, consequently forming what analysts refer to as a deep state referred to as \"The Establishment\". The need for border management led to the creation of the National Guard and the Civil Armed Forces to deal with civil unrest in the North-West, as well as the security of border areas in Punjab and Sindh by paramilitary troops. In 2024, the Pakistan Armed Forces had approximately 660,000 active personnel, excluding 25,000+ personnel in the Strategic Plans Division Forces and 291,000 active personnel in the various paramilitary forces. The military has traditionally had a large pool of volunteers, and therefore conscription has never been brought into effect, although both the Constitution of Pakistan and supplementary legislation allow for conscription in a state of war.\nAccounting for 18.3% of national government expenditure in 2021, after interest payments, Pakistan's military absorbs a large part of the country's annual budget. The armed forces are generally highly approved of in Pakistani society. As of April 2021,[ [update]] Pakistan was the sixth-largest contributor to United Nations peacekeeping efforts, with 4,516 personnel deployed overseas. Other foreign deployments have consisted of Pakistani military personnel serving as military advisers in various African and Arab countries. The Pakistani military has maintained combat divisions and brigade-strength presences in some Arab states during the Arab\u2013Israeli Wars, aided American-led coalition forces in the first Gulf War against Iraq, and actively taken part in the Somali and Bosnian conflicts.\nHistory.\nThe Pakistani military traces its roots directly back to the British Indian Army, in which many British Indian Muslims served during World War I and World War II, prior to the Partition of India in 1947. Upon Partition, military formations with a Muslim-majority (such as the Indian Army's infantry Muslim regiments) were transferred to the new Dominion of Pakistan, while on an individual basis, Indian Muslims could choose to transfer their allegiance and service to the Pakistan Armed Forces (consisting of the Pakistan Army, Royal Pakistan Navy and Royal Pakistan Air Force) or remain serving in the Indian Armed Forces of the Dominion of India. Significant figures who opted for the former included Ayub Khan (British Indian Army), Haji Mohammad Siddiq Choudri (Royal Indian Navy) and Asghar Khan (Royal Indian Air Force). Many of the senior officers who would form the Pakistan Armed Forces had fought with British forces in World War II, thus providing the newly created country with the professionalism, experience and leadership it would need in its future wars against neighbouring India. In a formula arranged by the British, military resources were to be divided between India and Pakistan in a ratio of 64% going to India and 36% going to Pakistan.\nThe Pakistani military largely retained British military traditions and doctrine until 1956, when the United States dispatched a specialised Military Assistance Advisory Group to Pakistan to build its military; from this point onward, American military tradition and doctrine became more dominant within Pakistan's armed forces. In March 1956, the order of precedence of the Pakistani military's three formal services changed from \"Navy-Army-Air Force\" to \"Army-Navy-Air Force\".\nBetween 1947 and 1971, Pakistan fought three direct conventional wars against India, with the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 witnessing the secession of East Pakistan as the independent state of Bangladesh. Rising tensions with Afghanistan in the 1960s (primarily over the Durand Line dispute) and an indirect proxy war fought against the Soviet Union throughout the 1970s and 1980s in the Soviet\u2013Afghan War with American, British and Israeli assistance led to a sharp rise in the development of the Pakistan Armed Forces. In 1999, an extended period of intense border-skirmishing with India, the Kargil War, resulted in a massive redeployment of forces in Kashmir. As of 2014,[ [update]] the military has been conducting counter-insurgency operations along the border areas of Afghanistan, while continuing to participate in several United Nations peacekeeping operations.\nSince 1957, the armed forces have taken control from the civilian government in various military coups\u2014ostensibly to restore order in the country, citing corruption and gross inefficiency on the part of the civilian leadership. While many Pakistanis have supported these seizures of power, others have claimed that the rampant political instability, lawlessness and corruption in Pakistan are the direct consequence of consistent military rule. The budget allocation for the Pakistan Armed Forces at over 20% of the annual budget of Pakistan. Elected officials and the lawmakers have been forced to come under military rule for over 30 years of Pakistan's existence.\nOrganisation and Command Structure.\nLeadership of the Pakistan Armed Forces is provided by the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee (JCSC), which controls the military from the Joint staff Headquarters (JS HQ), adjacent to the Air HQ, Navy HQ, and Army General HQ (GHQ) in the vicinity of the Rawalpindi Military District, Punjab. The Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee is composed of the Chairman Joint Chiefs, the Chief of Army Staff, the Chief of Air Staff and the Chief of Naval Staff.\nAt the JS HQ, it forms with the office of the Engineer-in-Chief, Navy Hydrographer, Surgeon-General of each inter-service, director of JS HQ, and Director-Generals (DGs) of Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR), Inter-Services Selection Board (ISSB), Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), and the Strategic Plans Division Force (SPD Force).\nJoint Chiefs of Staff Committee (JCSC).\nFollowing military failures in the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 and Bangladesh Liberation War, federal studies on civil\u2013military relations were held by a commission led by Hamoodur Rahman, Chief Justice of Pakistan. Recommendations of the Hamoodur Rahman Commission helped establish the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee to co-ordinate all military work and oversee joint missions and their execution during operations.\nThe chairmanship of the JCSC rotates among the three main service branches, with appointment by the prime minister confirmed by the president. The chairman outranks all other four-star officers; however, he does not have operational command authority over the armed forces. In his capacity as chief military adviser, he assists the prime minister and the minister of defence in exercising their command functions.\nTechnically, the JCSC is the highest military body; and its chairman serves as the principal staff officer (PSO) to the civilian prime minister, Cabinet, National Security Council (its adviser), and president. The JCSC deals with joint military planning, joint training, integrated joint logistics, and provides strategic directions for the armed forces; it periodically reviews the role, size, and condition of the three main service branches; and it advises the civilian government on strategic communications, industrial mobilisations plans, and formulating defence plans. In many ways, the JCSC provides an important link to understand, maintain balance, and resolve conflicts between military and political circles. In times of peace, the JCSC's principle functions are to conduct planning of civil\u2013military input; in times of war, the chairman acts as principal military adviser to the prime minister in the supervision and conduct of joint warfare.\nService branches.\nArmy.\nAfter the partitioning of British India in 1947, the Pakistan Army was formed by Indian Muslim officers serving in the British Indian Army. The largest branch of the nation's military, it is a professional, volunteer fighting force, with about 560,000 active personnel and 550,000 reserves (though estimates vary widely). Although, the Constitution provides a basis for the service draft, conscription has never been imposed in Pakistan. A single command structure known as General Headquarters (GHQ) is based at Rawalpindi Cantt, adjacent to the Joint staff HQ. The army is commanded by the Chief of Army Staff (COAS), by statute a four-star army general, appointed by the president with the consultation and confirmation of the prime minister. As of 2022,[ [update]] General Asim Munir was the chief of army staff. Army General Sahir Shamshad Mirza is the current Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee. The army has a wide range of corporate (e.g.: Fauji Foundation), commercial (e.g.: Askari Bank), and political interests, and on many occasions has seized control of the civilian government to restore order in the country.\nThe Army Aviation Corps reportedly operates about 250 aircraft, including approximately 40 AH-1 Cobra combat helicopters. The Army Strategic Forces Command operates a wide range of missile systems in its arsenal. In spite of the Pressler amendment enforced in the 1990s, the army has been focused on development of land-based weapon systems and production of military hardware. Domestic innovation resulted in the successful development of G3A3 rifles, Anza missile systems, and Al-Zarrar and Al-Khalid main battle tanks (MBTs).\nSince 1947, the army has waged three wars with neighbouring India, and several border skirmishes with Afghanistan. Due to Pakistan's diverse geography, the army has extensive combat experience in a variety of terrains. The army has maintained a strong presence in the Arab world during the Arab\u2013Israeli Wars, aided the Coalition Forces in the first Gulf War, and played a major role in combat in the Bosnian War as well as rescuing trapped American soldiers in Mogadishu, Somalia in 1993. Recently, major joint-operations undertaken by the army include Operation Black Thunderstorm and Operation Rah-e-Nijat, against armed insurgents within Pakistan. The army has also been an active participant in UN peacekeeping missions.\nAir Force.\nBrought into existence in 1947 with the establishment of the Pakistan Air Force Academy, the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) is regarded as a \"powerful defence component of the country's defence.\" The prefix \"Royal\" was added in 1947, but dropped when Pakistan became an Islamic republic in 1956. The PAF is the seventh-largest air force and the largest in the Muslim world, with about 943 combat fighter jets and over 200 trainer, transport, communication, helicopter, and force-multiplier aircraft. A single command structure Air Headquarters (AHQ) is based at Islamabad. The air force is commanded by the Chief of Air Staff (CAS), by statute a four-star air chief marshal, appointed by the president, with the consultation and confirmation of the prime minister. As of March\u00a02021,[ [update]] Air Chief Marshal Zaheer Ahmad Babar is the CAS.\nIn many important events in Pakistan's history, the air force has played a pivotal, influential, and crucial role in the nation's defence and national security, and promoted a sense of security in civil society. Its military significance and importance in public perception contribute to the PAF's dominance over the other major service branches. The PAF officially uses the slogan: \"Second to None; fully abreast with the requisite will and mechanism to live by its standards in the coming millennium and beyond.\"\nHistorically, the air force has been heavily dependent on U.S., Chinese, and French aircraft technology to support its growth, despite impositions of the Pressler amendment. While F-16s continue to be a backbone of the air force, the local development and quick production of the JF-17 have provided an alternative route to meet its aerial combat requirements. According to PAF accounts, the air force plans to retire several of its ageing French-licensed Mirage III and Mirage 5 fighter jets.\nJoint production with the Chinese Air Force of a light-weight multi-role combat aircraft and further avionics development of the JF-17 is ongoing at the Pakistan Aeronautical Complex (PAC). As of 2016, 70 JF-17s are operational and have replaced 50 Mirage IIIs and F-7Ps. The PAF plans to replace all F-7Ps and Mirage III/5 aircraft by 2020. The F-7PG will be replaced later, and the JF-17 fleet may eventually be expanded to 300 aircraft. Realising the importance of fifth generation fighter aircraft, the PAF successfully negotiated for the procurement of approximately 36 Chinese FC-20 fighter jets \u2013 a deal worth around US$1.4\u00a0billion, signed in 2009. It was expected that the FC-20s would be delivered in 2015. In close co-ordination with Turkish Aerospace Industries, the PAC engaged in a mid-life update (MLU) program of its F-16A/Bs, approximately 26 of which are in service. In 2010, the air force procured at least 18 newly built F-16C/D Block 52s under the Peace Gate-II by the United States.\nIn 2009, the PAF enlisted two types of airborne early warning and control (AEW&amp;C) systems aircraft: four Erieye-equipped Saab 2000s from Sweden, and a Chinese AWACS based on the Shaanxi Y-8F cargo aircraft. Four Ilyushin Il-78 aerial tankers, capable of refuelling F-16, Mirage III, Mirage 5, JF-17, and FC-20 fighters, have been acquired second-hand from Ukrainian surplus stocks. The fleet of FT-5 and T-37 trainers is to be replaced with approximately 75 K-8 Karakorum intermediate jet training aircraft. Other major developments continue to be under development by the local aerospace industries; some of its electronic systems were exhibited in IDEAS 2014 held in Karachi. Since the 1960s, the PAF has held regular combat exercises, such as Exercise Saffron Bandit and Exercise High Mark, modelled on the USAF Weapons School; many authors believe the PAF is capable of mastering the methods of \"toss bombing\" since the 1990s.\nNavy.\nThe Pakistan Navy was formed in 1947 by the Indian Muslim officers serving in the Royal Indian Navy. The prefix \"Royal\" was soon added but dropped in 1956 when Pakistan became an Islamic republic. Its prime responsibility is to provide protection of nation's sea ports, marine borders, approximately 1,000\u00a0km (650\u00a0mi) of coastline, and supporting national security and peacekeeping missions. With approximately 30,000 active duty personnel and commissioned warships, its operational scope has expanded to greater national and international responsibility in countering the threat of sea-based global terrorism, drug smuggling, and trafficking issues.\nA single command structure known as Naval Headquarters (NHQ) is based at the Rawalpindi Cantt, adjacent to the Joint Staff HQ. The navy is commanded by the Chief of Naval Staff (CNS), who is by statute a four-star admiral, appointed by the president, with the required consultation and confirmation of the prime minister. As of October\u00a02020,[ [update]] Admiral Muhammad Amjad Khan Niazi is the chief of naval staff.\nNavy Day is celebrated on 8 September to commemorate its service in the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965. According to author Tariq Ali, the navy lost one-half of its force in the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971. The Navy heavily depended on American-built naval technology and operated a large infrastructure from 1947 to 1971. The Pressler amendment forced an embargo in the 1990s, during which the navy developed air independent propulsion (AIP) technology purchased from France and built the \"Agosta\"-class submarines; two of these (as well as one of the new frigates) were built at Pakistan's facilities in Karachi. The navy's surface fleet consists of helicopter carriers, destroyers, frigates, amphibious assault ships, patrol ships, mine-countermeasures, and miscellaneous vessels. Established in 1972, the Naval Air Arm provides fleet air defence, maritime reconnaissance, and anti-submarine warfare capability. Mirage 5 aircraft donated by the PAF are flown by the Navy, equipped with Exocet anti-ship missiles. The Navy's fleet of P-3C Orion turboprop aircraft, equipped with electronic intelligence (ELINT) systems, play a pivotal role in the Navy's gathering of intelligence. Since 2001, the navy has emphasised its role and expanded its operational scope across the country with the establishment of Naval Strategic Forces Command, based in Islamabad.\nIn the 1990s, the navy lost its opportunity to equip itself with latest technology and negotiated with the Royal Navy to acquire ageing \"Tariq\"-class destroyers in 1993\u201394, which continue to be extensively upgraded. During the same time, the Navy engaged in a process of self-reliance and negotiated with China for assistance. This ultimately led the introduction of F-22P \"Zulfiquar\"-class frigates, which were designed and developed at the Karachi Shipyard and Engineering Works (KSEW); at this same time, the \"Agosta\"-90B submarines were also built. Pakistan's role in the war on terror led to a rapid modernisation, which saw the induction of the PNS \"Alamgir\" anti-submarine warship in 2011. The submarines remain to be backbone of the navy, which has been developing a nuclear submarine. Since 2001, media reports have been surfaced that the Navy has been seeking to enhance its strategic strike capability by developing naval variants of the nuclear cruise missile. The Babur cruise missile has a range of and is capable of using both conventional and nuclear warheads. Future developments of Babur missiles include capability of being launched from submarines, surface ships, and a range extension to . An air-launched version, \"Ra'ad\", has been successfully tested.\nSince the 1990s, the navy has been conducting joint naval exercises and has participated in multinational task forces such as CTF-150 and CTF-151.\nMarines.\nRecommended by the Navy, based on Royal Marines, the Pakistan Marines were established on 1 July 1971 to undertake riverine operations in East Pakistan. The Marines saw their first combat actions in amphibious operations during the Bangladesh Liberation War, fighting against the Indian Army. Due to poor combat performance in the war, high losses and casualties, and inability to effectively counter the Indian Army, the Marines were decommissioned by 1974. However, Marines continued to exist in its rudimentary form until 1988 to meet fundamental security requirements of Pakistan Navy units. In 1990, the Marines were recommissioned under Commander M. Obaidullah.\nThe Marines are the uniform service branch within the Navy whose leadership comes directly from the Navy. It shares the Navy's rank code, but conducts its combined combat training with army at Pakistan Military Academy Kakul and School of Infantry in Quetta.\nIts single command structure is based at the Manora Fort in Qasim Marine Base in Karachi and the Marines are under the command of the Commander Coast (COMCOAST), by statute a two-star rear-admiral. According to the ISPR, the Marines are deployed at the southeastern regions of Pakistan to avoid infiltration and undercover activities from the Indian Army.\nA small number of Marine Battalions are deployed at the Sir Creek region to deter the Indian Army, and coordinated the relief efforts in the 2010 Pakistan floods. Almost an entire combat contingent of Marines were deployed in Sindh and Southern Punjab to lead the flood-relief operations in 2014.\nFor intelligence purposes, the army immediately raised the combat battalion of the Marines, from the officers of the Navy, in 1999. Major intelligence activities are gathered from the Sir Creek region by the Marines, where an entire battalion is deployed to conduct reconnaissance.\nParamilitary forces.\nCivil Armed Forces.\nThe Civil Armed Forces (CAF) of Pakistan comprise several paramilitary organisations, separate and functionally distinct from the regular Pakistan Armed Forces. Operating under the purview of the Ministry of Interior in peacetime, the CAF shoulders the crucial responsibility of maintaining internal security. This encompasses assisting civilian law enforcement agencies in tasks like crime prevention, border control and public order maintenance. The CAF additionally plays a vital role in counter-insurgency and counter-terrorism operations, along with tackling anti-smuggling activities. During natural disasters, the CAF collaborates closely with the military to provide relief and support. In times of war, the CAF falls under the direct command of the Ministry of Defence and the Pakistan Armed Forces. Estimates from 2024 place the strength of the CAF at approximately 291,000 personnel. With the exception of the Frontier Constabulary, command positions within the CAF are typically filled by officers on secondment from the Pakistan Army.\nPakistan National Guard.\nPakistan National Guard is a military reserve force and a component of the Pakistan Army. Functioning as a \"second line of defense\" alongside the Pakistan Army Reserve and the Civil Armed Forces, the National Guard's primary roles include internal security, disaster relief and wartime support for the regular army. Established on 1 January 1948, it comprises approximately 185,000 personnel with its headquarters at the General Headquarters (GHQ) in Rawalpindi.\nPersonnel.\nTroop strength.\nAs of 2024,[ [update]] estimations by national and international bodies were that approximately 660,000 people were on active duty in the three main service branches, with an additional 291,000 serving in paramilitary forces and 550,000 in reserve. It is an all-volunteer military, but conscription can be enacted at the request of the president with the approval of the parliament of Pakistan. The military is the sixth largest in the world and has troops deployed around the globe in military assistance and peacekeeping operations.\nPakistan is the only predominantly Muslim country in which women serve as high-ranking officers and in combat roles, and a sizeable unit of female army and air force personnel has been actively involved in military operations against Taliban forces.\nMembers of the Pakistani military hold a rank, either that of officer or enlisted, and can be promoted.\nThe following table summarises current Pakistani military staffing:\nUniforms.\nFrom 1947 to the early 2000s, Pakistan's military uniforms closely resembled those of their counterparts in the British armed services. The Army uniform consisted of plain yellowish khaki, which was the standard issue as both the combat uniform (ACU) and the service uniform (ASU). The Pakistan Air Force (PAF) uniform was primarily based on the Royal Air Force uniform, with bluish-grey as its reporting colour markings. The Navy uniform was likewise based on the Royal Navy uniform, with predominant colours of navy blue and white.\nIn 2003, the service uniforms for each major service branch were revised and orders were made to issue new uniforms roughly based on the American military. With Marines reestablished in 2004, the Universal Camouflage Pattern (UCP) uniforms are now worn by each service in respect to their colours; the flag of Pakistan patch worn on the shoulder became compulsory.\nIn the military, the service dress, however, remains yellowish khaki for the Army; plain white service dress for the Navy (excluding the Marines). The Air Force abandoned its rank and uniform structure in 2006, and introduced its own uniform insignia which closely resembled that of the Turkish Army. Army service uniform consists of a round shoulder patch of army's insignia. Prior to becoming a republic; the shoulder patches were of the pattern inherited from the British Indian Army, and resembled the shape of the Crusader shields. In 1956, the Pakistan Army decided to adopt a round shape that reflected Islamic Heritage.\nThe Army's standard UCP is based on a pixelated version of the region's arid desert patterns. The army's UCP varies depending on the type of missions and deployment it is being used for. The Navy's UCP is based on a design that incorporates sparse black and medium grey shapes on a light grey background. The Marines have a woodland pattern featuring light brown, olive green and dark blue shapes on a tan or light olive background. Slight colour variations have been noted. Other than a greenish flight suit and a standard service dress, the Air Forces's Airman Battle Uniform (ABU) camouflage features a variation of the six-colour desert pattern. In each service's UCP, the name of the service branch, rank, and gallantry badges are worn on the chest; insignia are worn on the shoulders with the compulsory flag-of-Pakistan patch.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Uniforms and Camouflage codes of the Pakistan Armed Forces, 1947\u2013present\nSource: ISPR works, Commons\nRank and insignia structure.\nAs Pakistan became independent, the British military ranks and insignia were initially commissioned by the armed forces as part of a legacy of British colonialism. Within a few months of its founding in 1947, the military had inherited all professional qualifications of the British military in India.\nIn respect to the British Indian military, the Ministry of Defence (MoD) authorised the three junior commissioned officer (JCO) pay grades between the enlisted ranks and commissioned officers. The JCO grades are equivalent to the civil bureaucracy's pay scales for those who rise by promotion from among enlisted recruits. The JCO grades in the Pakistani military are a continuation of the former Viceroy of India's commissioned pay grades during the British colonial period. Promotion to the JCO, however, remains a lucrative and powerful incentive for the enlisted military personnel; thus, if JCO ranks are ever phased out, it will probably be a slow process.\nCurrent deployments.\nWithin Pakistan.\nIt is estimated that approximately 60\u201370% of Pakistan's military personnel are deployed along the Indo-Pakistani border. In the aftermath of the United States invasion of Afghanistan, more than 150,000 personnel were shifted towards the Tribal Areas adjacent to Afghanistan. Since 2004, Pakistan's military forces have been engaged in military efforts against al-Qaeda extremists.\nIn comparison with multinational and US forces, Pakistan's military has suffered the highest number of casualties in the war on terror, both in confrontations with al-Qaeda and during border skirmishes with the United States. After the 2008 Mumbai attacks and the subsequent standoff with India, several combat divisions were redeployed to Eastern and Southern Pakistan.\nIn addition to its military deployments, the armed forces also assist the government in responding to natural disasters such as the 2005 Kashmir earthquake and the nationwide floods of 2010.\nOverseas.\nA large number of Pakistan Armed Forces personnel are deployed overseas as part of the United Nations' peacekeeping missions. As of May 2019, 5,083 personnel were serving abroad, making Pakistan the sixth-largest contributor of personnel to UN peacekeeping missions.\nForeign military relations.\nChina.\nChina's relationship with Pakistan holds great importance for both countries in terms of common interest and geopolitical strategy. The alliance was initially formed to counter the regional influence and military threat posed by India and the Soviet Union. In recent years, with the strategic cooperation between the United States and India has deepened further, China and Pakistan have signed several military cooperation agreements.\nChina has been a steady source of military equipment and has cooperated with Pakistan in setting-up weapons production and modernisation facilities. According to Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), Pakistan is China's biggest arms buyer, counting for nearly 63% of Chinese arms exports. According to SIPRI, 81% of Pakistan's arms imports between 2019 and 2024 came from China. The two countries are actively involved in several joint projects to enhance each other's military needs, including development and production of the JF-17 Thunder fighter jet, the K-8 Karakorum advanced training aircraft, the Al-Khalid tank, airborne early warning and control (AEW&amp;C) systems, and many other projects. The two countries have held several joint military exercises to enhance co-operation between their armed forces. A 2023 report by the United States Institute of Peace argues that China and Pakistan's military relationship has \"advanced from an episodic partnership to a threshold alliance\", Pakistan \"increasingly sourced from China, especially the higher-end combat strike and power projection capabilities; and Pakistan continues to retire older U.S. and European origin platforms\". But both sides need to do more to make this threshold relationship a full-fledged ally.\nOther Asian countries.\nPrior to 1971, Pakistan's military had a strong presence in East Pakistan and an active theatre-level military command. After Bangladesh's independence from Pakistan, full diplomatic relations were not restored until 1976. Relations improved considerably under the Bangladesh military governments of President Lieutenant General Ziaur Rahman and Lieutenant General Hussain Muhammad Ershad, as Bangladesh had grown distant from its former war ally, India. Common concerns over India's regional power have influenced strategic co-operation, leading to a gift of several squadrons of F-6 fighter aircraft to the Bangladesh Air Force in the late 1980s.\nAfter being condemned by India, Great Britain, and the United States between 2004 and 2006 for repressing democracy, the Nepalese monarchy developed military ties with China and Pakistan, who offered extensive support, arms, and equipment for the monarchy's struggle to stay in power in the face of a Maoist insurgency.\nWhen India proved reluctant to supply Sri Lanka with weapons, the insurgency-plagued island nation turned to Pakistan. In May 2000, with separatist Tamil Tiger rebels about to recapture their former capital of Jaffna, Pakistan President Musharraf provided millions of dollars of much-needed armament to the Sri Lankan government. In May 2008, Lt-Gen Fonseka of the Sri Lanka Army held talks with his Pakistan Army counterparts regarding the sale of military equipment, weapons, and ammunition. The sale of 22 Al-Khalid main battle tanks to the Sri Lanka Army was finalised during these talks, in a deal worth over US$100\u00a0million. In April 2009, Sri Lanka requested $25\u00a0million worth of 81\u00a0mm, 120\u00a0mm and 130\u00a0mm mortar ammunition, to be delivered within a month, which proved decisive in the defeat of the Tamil Tigers.\nSince the 1970s, Pakistan and North Korea have cooperated extensively on the development of ballistic missile and nuclear weapons technologies. Pakistan's strong alliance with China and the legacy of a major scandal linking the Pakistani military to North Korea's nuclear program have prevented Islamabad from joining UN efforts to diplomatically isolate the DPRK.\nNATO states and Russia.\nThroughout its history, Pakistan has had a fluctuating military relationship with the United States. During times of co-operation, U.S. military funding and training have enhanced the Pakistan Armed Forces; in contrast, severing of U.S. support at critical junctures has led to bitter disillusionment. The Pakistani military, which generally prefers a balance with China or America, is not ready to sever ties with the United States, despite leaked Pentagon intelligence suggesting that Pakistani diplomats are negative about ties with it.\nIn support of the United States' 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, Pakistan's armed forces received large amounts of military aid, funding, and training. According to Ministry of Finance calculations, in the three years prior to the 11 September attacks, Pakistan received approximately $9\u00a0million in American military aid; in the three years after, the amount increased to $4.2\u00a0billion.\nPakistan has maintained military-to-military relations with the 30 member states of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). NATO regards its relations with Pakistan as \"partners across the globe.\" With the support of US Secretary of State Colin Powell, Pakistan was designated a \"major non-NATO ally\" in 2004. However, after the United States troops withdraws Afghanistan in 2021, U.S. \"clearly distanced\" itself from Pakistan, and all U.S. military aid has been cancelled.\nSince the 2000s, military relations have improved between the Russian armed forces and the Pakistan armed forces. Russia and Pakistan have held Joint Tactical Exercise Friendship since 2016.\nMiddle Eastern countries.\nPakistan's close ties to the nations of the Middle East, based on geography and shared religion, have led to periodic military deployments since the 1960s. The Arab world countries \u2013 many of them wealthy but with small populations and limited militaries \u2013 have historically depended on regional armies to provide a protective umbrella and military muscle in times of instability and crisis. The Pakistani military has retained a particularly close relationship with Saudi Arabia which has been a sporadically generous patron: much of the military equipment bought from the United States by Pakistan in the 1980s was paid for by Saudi Arabia. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Kuwait also have been important sources of financial support.\nPakistani military personnel have been posted as military advisers and instructors to the militaries of Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Syria, Libya, Kuwait, and the UAE. Pakistan Air Force, Navy, and Army personnel played crucial roles in building the UAE military. Many Arab military officials have been educated at Pakistan's military staff colleges and universities. A combat division commanded by Major-General Zia-ul-Haq was instrumental in putting down the Palestinian Black September revolt against King Hussein in Jordan in the early 1970s.\nPakistan has enjoyed strong military co-operation with the Iranian military since the 1950s. Iranian leader Mohammad Reza Shah provided free fuel to PAF fighter jets in the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965, allowing Pakistani planes to land at Iranian Air Force bases, refuel, and take off. The military relationship continued even after the Iranian revolution, as Pakistan was among the first countries to recognise the new Iranian government. In the aftermath of the hostage crisis in Tehran, the United States severed its ties with Iran, leading Iran to send its military officers and personnel to be educated at Pakistani military academies. Relations became difficult following the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, when hundreds of foreign fighters (mostly Sunni Arabs) arrived in Pakistan to take part in the Afghan Jihad. Pakistan President Zia-ul-Haq's military administration policy reflected extremist views towards the Shiites and caused religious tensions to rise between Sunni and Shiites in Pakistan, much to the discomfort of Iran. During the Iran\u2013Iraq War, the Arab countries and the United States, who were supporting Iraq, pressured Pakistan to discontinue its covert support and military funding for Iran.\nThe 1980s were a difficult time in military relations for both countries, as Iran was blamed for the rising ethnic tensions between Sunnis and Shiites in Pakistan. The relationship further deteriorated in the 1990s when the Taliban, with Pakistan's support, began their rule of Afghanistan. In 1998, Iran and Afghanistan were on the verge of war over the assassination of Iranian diplomats. Iran's relations with India improved during this time, with both supporting the Northern Alliance against the Taliban.\nThe situation began to normalise in 2000, with Pakistan and Iran reinstating trade relations. In the wake of the 11 September attacks in the United States and the fall of the Taliban government in Afghanistan, the two countries began rebuilding their military ties. Over the years, diplomatic delegations have been exchanged, and Pakistan has agreed to sell military equipment to Iran. In addition, Pakistan has maintained strong military-to-military ties with Turkey, and would like to use these, as well as its Iranian connections, as a bridge to the new Muslim states of Central Asia.\nBilateral relations deteriorated after Pakistan refused to participate in the Saudi-led intervention in Yemen, but it subsequently participated in the \"Islamic Military Counter Terrorism Coalition\" (IMCTC) alliance in 2015.\nSpecial operations forces.\nAfter the Indo-Pakistani War of 1947, recommendations for establishing an elite commando division within the army were accepted. Commissioned in 1956 with help from US Army Special Forces, the Pakistan Army's Special Services Group (SSG) is an elite special operations division; its training and nature of operations are roughly equivalent to British Special Air Service (SAS) and US Army Special Forces and Delta Force. Tentative estimates of the division's size are put at four battalions but the actual strength is kept highly classified.\nWith the successful commissioning of Special Services Group, the Pakistan Navy accepted recommendations for commissioning its own special operational unit shortly after the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965. Established as Special Service Group Navy (SSGN) in 1966, it is an elite and secretive commando division whose training and combat operations are similar to the Royal Navy's Special Boat Service and US Navy's Special Warfare Development Group (DEVGRU) and Sea, Air, Land (SEAL) teams. Operatives' identities and actual static strength are kept secret and classified. Very few details of their missions are publicly known.\nA small unit of Pakistan Marines have, since 1990, operated reconnaissance units to deter the Indian Army's actions in the Sir Creek region. Other battalions of Marines are trained to carry out operations with airborne, heliborne, submarine, and waterborne insertions and extractions.\nThe Special Service Wing (SSW) is the newest special operations force, re-established by the Pakistan Air Force in 2004, in the wake of challenges posed by the Afghanistan war. The unit was active earlier by the name of Special Air Warfare Wing and had seen action during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 and 1971. The SSW is designed to execute difficult aerial and land operations, serving as equivalent to the US Air Force's Special Tactics Squadron units. Following the secretive tradition of its counterparts in other services, the actual number of its serving personnel is kept classified.\nUN peacekeeping forces.\nIn 2009, Pakistan was the single largest contributor of UN peacekeeping forces, with more than 11,000 Pakistani military personnel serving in UN peacekeeping operations worldwide.\nThe table below shows the current deployment of Pakistani Forces in UN Peacekeeping missions.\nInvolvement in Pakistani civil society.\nAccording to the views of British scholar Anatol Lieven, the Pakistan Armed Forces play a vital role in keeping the Pakistani state together, promoting a spirit of unity and nationhood, and providing a bastion of selfless service to the nation. As an institution, the armed forces have been integrated into Pakistani civil society since the establishment of the country in 1947. The military has been involved in building much of the country's infrastructure (such as dams, bridges, canals, power stations, and energy projects) and civil\u2013military input from all sections of the armed forces has helped to build a stable society and professionalism in the armed forces.\nIn times of natural disasters such as floods and earthquakes, army engineers, medical and logistics personnel, and the armed forces generally have played a major role in rescue, relief, and supply efforts. In 2010, armed forces personnel donated one day of salary for their flood-effected brethren.\nIn 1996, Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Jehangir Karamat, described the Pakistan Armed Forces' relations with civilian society:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In my opinion, if we have to [have a] repeat of past events, then we must understand that military leaders can pressure only up to a point. Beyond that, their own position starts getting undermined, because the military is, after all, a mirror image of the civil society from which it is drawn.\nAccording to 2012 reports of the National Reconstruction Bureau (NRB), around 91.1% of civilian infrastructure in the Federally Administered Tribal Area was built by the armed forces in a policy based on sustainable development plans, to improve the livelihood of ordinary people of the region. According to Air Force statistics, the air force conducted approximately 693 relief operations in Pakistan and abroad during the fiscal period 1998\u20132008. The Air Force carried and distributed thousands of tons of wheat, medicines, emergency shelters, and provided assistance to rehabilitate the disaster-effected areas of the country.\nDuring the wave of floods from 2010 to 2014, the Navy launched relief operations nationwide and provided healthcare, medicines, relief efforts, and coordinated the distribution of food in the flood-effected areas. In the Navy's own admission, it had provided of food and relief goods to flood victims; this included 5,700\u00a0kg of ready-to-cook food, 1,000\u00a0kg of dates and 5,000\u00a0kg of food dispatched to Sukkur. The Pakistan Naval Air Arm had air dropped more than 500\u00a0kg of food and relief goods in Thal, Ghospur, and Mirpur areas.\nEngineering units of the Navy built more than 87 houses distributed to the local internally displaced persons (IDPs). About 69,000 affected IDPs were treated in Navy medical camps.\nCriticism.\nIn Pakistan, Pakistan Army, Pakistan Air Force, Pakistan Navy, and some intelligence agencies are considered as part of Pakistani military. Over the years, the military has been criticised for its past and present actions. Most of the criticism is levelled against Pakistan Army who is the most dominant branch of Pakistan's military. It has been criticised for eroding democratic processes in Pakistan, for being the largest business conglomeration in the country, for excessive control over the domestic and foreign policies of Pakistan, for war crimes, role in Bengali genocide, and corruption within the institution.\nCriticism of military is generally considered as a no-go area and fierce critics are treated brutally by the military from enforced disappearances to extrajudicial killings. Some of the critics of Pakistan Army, such as human rights activist Manzoor Pashteen, have been jailed while others like Ahmad Noorani and Taha Siddiqui have been forced to flee the country.\nHandling of corruption allegations.\nThe Army runs the Fauji Foundation which sold Khoski Sugar Mill in 2004 for PKR 300 million despite receiving the highest bid of PKR 387 million. In 2005, a corruption case was filed in the National Accountability Bureau (NAB) against then managing director Syed Muhammad Amjad who was involved in the corruption.\nIn 2010, a corruption scandal was unearthed that involved two Pakistan Army generals, (Maj Gen Khalid Zaheer Akhtar and Lt Gen Muhammad Afzal), and caused a loss of Rs.\u00a0 to the National Logistics Corporation through speculative investments between 2004 and 2008. In 2015, both of them were convicted by the military court of Pakistan.\nAir Force corruption.\nThe Pakistan Air Force runs the Shaheen Foundation which founded Shaheen Insurance in 1995 as a joint venture with a South African insurance company, Hollard Group. Later, Hollard's management was dissatisfied with the investment, citing corruption as a major impediment to their investment's success.\nNavy handling of corruption allegations.\nPakistan Navy's officials were found guility of corruption in Karachi affair. Commissions of 6.25% of the contract, approximately \u20ac50 million, were paid out to the lobbying firms in Pakistan and France. Some \u20ac50m were allegedly paid as \"sweeteners\" to various senior Pakistan Navy admirals and officers as well as the political leaders. In 1996\u201397, the Naval Intelligence led by its Director-General, Rear-Admiral Tanvir Ahmed, secretly launched its investigations into this matter and began collecting physical evidence that eventually led to the exposure of Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral Mansurul Haq, in receiving massive monetary commissions in 1997. Massive media coverage and the news of the dismissals of one and two-star admirals tarnished the image of the Navy, with Admiral Fasih Bokhari, who took over the command of the Navy from Admiral Mansurul Haq, forced to attempt damage control of the situation.\nCommemoration and parades.\nThe \"Youm-e-Difa\" (English: Defence Day) \u2013 Pakistan's day in remembrance of fallen soldiers of the Indo-Pakistani war of 1965 \u2013 is observed on 6 September. Memorial services are held in the presence of Pakistan's top military and civil officials. Wreaths of flowers are laid on the graves of the fallen soldiers and ceremonies are held across the country. The change of guard ceremony takes place at Mazar-e-Quaid, where the cadets of inter-services academies present Guard of Honour and take the charge. Additionally, the \"Youm-e-Fizaya\" (Air Force Day) is celebrated on 7 September, and the \"Youm-e-Bahriya\" (Navy Day) on 8 September.\nThe Pakistan Armed Forces parades take place on 23 March, which is celebrated as \"Youm-e-Pakistan\" (Pakistan Day). All main service branches parade on Constitution Avenue in Islamabad, where the weapon exhibitions are televised.\nNuclear weapons.\nPakistan's development of nuclear weapons began in 1972, following the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, with the government adopting a policy of deliberate ambiguity which was practised and observed from 1972 to 1998. Amid pressure built after India's nuclear test in 1998, Pakistan successfully conducted its first publicly announced nuclear tests in 1998: Chagai-I and Chagai-II. With these tests, Pakistan became the seventh nation to achieve the status of a nuclear power.\nUnder a public policy guidance, strategic weapons and projects are researched and developed entirely by civilian scientists and engineers, who also develop a wide range of delivery systems. On military policy issues, Pakistan issues directives towards \"first use\" and maintains that its program is based on nuclear deterrence, to peacefully discourage attack by India and other countries with large conventional-force advantages over Pakistan. According to United States military sources, Pakistan has achieved survivability in a possible nuclear conflict through second strike capability. Since the early 1990s, Pakistan's nuclear strategists have emphasised attaining \"second strike\" capability in spite of their \"first use\" policy. Statements and physical actions by Pakistan have cited the survivability through a second strike, forming a naval-based command and control system to serve as \"the custodian of the nation's second-strike capability.\"\nIn January 2000, the head of United States Central Command, General Anthony Zinni, told NBC that longtime assumptions that India had an edge in the South Asian strategic balance of power were questionable at best. Said Zinni: \"Don't assume that the Pakistanis' nuclear capability is inferior to the Indians\".\nDespite international pressure, Pakistan has refused to sign either the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty or the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. Initiatives taken towards consolidating strategic infrastructure led to the establishment, in 2000, of the National Command Authority (NCA), which oversees the policy, military control, development, and deployment of the country's tactical and strategic nuclear arsenals. The command and control of the strategic arsenal are kept under an inter-service strategic command which reports directly at the Joint staff HQ.\nSince its establishment in 2000, the chairperson of the NCA has been the Prime Minister of Pakistan. The NCA supervises and forms a tight control of the strategic organisations related to the research and development in Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD). Pakistan has an extremely strict command and control system over its strategic assets, which is based on C4ISTAR (Command, Control, Communications, and Computing of Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance). Pakistan's strategic command structure has a three-tier system which forms by combining the National Command Authority, Strategic Plans Division and each of three Inter-Services strategic force commands. The SPD's own force called SPD Force is responsible for security of nuclear weapons while the strategic forces commands of the air force, army, and navy exercise the deployments and eventual usage of the WMDs. However, the executive decisions, operational planning's, and controls over the WMDs remains vested with the NCA under the Prime Minister of Pakistan.\nDefence Intelligence.\nTraditionally, the bulk of intelligence work in Pakistan has been carried out by the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), Intelligence Bureau (IB), Military Intelligence (MI) and the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) as well as the others in the Pakistani intelligence community. To provide better co-ordination and eliminate competition, the National Intelligence Coordination Committee was established in 2020.\nMilitary academies.\nThe military academies are:\nThere are also a number of engineering, professional, and higher education military institutes:\nMilitary justice system.\nPakistan's military justice system rests on the inter-services administrated Judge Advocate General Branch (JAG); all military criminal cases are overseen by the high-ranking officials of joint tribunals of the military. Each major service branch has its own service law: Army Justice Act, promulgated in 1952; the PAF Justice Act, established in 1953; and the Navy Ordinance, enacted in 1961. The identities of active-duty uniformed JAG officials are kept classified and no details of such individuals are made available to media.\nAll three sets of service laws are administered by the individual major service branches under the central reporting supervision of the Ministry of Defence (MoD). The army has a four-tier system while the air force and navy have three-tier systems. The two top levels of all three-tier systems are the general court-martial and district court-martial; the third level comprises the field general court-martial in the army, air force, and navy. The fourth-level tier of the army comprises the summary court-martial. The differences in tier levels reflect whether their competence extends to officers or enlisted personnel, and the severity of the punishment that may be imposed.\nPakistan's Supreme Court and the civilian courts cannot question decisions handed down by the military judges, and double jeopardy is prohibited. In cases where a member of the military is alleged to have committed a crime against a civilian, then the MoD and Ministry of Justice (MoJ) determine the prosecution of the case to be tried, whether military or civilian courts have jurisdiction. Former servicemen in civilian life who are accused of felonies committed while on active duty are liable for prosecution under the jurisdiction of military courts. These courts are empowered to dispense a wide range of punishments including death. All sentences of imprisonment are served in military prisons or detention barracks.\nMilitary budget.\nFaced with defence and security issues involving much larger opponents on both its eastern and western borders, the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Finance require a disproportionate share of the nation's resources to maintain even a minimally effective defensive stance. Since 1971, the military budget of the armed forces grew by 200% in support of armed forces contingency operations. During the administrations of Prime Ministers Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, approximately 50\u201360% of scientific research and funding went to military efforts.\nIn 1993, Benazir Bhutto's defence budget for the year was set at PKR 94 billion (US$3.3 billion), which represented 27% of the government's circular spending and 8.9% of GDP, in calculations shown by the United States military. Despite criticism from the country's influential political-science sphere, the government increased the military budget by an additional 11% for the fiscal year 2015\u201316.\nDuring the 2024\u201325 fiscal year, while IMF-imposed austerity measures placed increased economic pressure on the general population, Pakistan's defence budget remained unaffected. Defence spending rose to approximately PKR 2.13 trillion, including an 11 percent year-on-year increase in military salaries and pensions. In comparison, allocations for essential public services remained significantly lower, with education receiving only 2 percent of GDP and healthcare 1.3 percent, reflecting a continued prioritisation of defence over social sectors despite broader economic hardships. In June 2025, following a military confrontation with India, Pakistan increased its defence spending by over 20 percent\u2014the largest hike in a decade. The federal budget allocated 2.55 trillion rupees (approximately $9 billion) to the armed forces, representing 1.97 percent of the country's GDP, up from 1.7 percent in the previous fiscal year. This marked a significant rise in military expenditure, nearly doubling from the 1.28 trillion rupees allocated in the 2020\u201321 fiscal year.\nDefence industry.\nAt the time of the creation of Pakistan, the country had virtually no military industry or production capability. In 1949\u201350, the contribution of the industrial sector to the GNP was only 5.8%, of which 4.8% was attributed to small-scale industries. The new nation's only major heavy-industry operation was the Karachi Shipyard and Engineering Works (KSEW), which was focused on civil maritime construction. All military industrial materials and weapons systems were either inherited or purchased from the United Kingdom.\nBy 1951, Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan had established the Pakistan Ordnance Factory (POF) in Wah Military District, with a civilian chemist, Dr. Abdul Hafeez, serving as director and senior scientist. The POF was oriented towards the production of small arms, ammunition, and chemical explosives. During the period of reliance on United States supply, from 1955 to 1964, there was little attention given to domestic production. Almost all military weapons and equipment were provided by the United States, as part of Pakistan's membership in South East Asian Treaty Organization (SEATO) and Central Treaty Organization (CENTO). By 1963, the Defence Science and Technology Organization (DESTO) was formed by POF Director Hafeez for the purposes of military research and development. After U.S. military assistance was cut off in the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 (followed by the disastrous 1971 War), Pakistan turned to China for help in expanding its military industrial and production capabilities, including the modernisation of the facilities at Wah.\nDuring the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, the US Congress scrutinised its military aid to Pakistan despite efforts by U.S. President Richard Nixon. After the war, programs on self-reliance and domestic production were launched with the establishment of the Ministry of Defence Production (MoDP) in 1972, aiming to promote and co-ordinate the patchwork of military production facilities which had developed since independence. New military policy oversaw the establishment of Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) in Taxila and the Pakistan Aeronautical Complex (PAC) in Kamra, north of Islamabad. The militarisation of the Karachi Shipyard Engineering Works (KSEW) took place the same year. The PAC reverse-engineered several F\u20136J, F\u20137P, Mirage III, and Mirage 5 fighter jets (of the Chinese and French), built the Mushshak trainer (based on the Swedish SAAB Safari), and maintained radar and avionics equipment. After the success of the Mushshak, the Super Mushshak and the state-of-art Karakoram-8 advanced training jet were produced. The MoDP includes several other specialised organisations devoted to research and development, production and administration.\nIn 1987, the KSEW began developing submarine technology and rebuilding the submarine base near Port Qasim. In the 1990s, concerns over Pakistan's secretive development of nuclear weapons led to the \"Pressler amendment\" (introduced by US Senator Larry Pressler) and an economic and military embargo. This caused a great panic in the Pakistan Armed Forces and each major service branch launched its own military-industrial programs.\nBy 1999, the KSEW had built its first long-range attack submarine, the \"Agosta\" 90B, which featured air-independent propulsion (AIP) technology purchased from France in 1995. By early 2000, a joint venture with China led to the introduction of the JF-17 fighter jet (developed at PAC) and the Al-Khalid main battle tank, built and assembled at HIT. Since 2001, Pakistan has taken major steps toward becoming self-sufficient in aircraft overhaul and modernisation and tank and helicopter sales.\nAfter the success of its major projects in the defence industry, the Defence Export Promotion Organization (DEPO) was created to promote Pakistani defence equipment to the world by hosting the International Defence Exhibition and Seminar (IDEAS), which is held biennially at the Karachi expo center. Pakistan's defence exports were reportedly worth over US $200million in 2006, and have continued to grow since.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23370", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23370", "title": "Foreign relations of Pakistan", "text": "The Islamic Republic of Pakistan emerged as an independent country through the partition of India in August 1947 and was admitted as a United Nations member state in September 1947. It is currently the second-most populous country within the Muslim world, and is also the only Muslim-majority country openly in possession of nuclear weapons. The country shares land borders with India, Iran, Afghanistan, and China.\nThe country has extensive trade relations with the European Union and with several countries globally. As of 2025[ [update]], Pakistan does not recognize Israel and its ties with India remain frozen since 2019.\nFrom a geopolitical perspective, Pakistan's location is strategically important as it is situated at the crossroads of major maritime and land transit routes between the Middle East and South Asia, while also serving as a bridge between the Arabian Sea and the energy-rich regions of Central Asia. Since the partition of India, the Kashmir conflict has defined the India\u2013Pakistan relationship: the two countries claim each other's zones of control in Kashmir, but are separated by a ceasefire boundary known as the Line of Control. Pakistan has close bilateral ties with China and the Muslim world, including Turkey, Azerbaijan, and the Gulf Arab countries. As a part of the First World during the Cold War, Pakistan cooperated with the United States to combat the global influence of the Soviet Union, though this relationship later became strained over the course of the war on terror. Pakistan is an active member of the Commonwealth of Nations, Organization of Islamic Cooperation, and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.\nForeign policy of Pakistan.\nPakistan's foreign policy seeks the 'promotion of Pakistan as a dynamic, progressive, moderate, and democratic Islamic country; developing friendly relations with all countries of the world, especially major powers and immediate neighbors; consolidating our commercial and economic cooperation with international community.\"\nPakistan's foreign policy is meant to formalize and define its interactions with foreign nations and standardize interactions with organizations, corporations and individual citizens. Backed by the semi-agricultural and semi-industrialized economy, Pakistan is the 44th largest (nominal GDP, 2025) and 26th largest (purchasing) economic power and 7th largest military in the world in terms of active personnel, with a defense budget of US$ (2024), 2.7% of its GDP (2024). The Foreign Minister of Pakistan is the official charged with state-to-state diplomacy, although the Prime minister maintains an ultimate authority over foreign policy. The state foreign policy includes defining the national interest, as well as the economic interest and strategies chosen both to safeguard that and to achieve its policy goals. Following the general election held in May 2013, Tariq Fatimi and NSA Sartaj Aziz were designated as advisers to the Prime Minister on foreign and strategic policies. After the dismissal of Nawaz Sharif's government in July 2017, Khawaja Muhammad Asif held the portfolio of foreign minister under the premiership of Shahid Khaqan Abbasi. After the victory of Imran Khan Niazi in the Pakistan General Elections 2018, Shah Mehmood Qureshi was named the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Subsequently, Bilawal Bhutto Zardari became foreign minister after the political crisis-a position previously held by his grandfather, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, and Hina Rabbani Khar.\nMuhammad Ali Jinnah's Vision.\nIn 1947, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, founder of the state of Pakistan, clearly described the principles and objectives of Pakistan's foreign policy in a broadcast message, which is featured prominently in a quotation on the homepage of Pakistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs website: \"The foundation of our foreign policy is friendship with all nations across the globe.\"\nOn 15 August 1947, outlining the foreign policy of Pakistan, Quaid-e-Azam observed:\n\"Our objective should be peace within and peace without. We want to live peacefully and maintain cordial and friendly relations with our immediate neighbours and with (the) world at large. We have no aggressive designs against any one. We stand by the United Nations Charter and will gladly make our contribution to the peace and prosperity of the world.\"\nHistorical overview.\nSince its independence in 1947, Pakistan's foreign policy has encompassed difficult relations with the neighbouring Soviet Union (USSR) who maintained a close military and ideological interaction with the neighbouring countries such as Afghanistan (in the West) and India (in East). During most of 1947\u20131991, the USSR support was given to Republic of India, over which it has fought three wars on Kashmir conflict. During the 1960s, Pakistan's relations with and neighbouring Afghanistan have also been extremely difficult due to the latter's contest over the Durand Line. The foreign relations with Iran, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and China remain important and based on the extensive cooperation in national security and economical interests in the Persian Gulf and wide-ranging bilateral relations with the United States and other Western countries. With the growing influence of the USSR in the region, Pakistan cemented close security relations with China in Asia and United Kingdom and Germany in Europe during most of the Cold War. Pakistan has had a fluctuating relationship with the United States, Pakistan played a crucial role in the establishment of US-China relations in the 1970s, mediating between the Henry Kissenger and Mao Zedong. At the same time, it also assisted in establishing relationships with other East Asian countries.\nIn recent years, Pakistan's ties with Russia have moved away from Cold War-era hostilities, and the chill in the relations between Pakistan and the U.S. has further pushed the country towards Russia and China. Prime Minister Imran Khan visited Moscow to meet President Vladimir Putin as Russia was launching the invasion of Ukraine. He has previously criticised America's \"War on Terror\". After the fall of the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) -led coalition government in 2022, the emergence of multiple crises has exacerbated the instability of its foreign policy.\nPakistan\u2013China relations.\nChina has played a significant role in the development, economy and security of Pakistan, with relationship beginning in 1951 when Pakistan was among the first countries to sever diplomatic ties with the Republic of China (on Taiwan Island) and recognizes the People's Republic of China (PRC) on Mainland China as the sole representative. Since then, both countries have placed considerable importance on the maintenance of an extremely close and supportive special relationship and the two countries have regularly exchanged high-level visits resulting in a variety of agreements. The PRC has provided economic, military, and technical assistance to Pakistan, and each country considers the other a close strategic ally. Since the advent of the 21st century, Pakistan and China have strengthened their relations through bilateral trade, military agreements and supporting each other on key issues. The intensifying US-China Strategic Rivalry has put Pakistan in an extremely difficult situation to maintain ties with both of these states. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari accused UN Human Rights Office report on Xinjiang were \"taken out of context\", and Pakistan supports China's activities for socio-economic development, harmony and peace, and stability.\nA cornerstone of the success of China's Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) is the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC). CPEC contains initiatives worth a total of $62 billion, such as infrastructure, energy, economic zones, and the development of the Gwadar port. A Chinese spokesperson said in 2022 that \"the bond of friendship and mutual assistance between the Chinese and Pakistani people is stronger than gold, and the two countries' iron-clad friendship is deeply rooted in the people and boasts strong vitality.\nMuslim world.\nAfter Independence, Pakistan vigorously pursued bilateral relations with other Muslim countries and made a wholehearted bid for leadership of the Muslim world, or at least for leadership in achieving its unity. The Ali brothers had sought to project Pakistan as the natural leader of the Islamic world, in large part due to its large manpower and military strength. A top-ranking Muslim League leader, Khaliquzzaman, declared that Pakistan would bring together all Muslim countries into Islamistan \u2013 a pan-Islamic entity. Such developments (alongside Pakistan's creation) did not get American approval and British Prime Minister Clement Attlee voiced international opinion at the time by stating that he wished that India and Pakistan would re-unite. Since most of the Arab world was undergoing a nationalist awakening at the time, there was little attraction to Pakistan's Pan-Islamic aspirations. Some of the Arab countries saw the 'Islamistan' project as a Pakistani attempt to dominate other Muslim states.\nPakistan vigorously championed the right of self-determination for Muslims around the world. Pakistan's efforts for the independence movements of Indonesia, Libya, Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt, Morocco, Somalia, Azerbaijan, and Eritrea were significant and initially led to close ties between these countries and Pakistan. However, Pakistan also masterminded an attack on the Afghan city of Jalalabad during the Afghan Civil War to establish an Islamic government there. Pakistan had wished to foment an 'Islamic Revolution' which would transcend national borders covering Pakistan, Afghanistan and Central Asia.\nOn the other hand, Pakistan's relations with Iran have been strained at times due to sectarian tensions. Iran and Saudi Arabia used Pakistan as a battleground for their proxy sectarian war and by the 1990s, Pakistan's support for the Sunni Taliban organization in Afghanistan became a problem for Shia-led Iran which opposed a Taliban-controlled Afghanistan. Tensions between Iran and Pakistan intensified in 1998, when Iran accused Pakistan of war crimes as Pakistani warplanes bombarded Afghanistan's last Shia stronghold in support of the Taliban. Although Iran later established ties with the reestablished Taliban government in Afghanistan, the insurgency in Balochistan has increased friction in relations between Iran and Pakistan. In the 1960s, the problems over the Durand Line escalated with Afghanistan which led to open hostilities in the 1970s. After the Taliban took power in 2021, border clashes between Pakistan and Afghanistan have increased sharply.\nMajor alliances.\nIn 1947 after gaining independence from the United Kingdom, Pakistan still had close ties with the country. The Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan also paid a historical and friendly state visit to the United States, and held meetings with President Harry Truman and the American military officials for the purpose of the military aid in 1951. Ideologically, Prime Minister Ali Khan was opposed to communism; and his government was struggling with issues concerning the matters of uplifting the national economy and protecting interests of national security. In 1954\u201356, the United States and Pakistan signed the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement which saw the dispatching of the Military Assistance Advisory Group to provide military training to the Pakistan Armed Forces in 1955\u201356.\nIn 1955, Pakistan joined the CENTO and the SEATO alliances. Also, in 1956, when Pakistan declared itself a republic, it continued as a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. In 1971, Pakistan withdrew itself from the two alliances in a vision of exercising an independent foreign policy. In 1964, Pakistan signed the Regional Cooperation for Development (RCD) Pact with Turkey and Iran, when all three countries were closely allied with the U.S., and as neighbours of the Soviet Union, wary of perceived Soviet expansionism. To this day, Pakistan has a close relationship with Turkey. RCD became defunct after the Iranian Revolution, and a Pakistani-Turkish initiative led to the founding of the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) in 1985. In 1974, Pakistan became a critical entity in the militarization of the OIC and has historically maintained friendly relations with all the Arab and Muslim countries under the banner of OIC. Pakistan rejoined the Commonwealth in 1989. In 2004, Pakistan became a Major non-NATO ally of the United States.\nPakistan was a member of the Commonwealth from 1947 to 1956 under the name 'Dominion of Pakistan'. From 1956 to 1972, the Islamic Republic of Pakistan was a republic in the Commonwealth of Nations, when it withdrew in protest at the Commonwealth's support of East Pakistan's secession and Bangladesh's independence. In 1989, Pakistan rejoined, despite Pakistan's suspension from the Commonwealth of Nations between 1999 and 2008.\nAt the Astana Summit on 9 June 2017, Pakistan became a full member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO). Pakistan, Iran and China have also established a 'Trilateral Consultation' to discuss counter-terrorism and security.\nMajor dissensions.\nTensions with India.\nSince 1947, Pakistan's relations have been difficult with neighbour India over regional issues. India and Pakistan have fought three conventional wars throughout the 20th century over the issue of Kashmir. There have been attempts to unite the countries but since 1940, Muhammad Ali Jinnah and his Muslim League had demanded an independent Pakistan, whose Muslims would have their own government rather than remaining subordinate to India's Hindu majority. There are many sources of tension between the two countries but the issues over terrorism, size disparities and three geostrategic issues: Kashmir, water, and the Siachen Glacier, are the major ones resulting in the attenuated volume of trade and trust deficit. The continuing dispute over the status of Kashmir inflames opinions in both nations and makes friendly relations difficult. Since 2019, Pakistan has frozen in relations with India after India revoked the autonomy of its administered Kashmir. Pakistan is also a member of the Coffee Club to oppose Indian membership in the United Nations Security Council.\nTrust Deficit with U.S..\nThe United States has played an important role in the young history of Pakistan, being one of the first countries to recognize their independence on 14 August 1947. Pakistan consistently found themselves on the United States side of issues faced during the Cold War. At the time, Pakistan served as a geostrategic position for United States military bases since it bordered the Soviet Union and China. The relationship between the two countries went through varying levels of friendliness, but these positive relations would fall apart following successful cooperation in fighting the Soviet Union's influence in Central Asia and the subsequent fall of the Soviet Union.\nIn reaction to Pakistan's new nuclear capacity, the United States in 1992 passed the Pressler Amendment approving sanctions against Pakistan, Relations would restrengthen following 9/11 with Pakistan's warm response following the tragedy. Aid was given to Pakistan for the first time again in 2002, and the 2000s saw an extension of this friendly relationship. The Bush and Obama administrations has concerns regarding Pakistan include regional and global terrorism; Afghan stability; democratization and human rights protection; the ongoing Kashmir problem and Pakistan-India tensions; and economic development. This dynamic would reach a head following a few incidents highlighted by the operation to kill Osama bin Laden in Abbottabad. While America's troubled relationship with Pakistan continues to be eroded by crisis after crisis, bilateral relationship persists of promoting trade and regional economic cooperation, this type of relationship is beneficial for both countries and gives incentive for continuing friendly relations in the early 2010s. However, with the U.S. troops withdrawal, its role in serving as a conduit for the U.S. in Afghanistan has ended.\nRecently U.S. stopped military aid to Pakistan, which was about US$2 billion per year. America's deference to India reflects its importance to counter China's influence in Asia. This imposes a ceiling on cooperation with Pakistan, limiting it to the non-strategic domain. Former Prime Minister Imran Khan had named senior U.S. diplomat Donald Lu as the person who was allegedly involved in the \"foreign conspiracy\" to topple his government through a no-confidence vote tabled by the Opposition. The U.S. has repeatedly dismissed Khan's allegations.\nWorld governance initiatives.\nPakistan signed the agreement to convene a convention for drafting a world constitution, leading to the establishment of the Constitution for the Federation of Earth in 1968. Ayub Khan, then president of Pakistan, endorsed the agreement to convene a World Constituent Assembly. Member of Parliament and adviser to the Prime Minister, Ahmed Ebrahim Haroon Jaffer, represented Pakistan at the World Constituent Assembly in Interlaken, Switzerland in August 1968.\nIn 1982, the inaugural Provisional World Parliament (PWP) convened in Brighton, United Kingdom, with Pakistani jurist and diplomat Sir Chaudhry Mohammad Zafarullah Khan presiding over the session at the Royal Pavilion.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Pakistan maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23372", "revid": "51065327", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23372", "title": "Palau", "text": "Country in the Western Pacific\nPalau, officially the Republic of Palau, is an island country located in the Micronesia subregion of Oceania in the western Pacific Ocean. The Republic of Palau consists of approximately 340 islands and is the western part of the Caroline Islands, while the eastern and central parts make up the Federated States of Micronesia.\nIt has a total area of , making it the sixteenth smallest country in the world. The most populous island is Koror, home to the country's most populous city of the same name. The capital, Ngerulmud, is located on the largest island of Babeldaob, in Melekeok State. Palau shares maritime boundaries with international waters to the north, the Federated States of Micronesia to the east, Indonesia to the south, and the Philippines to the northwest.\nThe country was originally settled approximately 3,000 years BP by migrants from Maritime Southeast Asia. Palau was first drawn on a European map by the Bohemian missionary Paul Klein based on a description given by a group of Palauans shipwrecked on the Philippine coast on Samar. The Palau islands were made part of the Spanish East Indies in 1885. Following Spain's defeat in the Spanish\u2013American War in 1898, the islands were sold to Germany in 1899 under the terms of the German\u2013Spanish Treaty, where they were administered as part of German New Guinea.\nAfter World War I, the islands were made a part of the Japanese-ruled South Seas Mandate by the League of Nations. During World War II, skirmishes including the major Battle of Peleliu were fought between American and Japanese troops as part of the Mariana and Palau Islands campaign. Along with other Pacific Islands, Palau was made a part of the United States-governed Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands in 1947. Having voted in a referendum against joining the Federated States of Micronesia in 1978, the islands gained full sovereignty in 1994 under a Compact of Free Association with the United States.\nPolitically, Palau is a presidential republic in free association with the United States, which provides defense, funding, and access to social services. Legislative power is concentrated in the bicameral Palau National Congress. Palau's economy is based mainly on tourism, subsistence agriculture, and fishing, with a significant portion of gross national product (GNP) derived from foreign aid. The country uses the United States dollar as its official currency. The islands' culture mixes Micronesian, Melanesian, Asian, and Western elements. Ethnic Palauans, the majority of the population, are of mixed Micronesian, Melanesian, and Austronesian descent. A smaller proportion of the population is of Japanese descent. The country's two official languages are Palauan (a member of the Austronesian language family) and English, with Japanese, Sonsorolese, and Tobian recognized as regional languages.\nEtymology.\nThe name for the islands in the Palauan language, \"Belau\", derives from the Palauan word for \"village\", \"beluu\" (thus ultimately from Proto-Austronesian *\"banua\"), or from \"aibebelau\" (\"indirect replies\"), relating to a creation myth. The name \"Palau\" originated in the Spanish \"Los Palaos\", eventually entering English via the German \"Palau\". An archaic name for the islands in English was the \"Pelew Islands\". The name of the country \"Palau\" is most likely not derived from the Malay word \"Pulau\" (island), despite the similarity in its word form.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPalau History Timeline\n Bourbon Spain (Spanish East Indies) 1710\u20131785\n Kingdom of Spain (Spanish East Indies) 1785\u20131808\n Napoleonic Spain (Spanish East Indies) 1808\u20131813\n Kingdom of Spain (Spanish East Indies) 1813\u20131873\n First Spanish Republic (Spanish East Indies) 1873\u20131874\n Kingdom of Spain (Spanish East Indies) 1873\u20131899\n First Philippine Republic January 23\u2013February 12, 1899\n German Empire (German New Guinea) 1899\u20131914\n Empire of Japan (South Seas Mandate) 1914\u20131944\n United States 1944\u20131962\n United Nations (Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands) 1947\u20131965\n United Nations (Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands) 1965\u20131979\n Federated States of Micronesia 1979\u20131981\n Palau 1981\u2013present\nEarly history.\nPalau was originally settled between the 3rd and 2nd millennia BCE by Austronesian peoples, most likely from what is now the Philippines or Indonesia. Sonsorol was sighted by the Spanish as early as 1521, when the Spanish mission of the \"Trinidad\", the flagship of Ferdinand Magellan's voyage of circumnavigation, sighted two small islands around the 5th parallel north, naming them \"San Juan\".\nIn December 1696, a group of sailors from the Caroline Islands were stranded on Samar, near Guiuan, when they met European missionary Paul Klein. Using pebbles, the sailors attempted to show Klein the approximate location and size of the islands. He used this information to produce the first European map of the Palau area. Klein sent the map to Jesuit Superior General, along with a letter detailing the names of the islands, the culture of the people, and his experiences with them.\nSpanish era.\nThe Klein map and letter caused a vast interest in the new islands. Another letter written by Fr. Andr\u00e9s Serrano was sent to Europe in 1705, essentially copying the information given by Klein. The letters resulted in three unsuccessful Jesuit attempts to travel to Palau from Spanish Philippines in 1700, 1708, and 1709. The islands were first visited by the Jesuit expedition led by Francisco Padilla on 30 November 1710. The expedition ended with the stranding of the two priests, Jacques Du Beron and Joseph Cortyl, on the coast of Sonsorol, because the mother ship \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\" was driven to Mindanao by a storm. Another ship was sent from Guam in 1711 to save them only to capsize, causing the death of three more Jesuit priests. The failure of these missions gave Palau the original Spanish name \"Islas Encantadas\" (Enchanted Islands).\nTransitions era.\nBritish traders became regular visitors to Palau in the 18th century (the British East India Company packet ship \"Antelope\" shipwrecked off Ulong Island in 1783, leading to Prince Lee Boo's visit to London), followed by expanding Spanish influence in the 19th century. Palau, under the name \"Palaos\", was included in the Malolos Congress in 1898, the first revolutionary congress in the Philippines, which wanted full independence from colonialists. Palau was part of the Spanish East Indies headquartered in the Spanish Philippines. Palau had one appointed member to the Congress, becoming the only group of islands in the entire Caroline Islands granted high representation in a non-colonial Philippine Congress. Congress also supported the right of Palau to self-determination if ever it wished to pursue such a path.\nLater in 1899 as part of the Caroline Islands, Palau was sold by the Spanish Empire to the German Empire as part of German New Guinea in the German\u2013Spanish Treaty (1899). During World War I, the Japanese Empire annexed the islands after seizing them from Germany in 1914. Following World War I, the League of Nations formally placed the islands under Japanese administration as part of the South Seas Mandate. In World War II, Palau was used by Japan to support its 1941 invasion of the Philippines, which succeeded in 1942. The invasion overthrew the American-installed Commonwealth government in the Philippines and installed the Japanese-backed Second Philippine Republic in 1943.\nUnited States era.\nDuring World War II, the United States captured Palau from Japan in 1944 after the costly Battle of Peleliu, when more than 2,000 Americans and 10,000 Japanese were killed, and later the Battle of Angaur. In 1945\u20131946, the United States re-established control of the Philippines and managed Palau through the Philippine capital of Manila. By the latter half of 1946, however, the Philippines was granted full independence with the formation of the Third Republic of the Philippines, shifting the U.S. Far West Pacific capital to Guam. Palau was passed formally to the United States under United Nations auspices in 1947 as part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands established pursuant to Security Council Resolution 21.\nIndependence.\nFour of the Trust Territory districts joined and formed the Federated States of Micronesia in 1979, but the districts of Palau and the Marshall Islands voted against the proposed constitution. Palau, the westernmost cluster of the Carolines, instead opted for independent status in 1978, which was widely supported by the Philippines, Taiwan, and Japan. It approved a new constitution and became the Republic of Palau on 1\u00a0January 1981. It signed a Compact of Free Association with the United States in 1982. In the same year, Palau became one of the founding members of the Nauru Agreement. The compact entered into force on 1 October 1994, concluding Palau's transition from trusteeship to independence as the last portion of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands to secure its independence pursuant to Security Council Resolution 956. Palau also became a member of the Pacific Islands Forum but withdrew in February 2021 after a dispute regarding Henry Puna's election as the forum's secretary-general. Legislation making Palau an \"offshore\" financial center was passed by the U.S. Senate in 1998.\nIn 2005, Palau led the Micronesia Challenge, which would conserve 30% of near-shore coastal waters and 20% of forest land of participating countries by 2020. In 2009, Palau created the world's first shark sanctuary, banning commercial shark fishing within its waters. In 2012, the Rock Islands of Palau was declared as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nIn 2015, Palau became a member of the Climate Vulnerable Forum under the chairmanship of the Philippines, and at the same time, the country officially protected 80% of its water resources, becoming the first country to do so. The protection of its water resources made significant increases in the country's economy in less than two years. In 2017, it became the first state in the world to establish an eco-promise, known as the \"Palau Pledge\", which is stamped on local and foreign passports. In 2018, Palau and the Philippines began re-connecting their economic and diplomatic relations. The Philippines supported Palau to become an observer state in ASEAN.\nPolitics and government.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPalau is a democratic republic. The President of Palau is both head of state and head of government. Executive power is exercised by the government, while legislative power is vested in both the government and the Palau National Congress. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Palau adopted a constitution in 1981.\nThe Compact of Free Association between the United States and Palau sets forth the free and voluntary association of their governments. It primarily focuses on the issues of government, economic, security, and defense relations. Palau has no independent military, relying on the United States for its defense. Under the compact, the American military was granted access to the islands for 50 years. The U.S. Navy role is minimal, limited to a handful of Navy Seabees (construction engineers). The U.S. Coast Guard patrols in national waters. The government has agreed to host a large United States Air Force high-frequency radar station in Palau, an over-the-horizon-radar system costing well over $100\u00a0million, which is expected to be operational in 2026.\nIn November 2020, Surangel Whipps Jr was elected as the new President of Palau to succeed President Tommy Remengesau.\nForeign relations.\nAs a sovereign state, Palau conducts its own foreign relations. Since independence, Palau has established diplomatic relations with numerous countries, including many of its Pacific neighbors, like Micronesia and the Philippines. On 29 November 1994, the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 963 recommending Palau's admission to the United Nations. The United Nations General Assembly approved admission for Palau pursuant to Resolution 49/63 on 15 December 1994. Palau has since joined several other international organizations. In September 2006, Palau hosted the first Taiwan-Pacific Allies Summit. Its president has made official visits to other Pacific countries, including Japan. Taiwan has provided financial support for Palau to maintain a presence at international fora, including the United Nations and United Nations Climate Change Conference.\nThe United States maintains a diplomatic delegation and an embassy in Palau, but most aspects of the countries' relationship have to do with compact-funded projects, which are the responsibility of the U.S. Department of the Interior's Office of Insular Affairs. For example, as part of this compact, Palau was granted ZIP Codes 96939 and 96940, along with regular U.S. Mail delivery. In international politics, Palau often votes in tandem with the United States on United Nations General Assembly resolutions.\nPalau has maintained close ties with Japan, which has funded infrastructure projects, including the Koror\u2013Babeldaob Bridge. In 2015, Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko visited Peleliu to honor the 70th anniversary of World War II.\nIn 1981, Palau voted for the world's first nuclear-free constitution. This constitution banned the use, storage, and disposal of nuclear, toxic chemical, gas, and biological weapons without first being approved by a 75 percent majority in a referendum. This ban delayed Palau's transition to independence because while negotiating the compact, the U.S. insisted on the option to operate nuclear-propelled vessels and store nuclear weapons within the territory, prompting campaigns for independence. In 2017, Palau signed the United Nations Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nPalau is a member of the Nauru Agreement for the Management of Fisheries. The Philippines, a neighboring ally of Palau to the west has expressed its intent to back Palau if ever it wishes to join ASEAN.\nIn June 2009, Palau announced that it would accept up to seventeen Uyghurs who had previously been detained by the American military at Guantanamo Bay, with some American compensation for the cost of their upkeep. Only one of the Uyghurs initially agreed to resettlement, but by the end of October, six of the seventeen had been transferred to Palau. An aid agreement with the United States, finalized in January 2010, was reported to be unrelated to the Uyghur agreement.\nAdministrative divisions.\nPalau is divided into sixteen states (until 1984 called municipalities). Koror is by far the largest, hosting a majority of the population. The states are listed below with their areas (in square kilometers) and 2015 and 2020 Census populations:\nHistorically, Palau's Rock Islands have been part of the State of Koror.\nMaritime law enforcement.\nPalau's Division of Marine Law Enforcement patrols the nation's exclusive economic zone. They operate two long-range patrol boats, the \"Kedam\" and the \"Remeliik II\", to hunt for poachers and unlicensed fishermen. Smaller boats are used for littoral operations. They are based on Koror.\nPolitical economy.\nIn the view of Islands Society president Michael Walsh, Palau is a key example of the successes of modern state-building in the Indo-Pacific region. It has successfully transitioned peacefully from colonial rule to full admission to the United Nations. Palau has maintained strong foreign relations with its neighbors in its region of Oceania. There have also been pushes for Palau to have observer status to the ASEAN as a demonstration of its growing influence in the region. However, Palau's peaceful transition to fully autonomous sovereign state is not without debate.\nPalau is hugely reliant on international aid, as demonstrated by President Surangel Whipps Jr address to the UN General Assembly in 2021. American influence has led some to contest that there are challenges to its sovereignty with its reliance on the American military under the Compact of Free Association, although not officially designated a de facto protectorate or otherwise. American influence has resulted in huge changes to Palau's society, economy, and political processes, and as such Palau may not yet be seen as a fully independent state or a fully realized success of modern state-building.\nGeography.\nPalau's territory consists of an archipelago located in the Pacific Ocean. Its most populous islands are Angaur, Babeldaob, Koror and Peleliu. The latter three lie together within the same barrier reef, while Angaur is an oceanic island several kilometers to the south. About two-thirds of the population lives on Koror. The coral atoll of Kayangel is north of these islands, while the uninhabited Rock Islands (about 200) are west of the main island group. A remote group of six islands, known as the Southwest Islands, some from the main islands, make up the states of Hatohobei and Sonsorol.\nClimate.\nPalau has a tropical rainforest climate with an annual mean temperature of . Rainfall is heavy throughout the year, averaging . The average humidity is 82% and, although rain falls more frequently between June and October, there is still much sunshine. Palau lies on the edge of the typhoon belt. Tropical disturbances frequently develop near Palau every year, but significant tropical cyclones are quite rare. Mike, Bopha and Haiyan are the only systems that struck Palau as typhoons on record.\nEnvironment.\nPalau has a history of strong environmental conservation. For example, Ngerukewid and the surrounding area are protected under the Ngerukewid Islands Wildlife Preserve, which was established in 1956. While much of Palau remains free of environmental degradation, areas of concern include illegal dynamite fishing, inadequate solid waste disposal facilities in Koror, and extensive sand and coral dredging in the Palau lagoon.\nAs with other Pacific island states, rising sea level presents a major environmental threat. However, according to the Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research average carbon dioxide emissions per person were 60 tonnes in 2019, the highest in the world, and mostly from transport. Inundation of low-lying areas threatens coastal vegetation, agriculture, and an already insufficient water supply. Wastewater treatment is a problem, along with the handling of toxic waste from fertilizers and biocides.\nOne species of saltwater crocodile, \"Crocodylus porosus\", is indigenous to Palau, occurring in varying numbers throughout the mangroves and in parts of the Rock Islands. Although this species is generally considered extremely dangerous, there has only been one fatal human attack, on 28\u00a0December 1965, in Palau in modern history. This attack led to a crocodile eradication program and trade in crocodile hides that ran into the 1980s. A management and conservation program running since the 1990s has led to a stabilization of the Palauan crocodile population.\nOn 5\u00a0November 2005, President Tommy E. Remengesau Jr. took the lead on a regional environmental initiative called the Micronesia Challenge, which would conserve 30% of near-shore coastal waters and 20% of forest land by 2020. Following Palau, the initiative was joined by the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and the US territories of Guam and Northern Mariana Islands. Together, this combined region represents nearly 5% of the marine area of the Pacific Ocean and 7% of its coastline.\nPalau contains the Palau tropical moist forests terrestrial ecoregion. It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.09/10, ranking it 27th globally out of 172 countries. The country is vulnerable to earthquakes, volcanic activity, and tropical storms.\nShark sanctuary.\nOn 25\u00a0September 2009, Palau announced that it would create the world's first shark sanctuary. Palau banned all commercial shark fishing within the waters of its exclusive economic zone. The sanctuary protects about of ocean, a similar size to France. President Johnson Toribiong announced the sanctuary at a meeting of the United Nations. Toribiong proposed a worldwide ban on fishing for sharks. In 2012, Palau received the Future Policy Award from World Future Council, because \"Palau is a global leader in protecting marine ecosystems\".\nEconomy.\nPalau's economy consists primarily of tourism, subsistence agriculture, and fishing. Tourist activity focuses on scuba diving and snorkeling in the islands' rich marine environment, including its barrier reefs' walls and World War II wrecks. In April 2022, Palau launched \"Ol'au Palau\", a responsible tourism program aimed to preserve the country's natural environment and traditional culture. The government is the largest employer, relying heavily on US financial assistance. Business and tourist arrivals numbered some 50,000 in fiscal year 2000\u20132001.\nAlthough Palau's ship registry represents less than 0.001% of the world fleet of commercial ships, it contains almost 60% of last-voyage flags in 2019. It suggests that the registry is used by shipping companies to evade end-of-life responsibilities. These responsibilities entail the decommissioning of a ship in such a way that the environmental impact and labor conditions are in order.\nThe population enjoys a per capita income twice that of Micronesia as a whole. Long-term prospects for the key tourist sector have been greatly bolstered by the expansion of air travel in the Pacific Rim, the rising prosperity of leading East Asian countries and the willingness of foreigners to finance infrastructure development.\nIn November 2006, Pacific Savings Bank officially announced bankruptcy. On 13 December 2006, the \"Palau Horizon\" reported that 641 depositors had been affected. Among them, 398 held less than US$5,000, with the remainder ranging from US$5,000 to US$2\u00a0million. On 12 December, 79 affected people received compensation. Toribiong said, \"The fund for the payout came from the balance of the Palau government's loan from Taiwan.\" From a total of US$1\u00a0million, which originally was for assisting Palau's development, US$955,000 was left at the time of bankruptcy. Toribiong requested the Taiwanese government use the balance to repay its loans. Taiwan agreed to the request. The compensation would include those who held less than US$4,000 in an account.\nThe income tax has three brackets with progressive rates of 9.3 percent, 15 percent, and 19.6 percent respectively. Corporate tax is four percent, and the Palau Goods and Services Tax was introduced on 1\u00a0January 2023. It is a broad-based tax of 10%, applied to most goods and services and other items sold or consumed in Palau. There are no property taxes.\nMajor tourist draws in Palau include Rock Islands Southern Lagoon, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and four tentative UNESCO sites, namely, Ouballang ra Ngebedech (Ngebedech Terraces), Imeong Conservation Area, Yapease Quarry Sites, and Tet el Bad (Stone Coffin).\nHealthcare.\nPalau is served by an 80-bed hospital, Belau National Hospital. With some medical specialties, there is no such specialty care in Palau, necessitating medical care in Taiwan, the Philippines, or Hawaii. There are no dermatologists or ophthalmologists (eye specialists) in Palau. VEGF drugs for diabetic eye diseases cannot be given for eye conditions so laser surgery is done by\nvisiting American ophthalmologists. Belau National Hospital cannot treat certain brain hemorrhages necessitating emergency airlift to Taiwan.\nTransportation.\nPalau International Airport provides scheduled direct flights with Guam (Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport), Manila (Ninoy Aquino International Airport), Brisbane (Brisbane Airport) and Taipei (Taoyuan International Airport). In addition, the states of Angaur and Peleliu have regular service to domestic destinations.\nAir service has at times been spotty. Palau Micronesia Air, Asian Spirit and Pacific Flier provided service to the Philippines and other destinations at various times during the 2000s, but all suspended service. United Airlines provides near-daily service to and from Guam, and once-weekly service to Yap. Korean Air also runs a direct service three times per week to Incheon. Two to four times per week, China Airlines flies between Koror and Taipei.\nIn May 2024, Nauru Airlines started direct weekly flights to Brisbane, Australia. This service was taken over by Qantas in December 2024 operating the \u201cPalau Paradise Express\u201d once a week from Brisbane with a Boeing 737-800. The route aims to enhance connectivity in the Pacific and boost tourism, trade, and people-to-people links, with support from the Australian and Palau governments.\nFreight, military, and cruise ships often call at Malaehaka Harbor, on Malakal Island outside Koror. The country has no railways, and of the of highways, only are paved. Driving is on the right, and the speed limit is . Taxis are available in Koror. They are not metered, and fares are negotiable. Transportation between islands mostly relies on private boats and domestic air services. However, there are some state-run boats between islands as a cheaper alternative.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population of Palau is approximately 21,779 (2023), 73% of whom are native Palauans of mixed Melanesian and Austronesian descent. There are many Asian communities within Palau. Filipinos form the largest Asian group and second largest ethnic group in the country, dating back to the Spanish colonial period. There are significant numbers of Chinese and Koreans. There are also smaller numbers of Palauans of mixed or full Japanese ancestry. Most Palauans of Asian origin came during the late 20th century with many Chinese, Bangladeshis, and Nepalese coming to Palau as unskilled workers and professionals. There are also small numbers of Europeans and Americans.\nLanguages.\nThe official languages of Palau are Palauan and English, except in two states (Sonsorol and Hatohobei) where the local languages, Sonsorolese and Tobian, respectively, along with Palauan, are official. Japanese is spoken by some older Palauans, and is an official language in Angaur. Because of the inheritance of the education system from the Republic's time as a trust territory, English is a core subject within the Palauan Education System, with a majority of its population utilizing it as a second language.\nA local dialect influenced by Philippine English is developing.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2020 census, 46.9% of the population is Roman Catholic, 25.9% Protestant (primarily evangelical), 5% Seventh-day Adventist, 5.1% Modekngei, 4.9% Muslim, 0.9% the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and 11.4% other religions.\nThe German and Japanese occupations of Palau both subsidized missionaries to follow the Spanish. Germans sent Roman Catholics and Protestants, the Japanese sent Shinto and Buddhist, and the Spaniards sent Roman Catholic missionaries as they controlled Palau. Three-quarters of the population are Christians (mainly Roman Catholics and Protestants), while Modekngei (a combination of Christianity, traditional Palauan religion and fortune telling) and the ancient Palauan religion are commonly observed. Japanese rule brought Mahayana Buddhism and Shinto to Palau, which was the majority religion among Japanese settlers. However, following Japan's World War II defeat, the remaining Japanese largely converted to Christianity, while some continued to observe Buddhism but stopped practicing Shinto rites. There are approximately 400 Bengali Muslims.\nCulture.\nPalauan society follows a very strict matrilineal system. Matrilineal practices are seen in nearly every aspect of Palauan traditions, especially in funerals, marriages, inheritance, and the passing of traditional titles.\nCuisine.\nThe cuisine includes local foods such as cassava, taro, yam, potato, fish and pork. It is also heavily influenced by Japanese, American, and Filipino cuisine, because of the significant presence of Filipino migrant workers. Fruit bat soup is a Palauan delicacy. Some local drinks include an alcoholic drink made from a coconut on the tree; a drink made from the roots of the kava; and the chewing of betel nuts. A dessert called \"tama\" was developed in Palau.\nNewspapers.\nPalau has several newspapers:\nSports.\nBaseball has been popular in Palau since its introduction to the country in the 1920s by the Japanese. The Palau national baseball team won the gold medal at the 1990, 1998 and 2010 Micronesian Games, as well as at the 2007 Pacific Games. On 20 June 2022, left fielder Bligh Madris played his first game for the Pittsburgh Pirates against the Chicago Cubs, thus becoming the first person of Palauan descent to play in the MLB. Palau has a national football team, organized by the Palau Football Association, but is not a member of FIFA. The association organizes the Palau Soccer League.\nThe Belau Omal Marathon began in 2023 as a partnership between Palau and Taiwan.\nEducation.\nPrimary education is required until age 16. Schools include both public (including Palau High School) and private institutions as well as some fields of study available at Palau Community College. For further undergraduate, graduate, and professional programs, students travel abroad to attend tertiary institutions, primarily in the United States. Palau offers distance learning through San Diego State University and the University of the South Pacific.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23373", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23373", "title": "History of Palau", "text": " \nPalau was initially settled around 1000 BC.\nPalau was likely sighted for the first time by Europeans as early as 1522, when the Spanish mission of the Trinidad, the flagship of Ferdinand Magellan's voyage of circumnavigation, sighted two small islands around the 5th parallel north, naming them \"San Juan\" without visiting them.\nPalau was subsequently discovered by the Europeans on 28 December 1696 when the first map of Palau was drawn by the Czech missionary Paul Klein based on a description given by a group of Palauans shipwrecked on the Philippine coast on Samar. This map and a letter sent to Europe by Klein in June 1697 had a vast impact on interest in Palau. It resulted in the first Jesuit attempts to travel to the islands from the Philippines in 1700, 1708 and 1709, which failed to establish missions. The islands were then visited by the Jesuit expedition led by Francisco Padilla on 30 November 1710, who left two priests Jacques Du Beron and Joseph Cortyl stranded on the coast of Sonsorol, while the mother ship Santissima Trinidad was swept away by a storm. Subsequent attempts to save Du Beron and Cortyl revealed that they were killed and eaten by the locals.\nBritish traders became prominent visitors in the 18th century, followed by expanding Spanish influence in the 19th century; the Palau islands were made part of the Spanish East Indies in 1885. After its defeat in the Spanish\u2013American War in 1898, Spain sold Palau and most of the rest of the Caroline Islands to Germany in 1899 under the terms of the German\u2013Spanish Treaty, with the Palauan islands administered as part of German New Guinea. Control passed to Japan during World War I. In the course of World War II the islands were taken by the United States in 1944. The Battle of Peleliu between September 15 and November 25, 1944, was hard fought, with 2,000 Americans and 10,000 Japanese killed. The islands passed formally to the United States under United Nations auspices in 1947 as part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.\nFour of the Trust Territory districts formed a single state, the Federated States of Micronesia, in 1979, but the districts of Palau and the Marshall Islands declined to participate. Palau, the westernmost cluster of the Caroline Islands, instead opted for independent status in 1978, approved a new constitution and became the Republic of Palau in 1981, and signed a Compact of Free Association with the United States in 1982. After eight referendums and an amendment to the Palauan constitution, the Compact was ratified in 1993 and went into effect on October 1, 1994, marking Palau independence de jure (after Palau was independent de facto since May 25, 1994, when the trusteeship was cancelled).\nLegislation making Palau an \"offshore\" financial center was passed by the Senate in 1998. In 2001, Palau passed its first bank regulation and anti-money laundering laws.\nArchaeology.\nCarbon dating of cave burials show a pygmy population, presumably the result of insular dwarfism, from at least 3,000, and perhaps as long as 4,500 years ago until about 900 years ago (1000\u20132500\u00a0BC until ca. 1100\u00a0AD).\nEvidence for early occupation in Palau comes from several loci scattered across the archipelago. Unfortunately, the earliest radiocarbon dates are not from clear contexts and thus provide little data on the early occupations. The earliest acceptable dates for Palau are from the 1st century and 2nd century A. D. Dates from the 1st and 5th century come from midden deposits on Kayangel. The earlier date is from tridacna shell from a deposit which may lie beneath the lowest cultural deposit. The shell is not associated with other artifacts and it is not clear if nearby artifacts are from a permanent occupation of the atoll. The 5th century date is associated with other artifacts, but it is still not clear if this part of the midden derives from a permanent occupation. In another study, Osborne obtained a date of A. D. 161 from excavations at the Badrulchau Site. The date is from a composite charcoal sample in a level under the stone pillar structure and apparently underlying the terracing on the hillside.\nThe construction and maintenance of terraces on the volcanic islands appears to precede the formation of the formal, nucleated, settlements observed at European contact in 1783. Furthermore, there is evidence of an intensification in the construction of terraces at the start of the second millennium. At about the same time as intensification of terrace construction on the volcanic islands, evidence from the rock islands suggests an increasing nucleation of settlements.\nAlthough many terrace systems are found on the hills ringing the volcanic islands, and possibly even some terraces in the rock islands, it has proven difficult to obtain solid chronological data on these. The variety of different forms of terraces and special features associated with terraces such as \"crown and brim \" elaborations \" suggest that the terraces functioned in different ways. The location and organizational characteristics of habitations associated with terraces appear to have been, to some extent, different than that of the historic pattern of traditional villages in coastal areas. At present, information on associations between the terraces and earlier habitation sites is lacking. Radiocarbon dates associated with terracing range from 491 to 1810. Most of the dates associated with terraces fall between 895 and 1165. The most recent date, 1810, is from a shell midden eroding out of the face of a terrace; the midden was apparently buried in the continuing building of the terrace.\nThe earliest date associated with cultural material from the rock islands is 620 from the Uchu larois Cave Site, followed by three dates in the 630s from the Mariar Site on Ngeruktabel Island and the Ngidech Beach Site on Ulebsechel Island. Some of these middens, especially from the Uchularois Cave Site, contain large quantities of artifacts, suggesting that they are the result of the intensive exploitation of marine resources, shellfish in particular.\nLater data from rock island sites suggest important changes in the settlement system with the development of nucleated villages. Evidence from legends and the tight clustering of the radiocarbon dates suggests that the villages were abandoned abruptly early in the 15th century. However, there is evidence of continued exploitation of resources in the rock islands after the abandonment of the villages. There are five dates from rock island sites in clear association with structures, and these dates range from 1200 to 1420. These dates, together with the size and complexity of village sites in the rock islands, suggest that these villages were permanently occupied during this time. It is probable that permanently occupied villages developed before 1200. There are four dates from middens in rock island sites ranging from 1345 until 1950. These latter four dates are not in association with structures, however.\nThe formation of the village systems observed historically appears to reflect a major transformation in Palauan society. The archaeological village sites on the volcanic islands are organized the same as the villages recorded historically by Keate (1789), Semper (1873), Kubary (1889), and Kr\u00e4mer (1919). The recorded village sites consist of clusters of features indicating the integration of domestic and community activities. The large stone features recorded in village sites have specific historic references in the oral tradition of Palau. These facts suggest that the village organization we see today evolved in the 14th and 15th centuries. By the end of the 16th century, the social system we see reflected in modern villages was largely in place.\nPre-contact.\nThe Palauan language is an outlier among the Austronesian languages, and so does not shed much light on the origins of the modern population. However, there are some indications that it may derive from the Sunda Islands (modern Indonesia).\nMigration to and colonization of the islands took place sometime around 2,000 years ago, but no later than the first centuries A.D. By 600 A.D. settlements were established throughout the archipelago.\nFor thousands of years, Palauans have had a well established matrilineal society, believed to have descended from Javanese precedents. Traditionally land, money, and titles passed through the female line. High Chiefs were chosen by Queens (high-ranking women) only. Clan lands continue to be passed through titled women and first daughters but there is also a modern patrilineal sentiment introduced by imperial Japan. The Japanese government attempted to confiscate and redistribute tribal land into personal ownership during World War II, and there has been little attempt to restore the old order. Legal entanglements continue amongst the various clans.\nEuropean contact and discovery in 1696.\nThere still is a debate whether the islands were or were not seen by some of the early European discoverers in the 16th century, specifically whether Spaniard Ruy L\u00f3pez de Villalobos, who landed in several Caroline Islands, spotted the Palau archipelago in 1543. No conclusive evidence exists, but some believe he could have seen the tip of a southernmost island in the group.\nThe first verifiable knowledge of Palau by Europeans came a century later in December 1696, when a group of Palauan islanders shipwrecked on the Philippines island of Samar. They were interviewed by the Czech missionary Paul Klein on 28 December 1696. Klein was not only able to draw the first map of Palau based on a drawing and a set of pebbles on the beach, but also to send an important letter in June 1697 to Europe. This map and the letter caused significant interest in the new islands and resulted in the first failed Jesuit attempts to travel to Palau from the Philippines in 1700, 1708 and 1709.\nThe islands were first visited by the Jesuit expedition led by Francisco Padilla on 30 November 1710, only to leave two stranded priests, Jacques Du Beron and Joseph Cortyl, on the coast of Sonsorol, while the mother ship \"Santissima Trinidad\" was being swept away by a storm. Spain later started to dominate the islands.\nPalau had also limited relations with the outside world before the 18th century, mainly with Yap and Java. Had it not been for shipwrecked islanders who took refuge in the Philippines in 1696, Europeans likely would not have found Palau until much later.\nEnglishman Henry Wilson, captain of the East India Company's packet ship \"Antelope\", was shipwrecked off the island of Ulong in 1783. The High Chief of (Koror) Palau allowed Captain Wilson to take his son, Prince Lee Boo, to England, where he arrived in 1784. However, the prince died soon after of smallpox. The East India Company erected a monument over his grave in St Mary's Churchyard, Rotherhithe. It was Wilson who gave the archipelago the name \"Pelew Islands\". The wreck of the Antelope began European intervention in Palauan affairs and marked the beginning of nearly two centuries of colonial domination of the islands .\nSpanish rule.\nIn the late 19th century, possession of the islands was claimed by Britain, Spain, and Imperial Germany. In 1885, the matter was brought to Pope Leo XIII for a decision. The Pope recognized the Spanish claim, but granted economic concessions to Britain and Germany. Palau then became part of the Spanish East Indies, along with the Mariana Islands, the Marshall Islands, and the rest of the Caroline Islands. They were all administered from the Philippines.\nIn 1885 the Spanish gained administrative control of the islands. By this time the focus of trepang production had shifted to the Philippines and Indonesia, and Palau no longer played an important role. Like the British, the Spanish did little to develop the islands, but they did establish Catholic missions in Koror and Melekeok.\nAfter being defeated in 1898 in the Spanish\u2013American War and losing possession of the Philippine Islands, Spain sold the Palau archipelago to Imperial Germany in the 1899 German\u2013Spanish Treaty.\nGerman era.\nIn 1898 Spain sold its rights in Palau to Germany. Palau was administered from German New Guinea, and a period of economic development began. German engineers began exploiting the islands' deposits of bauxite and phosphate, and a rich harvest in copra was made.\nThe German Administration established and operated several mining companies and several copra plantations. Also, perhaps as important as the economic development, the German Administration began pushing for social reforms which included the relocation of people into larger villages and a large number of public works projects such as the construction of piers and navigation beacons. Young men were forced to work in the phosphate mines on Angaur and Beliliou Islands, on the copra plantations, and on a never completed ditch across the most narrow part of Babeldaob Island in what is today the state of Ngaraard.\nJapanese mandate.\nUnder the terms of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, the Empire of Japan declared war on the German Empire in 1914 and invaded German colonial empire in the Pacific Ocean. Palau was seized by ships of the Imperial Japanese Navy. After the war, the League of Nations awarded Palau to Japan as a Class C League of Nations Mandate.\nDuring World War I, the Japanese administration continued many of the programs already established by the German administration. A Japanese military government ruled the islands during the war years, but was replaced by a civilian one which existed until the start of World War II. Whereas the Germans wanted to foster certain mercantile enterprises with a minimum of personnel and resources, the Japanese administration had very different aims. The Japanese sought to create in Micronesia an extension of Japanese culture and economy. Large numbers of Japanese and Ryukyuans were encouraged to emigrate to Micronesia to work on plantations or in other economic enterprises, resulting in Palau becoming a major colonial center. By 1938, there were approximately 15,000 Japanese in Palau as opposed to about 6,000 Palauans and Koror had expanded into a substantial all-Japanese city.\nJapan incorporated the islands as an integral part of its empire, establishing the Nan'y\u014d Government with Koror Island as the capital. From 1914 to 1922, the Japanese Imperial Navy had been in control. Civilian control was introduced from 1922, and Palau was one of six administrative districts within the Mandate. Japan mounted an aggressive economic development program and promoted large scale immigration by Japanese, Ryukyuans and Koreans. Native Palauans soon became a small minority in their own homeland. The Japanese continued the German mining activities, and also established bonito (skipjack tuna) canning and copra processing plants in Palau.\nJapanese trading companies were quick to establish operations to exploit the economic potential of the islands, especially the abundant fish resources and pearl harvesting. The Japanese established a commercial center in Koror, and began developing a series of agricultural plantations on Babeldaob Island. Following World War I, the civilian government instituted a series of major changes in Palauan life. The changes included establishing primary schools for Palauans and constructing modern water and electrical systems. Elderly informants remember the Japanese administration as a time of order when things worked well. Despite the substantial improvements made in social services for the Palauans, the Japanese were quite clear on the role and status of the native peoples in Micronesia. Native peoples were to be second class citizens and serve as a source of cheap labor for the various agricultural and mercantile enterprises.\nWorld War II.\nLife was especially hard for Palauans during World War II. By the late 1930s the Japanese military build-up was well underway and some restrictions were already being applied to Palauans. When the war began to turn against the Japanese in 1942, the restrictions on Palauans were increased and shortages became common. Palauans were forced into labor gangs to help build island defenses. The Japanese began to relocate large numbers of Palauans from the larger towns on Orcor and Beliliou to villages on Babeldaob Island. Palauan villages were expected to increase food production to help feed the large number of Japanese troops.\nIn 1944, American forces took the islands of Beliliou and Angaur in a bitter and bloody battle. Making use of the large number of natural openings in the coralline limestone formations, the Japanese had created a defensive fortress of interlocking tunnels, bunkers, and hardened gun positions where more than 10,000 defenders could safely wait out the naval bombardment. As the Americans made their way to the beaches, they were met with withering fire from numerous undamaged gun emplacements. It would take more than 66 days and cost the better part of one entire Marine division to secure the island. Key defensive positions had to be taken one at a time at appalling cost. Following the bloody experience on Beliliou, U.S. military planners were content to bypass the 30,000 or so Japanese troops remaining in Koror and Babeldaob. Aircraft based on Beliliou and Angaur conducted daily harassment raids over the northern islands.\nThe final months of the war were grim. U.S. aircraft roamed over the skies looking for targets to bomb and strafe. The large garrison of Japanese soldiers ran out of food and became desperate. Informants remember the terror of aerial attacks and Japanese soldiers taking food supplies that were already short. Starvation and disease began to take a toll prior to the surrender and repatriation of Japanese forces.\nAt the end of the Pacific War, less than five thousand Palauans were left alive with many Palauan families adopting Japanese children into their midst (those refused passage back to Japan, as they were too young to make the dangerous journey). All surviving Japanese were repatriated after the end of the war. There are still about 100 American servicemen listed as Missing In Action in Palau. Starting in 1993, a small group of American volunteers called The BentProp Project has searched the waters and jungles of Palau for information that could lead to the identification and recovery of these remains. The Palauan people, in recognition of the basic human hospitality that is unique to all people of the islands all over the planet, allowed the Japanese and US governments to search for their missing soldiers as well as bringing back their remains.\nPost-war era.\nIn 1947, the United States, as the post-World War II occupying power, agreed to administer Palau as part of the U.N.-created Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (TTPI). While the U.S. used Palau as a strategic military base, it was reluctant to provide socioeconomic development and welfare for the residents in order to protect their traditional way of life. This policy was criticized as a \"zoo policy\", and in the 1960s, the policy was changed to include Peace Corps deployments and technical assistance in education, medicine, and industry. In the 1970s, the U.S. undertook a major capital improvement program, upgrading facilities for such things as transportation, water, and sewage. After many years of talks on a post-trust status for Palau, the U.S. Congress in 1986 approved a Compact of Free Association agreed to by U.S. and Palauan negotiators. While supported by a majority of Palauan voters in each of seven referendums, compact proponents failed to gain the 75% majority required by Palau's constitution to approve issues with possible nuclear implications. After adoption of a constitutional amendment and a long period of transition, including the violent deaths of two presidents (Haruo Remeliik in 1985 and Lazarus Salii in 1988), Palau's courts ruled that the 68% pro-compact vote in an eighth referendum\u2014held November 9, 1993\u2014was sufficient to approve the compact.\nOn October 1, 1994, following a proclamation by President Clinton, Palau began its independence in free association with the U.S. Under the compact, the U.S. remains responsible for Palau's defense for 50 years. The U.S. must approve the entry into Palauan territory of any foreign military, may establish military bases there, and is permitted to operate nuclear-capable warships there. For 15 years, Palau receives financial assistance from the U.S. and is eligible to participate in some 40 federal programs. It is estimated that the value of U.S. financial and program assistance will exceed $500 million during this period.\nIn November 2020, Surangel Whipps Jr was elected as the new President of Palau to succeed President Tommy Remengesau.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23374", "revid": "1302992529", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23374", "title": "Geography of Palau", "text": "The Republic of Palau consists of eight principal islands and more than 250 smaller ones lying roughly 500 miles southeast of the Philippines, in Oceania. The islands of Palau constitute the westernmost part of the Caroline Islands chain. The country includes the World War II battleground of Peleliu and the world-famous Rock Islands. The total land area is . It has the 42nd largest Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nLandform.\nThe Palau archipelago contains more than 250 islands and islets stretched along a 150\u00a0km north south trending arc in the western Pacific. Its center is located near 7\u00b0 north latitude, some 650\u00a0km north of Jayapura on the island of New Guinea, and near 134\u00b0 east latitude, some 900\u00a0km east of Mindanao, Philippines.\nThe geologically diverse archipelago is dominated by Babeldaob, primarily a volcanic island, whose 363\u00a0km2 area represents more than three fourths of Palau's total land mass. The remaining 90\u00a0km2 are divided among three volcanic islands, two atolls, and numerous uplifted coralline limestone islands. These limestone islands, primarily situated in the archipelago center between Oreor and Beliliou islands, are known as the \"rock islands.\" The limestone islands of Beliliou and Angaur, called platform islands, are not considered rock islands for various physiographic and culture historical reasons. There are several small islands, including Sonsorol and Tochobei (Tobi), some distance southwest of Angaur.\nGeology.\nThe Palau Islands are composed chiefly of accumulated volcanic material and limestone. Geologists distinguish three geologic units of erupted volcanic breccia and interbedded tuff. Weathered material from exposed upper parts of the volcanic islands was eroded away and accumulated in shallow coastal waters forming deposits of clay. The substrata of the volcanic islands are volcanic breccias and tuffs, some flow material, conglomerates, and related sediments. The sediments are extensively lateritic clays and are strongly acid. The Airai clay deposit covers much of southeastern Babeldaob Island and exceeds 45 m thick.\nThe rock islands, the platform islands and the eastern half of Oreor Island are made up of Palau limestone. The limestone is raised coralline reef structure which formed in the warm tropical waters during Miocene to Pleistocene times. Surrounding the volcanic islands are natural terraced benches resulting from sea level changes and uplifting of the Palau ridge. Two levels of natural terraced benches have been recognized. One bench is 1 m to 2 m above mean sea level, while a second, and much broader, bench is 5 to 10 m above mean sea level. Many villages on Babeldaob Island are built on this second bench. Geologic data indicate that Babeldaob Island has undergone a net uplift of land relative to sea level of about 2 m in the last 4000 years; thus, for most of the Palau coastline, submerged habitation sites in intertidal and coastal swamp areas are unlikely. Excepting a few calcareous sand beaches, the rock island edges rise abruptly out of the water, forming steep cliffs. Distinctive geologic features of the rock islands are shear cliffs and a notch cut back into the cliff just above mean sea level.\nOceanography.\nMost of the Republic of Palau lies within the influence of both the North Equatorial Current (NEC, flowing east to west) and the Equatorial Countercurrent (ECC, flowing west to east). The influence of the NEC is strongest between November and May, when the trade winds prevail, and the ECC predominates the rest of the year. The Southwest Islands lie more deeply within the influence of the ECC. Sea surface temperatures range from throughout the year. Subsurface temperatures to about rarely fall below . Below this depth, the temperature drops quickly to less than at approximately . The constant heating of the ocean surface in the tropics creates a highly stratified temperature regime in the water column, with little mixing. This general regime may vary locally or seasonally, as in the case of the upwelling of cold subsurface waters along steep leeward islands slopes.\nSoils.\nAccording to the 1983 Soil Conservation Service survey (Smith, 1983), there are roughly 18 kinds of soils in Palau, exhibiting a wide variety of texture, drainage, depth and fertility characteristics. To paraphrase the survey's summary, upland volcanic and limestone island soils are well-drained, limestone island soils excessively so. Upland volcanic island soils range from nearly level to very steep and are fine-textured, while bottom land soils are poorly drained or saturated. Limestone island soils may be either level, deep and sandy or steep, shallow and loamy in areas where they are associated with rock outcrops.\nStatistics.\nThe area of Palau is slightly more than 2.5 times the size of the US city of Washington, DC.\nMaritime claims:\n&lt;br&gt;\"territorial sea:\"\n12\u00a0nautical miles\n&lt;br&gt;\"exclusive economic zone:\"\n (200 nmi)\nElevation extremes:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest point:\"\nPacific Ocean 0 m\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest point:\"\nMount Ngerchelchauus (on Babeldaob)\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\"\n2.17%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\"\n4.35%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n93.48% (2011)\nEnvironment - international agreements:\n&lt;br&gt;\"party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Law of the Sea\nTerrain varies geologically from the high, mountainous main island of Babeldaob to low, coral islands usually fringed by large barrier reefs. Natural resources consist of forests, minerals (especially gold), marine products, and deep-seabed minerals. Current environmental issues include inadequate facilities for disposal of solid waste; threats to the marine ecosystem from sand and coral dredging, illegal fishing practices, and overfishing.\nClimate.\nThe climate of the Palau Islands is defined as being maritime tropical, characterized by little variation seasonally or diurnally. The country has a K\u00f6ppen Climate Classification of \"Af\" (Tropical Rainforest Climate). It rains almost daily. Short but torrential storms provide over 3.8m annually. Prolonged dry spells or droughts are rare. The northeast trade winds, usually blowing from December to July bring frequent rains and often a slightly drier time from February through April. The southwest trade winds are often associated with more violent storms. Although the Palau Islands are outside of the main typhoon zone, several damaging typhoons have struck the islands. The mean annual temperature is 27\u00a0\u00b0C, with a range in variation of less than 4\u00a0\u00b0C from the coolest months, January and February, to the warmest month, April. The daily variation averages only 6\u00a0\u00b0C. The humidity is very high, averaging 82% annually.\nVegetation.\nThe volcanic islands contain heavily eroded hills reaching heights of 250m above sea level, while the rock islands and atolls vary in elevation from sandy relict beaches a few meters above sea level to jagged limestone hills more than 200m high. The islands all are covered with dense stands of mixed tropical forest; in addition, the volcanic islands contain numerous areas of savanna and a broad belt of coastal mangrove swampland. An extensive barrier reef surrounds the central islands of the archipelago, forming a rich lagoon area of more than 1200\u00a0km2. Variations in soil type, elevation, and human activity have led to the development of distinctive plant communities. At present, only 75% of the Palau Islands are forested, the rest being covered by secondary vegetation, marsh, grassland, crop land, urban development, or are barren.\nSeveral types of forest communities can be observed in Palau. Upland forests are found on the volcanic islands' uplands and include a great diversity of species. The variety of trees includes hard woods, palms, and pandanus. On the lower slopes, especially around settlements, the upland forest association becomes mixed with four other forest communities including the plantation forest, the palm forest, the agroforest, and the coconut plantation associations. These four forest communities include a wide variety of food producing species in tree gardens or kitchen gardens. Interspersed throughout these food producing forest associations are areas of cropland and urban development. The important resources of the food producing forest associations include coconut, breadfruit, mango, banana, almond, and betelnut.\nImportant resources in the gardens include several species of targ cassava, pineapple, and tobacco . Most cropland in Palau is divided into small garden areas. The swamp forest and mangrove forest associations are found on coastal lowlands where the terrain is level, especially surrounding the volcanic islands but also including large portions of Beliliou Island. These forests serve to hold eroding soil from washing into the lagoon and thus provide a natural buffer to protect the lagoon. The swamp forest is also found in upland areas on the volcanic islands where poor drainage conditions exist. Distinctive forest communities are found on the atolls, the rock islands and on the platform islands. Included in these communities is the casuarina forest with the needle-bearing ironwood tree (ngas).\" In addition to the forest associations on the volcanic islands are large areas of grasslands and savanna. The grassland/savanna association accounts for 16% of the total area of Palau (6,783 hectares out of a total of 41,619) and most (99%) of this association is found on Babeldaob Island. While some of this association is the result of human activity, at least a portion of the association is found on poor soils. In Palauan, these open areas are called ked. Most of the prehistoric terraces identified in Palau are associated with these unforested areas.\nRelief.\nThe relief of the country varies from the hilly main island of Babeldaob to the low, coral islands, usually bordered by large barrier reefs. Average altitude - no data available; the lowest point is the water level of the Pacific Ocean (0 m); The highest point is Mount Ngerchelchuus (242 m).\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Palau, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain&amp;colon; https://"}
{"id": "23375", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23375", "title": "Demographics of Palau", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Palau include population density, ethnicity, education level, the health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.\nAbout 70% of the Palauan population lives in the city of Koror on Koror Island. Koror is the former capital of the nation. The present capital is Ngerulmud, in Melekeok State on the bigger but less developed island of Babeldaob\u2014the second-largest island in Micronesia after Guam.\nPopulation.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.IV.2020): \nVital statistics.\nBirths and deaths \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23376", "revid": "26161718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23376", "title": "Politics of Palau", "text": " \nThe politics of Palau take place in a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Palau is both head of state and head of government. Palau currently has no political parties and is a \"de facto\" non-partisan democracy although there is no law preventing the formation of political parties.\nExecutive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Palau National Congress. The judiciary of Palau is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nHistory.\nPalau adopted a constitution on January 1, 1981. There were disagreements between the United States and Palau over the constitution.\nPalau witnessed several instances of political violence in the 1980s. The republic's first president, Haruo I. Remeliik, was assassinated in 1985; the Minister of State was found to be complicit in the crime. Palau's third president, Lazarus Salii, committed suicide in August 1988 amid bribery allegations. Salii's personal assistant had been imprisoned several months earlier after being convicted of firing shots into the home of the Speaker of the House of Delegates.\nPalau gained independence from the United Nations trusteeship administered by the United States on 1 October 1994 and entered a Compact of Free Association with the United States.\nThe Senate passed legislation making Palau an \"offshore\" financial center in 1998. Opponents to the legislation voiced fears that the country would become a haven for money launderers and other sorts of criminal activity. In December 1999, a group of major international banks banned U.S. dollar-denominated transactions involving Palau and the other Pacific island states of Vanuatu and Nauru.\nExecutive branch.\nPresidential elections take place every four years, when the president and vice president run on separate tickets. The president, who is the head of state and head of government, is currently Surangel Whipps Jr.\nCabinet.\nThe President is advised and assisted in governing by his/her Cabinet, composed of the Vice President and ministers responsible for the eight government ministries. The ministries include Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Education.\nLegislature.\nThe Palau National Congress (\"Olbiil era Kelulau\") is a bicameral legislature consisting of the House of Delegates and the Senate of Palau, which both sit at the Capitol Complex in Ngerulmud, Melekeok State.\nIn the last elections, held on 1 November 2016, only non-partisans were elected; no political parties exist.\nJudiciary.\nThe judiciary of Palau interprets and applies the laws of Palau, as modified by custom and tradition, to ensure equal justice under law, and to provide a mechanism for dispute resolution. The judiciary comprises a four-member Supreme Court, a Court of Common Pleas, and a Land Court. The Supreme Court has a trial division and an appellate division and is presided over by the Chief Justice, assisted by three Associate Justices and a number of \"ad hoc\" part-time Associate Justices.\nAgencies.\nThe executive branch also has some independent agencies, including the Environmental Quality Protection Board, created in 1981 and tasked with protecting the \"unique and aesthetically beautiful environment while promoting sustainable economic and social development\".\nCOFA Trust Fund Board.\nTo manage the funds appropriate to Palau from the United States through the Compact of Free Association (COFA), the COFA Trust Fund Board was reestablished in 2014. The Board meets monthly to review the trust fund's performance and meets annually with the investment advisor (currently Raymond James &amp; Associates' Asia-Pacific Group, based in Guam).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23377", "revid": "33408448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23377", "title": "Economy of Palau", "text": " \nThe economy of Palau consists primarily of tourism, fishing and subsistence agriculture. The government is the major employer of the work force, relying heavily on financial assistance from the United States. The population enjoys a per capita income of more than twice that of the Philippines and much of Micronesia. Long-term prospects for the tourist sector have been greatly bolstered by the expansion of air travel in the Pacific and the rising prosperity of leading East Asian countries.\nPalau's per capita GDP of $17,000 makes it one of the wealthier Pacific Island states. Nominal GDP increased by an annual average of nearly 14% from 1983 to 1990, and by an annual rate of over 10% from 1991 to 1997. Growth turned sharply negative in 1998 and 1999 as a result of the 1997 Asian financial crisis.\nIndustries.\nTourism is Palau's main industry. Activity focuses on scuba diving and snorkeling among the islands' rich marine environment, including the Floating Garden Islands to the west of Koror. Major scuba diving sites include German Channel and Blue Corner. The number of visitors\u201485% of whom come from Japan, Taiwan, and the U.S.\u2014reached nearly 67,000 in 1997, more than quadruple the level of a decade earlier. Tourism earned $67 million in foreign exchange for Palau in 1996, (which is 1,000 dollars per person) accounting for roughly half of GDP. Arrivals from Asian countries dropped in 1998 and 1999 due to the regional economic downturn and the depreciation of many Asian currencies against the dollar, which made Palau's dollar-denominated prices more expensive.\nThe service sector dominates the Palauan economy, contributing more than 80% of GDP and employing three-quarters of the work force. The government alone employs nearly 30% of workers. One of the government's main responsibilities is administering external assistance. Under the terms of the Compact of Free Association with the United States, Palau will receive more than $450 million in assistance over 15 years, $30 million per year, and is eligible to participate in more than 40 federal programs. The first grant of $142 million was made in 1994. Further annual payments in lesser amounts will be made through 2009. U.S. grants in 1999 totaled $24 million.\nConstruction is the most important industrial activity, contributing over 9% of GDP. Several large infrastructure projects, including the rebuilding of the bridge connecting Koror and Babeldaob Islands after its collapse in 1996 and the construction of a highway around the rim of Babeldaob, boosted activity at the end of the 1990s.\nAgriculture is mainly on a subsistence level, the principal crops being coconuts, root crops, and bananas. Fishing is a potential source of revenue, but the islands' tuna output dropped by over one-third during the 1990s.\nThere are no patent laws in Palau, and the country is not a member of either the Patent Cooperation Treaty nor the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property. The primary method of intellectual property protection on the island is through publishing cautionary notices on the local newspaper, The Island Times.\nEconomic challenges.\nThe main economic challenge confronting Palau is to ensure the long-term viability of its economy by reducing its reliance on foreign assistance. Palau has created a trust fund to be drawn upon after the cessation of Compact grants, the value of which had grown to $140 million by the beginning of 2009. Also, in the late 1990s, Palau was affected by the 1997 Asian financial crisis, and their economy suffered. The island took a huge hit during the COVID-19 pandemic with global travel restrictions putting tourism to a halt. The Asian Development Bank projects that the GDP of Palau contracted by 9.5% in 2020.\nHistorically, the United States has provided substantial assistance to Palau. Japan and Taiwan have provided funding for infrastructure projects in Palau.\nTourism challenges.\nIn order to tackle mass tourism, the Palau Legacy Project, a sustainable tourism body, created a visa policy for the island of Palau to protect the nation from environmental damage. The \"Palau Pledge\" was the most awarded campaign of 2018 according to the WARC Creative 100 index.\nEconomic statistics.\nIncome.\nGross Domestic Product (GDP):\npurchasing power parity \u2013 $132 million (2009 est.)\nGDP \u2013 real growth rate:\n1% (2009 est.)\nGDP \u2013 per capita:\npurchasing power parity \u2013 $8 500 (2009 est.)\nGDP \u2013 composition by sector\nPopulation below poverty line:\nN/A\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share\nInflation.\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n3.4% (2000 est.)\nWorkforce.\nLabor force:\n10 200 (2000)\nLabor force \u2013 by occupation\nUnemployment rate:\n4.2% (2000 est.)\nIndustries.\nDominant industries include tourism, craft items (from shell, wood, pearls), construction, and garment making.\nIndustrial production growth rate:\nN/A\nElectricity.\nElectricity \u2013 production:\n200 MWh (1996)\nElectricity \u2013 production by source\nElectricity \u2013 consumption:\n200 MWh (1996)\nElectricity \u2013 exports:\n0 kWh (1996)\nElectricity \u2013 imports:\n0 kWh (1996)\nTrade.\nAgriculture \u2013 products:\ncoconuts, copra, cassava (tapioca), sweet potatoes\nExports:\n$18 million (f.o.b., 2001)\nExports \u2013 commodities:\ntrochus (type of shellfish), tuna, copra, handicrafts\nExports \u2013 partners:\nJapan 70.1%, South Korea 15.1% United States 7.1% (2019)\nImports:\n$99 million (f.o.b., 2001 est.)\nImports \u2013 commodities:\nmachinery and equipment, fuels, metals, foodstuffs\nImports \u2013 partners:\nSouth Korea 18.7%, China 18.2%, Taiwan 16.9%, United States 16.5%, Japan 16%, (2019)\nDebt and aid.\nDebt \u2013 external:\n$18.4 Billion (2014 estimate). Palau ranks as one of the countries with the highest external debt as a share of GDP.\nEconomic aid \u2013 recipient:\n$155.8 million. Note: the Compact of Free Association with the U.S., entered into after the end of the UN trusteeship on 1 October 1994, provides Palau with up to $700 million in U.S. aid over 15 years in return for furnishing military facilities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23378", "revid": "50307341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23378", "title": "Telecommunications in Palau", "text": "Overview of telecommunication systems and infrastructure in Palau \nTelephones.\nTelephones - main lines in use:\n7,300 (2012)\nTelephones - mobile cellular:\n17,150 (2012)\nTelephone system:\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\"\nPalau National Communications Corporation\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\"\nsatellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)\nRadio and television.\nRadio broadcast stations:\nAM 1, FM 3, shortwave 1 (2002)\nRadios:\n12,000 (1997)\nTelevision broadcast stations:\nNone, cable and satellite networks provide television service.\nTelevisions:\n11,000 (1997)\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\nhttps:// (Formally PalauNet)\nCountry code (Top level domain): PW\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23379", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23379", "title": "Transport in Palau", "text": ""}
{"id": "23380", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23380", "title": "Military of Palau", "text": ""}
{"id": "23382", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23382", "title": "Palmyra Atoll", "text": "U.S. territory in the North Pacific Ocean\nPalmyra Atoll (), also referred to as Palmyra Island, is one of the Northern Line Islands (southeast of Kingman Reef and north of Kiribati). It is located almost due south of the Hawaiian Islands, roughly one-third of the way between Hawaii and American Samoa. North America is about northeast and New Zealand the same distance southwest, placing the atoll at the approximate center of the Pacific Ocean. The land area is , with about 9 miles (14 km) of sea-facing coastline and reef. There is one boat anchorage, known as West Lagoon, accessible from the sea by a narrow artificial channel and an old airstrip; during WW2, it was turned into a Naval Air Station for several years and used for training and refueling. It was shelled by a submarine in December 1941, days after the Attack on Pearl Harbor, but was not the site of a major battle. Palmyra has, over time, had many of its islets merged together, so the actual amount of contiguous land depends on the tide and locations of sandbanks. For example, Strawn, Menge, and Cooper Islands are one contiguous island. Likewise, there are many shoals and coral heads on the atoll, which is ringed by a coral reef.\nIt is the second-northernmost of the Line Islands and one of three American islands in the archipelago, along with Jarvis Island and Kingman Reef. Palmyra Atoll is part of the Pacific Islands Heritage Marine National Monument, the world's largest marine protected area. The atoll comprises submerged sand flats along with dry land and reefs. It comprises three lagoons separated by coral reefs. The western reef terrace is one of the biggest shelf-reefs, with dimensions of . Over 150 species of coral inhabit Palmyra Atoll, double the number recorded in Hawaii.\nPalmyra Atoll has no permanent population, but there are a steady stream of temporary staff and visitors for research, tourism, and other projects such as marine science or survey work. It is administered as an incorporated unorganized territory, presently the only one of its kind, by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service of the United States Department of the Interior. The territory hosts a variable transient population of 4\u201325 staff and scientists employed by various departments of the U.S. government and by The Nature Conservancy, as well as a rotating mix of Palmyra Atoll Research Consortium scholars. Submerged portions of the atoll are administered by the Department of the Interior's Office of Insular Affairs.\nIn 2000, most of the land on the atoll, excluding only the Home and possibly Sand islets, was bought by The Nature Conservancy for US$30 million (GBP 21 million) from the Fullard-Leo family.\nGeography.\nThe atoll consists of an extensive reef, three shallow lagoons, and a number of sand and reef-rock islets and bars covered with vegetation\u2014mostly coconut palms, \"Scaevola\", and tall \"Pisonia\" trees.\nMany of the islets are connected. Sand Island and the two Home Islets in the west; Quail, Whippoorwill, and Bunker Islands in the north; and Eastern, Fern, Bird, and Barren Islands in the east are not. The largest island is Cooper Island in the north, followed by Kaula Island in the south. The northern arch of islets is formed by Strawn Island, Cooper Island (or Cooper-Meng Island since the original Cooper and Meng Islands were joined in 1940), Aviation Island, Quail Island, Whippoorwill Island, Bunker Island, followed in the east by Eastern Island, Papala Island and Pelican Island, and in the south by Bird Island, Holei Island, Engineer Island, Tanager Island, Marine Island, Kaula Island, Paradise Island, the Home Islets, and Sand Island (clockwise).\nPalmyra Atoll is in the Samoa Time Zone (UTC\u221211:00), the same time zone as American Samoa, Midway Atoll, Kingman Reef and Jarvis Island.\nIncorporation into the United States.\nIn \"The Insular Cases\", the Supreme Court held incorporated territories to be integral parts of the United States, as opposed to mere possessions. The incorporated Palmyra Atoll is the southernmost point of the incorporated United States, with its southernmost shore at 5\u00b052'15\" N latitude. U.S.-controlled territories such as American Samoa (and the southernmost place, Rose Atoll) are farther south, but they are not incorporated territories.\nClimate.\nAverage annual rainfall is approximately per year. Temperatures average year round. The atoll has nearly the highest oceanicity index (i.e., the degree to which its climate is affected by the sea) and one of the lowest diurnal and annual temperature variations of any place on Earth. Nauru has more consistent nighttime temperatures with every month recording 77\u00a0\u00b0F (25 C) average, as well as more evenly spread precipitation.\nOfficial names.\nAlthough Palmyra is a coral atoll with several islets, not a single island, it has been called \"Palmyra Island\" since its discovery in 1802. More recently it is for some purposes called \"Palmyra Atoll\". The name of the federal territory retained by Congress since 1959 is \"Palmyra Island\", but the official name of the National Wildlife Refuge within the territory is \"Palmyra Atoll\", as is the corresponding division of the Pacific Islands Heritage Marine National Monument. Formal deeds, leases and federal orders for land there call it \"Palmyra Island\". Further, the islets on the atoll are also named \"island\", such as Kaula Island, Cooper Island, and others. The biggest single island is Cooper Island, located on the lagoon's north side.\nPolitical status.\nPalmyra is an incorporated territory of the United States (the only such territory since 1959), meaning that it is subject to all provisions of the U.S. Constitution and is permanently under American sovereignty. Palmyra remains an unorganized territory. No Act of Congress since Hawaii statehood in 1959 has specified how Palmyra is to be governed. The only relevant federal law gives the president the authority to administer Palmyra as directed or via the United States District Court for the District of Hawaii (Hawaii Omnibus Act, Pub. L. 86\u2013624, July 12, 1960, 74 Stat. 411). Executive Order 10967, effective October 10, 1961, provided that the Department of the Interior be responsible for all executive, legislative, and judicial authority of its civil administration.\nThe governance issue is generally a moot point since no permanent population lives there. Cooper Island and ten other land parcels in this atoll are owned by The Nature Conservancy, which manages them as a nature reserve. The southwesternmost islets, including Home, are owned by descendants of former Palmyra owner Henry Ernest Cooper and others. The rest of Palmyra is federal land and waters under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Since Palmyra has no state or local government, it is administered directly from Honolulu by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, except for some submerged tracts administered by the Office of Insular Affairs, both in the U.S. Department of the Interior. Palmyra is counted as one of the U.S. minor outlying islands for all other purposes. They are outside the customs territory of the United States and have no customs duties.\nPalmyra land was registered in Hawaii Land Court in 1912. In 1959, the rest of the federal Territory of Hawaii, excluding Palmyra, became the state of Hawaii. Hawaii Land Court became a state court and lost jurisdiction over Palmyra land. Instead, Palmyra land documents are filed or recorded in federal court in Honolulu.\nEconomy.\nThe only current economic activity on Palmyra is paid ecotourism visits by TNC donors. Most roads and causeways were built during World War\"\u00a0\"II. Most of these are now unserviceable and overgrown, and most causeways and filled areas between islets have washed-away gaps. A unpaved airstrip on Cooper Island was built for the Palmyra Island Naval Air Station before and during World War\"\u00a0\"II.\nAirport.\nPalmyra (Cooper) Airport () is an unattended airport on Palmyra Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. It is a private-use facility, originally built during World War\"\u00a0\"II and now owned by The Nature Conservancy. It has one runway (6/24) measuring . When built, the airport was called Palmyra Atoll Airfield, and later Palmyra Island Naval Air Station as it was a former Naval airfield on the Palmyra Atoll in the Line Islands of the Central Pacific Area. The name for the airport comes from Henry Ernest Cooper Sr. (1857\u20131929), who owned Palmyra from 1911 to 1922.\nPreliminary surveys were made by the U.S. Navy in 1938 for an airfield at this location. The first Navy group to begin construction sailed from Honolulu on November 14, 1939. The runway was made from crushed coral and expanded during World War\"\u00a0\"II. During World War\"\u00a0\"II, the U.S. Naval Construction Battalion dredged a channel so that ships could enter the protected lagoons and bulldozed coral rubble into a long, unpaved landing strip for refueling transpacific supply planes at the airbase. On January 16, 1942, six Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress bombers from Hawaii were stationed at the airbase, commanded by Lt. Col. Walter C. Sweeney Jr. as part of Hawaiian Air Force's Task Group 8. Marine Corps VMF-211 pilots also used the airfield. During World War\"\u00a0\"II, two other runways were built and used, one on Meng Island and another on Sand Island. These runways are now overgrown with plants and returning to the jungle. The U.S. Air Force maintained the main airfield until 1961.\nThe airstrip still exists today but can be used only after prior permission has been obtained or in an emergency.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nThe first known sighting of Palmyra came in 1798 aboard the American sealing ship \"Betsy\" on a voyage to Asia, according to the memoir of Captain Edmund Fanning of Stonington, Connecticut. Fanning wrote that he had awakened three times during the night before, and after the third time took it as a premonition, ordering \"Betsy\" to heave to for the rest of the night. The next morning, \"Betsy\" resumed sailing, but only about a nautical mile farther on, he believed he sighted the reef later known as Palmyra Island. It might have been wrecked if the ship continued on her course at night. Captain Fanning's claim to have discovered Palmyra itself has been challenged, on the view that he had only reached Kingman Reef away and could not possibly have seen Palmyra from that distance. On page 3, the Baltimore newspaper \"The Telegraphe and Daily Advertiser\" of July 29, 1803, appears to quote directly from Fanning's journal: \"We supposed that we saw land from the masthead to the southward of the shoal (Kingman Reef) but it was so hazy we were not certain.\" This would stand in conflict with Fanning's book of 1833, in which he, while referring to Kingman Reef, wrote \"I went aloft, and with the aid of the glass could plainly see the land over it, far in the south.\"\nOn November 7, 1802, the ship \"Palmyra\", under Captain Cornelius Sowle (sometimes spelled \"Sawle\"), was shipwrecked on the reef, which took the vessel's name. Lacking a navigable boat passage through the reef from the sea, it had never been inhabited. A lack of archaeological surveys on the atoll leaves the question of habitation before European contact open. As a result, no marae, basalt artifacts or evidence of Polynesian, Micronesian or other pre-European native settlements before 1802 have been reported on Palmyra. At the time of his discovery, Captain Sowle wrote:\nThere are no inhabitants on the island, nor was any fresh water found; but cocoanuts [\"sic\"] of a very large size, are in great abundance; and fish of various kinds and in large shoals surround the land.\n\"Esperanza\" treasure.\nDuring the 19th and 20th centuries, stories circulated in the Pacific of a large treasure of gold, silver and precious stones (sometimes described as Inca treasures) that had been looted in the Viceroyalty of Peru. A crew loaded it in secret onto the ship \"Esperanza\" in Callao harbor, Peru, and embarked into the Pacific Ocean on January 1, 1816, bound for the Spanish West Indies.\nAccording to a survivor, seaman James Hines, the \"Esperanza\" was caught in a storm that dismasted and damaged the ship. After that, it was attacked and boarded by pirates, who loaded the treasure and surviving crew onto their own ship. The \"Esperanza\" sank, and the pirates and their captives sailed west across the Pacific bound for Macao.\nAfter 43 days, the pirates' ship met a storm, lost course, and struck the coral reef surrounding Palmyra Island, breaking the mast. The 90 men aboard pulled the ship closer to land, but it was not serviceable. They offloaded the treasure to the island, distributed some, and buried the rest. They repaired part of their boat, and most crew shipped away, not to be heard from again. The remaining ten men spent most of a year on Palmyra, living on dwindling stores and local food. They spent three months building a small escape boat, upon which six men left Palmyra. Of these, four were washed overboard in a storm, and the other two were rescued by an American whaler bound for San Francisco. One died en route. The survivor, James Hines, was put in a hospital, but he died 30 days later.\nBefore Hines died, he wrote letters describing the affair and the location of the treasure, which originally included 1.5 million Spanish gold pesos and an equal value in silver (possibly consisting of precolumbian artworks). Around 1903, over 95 years later, the letters were allegedly deposited for safekeeping with Capt. William R. Foster, the harbormaster of Honolulu, by a sailor who was bound for the Solomon Islands but never returned. After holding the letters for 20 years in an iron chest, Foster revealed them to a reporter, who published the details. A conflicting variant of the story was published by Capt. F. D. Walker of Honolulu in 1903 and in 1914. In 1997, William A. Warren filed a federal salvage claim for a ship sunk off the atoll that he claimed had treasure from the \"Esperanza\", but he abandoned his claim after legal objection from the Fullard-Leos, who owned most of Palmyra.\nThe legend of the \"Esperanza\" and \"Santa Rosa\" (a ship rumored to have recovered the \"Esperanza\" treasure and sailed back to Honolulu) inspired a Jack London story called \"The Proud Goat of Aloysius Pankburn\", which was published as part of London's David Grief stories in the \"Saturday Evening Post\".\nAmerican visits.\nThe atoll was visited by the in 1842 as part of the United States Exploring Expedition, led by Charles Wilkes. This marked the first visit to Palmyra by a scientific expedition. Various live samples of native plants and animals were collected. In his 23rd volume recording the findings of the USXX (United States Exploring Expedition of 1838\u20131842), Wilkes wrote of Palmyra, mentioning some unspecified inhabitants at that time:\nThis island is inhabited\u00a0... It is to be regretted that all these detached islands should not be visited by our national vessels, and friendly intercourse kept up with them. The benefit and assistance that any shipwrecked mariners might derive from their rude inhabitants, would repay the time, trouble, and expense such visits would occasion.\nIn 1859, Palmyra Atoll was claimed for the United States both by Alfred Benson and by Dr. Gerrit P. Judd of the brig \"Josephine\", under the Guano Islands Act of 1856, but no guano was there to be mined, so the claims were abandoned.\nAnnexation by the Kingdom of Hawaii (1862).\nOn February 26, 1862, King Kamehameha IV of Hawaii commissioned Captain Zenas Bent and Johnson Beswick Wilkinson, both Hawaiian citizens, to take possession of the atoll. On April 15, 1862, it was formally annexed to the Kingdom of Hawaii, while Bent and Wilkinson became joint owners.\nOver the next century, ownership passed through various hands. Bent sold his rights to Wilkinson on December 25, 1862. Palmyra later passed to Kalama Wilkinson (Johnson's widow). In 1885, it was divided among her four heirs, two of whom sold their rights to William Luther Wilcox who, in turn, sold them to the Pacific Navigation Company. In 1897, this company was liquidated, and its interests were sold first to William Ansel Kinney and then to Fred Wundenberg, all residents of Honolulu.\nA further Wilkinson heir left her share to her son William Ringer Sr., who also bought his great-uncle's share, giving Ringer a one-third undivided share as a tenant in common.\nSeparately, in 1889, Commander Nichols of claimed Palmyra for the United Kingdom, unaware of Hawaii's prior claim.\nPart of the U.S. Territory of Hawaii (1900\u20131959).\nIn 1898, the United States by the Newlands Resolution annexed the Republic of Hawaii, formerly the Provisional Government of Hawaii, and Palmyra with it. An Act of Congress made all of Hawaii, including Palmyra, into an \"incorporated territory\" of the United States. (\"Act\" of April 30, 1900, ch. 339, \u00a7\u00a7 4\u20135.) On June 14, 1900, Palmyra became part of the new U.S. Territory of Hawaii.\nWith the imminent opening of the Panama Canal, Palmyra became strategically important. Britain had established a submarine cable station for the All Red Line on nearby Fanning Island. The U.S. Navy sent to Palmyra, where on February 21, 1912, American sovereignty was formally reaffirmed.\nWilliam Ringer Sr. died in 1909, survived by his wife and three minor daughters.\nOn June 12, 1911, Wundenberg's widow sold his two-thirds undivided interest in Palmyra as a tenant in common to Judge Henry Ernest Cooper (1857\u20131929).\nIn 1912, Cooper bought the Ringer daughters' inherited rights from their legal guardian, and petitioned to register Torrens title to all of Palmyra for himself. After a legal challenge, Cooper's ownership of the atoll was held by the Supreme Court of Hawaii to be subject to rights sold by Ringer's widow to Henry Maui and Joseph Clarke. Maui's and Clarke's interests, per the U.S. Supreme Court in 1947, had been divided, with one-third going to Bella Jones of Honolulu in 1912, and the rest passing to their heirs.\nCooper visited the island in July 1913 with scientists Charles Montague Cooke Jr. and Joseph F. Rock, who wrote a scientific description of the atoll. Botanist Rock discovered unusual coconut palms in 1913, which palms expert Odoardo Beccari identified as \"Cocos nucifera palmyrensis\" (Becc.), the coconut type with the largest, longest and most triangular (in cross-section) fruits in the world, existing only at Palmyra. (The closest \"Cocos nucifera\" relative occurs only in the distant Nicobar Islands in the Indian Ocean.) The \"mammoth coconuts\" were put on display in Honolulu in 1914 along with paintings of Palmyra by Hawaiian artist D. Howard Hitchcock, who had accompanied Cooper to the island.\nIn September 1921, as part of a national push to better document the coastal and outlying areas owned by the United States, a small naval detachment was sent to Palmyra to conduct the first aerial surveys of the atoll. The events of that trip were recorded by a naval Pharmacist Mate, M. L. Steele, who wrote:\nDuring our visit the weather was delightful. The detachment remained at these islands two days and they were perfect for flying, affording an opportunity to take wonderful aerial pictures. The commanding officer and the aviators made a number of flights and the official photographer was in his element.\nAt the time, Palmyra was occupied by three Americans: Colonel William Meng, his wife, and Edwin Benner Jr. While there, the USS \"Eagle Boat 40\", which had transported aircraft and photographic equipment to the islands, made a very rare exception to naval regulation and took aboard the wife, Mrs. Meng, to return her to Honolulu for medical aid, as she was not handling the isolation and trying physical conditions of Palmyra well.\nOn August 19, 1922, Cooper sold his interest in the atoll, except for two minor islets, to Leslie and Ellen Fullard-Leo for $15,000 (). They established the Palmyra Copra Company to harvest the coconuts growing on the atoll. Their three sons, including actor Leslie Vincent, continued as the owners afterward, subject to a period of military administration and construction by the Navy before and during World War\"\u00a0\"II from 1939 through 1945. In 2000, The Nature Conservancy acquired the majority of Palmyra Atoll from the Fullard-Leo family for $30 million ().\nU.S. Navy base and post-war (1939\u20131959).\nPalmyra was turned into a military base in the Pacific at the start of World War\"\u00a0\"II after some legal questions were resolved. The island was fortified when it found itself on the front lines of the Pacific due to the losses of U.S. territories to the west. It was shelled once early in the war, but due to U.S. military success, it was later used for refueling and training. After World War\"\u00a0\"II, it was returned to private ownership, and the naval base was mostly demolished.\nBackground.\nSeveral memoirs, reports, and unofficial documents in the decades since World War\"\u00a0\"II have stated Palmyra was placed under naval jurisdiction in 1934 as part of Executive Order 6935. However, Palmyra is not mentioned in this order in any capacity. The first official mention of Palmyra under Naval Jurisdiction comes from a 1939 letter from the U.S. Attorney General, mentioned in a 1997 Insular Areas report, concluding \"Palmyra was U.S. public land and that the Fullard-Leo claim was invalid. S. Rep. No. 83-886 at 37.\" Soon after this determination, President Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8616, officially, \"Placing Palmyra Island, Territory of Hawaii, Under the Control and Jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Navy\".\nStarting in 1937, the Fullard-Leo family began attempts to lease Palmyra to the U.S. Navy. During negotiations, the government filed a quiet title action against the Fullard-Leos and Henry Ernest Cooper's six surviving children, claiming property at Palmyra had never been privately owned under the Kingdom of Hawaii or later. The case reached the U.S. Supreme Court. The Insular Areas report states, \"While the suit was pending during World War\"\u00a0\"II, the Navy occupied Palmyra and built a runway and several buildings.\" The Fullard-Leos and Coopers finally won their case in \"United States v. Fullard-Leo et al.\", 331 U.S. 256 (1947), which quieted good land title against the federal government in favor of private landowners. The opinion acknowledged certain of Henry Maui's and Joseph Clarke's interests (331 U.S. 256 at 278) but their heirs and their successor Mrs. Bella Jones were not made parties to the case. As of 2007[ [update]], descendants of Henry Cooper still owned two small Home islets in the southwestern tip that were not sold in 1922.\nIn July 1938, Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes wrote a letter to President Roosevelt, imploring him not to turn Palmyra over to the U.S. Navy for use as a military base. Quoting his letter, he writes,\n...\u00a0the Navy Department has plans for the acquisition and development of the island as an air base. Our representatives have studied conditions at Palmyra and other islands in the south Pacific, and they report that use of this small land area as an air base for Navy Department purposes would undoubtedly destroy much, if not all, that makes the island one of our most scientifically and scenically unique possessions.\nThe letter was unsuccessful, and plans for the base proceeded.\nOn February 14, 1941, Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8682 to create naval defenses areas in the central Pacific territories. The proclamation established the \"Palmyra Island Naval Defensive Sea Area\", encompassing the territorial waters between the extreme high-water marks and the three-mile marine boundaries surrounding the atoll. \"Palmyra Island Naval Airspace Reservation\" was also established to restrict access to airspace in the area. Only U.S. government ships and aircraft were permitted to enter the naval defense areas at Palmyra Atoll unless authorized by the Secretary of the Navy. The Navy took over the atoll for use as the Palmyra Island Naval Air Station on August 15, 1941. From November 1939 through 1947, the atoll had resident federal government representatives and island commanders. The atoll was shelled by a Japanese submarine in 1941, with no significant damage or injuries. The government made extensive alterations to the landforms. It blasted and dredged a ship channel from the open sea into the West Lagoon, which had been completely enclosed by islands and reefs and was non-navigable until the channel reached the lagoon on May 15, 1941. It joined islands with causeway roads, built new islands, and extended existing islands with dredged coral spoil, including the main runway on Cooper Island, an emergency landing strip called Sand Island joined by a causeway to Home Island and two artificial runway islands that were not completed. These alterations blocked the water flow through the atoll and are believed to have severely harmed the natural ecology of the lagoons.\nPacific war.\nIn December 1941, the Empire of Japan declared war on the United States and Great Britain. It launched attacks and invasions across Asia and the Pacific, plunging the United States into World War\"\u00a0\"II. In that context, the Imperial Japanese Navy submarine \"I-75\" bombarded the naval air station on December 24, 1941. Opening fire at 04:55 Greenwich Civil Time, the submarine fired twelve rounds from the deck gun, targeting the atoll's radio station, and hit the United States Army Corps of Engineers dredge \"Sacramento\", which was anchored in the lagoon, with one shell. A coastal artillery battery on the atoll returned fire, forcing \"I-75\" to submerge and withdraw.\nAlthough the U.S. lost control of the Philippines, Guam, and Wake, early in the war, the tide of the Pacific battle was slowly turned with such battles as the Battle of Midway and Guadalcanal. By 1944, much of the Southwest Pacific was in Allied control, and a combination of island hopping and strategic bombing led to the Japanese surrender in 1945. During the war Palmyra base was used by the Navy for training and refueling. The atoll was extensively developed which reduced the numbers of islets from 52 to 25.\nIn the lobby of the \"Transient Hotel\" (built by the Seabees, and used by airmen on their way to the Pacific Theater front), a mural was hung depicting a quiet island scene. It was painted by Academy Award\u2013nominated art director William Glasgow, who served in the Army from 1943 to 1945. However, it is unclear when he painted it and how it ended up on Palmyra.\nIn 1947, the base was returned to private ownership after a court case with the Federal government.\nAfter World War II, much of the Naval Air Station was demolished, with some of the materials piled up and burned on the atoll, dumped into the lagoon, or, in the case of unexploded ordnance on some islets, left in place. Compared to other bases little is known about the operations at Palmyra during WW2. However, it is known that the island was extensively modified.\nU.S. Territory of Palmyra Island (1959\u2013present).\nWhen Hawaii was admitted to the United States in 1959, Palmyra was explicitly separated from the new state, remaining a federal incorporated territory, to be administered by the secretary of the interior under a presidential executive order.\nIn 1962, the Department of Defense used Palmyra as an observation site during several high-altitude nuclear weapons tests high above Johnston Atoll. A group of about ten men supported the observation posts during this series of tests, while about 40 people carried out the observations.\nAlby Mangels, the Australian adventurer and documentary filmmaker of \"World Safari\", visited the atoll during his six-year trip in the 1970s.\nIn early 1979, the U.S. government began exploring the idea of storing nuclear waste on remote Pacific islands like Palmyra. Those who knew the island and the region saw no benefit to this idea, commenting on the devastating effects a leak of these storage tanks would create. By 1982 a formal proposal had been written which \"analyzes the proposal to store spent nuclear fuel on Palmyra Island, a U.S. territory nearly a thousand miles south of Hawaii. The proposal has military, political, social, and technical implications.\" The idea was abandoned soon after the proposal, and no such storage facilities were built.\n\"Sea Wind\" murder.\nIn 1974, Palmyra was the site of a murder, and possible double murder, of a wealthy San Diego couple, Malcolm \"Mac\" Graham and his wife, Eleanor \"Muff\" Graham. The mysterious deaths, including the murder conviction of Duane (\"Buck\") Walker (a.k.a. Wesley G. Walker) for Eleanor Graham's murder, and the acquittal of his girlfriend, Stephanie Stearns, made headlines worldwide, and became the subject of a true crime book, \"And the Sea Will Tell\", written by Bruce Henderson and Vincent Bugliosi, Stearns's defense attorney. The book led to a CBS television miniseries of the same name, starring James Brolin, Rachel Ward, Deidre Hall, and Hart Bochner; Richard Crenna played lawyer Bugliosi. The story was retold in \"The FBI Files\".\nWalker and Stearns were arrested in Honolulu in 1974 after returning from Palmyra aboard \"Sea Wind\", the yacht stolen from the Grahams. Because no bodies were found at the time, Walker and Stearns were convicted only for the theft of the yacht. Six years later, a partially-buried, corroded chest was found in a lagoon at Palmyra, containing Eleanor Graham's remains. Walker and Stearns were arrested in Arizona for murder, and Walker was convicted in 1985. Stearns was acquitted in 1986 after her defense argued that Walker had committed the murders without Stearns's knowledge. Because no body or other evidence of Malcolm Graham's death has been discovered, his murder was never formally alleged.\nWalker served 22\u00a0years in the United States Penitentiary, Victorville, California, before receiving parole in 2007. He wrote an 895-page book about his experiences and life on Palmyra Island, in which he denied killing Eleanor Graham. It states they had sexual relations; her husband Malcolm Graham caught them and shot at them in anger, inadvertently killing her. Walker said that the two men had a gunfight the next day and that Malcolm Graham consequently died from a rifle wound.\nWalker accused author Vincent Bugliosi \u2013 Stearns' lawyer \u2013 of vainglory and exploiting class prejudice against him and wrote that his lawyer, Earle Partington, was incompetent. Walker did not implicate Stearns in any killing. Walker died in a nursing home following a stroke on April 26, 2010.\nSovereignty challenges (1997\u20131999).\nIn the late 1990s, Rachel Lahela Kekoa Bolt, a native Hawaiian heir of Henry Maui, and some of her descendants filed federal lawsuits claiming her inherited interest in Palmyra and challenging the legality of the Newlands Resolution that annexed Hawaii. The lawsuits challenged American sovereignty over both the State of Hawaii and the United States Territory of Palmyra Island. On similar grounds, they intervened in a federal marine salvage claim for a sunken treasure ship at Palmyra. The cases were dismissed on procedural grounds before trial.\nNational Wildlife Refuge and National Monument.\nIn December 2000, The Nature Conservancy (TNC) bought most of Palmyra Atoll from the three Fullard-Leo brothers for coral reef conservation and research. In 2003, a scientific study was published about fossilized coral washing up on Palmyra. This fossilized coral was examined for evidence of the behavior of the effect of El Ni\u00f1o on the tropical Pacific Ocean over the past 1,000 years. The atoll was purchased for US$30 million; however, certain areas were later purchased by the United States government. TNC, Island Conservation, and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service manage the island, which is used for research. Major programs have been to eliminate rats and invasive palms. One of the challenges has been understanding how the rich peaty soil that can be found on the island developed on the coral, and one of the overall goals is to maintain biodiversity globally in locations similar to Palmyra.\nOn January 18, 2001, Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt issued Secretary's Order No. 3224 designating Palmyra's tidal lands, submerged lands and surrounding waters out to from the water's edge as a National Wildlife Refuge. Subsequently, the Department of the Interior published a regulation providing for the management of the refuge. 66 Fed. Reg. 7660-01 (January 24, 2001). The pertinent part of the regulation states:\nWe will close the refuge to commercial fishing but will permit a low level of compatible recreational fishing for bonefishing and deep water sportfishing under programs that we will carefully manage to ensure compatibility with refuge purposes.\u00a0... Management actions will include protection of the refuge waters and wildlife from commercial fishing activities.\nIn March 2003, TNC conveyed of the emergent land of Palmyra to the United States to be included in the refuge. In 2005, it added 28 acres to the conveyance. TNC and Henry Ernest Cooper's descendants kept their remaining private land tracts.\nThe conveyance to TNC from the Fullard-Leos in 2000 was subject to a preexisting commercial fishing license. Then, in 2001, the Secretary of the Interior banned commercial fishing near Palmyra but allowed sport fishing, as quoted above. In January 2007, the commercial fishing licensees sued the United States in the Court of Federal Claims alleging that, under the Takings Clause, the Interior Department regulation had \"directly confiscated, taken, and rendered wholly and completely worthless\" their purported property interests. The United States moved to dismiss the lawsuit, and the court granted the motion. On April 9, 2009, the court's decision was affirmed by the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.\nIn November 2005, TNC established a new research station on Palmyra to study global warming, coral reefs, invasive species, and other environmental concerns.\nThe Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument, comprising Palmyra Atoll, Baker Island, Howland Island, Jarvis Island, Johnston Atoll, and Kingman Reef, was established on January 6, 2009, by proclamation of President George W. Bush. This national monument extends offshore and is managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. In 2025, this was renamed Pacific Islands Heritage Marine National Monument.\nConservation and restoration.\nIn 2011, Fish and Wildlife Service, TNC, and Island Conservation began an extensive program to eradicate the horde of non-native rats that arrived on Palmyra during World War\"\u00a0\"II. As many as 30,000 rats once roamed the atoll, eating the eggs of native seabirds and destroying the seedlings of one of the largest remaining Pacific stands of \"Pisonia grandis\" trees. The rats were eliminated in 2012; however, 51 animal samples representing 15 species of birds, fish, reptiles, and invertebrates were collected for residue analysis during systematic searches or as nontarget mortalities. Brodifacoum residues (the toxicant employed during the project) were detected in most (84.3%) of the samples analyzed with unknown long-term and sublethal effects. One side effect was the demise of the island's population of Asian tiger mosquitoes. This was claimed to be the first time killing off one unwanted species, which resulted in removing a second. The other mosquito species on the island, \"Culex quinquefasciatus,\" prefers to feed on birds and was not affected by the elimination of rats.\nPost-rat-eradication monitoring documented a notable recruitment event for \"Pisonia grandis\", a dominant tree species that is important throughout the Pacific region. However, by five years post-eradication, a 13-fold increase in recruitment of the range-expanding coconut palm \"Cocos nucifera\" was found.\nBeginning in 2019, TNC worked in partnership with Island Conservation and the Fish and Wildlife Service to restore the native rainforest at Palmyra Atoll by removing dominant \"C.\u00a0nucifera\" coconut palms, which the conservancy says are the result of former copra plantations and military activity. Other trees provide habitat for 11 seabird species, and the conservancy wrote that their re-establishment across the atoll would encourage coral growth and might lessen the local effects of a rise in sea-level. As of December 2019, half a million coconut sprouts had been removed, and tracking has begun of the ecosystem's response.\nPalmyra Atoll's location in the Pacific Ocean, where the southern and northern currents meet, litters its beaches with trash and debris. Plastic mooring buoys and plastic bottles are plentiful.\nThe atoll is dominated by the coconut crab, the largest species of terrestrial invertebrate.\nTo avoid introducing any new invasive species, visitors to the atoll freeze and disinfect their belongings.\nIn September 2024, the Guam Kingfisher was introduced to Palmyra.\nTourism.\nTourists can visit Palmyra Atoll (unlike most of the U.S. minor outlying islands, which are closed to the public), though few do, due to the difficulty of accessing it. Visitors must obtain prior approval from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or the Nature Conservancy. A statement by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service states as follows:\nPublic access to Palmyra Atoll is self-limiting due to the very high expense of traveling to such a remote destination. The Nature Conservancy owns and operates the only airplane runway on Palmyra, and by boat it's a 5\u20137 day sailing trip from Honolulu. There are four ways the public may gain access to the refuge: (1) Working for, contracting with, or volunteering for The Nature Conservancy or Fish and Wildlife Service; (2) Conducting scientific research via Fish and Wildlife Service Special Use Permits; (3) Invitation through The Nature Conservancy sponsored donor trip; (4) Visitation by private recreational sailboat or motorboat.\nAmateur radio (DX) visitors.\nSince the 1940s, Palmyra's most consistent visitors have been members of distance expedition (DX) teams, as the atoll is a popular spot for these amateur radio operators. More than 25 expeditions have arrived. Once on the islands, the hams set up radios and antennas and make as many two-way radio contacts with other hams as possible. Former N. California DX Club president Richard Malcolm Crouch became a Palmyra landowner.\nIn June 1974, the KP6PA DXpedition team helped rescue a couple whose ship had run aground on the reefs. The man, Buck Walker, was later convicted of homicide in the much-publicized \"Sea Wind\" murder case.\nIn 1980, two members of the visiting team were injured severely enough to need an airlift back to Honolulu. The first incident resulted from injuries sustained in a plane crash, as the pilot underestimated wind conditions and the poor state of the landing strip. The second injury, to a surgeon, happened when he fell and cut his hands on broken glass. The surgeon then sued the atoll's owners, as he could no longer practice surgery, and the atoll was closed to visitors for most of the 1980s while cleanup activities were undertaken.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n*https:// by FWS"}
{"id": "23383", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23383", "title": "Palmyra Atoll/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "23384", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23384", "title": "Palmyra Atoll/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "23385", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23385", "title": "Palmyra Atoll/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "23386", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23386", "title": "Palmyra Atoll/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "23387", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23387", "title": "Palmyra Atoll/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "23388", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23388", "title": "Palmyra Atoll/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "23389", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23389", "title": "Palmyra Atoll/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "23391", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23391", "title": "Palmyra Atoll/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "23392", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23392", "title": "History of Panama", "text": "The history of Panama includes the history of the Isthmus of Panama prior to European colonization.\nBefore the arrival of Europeans, Panama was widely settled by peoples speaking Chibchan languages, Choco languages, and Cueva language. There is no accurate knowledge of the size of the Pre-Columbian indigenous population. Estimates range as high as two million people. They lived mainly by fishing, hunting, gathering edible plants and fruits, growing corn, squash, and root crops, and lived in wattle and daub houses with thatched rooves of palm leaves.\nThe first permanent European settlement, \"Santa Mar\u00eda la Antigua del Dari\u00e9n\" on the Americas mainland was founded in 1510. Vasco N\u00fa\u00f1ez de Balboa and Mart\u00edn Fern\u00e1ndez de Enciso agreed on the site near the mouth of the Tarena River on the Atlantic. This was abandoned in 1519 and the settlement moved to Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Asunci\u00f3n de Panam\u00e1 (present day Panama City), the first European settlement on the shores of the Pacific.\nPanama was part of the Spanish Empire for over 300 years (1513\u20131821) and its fate changed with its geopolitical importance to the Spanish crown. In the 16th and 17th centuries, at the height of the Empire, no other region would prove of more strategic and economic importance.\nOn November 10, 1821, in a special event called Grito de La Villa de Los Santos, the residents of the Azuero declared their separation from the Spanish Empire. As was often the case in the New World after independence, control remained with the remnants of colonial aristocracy. In Panama, this elite was a group of less than ten extended families. The derogatory term \"rabiblanco\" (\"white tail\") has been used for generations to refer to the usually Caucasian members of the elite families.\nIn 1852, the isthmus adopted trial by jury in criminal cases and\u201430 years after abolition\u2014would finally declare and enforce an end to slavery\nPre-Columbian history.\nThe earliest artifacts discovered in Panama include Paleo-Indians projectile points. Later central Panama was home to some of the earliest pottery-making in the Americas, such as the Monagrillo cultures dating to about 2500\u20131700 BC. These evolved into significant populations that are best known through the noteworthy burials (dating to c. 500\u2013900 AD) at the Monagrillo archaeological site, and the polychrome pottery of the Gran Cocl\u00e9 style. The monumental monolithic sculptures at the Barriles (Chiriqu\u00ed) site are other important evidence of the ancient isthmian cultures.\nPanama was widely settled by Chibchan languages, Choco languages, and Cueva language speakers, among whom the largest group were the Cueva (a possible lingua franca) speakers. There is no accurate knowledge of the size of the Pre-Columbian indigenous population of the isthmus at the time of the European conquest. Estimates range as high as two million people, but more recent studies place that number closer to 200,000. Archaeological finds, as well as testimonials by early European explorers, describe diverse native isthmian groups exhibiting cultural variety and already experienced in using regional trade routes. The indigenous people of Panama lived by hunting, gathering edible plants &amp; fruits, growing corn, cacao, and root crops. They lived in small huts made of palm leaves over a rounded branch structure, with hammocks hung between the interior walls. There is evidence of coconuts reaching the Pacific coast of Panama from the Philippines in Precolumbian times.\nSpanish colonial period.\nIn 1501, Rodrigo de Bastidas was the first European to explore the Isthmus of Panama sailing along the eastern coast. A year later Christopher Columbus on his fourth voyage, sailing south and eastward from upper Central America, explored Bocas del Toro, Veragua, the Chagres River and Portobelo (Beautiful Port) which he named. Soon Spanish expeditions would converge upon \"Tierra Firma\" (also Tierra Firme, Spanish from the Latin terra firma, \"dry land\" or \"mainland\") which served in Spanish colonial times as the name for the Isthmus of Panama.\nIn 1509, authority was granted to Alonso de Ojeda and Diego de Nicuesa to colonize the territories between the west side of the Gulf of Urab\u00e1 to Cabo Gracias a Dios in present-day Honduras. The idea was to create an early unitary administrative organization similar to what later became Nueva Espa\u00f1a (now Mexico). Tierra Firme later received control over other territories: the Isla de Santiago (now Jamaica) the Cayman Islands; Roncador, Quitasue\u00f1o, and Providencia and other islands now under Colombian control.\nSanta Maria la Antigua del Dari\u00e9n.\nIn September 1510, the first permanent European settlement, \"Santa Mar\u00eda la Antigua del Dari\u00e9n\" on the Americas mainland was founded. Vasco N\u00fa\u00f1ez de Balboa and Mart\u00edn Fern\u00e1ndez de Enciso agreed on the site near the mouth of the Tarena River on the Atlantic, in modern Colombia. Balboa maneuvered and was appointed Mayor on the first official \"cabildo abierto\" (municipal council) held on the mainland. On August 28, 1513, the Santa Mar\u00eda de La Antigua del Dari\u00e9n mission was erected with Fray Juan de Quevedo as the first Catholic Bishop in the continental Americas.\nBalboa expedition.\nOn September 25, 1513, the Balboa expedition verified claims by indigenous people that the Panama isthmus had another coast to the southwest along another ocean. Balboa was the first known European in the Americas to see the Pacific Ocean, which he named the South Sea.\nThe 'fantastic descriptions' of the isthmus by Balboa, as well as by Columbus and other explorers, impressed Ferdinand II of Aragon and Castilla, who named the territory \"Castilla Aurifica\" (or \"Castilla del Oro\", Golden Castille). He assigned Pedro Arias D\u00e1vila (Pedrarias Davila) as Royal Governor. Pedrarias arrived in June 1514 with a 22 vessel, 1,500 men armada. D\u00e1vila was a veteran soldier who had served in the wars against the Moors at Granada and in North Africa.\nColonization.\nOn August 15, 1519, Pedrarias, having abandoned \"Santa Mar\u00eda la Antigua del Dari\u00e9n\", moved the capital of \"Castilla del Oro\" with all its organizational institutions to the Pacific Ocean's coast and founded Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Asunci\u00f3n de Panam\u00e1 (present day Panama City), the first European settlement on the shores of the Pacific.\nFrom about 1520 the Genoese controlled the port of Panama, the first port on the Pacific, founded by the conquest of the Americas. The Genoese obtained a concession from the Spanish to exploit the port mainly for the slave trade of the new world on the Pacific, until the destruction of the primeval city in 1671. In the meantime in 1635 Don Sebasti\u00e1n Hurtado de Corcuera, the then governor of Panama, had recruited Genoese (Participants in the Crusades), Peruvians, and Panamanians, as soldiers to wage war against Muslims in the Philippines and to found the city of Zamboanga.\nGovernor Pedrarias sent Gil Gonz\u00e1lez D\u00e1vila to explore northward, and in 1524 Francisco Hern\u00e1ndez de C\u00f3rdoba to settle that region (present day Nicaragua). Pedrarias was a party to the agreement authorizing the expedition by conquistadors Francisco Pizarro and Diego de Almagro that brought the European discovery and conquest of the Inca Empire (present day Peru).\nIn 1526, Pedrarias was superseded as Governor of Panama by Pedro de los R\u00edos, and retired to Le\u00f3n in Nicaragua, where he was named its new governor on July 1, 1527. Here he died on March 6, 1531, aged 90 or 91.\nPanama was part of the Spanish Empire for over 300 years (1513\u20131821) and its fate changed with the geopolitical importance of the isthmus to the Spanish crown. In the 16th and 17th centuries, at the height of the Empire, no other region would prove of more strategic and economic importance.\nGovernor Pedrarias began building intercontinental and trans-isthmian portage routes, such as the \"Camino Real\" and \"Camino de Cruces\", linking Panama City and the Pacific with Nombre de Dios (and later with \"Portobelo\") and the Atlantic, making possible the establishment of a trans-atlantic system of Treasure Fleets and trade. It is estimated that of all the gold entering Spain from the New World between 1531 and 1660, 60% had arrived at its destiny via the 'Treasure Fleet and Fairs' system from Nombre de Dios/Portobello.\nExplorations and conquest expeditions launched from Panama claimed new lands and riches from Central and South America. Other explorations sought a natural waterway between the Atlantic and the South Sea with the hope of reaching the Molucas (Spice Islands\u2014Maluku Islands) and Cathay (China). Eventually, the practicality of the Isthmus came about as it was the middle of two oceans. Latin-American traders often passed through Panama before proceeding to Cuba before sailing to Spain in the Spanish treasure fleet. It also served a similar purpose to those going to Asia, in which case, Panama was a supporting node in the Transpacific Manila galleons connecting Southeast Asia and Latin America via Spanish Philippines. However, at 1579, the role of Panama was expanded as the royal monopoly Acapulco-Mexico had, with trade with Manila-Philippines, was removed and thus Panama, by decree, became another port that could trade directly with Asia and the Philippines.\nReal Audiencia of Panama.\nIn 1538, the Real Audiencia of Panama, was established, initially with jurisdiction from Nicaragua to Cape Horn. A Real Audiencia (royal audiency) was a judicial district that functioned as an appellate court. Each audiencia had \"oidores\" (a hearer, a judge).\nStrategically located on the Pacific coast, Panama City was relatively free of the permanent menace of pirates that roamed the Atlantic coast for over one and a half centuries, until it was destroyed by a devastating fire, when the privateer Henry Morgan sacked it on January 28, 1671. It was rebuilt and formally established on January 21, 1673, in a peninsula located 8\u00a0km from the original settlement. The ruins of the original city are a tourist attraction known as \"old Panama\".\nIn 1698, a Scottish colony called \"New Caledonia\" was founded west of the Gulf of Dari\u00e9n in the Bay of Caledonia, under the Darien scheme. The scheme failed for a number of reasons, and the ensuing Scottish debt contributed to the 1707 Acts of Union that joined the previously separate states of the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland \u2013 into the Kingdom of Great Britain\".\nWhen Panama was colonized, the indigenous peoples who survived many diseases, massacres and enslavement of the Spanish conquest ultimately fled into the forest and nearby islands. Indian slaves were replaced by imported enslaved Africans.\nPanama developed a distinctive sense of autonomy and regional or national identity well before the rest of the colonies. This was due to its prosperity during the first two centuries (1540\u20131740) while contributing to colonial growth; the placing of extensive regional judicial authority (Real Audiencia) within its jurisdiction; and the pivotal role it played at the height of the Spanish Empire\u2014the first modern global empire.\nIn 1744, Bishop Francisco Javier de Luna Victoria y Castro established the College of San Ignacio de Loyola, and on June 3, 1749, founded La Real y Pontificia Universidad de San Javier. However, by this time, Panama's importance and influence had become insignificant as Spain's power dwindled in Europe and advances in navigation technique increasingly permitted to round Cape Horn in order to reach the Pacific. While the Panama route was short, it was also labor-intensive and expensive because of the loading and unloading and laden-down trek required to get from the one coast to the other. The Panama route was also vulnerable to attack from pirates (mostly Dutch and English) and from \"cimarrons\", escaped former slaves who lived in communes or palenques around the Camino Real in Panama's Interior, and on some of the islands off Panama's Pacific coast. During the latter 18th and early 19th centuries, migrations to the countryside decreased Panama City's population and the isthmus' economy shifted from the tertiary to the primary sector.\nAttempts by other Europeans to take its Caribbean territory prompted Spain to found the Viceroyalty of New Granada (northern South America) in 1713. The Isthmus of Panama was placed under its jurisdiction. But the remoteness of New Granada's capital Santa Fe de Bogot\u00e1 proved to be a great obstacle. The authority of the new Viceroyalty was contested by the seniority, closer proximity, previous ties to the Viceroyalty of Peru in Lima and even Panama's own initiative. This uneasy relationship between Panama and Bogot\u00e1 would persist for a century.\nIndependence.\nIn 1819, New Granada finally achieved freedom from Spain. Panama and the other regions of former New Granada were therefore technically free. Panama considered union with Peru or with Central America in federations that were emerging in the region. Finally it was won over by Gran Columbia's Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar, who, after residing in Jacmel, Haiti, was given 2 armies to liberate South America. Bol\u00edvar's ambitious project of a Gran Colombia (1819\u20131830) was taking shape. Then, timing the action with the rest of the Central American isthmus, Panama declared independence in 1821 and joined the southern federation. As the isthmus' central interoceanic traffic zone, as well as the City of Panama had been of great historical importance to the Spanish Empire and subject of direct influence, so, the differences in social and economic status between the more liberal region of Azuero, and the much more royalist and conservative area of Veraguas displayed contrasting loyalties. When the \"Grito de la Villa de Los Santos\" independence motion occurred, Veraguas firmly opposed it.\nOrigin of the movement.\nThe Panamanian movement for independence can be indirectly attributed to the abolishment of the encomienda system in Azuero, set forth by the Spanish Crown, in 1558 due to repeated protests by locals against the mistreatment of the native population. In its stead, a system of medium and smaller-sized landownership was promoted, thus taking away the power from the large landowners and into the hands of medium and small sized proprietors.\nHowever, the end of the encomienda system in Azuero sparked the conquest of Veraguas in that same year. Under the leadership of Francisco V\u00e1zquez, the region of Veraguas passed into Castillan rule in 1558. In the newly conquered region, the old system of encomienda was reimposed.\nPrinting.\nAfter the region of Veraguas was conquered, the two regions settled for a mutual dislike of each other. Inhabitants of Azuero considered their own region symbolic of the power of the people, while Veraguas represented an old, oppressive order. Diametrically, inhabitants of Veraguas saw their region as a bastion of loyalty and morality, while Azuero was a hotbed for vice and treason.\nThe tension between the two regions peaked when the first printing press arrived in Panama in 1820. Under the guidance of Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Goit\u00eda, the press was used to create a newspaper called \"La Miscel\u00e1nea\". Panamanians Mariano Arosemena, Manuel Mar\u00eda Ayala, and Juan Jos\u00e9 Calvo, as well as Colombian Juan Jos\u00e9 Argote, formed the writing team of the new newspaper, whose stories would circulate throughout every town in the isthmus.\nThe newspaper was put to use for the cause of independence. It circulated stories expounding the virtues of liberty, independence, and the teachings of the French Revolution, as well as stories of the great battles of Bol\u00edvar, the emancipation of the United States from their British masters, and the greatness of men such as Santander, Jose Mart\u00ed, and other such messengers of freedom.\nDue to the narrow area of circulation, those in the capital were able to transmit these intoxicating ideals to other separatists, such as those in Azuero. In Veraguas, however, there remained a strict sense of loyalty to the Spanish Crown.\nJos\u00e9 de F\u00e1brega.\nOn November 10, 1821, in a special event called Grito de La Villa de Los Santos, the residents of the Azuero declared their separation from the Spanish Empire. In Veraguas and Panama City, this act was met with disdain, but of differing degrees. To Veraguas, it was the ultimate act of treason, while in the capital, it was seen as inefficient and irregular, and it forced them to accelerate their plans.\nThe Grito event shook the isthmus to the core. It was a sign, on the part of the Azuero residents, of their antagonism to the independence movement in the capital, who in turn regarded the Azueran movement with contempt, as they believed that Azuerans fought against their right to rule, once the peninsulares (peninsular-born) were long gone.\nThe Grito was an incredibly brave move by Azuero, which feared quick retaliation by staunch loyalist Colonel Jos\u00e9 de F\u00e1brega, who had controlled the isthmus' military supplies. However, separatists in the capital had converted F\u00e1brega to separatism. This gradual process had begun when F\u00e1brega was left in charge by the former Governor General, Juan de la Cruz Mourge\u00f3n, who had left the isthmus on a campaign in Quito in October 1821. Thus, soon after the separatist declaration of Los Santos, F\u00e1brega convened every organization in the capital with separatist interests and formally declared the city's support for independence. No military repercussions occurred due to the skillful bribing of royalist troops.\nHaving sealed the fate of the Spanish Crown's rule in Panama with his defection, J\u00f3se de F\u00e1brega now collaborated with the separatists in the capital to bring about a national assembly, where the fate of the country would be decided. Every region in Panama attended the assembly, including the former loyalist region of Veraguas, which was eventually convinced to join the revolution, due to the sheer fact that nothing more could be done for the royalist presence in Panama. Thus, on November 28, 1821, the national assembly was convened and Independence Act of Panama was officially declared (through F\u00e1brega, who was invested with the title of Head of State of Panama) that the isthmus of Panama had severed its ties with the Spanish Empire and its decision to join New Granada and Venezuela in Bol\u00edvar's recently founded the Republic of Colombia.\nAfter the act, F\u00e1brega wrote to Bol\u00edvar of the event, saying:\nI have the pleasure to communicate to Your Excellency the praiseworthy news of the Isthmus' decision of independence from Spanish dominion. The town of Los Santos, to the comprehension of this Province, was the first town to pronounce with enthusiasm the sacred name of Liberty and immediately almost every other town imitated their glorious example...\nInasmuch as I am concerned, Most Excellent Sir, the effusion of my gratitude is inexplicable, at having had the unique satisfaction capable of filling the human heart, as is to deserve the public confidence in circumstances so critical to govern the independent Isthmus; and I can only correspond to such high distinction with the sacrifices I am willing to make since I devoted myself, as it wished, to the mother country that has seen me be born and to who I owe all that I own...\nBol\u00edvar, in turn, replied,\nIt is not possible to me to express the feeling of joy and admiration that I have experimented to the knowledge that Panama, the center of the Universe, is segregated by itself and freed by its own virtue. The act of independence of Panama is the monument most glorious that any American province can give. Everything there is addressed; justice, generosity, policy and national interest. Transmit, then, you to those meritorious Colombians the tribute of my enthusiasm by their pure patriotism and true actions...\nPanama and Colombia.\nSim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar had hesitated to include Panama in his Gran Colombia project, because he was aware of Panama's geographical obstacles and its critical role in trade throughout history, and while under Spanish tutelage. Also, he had no role in Panama's independence, unlike his important military factor in the independence of Venezuela, New Granada and Ecuador. Thus, while Bol\u00edvar knew that Panama was linked historically and culturally to South America, he also knew that the region was part of Central America geographically. This view is clearly seen in some of his famous documents and quotes such as his Carta de Jamaica (1815):\nThe Isthmian States, from Panama to Guatemala, will perhaps form an association. This magnificent position between the two great oceans could with time become the emporium of the universe. Its canals will shorten the distances of the world: they will narrow commercial ties between Europe, America and Asia; and bring to such fortunate region the tributes of the four parts of the globe. Perhaps some day only there could the capital of the world be established!\nNew Granada will join Venezuela, if they convene to form a new republic, their capital will be Maracaibo...This great nation would be called Colombia in tribute to the justice and gratitude of the creator of our hemisphere.\nNevertheless, in 1821, convinced that under Bol\u00edvar's leadership the nation's destiny would move in the most progressive direction, the Isthmus joined Venezuela, New Granada (present day Colombia) and in 1822 Ecuador. The Republic of Colombia (1819\u20131830) or \u2018Gran Colombia\u2019 as it was called after 1886, roughly corresponded in territory to the former colonial administrative district Viceroyalty of New Granada (1717\u20131819). Although Panama belonged to that Viceroyalty, its economic and political ties had been much closer to the Viceroyalty of Peru (1542\u20131821).\nThe Anfictionic Congress of June 1826, under Bol\u00edvar ideal of territorial unity, brings together representatives of the new countries of the American continent in Panama City, such as Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Central America, the United States, Gran Colombia, Chile, Mexico and Peru, as a confederation in defense of the continent against possible actions of the League of the Holy Alliance formed by the European powers and their claims of lost territories in America.\nPanama separated from the Republic of Colombia In September 1830 under the guidance of General Jos\u00e9 Domingo Espinar. Espinar rebelled against the nation's central government in response to being transferred to another command, and requested that Bol\u00edvar take direct command of the Isthmus Department. It made this a condition to reunification with Republic of Colombia. Bol\u00edvar rejected Espinar's actions and called for Panama to rejoin the central state.\nBecause of overall political tension, Republic of Colombia's final days approached. Bol\u00edvar's vision for territorial unity disintegrated when the Venezuelan General Juan Eligio Alzuru led a military coup against Espinar. After order was restored, in early 1831 Panama rejoined what was left of the republic, forming a territory slightly larger than present Panama and Colombia combined, which by then had adopted the name Republic of New Granada. The alliance lasted 70 years and proved precarious.\n19th century.\nWhen separation of Venezuela and Ecuador were being established, in 1831 the isthmus again reiterated its independence, now under the same General Alzuru as supreme military commander. Abuses by Alzuru's short-lived administration were countered by forces led by Colonel Tom\u00e1s de Herrera, resulting in the defeat and execution of Alzuru in August, and the reestablishment of ties with New Granada.\nA religious conflict sparked a civil war. During this war, in November 1840, the isthmus led by General Tom\u00e1s de Herrera, who assumed the title \"Superior Civil Chief\", declared its independence as did multiple other local authorities. The State of Panama took in March 1841 the name of 'Estado Libre del Istmo', or the Free State of the Isthmus. The new state established external political and economic ties and by March 1841, had drawn up a constitution which included the possibility to rejoin New Granada, but only as a federal district. Herrera's title was changed to \"Superior Chief of State\" in March 1841 and in June 1841 to president. By the time the civil conflict ended and New Granada and the Isthmus had negotiated the Isthmus's reincorporation to the union, Panama's First Republic had been free for 13 months. Reunification happened on December 31, 1841.\nIn the end, the union (called United States of Colombia 1863\u20131886 and the Republic of Colombia since 1886) was made possible by the active participation of the United States under the 1846 Mallarino\u2013Bidlack Treaty until 1903. In the 1840s, two decades after the Monroe Doctrine declared US intentions to be the dominant anti-European imperial power in the Western Hemisphere, North American and French interests became excited about the prospects of constructing railroads and/or canals through Central America to quicken trans-oceanic travel. At the same time, it was clear that New Granada's control over the isthmus was becoming untenable. In 1846, the US and New Granada signed the Mallarino\u2013Bidlack Treaty, granting the US right of way across the Isthmus, and most significantly the power to intervene militarily, ensuring neutrality of the Isthmus, and guaranteeing New Granada sovereignty.\nThe world's first transcontinental railroad, the Panama Railway, was completed in 1855 across the Isthmus from Aspinwall/Col\u00f3n to Panama City. In April, 1856 a conflict known as the Watermelon Riot occurred when a mob of angry Panamanians attacked a group of American travelers who used the Panama railroad to travel to and from the California gold rush after an American traveler stole a watermelon from a local fruit vendor. The outbreak prompted the US to send troops in September, 1856 to protect the railroad stations. This was the first of many times that the US used troops to intervene in Panama.\nThe US used troops to suppress separatist uprisings and social disturbances on many occasions.\nUnder a federalist constitution that was later brought up in 1858 (and another one in 1863), Panama and other constituent states gained almost complete autonomy on many levels of their administration, which led to an often anarchic national state of affairs that lasted roughly until Colombia's return to centralism in 1886 with the establishment of a new Republic of Colombia.\nAs was often the case in the New World after independence, administration and politics were controlled by the remnants of colonial aristocracy. In Panama, this elite was a group of under ten extended families. Though Panama has made enormous advances in social mobility and racial integration, still much of economic and social life is controlled by a small number of families. The derogatory term \"rabiblanco\" (\"white tail\"), of uncertain origin, has been used for generations to refer to the usually Caucasian members of the elite families.\nIn 1852, the isthmus adopted trial by jury in criminal cases and\u201430 years after abolition\u2014would finally declare and enforce an end to slavery.\nPanama Canal.\nPanamanian history which has been shaped by the recurrent theme of transisthmian commerce, looked now at the possibility of a canal to replace the difficult overland route. In 1519, the Spanish crown financed the building of a cobbled track that joined the oceans, and by 1534, the Chagres River was dredged, facilitating traffic for two-thirds of the way.\nFrench start.\nFrom 1882, Ferdinand de Lesseps started work on a canal. By 1889, with engineering challenges caused by frequent landslides, slippage of equipment and mud, plus disease, the effort failed in bankruptcy. A new company was formed in 1894 to recoup some of the losses of the original canal company, but abandoned 19th-century French machinery could easily be seen in Panama until the 21st century, when some was removed and sold for scrap.\nUS involvement.\nUS President Theodore Roosevelt convinced US Congress to take on the abandoned works in 1902, while Colombia was in the midst of the Thousand Days' War. During the war, there were at least three attempts by Panamanian Liberals to seize control of Panama and potentially achieve full autonomy, including one led by Liberal guerrillas like Belisario Porras and Victoriano Lorenzo, each of whom was suppressed by a collaboration of Conservative Colombian and US forces under the Mallarino\u2013Bidlack Treaty which had been in effect since 1846. The Roosevelt administration proposed to Colombia that the US should control the canal in return for a $10 million payment and $250,000 annual payment that would begin in 1912. The negotiations initially went well for the US and it received everything it was asking for in the Hay\u2013Herr\u00e1n Treaty, but the Colombian government, upset by the US bias in the treaty, refused to ratify it and began demanding more money. By September 1903, negotiations had all but broken down. The US then changed tactics.\nAccording to the treaty, the US was to pay $40,000,000 to the stockholders of the French company that had tried to build the canal across Panama. Colombia's rejection of the treaty confronted these French investors with the prospect of losing everything. At this point, the French company's chief lobbyist (and a major stockholder), Philippe Bunau-Varilla went into action. Justly confident that the Roosevelt administration would support his initiative, he met with Manuel Amador, the leader of the Panamanian Independence movement, in a suite in the Waldorf-Astoria hotel in New York where he wrote him a $100,000 check to fund a renewed Panamanian revolt. In return, Bunau-Varilla would become Panama's representative in Washington.\nBunau-Varilla arranged for the Panama City fire department to stage a revolution against Colombia which officially began on November 3, 1903. The US Navy gunboat was dispatched to local waters around the city of Col\u00f3n, where 474 Colombian soldiers had landed to cross the isthmus and crush the rebellion. \"Nashville\"'s commanding officer, Commander John Hubbard, sent a small party ashore and, with the support of the American superintendent of the Panama Railroad, prevented the Colombians from taking the train to Panama City. On November 13, 1903, after 57 years of policing Bogot\u00e1's interests, the US formally recognized the country of Panama.\nLess than three weeks later, on November 18, 1903, the Hay\u2013Bunau-Varilla Treaty was signed between Frenchman Philippe Bunau-Varilla, who had promptly been appointed Panamanian ambassador to the United States, representing Panamanian interests, and the US Secretary of State John Hay. The treaty allowed for the construction of a canal and US sovereignty over a strip of land wide and long, (16 kilometers by 80 kilometers) on either side of the Panama Canal Zone. In that zone, the US would build a canal, then administer, fortify, and defend it \"in perpetuity\".\nRoosevelt's explanation of the US role in the region was made clear throughout many speeches since 1902. First, he invoked the Mallarino\u2013Bidlack Treaty; second, he made clear that Colombia had rejected his offers for a deal; and finally, he argued that Colombia had never been able to prevent Panama from gaining sovereignty. On his December 7, 1903 Third Annual Message to the Senate and House of Representatives, he enumerated an extensive list of interventions the US armed forces had made in Panama since 1850 explaining:\nThe above is only a partial list of the revolutions, rebellions, insurrections, riots, and other outbreaks that have occurred during the period in question; yet they number fifty-three for the fifty-three years...\nAnd he added:\nIn short, the experience of over half a century has shown Colombia to be utterly incapable of keeping order on the Isthmus. Only the active interference of the United States has enabled her to preserve so much as a semblance of sovereignty. Had it not been for the exercise by the United States of the police power in her interest, her connection with the Isthmus would have been sundered long ago.\nTreaties like the Bidlack\u2013Mallarino Treaty were considered constitutional and legal, even though they involved US interference in matters of a sovereign country. Roosevelt's speeches made clear that the US decided to unilaterally break with the Bidlack\u2013Mallarino treaty and, instead of solving the internal Panamanian problem as the treaty stipulated, helped Panama to separate from Colombia. Thus it enforced only that part of the treaty which was of interest to the US, namely, \"it granted the US significant transit rights over the Panamanian isthmus\".\nIt is a common mistake to call the 1903 events \u2018Panama's independence from Colombia\u2019. Panamanians do not consider themselves former Colombians. They celebrate their independence from Spain on November 28, 1821, and separation from Colombia on November 3, 1903, which is referred to as \"Separation Day\".\nReaction to the Hay\u2013Bunau-Varilla Treaty.\nThe reaction to the treaty in the US was generally positive, public support for building a canal (as the treaty effectively guaranteed) having already been high. The Panamanian reaction, however, was more mixed. Although the new Panamanian government, led by Manuel Amador, was happy to have its independence from Colombia, they also knew that the US could easily assert itself over them if it felt they were not working in line with its interests. They had instructed their ambassador, Bunau-Varilla, to not make any agreements with the US that would compromise Panama's new freedom, nor could he make a canal treaty without consulting them. Both of these orders were ignored. Nevertheless, the Panamanian government, fearing the alternative, ratified the treaty.\nBy the time the Canal opened in 1914, many Panamanians still questioned the validity of the treaty. The controversy surrounding the US's presence in Panama was a major issue in Panamanian politics throughout the following decades and revisions to the Hay\u2014Bunau-Varilla Treaty in 1936 (Arias-Roosevelt/Hull-Alfaro Treaty) and 1955 (Remon\u2013Eisenhower Treaty) both failed to adequately address the situation. The controversy would continue until the US agreed to hand over the Canal Zone wholly to Panama in the 1977 Torrijos\u2013Carter Treaties.\nConstruction.\nThe Panama Canal was built by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers between 1904 and 1914; the existing 83-kilometer (50-mi.) lock canal is considered one of the world's great engineering triumphs. On January 5, 1909, the government of Rafael Reyes in Colombia signed and presented to its Congress a treaty that would officially recognize the loss of its former province, but the treaty was not ratified, due to popular and legislative opposition. Negotiations continued intermittently until a new treaty was signed on December 21, 1921, which formally accepted the independence of Panama.\nRoosevelt's policy to \u2018walk softly and carry a big stick\u2019, and the Canal Company's apartheid early on, have been much criticized. Yet, beyond the financial injection to the country's economy and workforce, the changes brought about by the canal venture were largely positive for Panama. To sanitize the area before and during construction, engineers developed an infrastructure to treat potable water, sewage, and garbage, that encompassed the Canal Zone and the cities of Panama and Colon.\nStandards in construction, transportation and landscaping for the Canal Zone's urban development during the first half of the 20th century had no parallel in tropical regions in the hemisphere. Dr. William Gorgas used techniques pioneered by Cuban physician Carlos Finley, to rid the area of yellow fever between 1902 and 1905. Gorgas' work in the sanitation of the Canal Zone and the cities of Panama and Colon eventually made him sought after internationally.\nThe Panama Canal, the area supporting the Canal, and remaining US military bases were turned over to Panama on December 31, 1999, in accordance with the Torrijos-Carter Treaties.\nMilitary coups and coalitions.\nFrom 1903 until 1968, Panama was a republic dominated by a commercially oriented oligarchy. During the 1950s, the Panamanian military began to challenge the oligarchy's political hegemony. The January 9, 1964 Martyrs' Day riots escalated tensions between the country and the US government over its long-term occupation of the Canal Zone. Twenty rioters were killed, and 500 other Panamanians were wounded. 4 US soldiers were killed as well.\nIn October 1968, Dr. Arnulfo Arias Madrid was elected president for the third time. Twice ousted by the Panamanian military, he was ousted again as president by the National Guard after only 10 days in office. A military junta government was established, and the commander of the National Guard, Brig. Gen. Omar Torrijos, emerged as the principal power in Panamanian political life. Torrijos implemented a populist policy, with the inauguration of schools and the creation of jobs, the redistribution of agricultural land (which was his government's most popular measure). The reforms were accompanied by a major public works programme. It also faces North American multinationals, demanding wage increases for workers and redistributing 180,000 hectares of uncultivated land. In February 1974, following OPEC's model for oil, it attempted to form the Union of Banana Exporting Countries with the other Central American States to respond to the influence of these multinationals, but did not obtain their support. Its policy promotes the emergence of a middle class and the representation of indigenous communities.\nOn September 7, 1977, the Torrijos\u2013Carter Treaties were signed by the Panamanian head of state Omar Torrijos and US President Jimmy Carter for the complete transfer of the Canal and the 14 US army bases from the US to Panama by 1999. These treaties also granted the US a perpetual right of military intervention. Certain portions of the Zone and increasing responsibility over the Canal were turned over in the intervening years.\nManuel Noriega regime (1983\u20131989).\nTorrijos died in a mysterious plane crash on July 31, 1981. The circumstances of his death generated charges and speculation that he was assassinated. Torrijos' death changed the tone but not the direction of Panama's political evolution. Despite constitutional amendments in 1983, which appeared to proscribe a political role for the military, the Panama Defense Forces (PDF) continued to dominate political life behind a facade of civilian government. By then, General Manuel Noriega was firmly in control of both the PDF and the civilian government, and had created the Dignity Battalions to help suppress opposition.\nDespite undercover collaboration with US president Ronald Reagan on his Contra war in Nicaragua (including the Iran\u2013Contra affair), to deliver arms and drugs by airplane, relations between the United States and Panama worsened in the 1980s. In response to a domestic political crisis and an attack on the US embassy, the US froze economic and military aid to Panama in the summer of 1987. Tensions sharpened in February 1988 when Noriega was indicted in US courts for drug-trafficking. In April 1988, Reagan invoked the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, freezing Panamanian Government assets in US banks, withholding fees for using the canal, and prohibiting payments by US agencies, firms, and individuals to the Noriega regime. The country went into turmoil.\nNational elections of May 1989 were marred by accusations of fraud from both sides. Panamanian authorities arrested American Kurt Muse who had set up an installation to jam Panamanian radio and broadcast phony election returns. However, the election proceeded and Guillermo Endara won by a margin of over three-to-one over Noriega. The Noriega regime promptly annulled the election, citing massive US interference, and embarked on new repression.\nForeign observers including the Catholic Church and Jimmy Carter certified Endara's electoral victory despite widespread attempts at fraud by the regime. At the request of the US, the Organization of American States convened a meeting of foreign ministers but was unable to obtain Noriega's departure. The US began sending thousands of troops to bases in the canal zone. Panamanian authorities alleged that US troops left their bases and illegally stopped and searched vehicles in Panama. An American Marine got lost in the former French quarter of Panama City, ran a roadblock, and was killed by Panamanian Police (which was a part of the Panamanian Military).\nUS invasion (1989).\nBy autumn 1989 the regime was barely clinging to power. On December 20, US troops began an invasion of Panama. Under codename Just Cause Operation they achieved their objectives and began withdrawal on December 27. The US was obligated to return control of the Canal to Panama on January 1 due to a treaty signed decades before. Endara was sworn in as president at a US military base on the day of the invasion. Noriega served a 40-year sentence for drug trafficking before his eventual death on May 29, 2017.\nThe US estimated the civilian death toll at 202, while the UN estimated 500 civilians dead and Americas Watch put the civilian death toll at 300.\nAfter the invasion, US President George H. W. Bush announced a billion dollars in aid to Panama. Critics argue that about half of the aid was a gift from American taxpayers to American businesses, because $400 million consisted of incentives for US business to export products to Panama, $150 million was to pay off bank loans and $65 million went to private sector loans and guarantees to US investors.\nAfter Noriega (1989\u2013present).\nIn the morning of December 20, 1989, hours after the invasion started, the presumptive winner of the May 1989 election, Guillermo Endara, was sworn in as president of Panama at a US military installation in the Canal Zone. On December 27, Panama's Electoral Tribunal invalidated the Noriega regime's annulment of the May 1989 election and confirmed the victory of opposition candidates for president (Endara) and vice presidents (Guillermo Ford and Ricardo Arias Calder\u00f3n).\nPresident Endara took office as the head of a four-party minority government, pledging to foster Panama's economic recovery, transform the Panamanian military into a police force under civilian control, and strengthen democratic institutions. During its 5-year term, the Endara government struggled to meet the public's high expectations. Its new police force proved to be a major improvement in outlook and behavior over its thuggish predecessor but was not fully able to deter crime. After an internationally monitored election campaign, Ernesto P\u00e9rez Balladares was sworn in as president on September 1, 1994.\nHe ran as the candidate for a three-party coalition dominated by the Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), the erstwhile political arm of the military dictatorship during the Torrijos and Norieiga years. A long-time member of the PRD, P\u00e9rez Balladares worked skillfully during the campaign to rehabilitate the PRD's image, emphasizing the party's populist Torrijos roots rather than its association with Noriega. He won the election with only 33% of the vote when the major non-PRD forces, unable to agree on a joint candidate, splintered into competing factions. His administration carried out economic reforms and often worked closely with the US on implementing the Canal treaties.\nOn May 2, 1999, Mireya Moscoso, the widow of former president Arnulfo Arias Madrid, defeated PRD candidate Mart\u00edn Torrijos, son of the late dictator. The elections were considered free and fair. Moscoso took office on September 1, 1999.\nDuring her administration, Moscoso tried to strengthen social programs, especially for child and youth development, protection, and general welfare. Education programs have also been highlighted. More recently, Moscoso focused on bilateral and multilateral free trade initiatives with the hemisphere. Moscoso's administration successfully handled the Panama Canal transfer and has been effective in administering of the Canal.\nPanama's official counternarcotics cooperation has historically been excellent. For example, officials of the US Drug Enforcement Administration praised the role of Noriega prior to his falling-out with the US over his own drug dealing. The Panamanian Government expanded money-laundering legislation and concluded with the US a Counternarcotics Maritime Agreement and a Stolen Vehicles Agreement. The Panamanian Government has enforced intellectual property rights and concluded the very important Bilateral Investment Treaty Amendment with the US and an agreement with the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC). The Moscoso administration was very supportive of the United States in combating international terrorism.\nIn 2004, Mart\u00edn Torrijos again ran for president and won the election. In 2009, conservative supermarket magnate Ricardo Martinelli won a landslide victory in the presidential election and he succeeded president Mart\u00edn Torrijos. Five years later, President Martinelli was succeeded by Juan Carlos Varela, the winner of 2014 election. In July 2019, Laurentino \"Nito\" Cortizo of the Democratic Revolution Party (PRD) was sworn in as the new President of Panama, after winning the May 2019 presidential election. On 1 July 2024, Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Mulino was sworn in as Panama's new president. Mulino, a close ally of former president Ricardo Martinelli, won the presidential election in May 2024. Increased immigration of Chinese to Panama soon rapidly made the Chinese in Panama form 4% of the population, supplanting the natives, of which, they are accused by the United States under President Donald Trump of militarily working for China amidst the strategic Panama Canal which form the fulcrum of trade in the Americas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23393", "revid": "1722754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23393", "title": "Geography of Panama", "text": "Panama is a country located in Central America, bordering both the Caribbean Sea and the Pacific Ocean, between Colombia and Costa Rica. Panama is located on the narrow and low Isthmus of Panama.\nThis S-shaped isthmus is situated between 7\u00b0 and 10\u00b0 north latitude and 77\u00b0 and 83\u00b0 west longitude. Panama encompasses approximately . It is long, and between wide.\nElevation.\nThe dominant feature of Panama's landform is the central spine of mountains and hills that forms the continental divide. The divide does not form part of the great mountain chains of North America, and only near the Colombian border are there highlands related to the Andean system of South America. The spine that forms the divide is the highly eroded arch of an uplift from the sea bottom, in which peaks were formed by volcanic intrusions.\nThe western portion of the spine, the Cordillera Central, extends from Costa Rica to a low saddle near the Panama Canal. Within the Cordillera Central are three ranges. The lofty Cordillera de Talamanca extends east from Costa Rica and contains Panama's highest peak, Volc\u00e1n Bar\u00fa, at . Volc\u00e1n Bar\u00fa (or Volc\u00e1n de Chiriqu\u00ed) last erupted in 1550 and is the apex of a highland that includes Panama's richest soil. Further east are the lower Serran\u00eda de Tabasar\u00e1 and Sierra de Veraguas ranges, the latter extending towards the Panama Canal.\nClimate.\nPanama has a tropical climate. Temperatures are uniformly high\u2014as is the relative humidity\u2014and there is little seasonal variation. Diurnal ranges are low; on a typical dry-season day in the capital city, the early morning minimum may be and the afternoon maximum . The temperature seldom exceeds for more than a short time.\nTemperatures on the Pacific side of the isthmus are somewhat lower than on the Caribbean, and breezes tend to rise after dusk in most parts of the country. Temperatures are markedly cooler in the higher parts of the mountain ranges, and frosts occur in the Cordillera de Talamanca in western Panama, with pipes having been frozen at as low as elevation.\nClimatic regions are determined less on the basis of temperature than on rainfall, which varies regionally from less than to more than per year. Almost all of the rain falls during the rainy season, which is usually from May through November, but varies in length from seven to nine months, with certain exception due to monsoons. The cycle of rainfall is determined primarily by two factors: moisture from the Caribbean, which is transported by north and northeast winds prevailing during most of the year, and the continental divide, which acts as a rain shield for the Pacific lowlands. Panama lies outside the Main Development Region for tropical cyclone activity. \nA third influence that is present during the late autumn is the southwest wind off the Pacific. This wind brings some precipitation to the Pacific lowlands, modified by the highlands of the Pen\u00ednsula de Azuero, which form a partial rainshield for much of central Panama. Rainfall is generally much heavier on the Caribbean than on the Pacific side. The annual average in Panama City is little more than half of that in Col\u00f3n.\nExamples.\nPacific Coast\nCaribbean coast\nInterior lowlands\nHighlands\nVegetation.\nPanama's tropical environment supports an abundance of plants. Forests dominate, interrupted in places by grasslands, scrub, and crops. Nearly 40 percent of Panama is wooded. Deforestation is a continuing threat to the rain-drenched woodlands. Tree cover has been reduced by more than 50 percent since the 1940s.\nSubsistence farming, widely practiced from the northeastern jungles to the southwestern grasslands, consists largely of corn, bean, and tuber plots. Mangrove swamps occur along parts of both coasts, with banana plantations occupying deltas near Costa Rica. In many places, a multi-canopied rain forest abuts the swamp on one side of Panama and increases to the lower reaches of slopes in the other.\nHarbors.\nThe Caribbean coastline is marked by several good natural harbors. The numerous islands of the Archipi\u00e9lago de Bocas del Toro, near the Beaches of Costa Rica, provide an extensive natural roadstead and shield the banana port of Almirante. The over 350 San Blas Islands, near Colombia, are strung out for more than along the sheltered Caribbean coastline.\nThe major port on the Pacific coastline is Balboa. The principal islands are those of the Archipi\u00e9lago de las Perlas in the middle of the Gulf of Panama, the penal colony on the Isla de Coiba in the Golfo de Chiriqu\u00ed, and the decorative island of Taboga, a tourist attraction that can be seen from Panama City. In all, there are some 1,000 islands off the Pacific coast.\nThe Pacific coastal waters are extraordinarily shallow. Depths of are reached only outside the perimeters of both the Gulf of Panama and the Golfo de Chiriqu\u00ed, and wide mud flats extend up to seaward from the coastlines. As a consequence, the tidal range is extreme. A variation of about between high and low water on the Caribbean coast contrasts sharply with over on the Pacific coast, and some up the R\u00edo Tuira, the tidal range is still over . A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 1,016\u00a0km2 of tidal flats in Panama, making it the 32nd ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.\nWaterways.\nNearly 500 rivers lace Panama's rugged landscape. Mostly unnavigable, many originate as swift highland streams, meander in valleys, and form coastal deltas. The R\u00edo Chepo and the R\u00edo Chagres are sources of hydroelectric power. The Kampia lake and Madden Lake (also filled with water from the R\u00edo Chagres) provide hydroelectricity for the area of the former Canal Zone.\nMore than 300 rivers empty into the Pacific. These Pacific-oriented rivers are longer and slower running than those of the Caribbean side. Their basins are also more extensive. One of the longest is the R\u00edo Tuira which flows into the Golfo de San Miguel and is the nation's only river navigable by larger vessels.\nAdministrative divisions.\nPanama is divided into 10 provinces, plus several indigenous \"comarcas\". The provinces are divided into districts, which in turn are subdivided into sections called corregimientos. Configurations of the corregimientos are changed periodically to accommodate population changes as revealed in the census reports.\nGeneral facts.\nGeographic coordinates: \nMap references:\nNorthern South America, the Caribbean and sometimes Central America\nArea:\n\"total:\"\n75,420\u00a0km2\n\"land:\"\n74,340\u00a0km2\n\"water:\"\n1,080\u00a0km2\nLand boundaries:\n\"total:\"\n555\u00a0km\n\"border countries:\"\nColombia 225\u00a0km, Costa Rica 330\u00a0km\nCoastline:\n2,490\u00a0km\nMaritime claims:\n\"territorial sea:\"\n\"contiguous zone:\"\n\"exclusive economic zone:\"\n and or edge of continental margin\nClimate:\ntropical maritime; hot, humid, cloudy; prolonged rainy season (May to January), short dry season (January to May)\nTerrain:\ninterior mostly steep, rugged mountains and dissected, upland plains; coastal areas largely plains and rolling hills\nExtreme points:\nNorthernmost point: Point Manzanillo\nSouthernmost point: Punta Mariato, Cerro Hoya National Park, Veraguas\nWesternmost point: Border with Costa Rica, Chiriqu\u00ed Province\nEasternmost point: Border with Colombia, Dari\u00e9n ProvinceLowest point: Pacific Ocean 0\u00a0mHighest point: Volcan de Chiriqui 3,475\u00a0m\nNatural resources:\ncopper, mahogany forests, shrimp, hydropower\nLand use:\n\"arable land:\"\n7.16%\n\"permanent crops:\"\n2.51%\n\"other:\"\n90.33% (2011)\nIrrigated land:\n346.2\u00a0km2 (2003)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n148\u00a0km3 (2011)\nNatural hazards:\noccasional severe storms and forest fires in the Darien area, earthquakes\nEnvironment - current issues:\nwater pollution from agricultural runoff threatens fishery resources; deforestation of tropical rain forest; land degradation and soil erosion threatens siltation of Panama Canal; air pollution in urban areas; mining threatens natural resources\nEnvironment - international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling\n\"signed, but not ratified:\"\nMarine Life Conservation\nGeography - note:\nstrategic location at eastern end of Central America; controls Panama Canal that links Atlantic Ocean via Caribbean Sea with Pacific Ocean. Central Panama has the unusual distinction of having the sun rise over the Pacific and set over the Atlantic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23394", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23394", "title": "Demographics of Panama", "text": " \nThis is a demography of the population of Panama including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population.\nPanama's 2020 census has been postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic but the government are currently assessing additional implications. They are evaluating the preparatory processes that can begin now, such as procurement.\nPopulation size and structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPanama's population was people in , compared to 860,000 in 1950. The proportion of the population aged below 15 in 2010 was 29%. 64.5% of the population were aged between 15 and 65, with 6.6% of the population being 65 years or older.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2013) (Data refer to projections based on the 2010 Population Census.):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021) (Data based on the 2010 Population Census.): \n2020 Statistics.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nPopulation distribution.\nSource:\nMore than half the population lives in the Panama City-Col\u00f3n metropolitan corridor.\nBocasdel Toro \nCocl\u00e9 \nCol\u00f3n \nChiriqu\u00ed \nDari\u00e9n \nHerrera \nLos Santos \nPanam\u00e1Oeste \nPanam\u00e1 \nVeraguas \nGuna Yala \nEmber\u00e1 \nEmber\u00e1 \nNasoTj\u00ebr Di \nNg\u00e4be-Bugl\u00e9 \nMadugand\u00ed \nWargand\u00ed \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nVital statistics.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nUN estimates.\nRegistration of vital events (especially deaths) was in Panama not complete until the end of the 20th century. The Population Departement of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n(p)=preliminary data\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe culture, customs, and language of Panama are predominantly Caribbean Spanish. In 2010 the population was 65% Mestizo (mixed European and Amerindian), 12.3% Native Panamanians, 9.2% black, 6.8% mulattoes, and 6.7% white. According to the 2023 census 17.2% of the population were native Panamanians, 31.7% was of (part) African descent, while the remainder (51%) were mestizo (mixed European and Amerindian) and whites.\nEuropean Panamanians.\nEuropean Panamanians or Caucasian ethnic groups in Panama include Spanish, British and Irish, Dutch, French, Germans, Italians, Portuguese, Poles, Russians or Ukrainians (a large number are Jews), Greeks, and Americans.\nAsian Panamanians.\nPanama has a considerable population of Asian origin; in particular those of Chinese and West Asian (Lebanese, Palestinian, and Syrian) origin. The first Chinese immigrated to Panama from southern China in the 19th century to help build the Panama Railroad. There followed several waves of immigrants, especially after the 1970s, when the ensuing decades saw up to 80,000 immigrants from all over China. At least 50,000 Panamanians are ethnically Chinese, though some estimates count as many as 135,000. Most of the Chinese population reside in the province of Chiriqu\u00ed. Some studies suggest that almost 1 million Panamanians have at least one Chinese ancestor.\nAfrican Panamanians.\nAfro-Panamanians first arrived during the colonial era. They are intermixed in the general population or live in small Afro-Panamanian communities along the Atlantic Coast and in villages within the Dari\u00e9n jungle. Most of the people in Darien are fishermen or small-scale farmers growing crops such as bananas, rice and coffee as well as raising livestock. Other Afro-Panamanians descend from later migrants from the Caribbean who came to work on railroad-construction projects, commercial agricultural enterprises, and (especially) the canal. Important Afro-Caribbean community areas include towns and cities such as Col\u00f3n, Cristobal and Balboa, in the former Canal Zone, as well as the R\u00edo Abajo area of Panama City. Another region with a large Afro-Caribbean population is the province of Bocas del Toro on the Caribbean coast just south of Costa Rica.\nMost of the Panamanian population of West Indian descent owe their presence in the country to the monumental efforts to build the Panama Canal in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Three-quarters of the 50,000 workers who built the canal were Afro-Caribbean migrants from the British West Indies. Thousands of Afro-Caribbean workers were recruited from Jamaica, Barbados and Trinidad.\nLanguages.\nMany languages, including seven indigenous languages, are spoken in Panama, although Spanish is the official and dominant language. The local variant is Panamanian Spanish. English is sometimes spoken by many professionals and those working in the business or governmental sectors of society.\nIndigenous languages include Buglere, Guaym\u00ed, Guna, Northern Embera and Teribe. Bocas del Toro Creole is also spoken.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe majority of Panamanians are Christian; most are Roman Catholics as a result centuries of Spanish colonial influence. Other faiths exist in Panama by the country's tolerance and freedom of religion, there are large Protestant, Jewish, Bah\u00e1'\u00ed, Muslim and Hindu religious groups in Panama.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23395", "revid": "48559704", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23395", "title": "Politics of Panama", "text": " \nThe politics of Panama take place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic with a multi-party system, whereby the President of Panama is both head of state and head of government.\nExecutive power is exercised by the president. Legislative power is vested in the National Assembly. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The branches are according to Panama's Political Constitution of 1972, reformed by the \"Actos Reformatorios\" of 1978 and the \"Acto Constitucional\" of 1983, united in cooperation and limited through a system of checks and balances.\nThree independent organizations with clearly defined responsibilities are found in the constitution: the Comptroller General of the Republic has the responsibility to manage public funds; the Electoral Tribunal has the responsibility to guarantee liberty, transparency, and the efficacy of the popular vote; and the Ministry of the Public oversees interests of State and of the municipalities.\nThe USAID website ranks Panama at 0.83/1 for democracy, but only 0.5/1 for political corruption.\nExecutive branch.\nThe Executive Branch includes a president and one vice president. The president and vice-president are elected on a single ballot for a five-year term by direct popular vote. Presidents are not allowed to immediately run for re-election, but can run again after waiting five years.\nLegislative Branch.\nThe legislative branch consists of a unicameral National Assembly (\"Asamblea Nacional\"), composed of 71 members elected to five-year terms from single- and multi-seat constituencies.\nJudiciary.\nThe Judicial Organ administers justice in a permanent, free and expeditious manner. It comprises the Supreme Court of Justice, the Tribunals, and the judges established by law, according to the constitution of Panama (title VII, chapter 1).\nElections.\nAn autonomous Electoral Tribunal supervises voter registration, the election process, and the activities of political parties. Everyone over the age of 18 is required to vote, although those who fail to do so are not penalized.\nPolitical Culture.\nThe dominant political parties in Panamanian history have been the PRD and the Paname\u00f1ista (former Arnulfista Party). These parties were founded by charismatic and strong political enemies, Omar Torrijos (PRD)\u2014the deceased father of former president, Mart\u00edn Torrijos\u2014and Arnulfo Arias (Paname\u00f1ista/Arnulfista), late husband of the ex-president, Mireya Moscoso. Even though these leaders died years ago, their aura is revived by their followers, and they are present in every election.\nCorruption.\nPanamanians have been working to root out the after-effects of several decades of military rule since the country's return to democracy in 1989. In 2020, it was reported that Panama loses approximately 1% of its GDP every year to corruption, including government corruption. However, the country is working to improve its democracy, and in July 2020, two ex-presidents of the country (Ricardo Martinelli and Juan Carlos Varela) were questioned over their involvement in the Odebrecht bribery scandal. Martinelli was eventually released after being found not guilty, but was subsequently re-arrested on charges of money laundering. Two sons of Martinelli (Luis Enrique and Ricardo Alberto Martinelli) were also charged with bribery and money laundering by the United States. In August 2020, Panama joined forces with the United States to form a joint task force to root out money laundering.\nHowever, despite the work being done, much still remains to be accomplished, and the International Trade Administration notes that corruption remains the largest hurdle for businesses wanting to invest in the country.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23396", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23396", "title": "Economy of Panama", "text": "The economy of Panama is based mainly on the tourism and services sector, which accounts for nearly 80% of its GDP and accounts for most of its foreign income. Services include banking, commerce, insurance, container ports, and flagship registry, medical and health and tourism. Historically, the Panama Canal (and the nearby Col\u00f3n Free Trade Zone) was the key source of Panama's income, but its importance has been displaced by the services sector. \nThe country's industry includes the manufacturing of aircraft spare parts, cement and ceramics, drinks, adhesives, and textiles. Additionally, exports from Panama include bananas, shrimp, sugar, coffee, and clothing. Panama's economy is fully dollarized, with the US dollar being legal tender in the country. Panama was the first foreign country to adopt the U.S. dollar as its legal currency (1903) after its secession from Colombia (with U.S. help) temporarily deprived it of a local currency. Panama is a high income economy with a history of low inflation.\nEconomic history.\nSince the early 16th century, Panama's geographic location gave the country a comparative advantage. From the earliest Spanish times, ports on each coast and a trail between them handled much of Spain's colonial trade to the benefit of the inhabitants of the port cities.\nPanama has always been dependent on world commerce for its prosperity, and it is affected by the cyclical nature of international trade. The economy stagnated in the 18th century as colonial exchange via the isthmus declined. In the mid-19th century, Panama's economy boomed as a result of increased cargo and passengers associated with the California Gold Rush. A railroad across the isthmus, completed in 1855, extended economic growth for about fifteen years until completion of the first transcontinental railroad in the United States led to a decline in trans-isthmian traffic.\nFrance's efforts to construct a canal across the isthmus in the 1880s and efforts by the United States in the early 20th century stimulated the Panamanian economy. The United States completed the canal in 1914. However, the world depression of the 1930s reduced international trade and canal traffic, causing widespread unemployment in the terminal cities and generating a flow of workers to subsistence farming. During World War II, canal traffic did not increase, but the economy boomed as the convoy system and the presence of United States forces, sent to defend the canal, increased foreign spending in the canal cities. The end of the war was followed by an economic depression and another movement of unemployed people into agriculture.\nThe postwar depression gave way to rapid economic expansion between 1950 and 1970. All sectors contributed to the growth. Agricultural output rose, and commerce evolved into a relatively sophisticated wholesale and retail system. Banking, tourism, and the export of services to the Canal Zone grew rapidly. Most importantly, an increase in world trade provided a major stimulus to use of the canal and to the economy.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, Panama's growth fluctuated with the vagaries of the world economy. After 1973, economic expansion slowed considerably as a result of a number of international and domestic factors. In the early 1980s, the economy rebounded. The acute recession in Latin America after 1982, however, wreaked havoc on Panama's economy. This period coincided with the rise to power of General Manuel Noriega during which Panama became increasingly indebted.\nThe United States started to pursue Noriega, culminating in sanctions that froze Panama's assets in the United States, and because Panama used the US dollar it was forced to default on its IMF debt in 1987. Economic turmoil in the country included a general strike and the banking system closing down for two months. The United States invaded Panama in 1989 and forced the surrender of Noriega. Panama regained access to IMF funds in 1992.\nAfter taking office in 1994, President Ernesto Perez Balladares instituted an economic liberalization program designed to liberalize the trade regime, attract foreign investment, privatize state-owned enterprises, institute fiscal discipline. After two years of near-stagnation, there was strong GDP growth in 1997\u20131998. The most important sectors which drove growth were the Panama Canal and the shipping and port activities of the Col\u00f3n Free Trade Zone.\nDuring the Moscoso administration beginning in 1999, Moscoso attempted to strengthen social programs. Moscoso's administration successfully handled the Panama Canal transfer and was effective in the administration of the Canal.\nUnder the Mart\u00edn Torrijos administration beginning in 2004, Panama continued strong economic growth and initiated the 2007\u20132016 Panama Canal expansion project. The canal expansion doubled the waterway capacity. Strong economic performance had reduced the national poverty level to 29% in 2008.\nIn 2008, Panama had the second most unequal income distribution in Latin America. The Torrijos government implemented tax reforms, as well as social security reforms, and backed regional trade agreements and development of tourism. Not a CAFTA signatory, Panama in December 2006 independently negotiated a free trade agreement with the US.\nIn May 2009, Ricardo Martinelli was elected president, and promised to promote free trade, establish a metro system, and complete the expansion plan for the Panama Canal.\nPanama's economic role has been compared to that of Singapore: commentators have described the country as \"the Singapore of central America\", although Panama's involvement in the Odebrecht scandal has dealt a blow to official attempts to market Panama using this expression.\nEconomic sectors.\nFinancial services.\nPanama has a substantial financial services sector and no central bank to act as a lender of last resort to rescue banks that get in trouble. As a result, Panamanian banks are very conservatively run, with an average capital adequacy ratio of 15.6% in 2012, nearly double the legal minimum. The sector grew up providing trade finance for trade passing through the Canal, and later evolved into money laundering for the drug trade under Noriega. Since the 2008 financial crisis, the country has been trying to shake off its reputation as a tax haven, signing double taxation treaties with many (mostly OECD) countries and in April 2011 a treaty on the exchange of financial information with the United States.\nTaxation.\nTaxation in Panama, which is governed by the Fiscal Code, is on a territorial basis; this is to say, that taxes apply only to income or gains derived through business carried on in Panama itself. The existence of a sales or administration office in Panama, or the re-invoicing of external transactions at a profit, does not of itself give rise to taxation if the underlying transactions take place outside Panama. Dividends paid out of such earnings are free of taxation.\nIn February 2005, Panama's unicameral legislature approved a major fiscal reform package in order to raise revenues from new business taxes, and increases the country's level of debt. The legislature voted 46 to 28 in favour of the measures, which include a new 1.4% tax on companies\u2019 gross revenues, and a 1% levy on firms operating in the Col\u00f3n Free Trade Zone \u2013 the largest free port in the Americas.\nFurther reforms.\nPresident Ricardo Martinelli had promised to implement a flat tax system with a flat tax of 10% and which promised to raise revenues, put inflation under control and which will allow enormous real wage gains. Instead the Martinelli government increased sales tax to 7% from 5%, as well as increasing other taxes, in order to finance many infrastructure projects around the country.\nThe current VAT rates are: 7% (standard rate); 15% (tobacco); 10% (alcohol and hotels); 5% (essential goods). The corporate tax rate is 25%, while the highest marginal income tax rate is 27%.\nTransportation.\nIn Panama City there are six highways: the Panama-Arraijan Bridge of the Americas, Panama-Arraijan Centennial Bridge, Arraijan-Chorrera, Corredor Norte, Corredor Sur, and Autopista Panama-Colon.\nPanama's roads, traffic and transportation systems are generally safe, with older traffic lights having undergone a recent overhaul and most have been replaced by traffic lights that are capable of being controlled [and changed] remotely, even at busy intersections where they are not needed. Driving during the midday is usually slow and demanding due to dense traffic, frequent traffic jams, and street renovation programs. On roads where poor lighting and driving conditions prevail, night driving is difficult and in many cases, restricted by local authorities, this usually occurs in informal settlements. Night driving is particularly hazardous in these areas. Traffic in Panama moves on the right, and Panamanian law requires that drivers and passengers wear seat belts.\nCurrently, Panama used to have an extensive and efficient, yet confusing to tourists, form of public transportation consisting of colorful painted buses colloquially known as '. A ' is usually \"customized\" or painted with bright colors, usually depicting famous actors, politicians or singers. It is now popular all over the city (and also in neighboring towns) for bus drivers to personally customize the interior and exterior of their \"\". Panama City's streets experience frequent traffic jams due to poor planning.\n\"Diablos Rojos\" are not allowed to operate in Panama city since 2010, except for recreational purposes. The Metrobus and the Metro are the only available public transportation methods.\nStatistics.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132019 (with IMF staff estimates in 2020\u20132026). Inflation below 5% is in green.\nNominal GDP per capita in Panama was (in balboas or US dollars) 11,691 in 2002, 13,099 in 2004, 14,004 in 2005 (Prelim), 15,141.9 in 2006 (est), as reported by Office of Statistics and Census, Government of Panama. Growth from 2002 to 2006 was especially strong in the transport and communications sector, which became the biggest component of GDP, although many sectors also saw strong growth. Real GDP rose 7.5% (2003\u201304), 6.9% (2004\u201305), 8.1% (2005\u201306).\nGDP growth in 2008 was 9.2%, reflecting a slowing of the robust growth of 11.5% seen in 2007. Although growth slowed to 2.4% in the first half of 2009, due to the global economic downturn, it is expected to improve in 2010 and is still one of the most positive growth rates in the region. Growth has been fueled by the construction sector, transportation, port and Panama Canal-related activities, and tourism. As a result of this growth, government deficit as a percentage of GDP dropped to 43% in 2009, and government-issued debt achieved investment grade in February 2010. A recent United Nations report highlighted progress in poverty reduction from 2001 to 2007\u2014overall poverty fell from 37% to 29%, and extreme poverty fell from 19% to 12%. However, Panama still has the second-most unequal income distribution in Latin America.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23398", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23398", "title": "Transport in Panama", "text": " \nTransport in Panama covers a vast network of routes predominantly traversed by cargo trucks and buses. The country's railway system, known as the Panama Canal Railway, facilitates the transportation of both passengers and goods. With a total of 15,137 km of roads, its four expressways\u2014Corredor Sur, Corredor Norte, Autopista La Chorrera, and Col\u00f3n Panama\u2014are the arteries that link various parts of the country. Tocumen International Airport (PTY) is the key hub for international travel, ranking among the largest and most important airports in Latin America. Additionally, the renowned Panama Canal links the mere 60 km that separate the Pacific Ocean and Atlantic Ocean, offering an alternative route for maritime cargo transportation, avoiding the need to sail around South America.\nBuses, the metro, taxis, and private car rental companies compose the urban transportation system. The introduction of the Metrobus has gradually replaced the colorful \"Diablo Rojo\" buses, which once transported passengers around the city and its surrounding areas. Long-distance buses connect different regions within the country, departing from the Albrook Bus Terminal, next to the Albrook Mall. Nearly all major cities in Panama are interconnected via a network of bus terminals, with interstate and international routes extending into Central America, including Mexico. The Panama Metro covers a significant portion of Panama City and is operated by Metro de Panam\u00e1 S.A. This environmentally friendly railway system operates on electricity and inaugurated its first line in 2014. Despite the weather conditions, the transportation infrastructure in Panama facilitates both domestic and international travel.\nRail transport.\nThe Panama Canal Railway is the only passenger and freight railway in the country. It is a standard-gauge railway running for 76\u00a0km between Col\u00f3n on the Atlantic coast and Corozal (just outside the capital, Panama City) on the Pacific coast. These are the only two stations on the line. Additionally, a broad-gauge railway (1524mm) exists alongside the locks of the Panama Canal. It is used by electric locomotives (\"Mules\") that assist in ship handling.\nThe Panama Metro is a rapid transit system in Panama City. Two lines are currently operational (opened in 2014 and 2019), with further lines planned.\nRoad transport.\nPanama has well-developed highways in particular, there are four main expressways:\nBecause of recent upgrades, the Pan-American highway has four lanes that run from Panama City to Santiago de Veraguas. Also, a small section of the Pan-American highway from Tocumen to Pacora, counting for 18\u00a0 km has been upgraded to a freeway. The same is true for the Pan-American stretch between David and Capacho, on the border with Costa Rica, adding 55\u00a0km of freeway. The newly built freeway between David and Bajo Boquete, extends for 38\u00a0km. This also applies to the Chitr\u00e9 - Las Tablas freeway that extends for 30\u00a0km.\nPanama's roads, traffic, and transportation systems are generally safe, however, non-functioning traffic lights are common. Driving is often hazardous and demanding due to dense traffic, undisciplined driving habits, poorly maintained streets, and a lack of effective signs and traffic signals. On roads where poor lighting and driving conditions prevail, night driving is difficult. Night driving is particularly hazardous on the old Panama City \u2013 Colon highway.\nBuses and taxis are not always maintained in a safe operating condition due to lack of regulatory enforcement, and since 2007 auto insurance has been mandatory in Panama. Traffic in Panama moves on the right, and Panamanian law requires that drivers and passengers wear seat belts, but airbags are not mandatory.\nFlooding during the April to December rainy season occasionally makes city streets unusable for most vehicles, and washes out some roads in rural areas. In addition, rural areas are often poorly maintained and lack illumination at night. Such roads are generally less traveled and the availability of emergency roadside assistance is very limited. Road travel is more dangerous during the rainy season and from the time of Carnival through to Good Friday. Carnival starts the Saturday before Ash Wednesday and goes on for four days.\nWater transport.\nThere are 800\u00a0km of waterways navigable by shallow draft vessels. The Panama Canal runs for 82\u00a0km across the country and is an important route for international freight ships traveling between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.\nPipelines.\nThe Trans-Panama pipeline carries crude oil for 130\u00a0km.\nMerchant marine.\nPanama has an extensive international ship register, comprising 7,860 ships. Most are owned by foreign countries, with Panama being a flag of convenience.\nAs of 2019, the ship types were: Bulk carrier (2,567), container ship (609), general cargo (1,325), oil tanker (798), and others (2,561).\nAir transport.\nTocumen International Airport is the primary international airport, located just east of Panama City. It is the hub of flag carrier Copa Airlines. Scheduled services operate to destinations in the Americas, Europe, Asia and the Middle East.\nThere are 117 airports across the country, 57 with paved runways and 60 with unpaved runways.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "23400", "revid": "45263154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23400", "title": "Foreign relations of Panama", "text": "Panama's foreign relations are conventional in outlook, with Panama being especially aligned with United States since the 1989 US invasion to topple the regime of General Manuel Noriega. The United States cooperates with the Panamanian government in promoting economic, political, security, and social development through U.S. and international agencies.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Panama maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23401", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23401", "title": "History of Papua New Guinea", "text": " \nThe prehistory of Papua New Guinea can be traced to about 50,000\u201360,000 years ago, when people first migrated towards the Australian continent. Agriculture was established at least 7000 years ago in the New Guinea Highlands. Extensive trade networks operated throughout the region, and successive waves of migration included the spread of Austronesian languages around 3000 years ago, and the rise of the Lapita culture.\nIn 1545 the Spanish explorer Y\u00f1igo Ortiz de Retez was the first person to give the name \"New Guinea\" to the main island. European colonisation began in the 1880s when the eastern portion of New Guinea was divided between the German Empire and the British Empire. In WWI, the Allies took control of German New Guinea. After the war ended, the League of Nations gave Australia a mandate to administer the former German territory. In 1949, an Act was passed by the Parliament of Australia to form the administrative union of the Territory of Papua and New Guinea. On 16 September 1975, the Territory gained independence from Australia and became a sovereign state known as the Independent State of Papua New Guinea.\nArchaeology.\nArchaeological evidence indicates that humans arrived on New Guinea perhaps 60,000 years ago, although this is under debate. They came probably by sea from Southeast Asia during the Last Glacial Period, when sea levels were lower. Although the first arrivals were hunters and gatherers, early evidence shows that people managed the forest environment to provide food. There also are indications of Neolithic gardening having been practiced at Kuk at the same time that agriculture was developing in Mesopotamia and Egypt. The sweet potatoes and pigs which are agricultural staples today were later arrivals, but shellfish and fish have long been mainstays of coastal dwellers' diets. Recent archaeological research suggests that 50,000 years ago people may have occupied sites in the highlands at altitudes of up to , rather than being restricted to warmer coastal areas.\nArchaeological evidence indicates that anatomically modern humans first arrived in what became New Guinea and Australia, as well as the Bismarck Archipelago, around 42,000 to 45,000 years ago. Bougainville was settled around 28,000 years ago, and the more distant Manus Island by 20,000 years ago. These migrations were part of one of the earliest migrations of humans from Africa, and resulting populations remained relatively isolated from the rest of the world throughout prehistory. Evidence of habitation of the highlands goes back 35,000 years. The climate warmed from around 18,000 years ago, and rising sea levels isolated New Guinea from Australia about 10,000 years ago. However, Aboriginal Australians and New Guineans diverged from each other genetically earlier, about 37,000 years ago. Habitation of the islands increased after the climate changed. Water rose over the Torres Strait around 8,500 years ago. The Bismarck and Solomon archipelagos were never connected to Sahul. The people of New Guinea share 4%\u20137% of their genome with the Denisovans, indicating that the ancestors of Papuans interbred in Asia with these archaic hominins.\nStone tools have been found on the Huon Peninsula dating back 40,000 years. Before proper agriculture, some plants had already been domesticated, including sago, \"Canarium indicum\", and karuka. \"C. indicum\" was possibly spread by people from the mainland to the islands. Karuka may have originally been domesticated \"Pandanus brosimos\". Taro was eaten long before it was purposefully farmed. Obsidian tools, which could be used for harvesting plants, were traded from at least 23,000 years ago. At some point, cassowary chicks began to be occasionally reared.\nAgriculture was independently developed in the New Guinea highlands around 7000 BC, making it one of the few areas in the world where people independently domesticated plants. Significant evidence of this comes from the Kuk Swamp, which has evidence of thousands of years of use to grow crops including taro and bananas.\nArchaeological evidence shows that Austronesian-speaking peoples of the Lapita culture reached the Bismarck Archipelago by 3,300 years ago. It is unknown whether they also settled on the mainland at this time, however there is strong evidence of their presence in coastal areas from around 500 BC. These communities interacted with larger trade networks. It is likely through these trading networks that banana and sugarcane moved from New Guinea to other areas of the world. Austronesian migration has been correlated with the introduction of pottery, pigs, chickens, dogs, and certain fishing techniques. Two plant species came from the Pacific: \"Barringtonia procera\" likely arrived from the Solomon Islands, while Kava came from Vanuatu.\nTrade reduced by around 300\u00a0AD, as demand for goods shifted to the Maluku Islands and Timor. After European interest in the region grew in the 16th century, Dutch influence grew over the Sultanate of Tidore. This Sultanate had some influence over islands near New Guinea. Over the centuries, Dutch authorities extended the area they claimed was part of this Sultanate to roughly the current Indonesia\u2013Papua New Guinea border, however limited or nonexistent the Sultan's actual control was. Renewed trade began to spread to the Eastern parts of New Guinea in the late 17th century, driven by demand for goods including dammar gum, sea cucumbers, pearls, copra, shells, and bird-of-paradise feathers.\nAlthough by the late 20th century headhunting and cannibalism had been practically eradicated, in the past they were practised in many parts of the country as part of rituals related to warfare and taking in enemy spirits or powers. In 1901, on Goaribari Island in the Gulf of Papua, missionary Harry Dauncey found 10,000 skulls in the island's long houses, a demonstration of past practices. According to Marianna Torgovnick, writing in 1991, \"The most fully documented instances of cannibalism as a social institution come from New Guinea, where head-hunting and ritual cannibalism survived, in certain isolated areas, into the Fifties, Sixties, and Seventies, and still leave traces within certain social groups.\"\nOn New Guinea, communities were economically linked through trading networks, however aside from some political alliances each community functioned largely independently, relying on subsistence agriculture. Goods were often traded along established chains, and some villagers would be familiar with and sometimes know the languages of the immediately neighbouring villages (although language by itself was not a marker of political allegiance). Some wider trading networks existed in maritime areas, such as the Kula ring. Other well known trade networks include the Schouten Islands and the mainland, trade across the Vitiaz Strait, and the Hiri trade cycle. While people did not move far along these routes, goods moved long distances through local exchanges, and cultural practices likely diffused along them. Despite these links, the creation of larger political entities under European rule had no precedent, and in many cases brought together communities who had historically antagonistic relationships, or no relationship at all.\nEuropean contact.\nIt is likely that some ships from China and Southeast Asia visited the island at times, and that there was some contact with New Guinean communities. The Portuguese explorer Ant\u00f3nio de Abreu was the first European to discover the island of New Guinea, encountering the north coast, and in 1526 his countryman Jorge de Menezes discovered the west coast. The first Spanish explorer to see the island was \u00c1lvaro de Saavedra Cer\u00f3n in 1528. Portuguese traders introduced the South American sweet potato to the Moluccas. From there, it likely spread into what is today Papua New Guinea sometime in the 17th or 18th century, initially from the southern coast. It soon spread inland to the highlands, and became a staple food. The introduction of the sweet potato, possibly alongside other agricultural changes, transformed traditional agriculture and societies and likely led to the spread of the Big man social structure. Sweet potato largely supplanted the previous staple, taro, and resulted in a significant increase in population in the highlands. They allowed for cultivation at higher altitudes, and for a larger number of pigs to be raised. The date of the sweet potato's arrival is still disputed. It did not spread to all communities, with some still relying on taro and yam. Also from the Americas, Tobacco was similarly introduced around this time, with the first written evidence showing it was present in 1616. Lima beans were likely introduced in the 1700s or 1800s. \"Bixa orellana\" followed some time before 1870. In total, over 170 native and introduced plant species are known to have been used for food in some way before permanent European contact, with the core plants being taro, banana, sago, and yam.\nWhen Europeans first arrived, inhabitants of New Guinea and nearby islands, whose technologies included bone, wood, and stone tools, had a productive agricultural system. They traded along the coast (mainly in pottery, shell ornaments and foodstuffs) and in the interior (exchanging forest products for shells and other sea products).\nThe first known Europeans to sight New Guinea were probably Portuguese and Spanish navigators sailing in the South Pacific in the early part of the 16th century. In 1526\u20131527 the Portuguese explorer Jorge de Menezes accidentally came upon the principal island.\n\"Papua\" is derived from a local term of uncertain origin, that may have already been used locally to refer to at least parts of the island now called New Guinea. In 1526 Portuguese explorer Jorge de Menezes named the island \"\". The word \"Papua\" has applied to various areas of New Guinea since then, with its inclusion in \"Papua New Guinea\" coming from its use for the Territory of Papua.\nPapua may be from a Malay word for the frizzled quality of Melanesian people's hair.\nRegarding the islands of New Guinea, the Portuguese captain and geographer Ant\u00f3nio Galv\u00e3o wrote that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The people of all these islands are blacke, and have their haire frisled, whom the people of Maluco do call Papuas.\n\"New Guinea\" (\"Nueva Guinea\") was the name coined by the Spanish explorer Y\u00f1igo Ortiz de Retez. In 1545, he noted the resemblance of the people to those he had earlier seen along the Guinea coast of Africa. Guinea, in its turn, is etymologically derived from the Portuguese word \"Guin\u00e9\". The name is one of several toponyms sharing similar etymologies, which likely means \"of the burnt face\" or similar, in reference to the dark skin of the inhabitants. Its use in the country name comes from German New Guinea, later the Territory of New Guinea, which was united with the territory of Papua.\nAlthough European navigators visited the islands and explored their coastlines thereafter, European researchers knew little of the inhabitants until the 1870s, when Russian anthropologist Nicholai Miklukho-Maklai made a number of expeditions to New Guinea, spent several years living among native tribes, and described their way of life in a comprehensive treatise.\nBy the 1800s, there was some trade with the Dutch East Indies. Beginning in the 1860s, people from New Guinea were effectively taken as slaves to Queensland and Fiji as part of the blackbirding trade. This was stopped in 1884. Most of those taken were from coastal Papua. Those who returned to New Guinea brought their interactions with the west with them, but the largest impact was the creation of what became the Tok Pisin language. French Explorer Louis Antoine de Bougainville sailed through what is now the Autonomous Region of Bougainville in the late 1760s. Russian anthropologist Nicholas Miklouho-Maclay lived in New Guinea for a few years in the 1870s.\nChristianity was introduced to New Guinea on 15 September 1847 when a group of French Marist missionaries came to Woodlark Island. They established their first mission on Umboi Island. Following that year, they were forced to withdraw their mission endeavour. Five years later on 8 October 1852, the Pontifical Institute for Foreign Missions, a pontifical institute, reestablished the mission on Woodlark Island, encountering sickness and resistance from local people. The location of this mission came following the advice of whalers who knew the area. For both parts of the island, missions were the primary source of western culture as well as religion. Missionary work in Papua started in the 1870s. The largest group was the London Missionary Society, which began in 1873 and included Polynesian missionaries. From this time until the First World War, 327 missionaries are recorded as working in Papua. In the same year, a Methodist mission opened in the Duke of York Islands. In 1886, a Lutheran mission opened in what is now the Finschhafen District. The Catholic Society of the Divine Word founded a mission in New Guinea 1896.\nThe British East India Company attempted to annex part of the island in 1793, but this was not approved by the British government. The western half of the island was annexed by the Netherlands in 1848. Information about the east initially came from whalers hunting off the island and anchoring at the Duke of York Islands, as well as traders passing through.\nSuccessful and long-term European settlement began in the 1870s. The Russian Nikolai Miklouho-Maclay and lived in the Rai Coast District for a few years from 1871, introducing crops which have retained Russian-derived names in local languages. The London Missionary Society set up missions on the south coast in 1872, while a trading port was established on the Duke of York Islands. The company of the German trader Johann Cesar VI. Godeffroy established a presence at Blanche Bay in 1873. On 24 April 1873, British Captain John Moresby aboard the HMS \"Basilisk\" raised the Union Flag on Hayter Island near Milne Bay and claimed it for the United Kingdom. However, this was not viewed favourably by the British government. The Duke of York Islands saw the arrival of Methodist missionaries in 1875.\nThe nearby Torres Strait Islands were annexed by Queensland in 1878, amid rising commercial interest in New Guinea, and the border moved further north in 1879. Queensland and other Australian states did not wish for Germany to claim the remained of New Guinea. Queensland attempted to annex the area in 1883, driven by the Governor of the Torres Strait Islands, although this was deemed unlawful. Negotiations with the United Kingdom saw the various British colonies in the region agree to pay for any administrative costs. The rejection of Queensland's unilateral action by the United Kingdom led to the 1883 Intercolonial Convention, accelerating the federation of Australia due to the desire of the Pacific colonies to have more autonomy.\nThe eastern half of the island was divided between two colonial powers in 1884. Germany declared a protectorate over the northern portion as German New Guinea before annexing it the next year, while the southern part of the island became the protectorate of British New Guinea. The border between the two was agreed in 1885, while border between British and Dutch was altered slightly in 1895.\nTerritory of Papua.\nIn 1883, the Colony of Queensland tried to annex the southern half of eastern New Guinea, but the British government did not approve. However, when Germany began settlements in the north a British protectorate was proclaimed in 1884 over the southern coast of New Guinea and its adjacent islands. The protectorate, called British New Guinea, was annexed outright on 4 September 1888. The possession was placed under the authority of the Commonwealth of Australia in 1902. Following the passage of the Papua Act in 1905, British New Guinea became the Territory of Papua, and formal Australian administration began in 1906, although Papua remained under their control as a British possession until the independence of Papua New Guinea in 1975.\nIn the British area, gold was found near the Mambare River in 1895.\nIn 1902, Papua was effectively transferred to the authority of the newly federated British dominion of Australia. With the passage of the Papua Act 1905, the area was officially renamed the Territory of Papua, and the Australian administration became formal in 1906, with Papua becoming fully annexed as an Australian territory. 1888 also saw the Ritter Island eruption, which sent large tsunamis towards the mainland.\nThere was little economic activity in Papua. Australia administered it separately under the \"Papua Act\" until it was invaded by the Empire of Japan in 1941, and civil administration suspended. During the Pacific War, Papua was governed by an Australian military administration from Port Moresby, where General Douglas MacArthur occasionally made his headquarters.\nIn 1908 the trade of birds-of-paradise was banned in Papua due to fears for the species' extinction.\nGerman New Guinea.\nWith Europe's growing desire for coconut oil, Godeffroy's of Hamburg, the largest trading firm in the Pacific, began trading for copra in the New Guinea Islands. In 1884, the German Empire formally took possession of the northeast quarter of the island and put its administration in the hands of a chartered trading company formed for the purpose, the \"German New Guinea Company\". In the charter granted to this company by the German Imperial Government in May 1885, it was given the power to exercise sovereign rights over the territory and other \"unoccupied\" lands in the name of the government, and the ability to \"negotiate\" directly with the native inhabitants. Relationships with foreign powers were retained as the preserve of the German government. The \"Neu Guinea Kompanie\" paid for the local governmental institutions directly, in return for the concessions which had been awarded to it. In 1899, the German imperial government assumed direct control of the territory, thereafter known as German New Guinea.\nWhile the German administration was at first run by a commercial company, by 1889 the German government had direct control. The German New Guinea Company had initially tried to develop plantations, but when this was not successful began to engage in barter trade. Trading posts were established in 1897, and German authorities soon banned other traders from accessing the region to try and restrict competition. Where trade continued inland, the use of established trade routes meant traders were safe from attacks. This clandestine internal cross-border trade continued until at least the 1930s. In the British area, gold was found near the Mambare River in 1895.\nNew Guinea was basically a business venture. Thousands of local workers were hired as cheap labor on cocoa and copra plantations. In 1899, the German government took control of the colony from the New Guinea company of Berlin. Education was in the hands of missionaries. In 1914 when the First World War broke out Australia seized the German colony. The plantations were given to Australian war veterans and in 1921 the League of Nations gave Australia a trusteeship over New Guinea. The plantations and gold mining generated a degree of prosperity.\nNew Guinea first placed limitations on the birds-of-paradise trade, before banning it for one year in 1914. The ban on trade became permanent in 1922 under Australian rule.\nSocial and political changes.\nUnder European rule, social relations amongst the New Guinean population changed. Tribal fighting decreased, while in new urban areas there was greater mixing as people moved to partake in the cash crop economy. The large inequality between colonial administrators and locals led to the emergence of what colonial governments called cargo cults. Very little land was changed, with most plantations limited to the islands and small areas of the mainland coast. However, a trading system developed with Melanesian populations exchanging copra, pearls, trochus shells, and bird-of-paradise skins. One of the most significant impacts of colonial rule was to changes in local travel. Colonial authorities outlawed tribal warfare, and it became normal to move for work, while roads increased the connectivity between inland areas.\nColonial authorities generally worked with individual village representatives, although in some cases an individual represented a group of villages. While these were sometimes village leaders, they were usually individuals with closer relationships to colonial officials who thus acted as intermediaries. Thus, neither German nor British authorities developed an effective system of indirect rule. In German New Guinea, Tok Pisin, an already existing pidgin language, began to spread through local adoption, and was reluctantly used by German authorities. Missionaries used a mixture of Tok Pisin and local languages, and such local languages were often individually specific to each mission station. In areas under British and then Australian governance, a simplified version of English emerged as an early lingua franca, although authorities soon adopted Hiri Motu, a pidgin version of the Motu language that was already in use around Port Moresby. Hiri Motu quickly became established as a \"de facto\" official language, preferable to pidgin English. Nonetheless, formal English was taught in the educational system.\nTerritory of New Guinea.\nFollowing the outbreak of World War\u00a0I in 1914, Australian forces captured German New Guinea and occupied it throughout the war. Following international law, Australian mostly maintained existing legislation during this period of formal military occupation. After the end of the war, the League of Nations authorised Australia to administer this area as a Class \"C\" League of Nations mandate territory from 9 May 1921, which became the Territory of New Guinea. The Territory of Papua and the new Mandate of New Guinea were administered separately.\nThe Commonwealth of Australia assumed a mandate from the League of Nations for governing the former German territory of New Guinea in 1920. It was administered under this mandate until the Japanese invasion in December 1941 brought about the suspension of Australian civil administration. Much of the Territory of New Guinea, including the islands of Bougainville and New Britain, was occupied by Japanese forces before being recaptured by Australian and American forces during the final months of the war (see New Guinea campaign).\nIn contrast to establishing an Australian mandate in former German New Guinea, the League of Nations determined that Papua was an external territory of the Australian Commonwealth; as a matter of law it remained a British possession. The difference in legal status meant that until 1949, Papua (former British protectorate Territory of Papua) and New Guinea (former German territory German New Guinea) had entirely separate administrations, both controlled by Australia. These conditions contributed to the complexity of organising the country's post-independence legal system.\nMore plantations were established along the coast and on the islands following the war, and a head tax was imposed that caused further participation in the colonial economy. Gold was discovered in the 1920s, and within a decade became the largest export. When Australian authorities took charge of German New Guinea's administration in 1921, they continued the practice of using Tok Pisin. While English was established as the official language of both territories, Tok Pisin remained the lingua franca of administration in the north, while Hiri Motu remained the lingua franca of the south. Tok Pisin became more widely spoken, while the use Hiri Motu remained mostly restricted to areas near Port Moresby.\nGold was discovered in Bulolo in the 1920s, and prospectors searched other areas of the island. The highland valleys were explored by prospectors in the 1930s and were found to be inhabited by over a million people.\nExploration of Mandated Territory of New Guinea.\nAkmana Expedition 1929\u20131930.\nThe exploration of Papua\u2013New Guinea has been a continuing process. As of October 2017 new groups of people occasionally are still contacted. Not until recent years has New Guinea's exploration been planned; much of it has been the work of miners, labour recruiters, missionaries, adventurers, with different objectives in mind. Many of these people have been doers, not recorders of facts, with the result that our knowledge of the territory's exploration has not kept pace with the exploration itself.\nAn exception is the record of the Akmana Gold Prospecting Company's Field Party which carried out two expeditions from September to December 1929 and from mid February to the end of June 1930. They journeyed on the \"Banyandah\", a cruiser of from Madang up the coast to the mouth of the Sepik River, travelling along that river to Marienberg and Moim, then along the Karosameri River to the Karrawaddi River and on to the Arrabundio River and Yemas, after which it was necessary to transport their stores and equipment by pinnace, canoe and ultimately on foot to their Mountain Base on the upper Arrabundio River.\nDuring their first expedition the Akmana Field Party prospected the tributaries of the Arrabundio and then trekked across a spur of the Central Mountain Range to sample the Upper Karrawaddi River. Retracing their steps to the Arrabundio they then headed out across another spur of the Central Mountain Range to the Junction of the Yuat River with the Jimmi and Baiyer Rivers, again without finding gold in sufficient quantity. Returning to Madang at the end of December 1929, several of the party went back to Sydney to obtain instructions from the Akmana Gold Prospecting Company.\nIn mid February 1930 the second expedition quickly returned to their Mountain Base and on across the mountains to the junction of the Yuat with the Baiyer and Jimmi Rivers. They prospected south along the Baiyer River to its junction with the Maramuni and Tarua Rivers, where they established a palisaded forward camp naming the place 'Akmana Junction.' From this base they prospected along the Maramuni River and its tributaries, again without success. Finally they prospected the Tarua River south past the tributary which flows to Waipai, once more without success and on the advice of mining engineer Seale, it was decided there was nothing to justify further exploration. They had not progressed to any country on the southern watershed through which the early explorers and prospectors travelled to the Hagan Range and Wabag. The party returned to Madang, sailing for Sydney on 3 July 1930.\nAfter leading the first expedition, Sam Freeman did not return and Reg Beazley became party leader of the second expedition, with Pontey Seale mining engineer, Bill MacGregor and Beazley prospectors and recruiters, and Ernie Shepherd in charge of transport and supplies, prospecting when opportunity arose. They had all served overseas during World War I with the AIF on the western front, in Egypt and the Levant and had previously been to New Guinea. In 1926 Freeman was near Marienberg with Ormildah drilling for oil; Shepherd was with Dr. Wade and R.J. Winters on their geological survey of an oil lease of in the Bogia and Nubio to Ramu region and up the Sepik River to Kubka above Ambunto. Beazley was drilling test sites for oil with Matahower in the lower Sepik and he and McGregor recruited labour on the Sepik and explored grass country to Wee Wak. Beazley also prospected the Arrabundio for gold and on his promising report to Freeman, Akmana Gold Prospecting Coy was floated in 1928.\nThe Akmana Gold Prospecting Field Party made contact with many peoples they called: grass country people, head hunters, pygmies, wig\u2013men, Kanakas, Poomani. These contacts were often with the help of Drybow/Dribu, a leader and spokesman of the wig\u2013men, a most intelligent man of goodwill, with a quiet authority that brought forth friendly cooperation. 'We made a peaceful entry into this new country, establishing a reputation for fair trade and decent behaviour ... but gold was our interest and we had traced the rivers and tributaries as far as practicable where conditions and results justified the effort and found nothing worthwhile. In the many years since, there have been quite a few reports of prospecting parties in the area. But nothing of note has been reported: So we did not leave much behind, it seems.'\n'Members of the Akmana party donated wigs they had brought back to various museums. Two of them went to The Australian Museum, Sydney (from Beazley and Shepherd). Current records at the Australian Museum show that Beazley's wig, described as \"a cap composed of human hair from the headwaters of the U\u2013at River, Central Mountains, Mandated Territory of NG\", was lodged on 31 January 1930, presumably on his quick visit to Sydney after the first expedition. Shepherd presented another wig to Father Kirschbaum, who wanted to send it to Germany. The wigs at The Australian Museum were later confused with some brought out of the Highlands 10 years afterwards by Jim Taylor during his Hagen\u2013Sepik patrol, and wrongly attributed to him when put on display. Seale presented two wigs to the National Museum Canberra in 1930.'\nWorld War II.\nShortly after the start of the Pacific War, the island of New Guinea was invaded by the Japanese. Most of West Papua, at that time known as Dutch New Guinea, was occupied, as were large parts of the Territory of New Guinea (the former German New Guinea, which was also under Australian rule after World War I), but Papua was protected to a large extent by its southern location and the near-impassable Owen Stanley Ranges to the north.\nThe New Guinea campaign opened with the battles for New Britain and New Ireland in the Territory of New Guinea in 1942. Rabaul, the capital of the Territory was overwhelmed on 22\u201323 January and was established as a major Japanese base from whence they landed on mainland New Guinea and advanced towards Port Moresby and Australia. Having had their initial effort to capture Port Moresby by a seaborne invasion disrupted by the U.S. Navy in the Battle of the Coral Sea, the Japanese attempted a landward invasion from the north via the Kokoda Trail. From July 1942, a few Australian reserve battalions, many of them very young and untrained, fought a stubborn rearguard action against a Japanese advance along the Kokoda Track, towards Port Moresby, over the rugged Owen Stanley Ranges. Local Papuans, called Fuzzy Wuzzy Angels by the Australians, assisted and escorted injured Australian troops down the Kokoda trail. The militia, worn out and severely depleted by casualties, were relieved in late August by regular troops from the Second Australian Imperial Force, returning from action in the Mediterranean theatre.\nThe Japanese were driven back. The bitter Battle of Buna-Gona followed in which Australian and United States forces attacked the main Japanese beachheads in New Guinea, at Buna, Sanananda and Gona. Facing tropical disease, difficult terrain and well constructed Japanese defences, the allies only secured victory with heavy casualties.\nIn early September 1942 Japanese marines attacked a strategic Royal Australian Air Force base at Milne Bay, near the eastern tip of Papua. They were beaten back by the Australian Army, and the Battle of Milne Bay is remembered as the first outright defeat on Japanese land forces during World War II. The offensives in Papua and New Guinea of 1943\u201344 were the single largest series of connected operations ever mounted by the Australian armed forces. The Supreme Commander of operations was the United States General Douglas MacArthur, with Australian General Thomas Blamey taking a direct role in planning and operations being essentially directed by staff at New Guinea Force headquarters in Port Moresby. Bitter fighting continued in New Guinea between the largely Australian force and the Japanese 18th Army based in New Guinea until the Japanese surrender in 1945.\nThe New Guinea campaign was a major campaign of the Pacific War. In all, some 200,000 Japanese soldiers, sailors and airmen died during the campaign against approximately 7,000 Australian and 7,000 American service personnel.\nDuring World War II, the New Guinea campaign (1942\u20131945) was fought in both the mainland and offshore islands. Approximately 216,000 Japanese, Australian, and U.S. servicemen died. The ground war which saw Japanese forces advance almost to Port Moresby involved significant contributions form native soldiers. Civil government of both territories was suspended during the war, being replaced by a joint military government.\nThe Second World War punctured the myth of differences between locals and foreigners, and increased the exposure of the population to the wider world and modern social and economic ideas. It also led to significant population movements, beginning the establishment of a common identity shared by those in the two Australian-ruled territories. Both Tok Pisin and Hiri Motu became more common to facilitate communication, and were used for radio broadcasts. The war was the first time Tok Pisin became widely spread in Papua. The joint governance of both territories that was established during the war was continued after the war ended, with the Papua New Guinea Provisional Administration Act of 1945 making this official policy.\nTerritory of Papua and New Guinea.\nFollowing the surrender of the Japanese in 1945, civil administration of Papua as well as New Guinea was restored, and under the Papua New Guinea Provisional Administration Act, (1945\u201346), Papua and New Guinea were combined in an administrative union.\nThe Papua and New Guinea Act 1949 formally approved the placing of New Guinea under the international trusteeship system and confirmed the administrative union under the title of The Territory of Papua and New Guinea. The Act provided for a Legislative Council (established in 1951), a judicial organization, a public service, and a system of local government, with Jack Keith Murray continuing as administrator until 1952, when he was succeeded by Donald Cleland. Cleland remained in the position until his retirement in 1967, and lived in Port Moresby until his death in 1975. The House of Assembly of Papua and New Guinea replaced the Legislative Council in 1963, and after elections on 15 February, opened on 8 June 1964. In 1971, the name of the territory was changed to Papua New Guinea.\nAustralia's change of policy towards Papua New Guinea largely commenced with the invitation from the Australian Government to the World Bank to send a mission to the Territory to advise on measures to be taken towards its economic development and political preparation. The mission's report, The Economic Development of the Territory of Papua New Guinea, published in 1964, set out the framework upon which much of later economic policy, up to and beyond independence, proceeded.\nIn 1946, New Guinea was declared a United Nations trust territory under Australian governance. In 1949 Papuans became Australian citizens, and Australia formally combined Papua and New Guinea into the Territory of Papua and New Guinea. However, this did not change the official status of the northern area as a United Nations trust territory.\nVillage councils were first created in both Papua and in New Guinea starting 1949, with the number steadily increasing over the years. These created alternative power structures, which while sometimes filled by traditional leaders, saw the beginning of a shift towards leaders with administrative or business experience. By 1951, a 28-member Legislative Council was instituted. This was largely dominated by Australian administrative members, with only 3 seats allocated to Papua New Guineans. Jack Keith Murray, an Australian soldier, became the first administrator of this new council. Speeches in the council could be in English, Tok Pisin, or Hiri Motu. A nationwide local government conference was held in 1959, and regional conferences were held afterwards.\nThe Australian government officially sought to shift post-war economic development more towards the benefit of the local population. Most development was agricultural, with an expansion of smallholding and a focus on facilitating exports. While clear economic objectives emerged, political aims less certain, with independence and becoming an Australian state both seen as possible futures. The 1960s and 1970s saw significant social changes as more of the population began to participate in the formal economy, leading to the development of a more local bureaucracy. Alongside this, Australian administrators promoted a shared national identity. Efforts began in the 1950s to move education, including in mission schools, away from local vernaculars towards English. English was seen by Australian authorities as a potential unifying language, and by many Papua New Guineans as a prestige language. However, growing national identity saw a desire to move back towards local languages, and in the 1970s local languages were re-added to the national syllabus as a supplement to English education. The national philosophy that developed among political leaders, \"The Melanesian Way\", advocated for an egalitarian and communal leadership reflecting consensual decision making.\nAerial surveys in the 1950s found further inhabited valleys in the highlands. The re-establishment of Australian administration following the war was followed by an expansion of that control, including over the previously mostly uncontrolled highland areas. Regular access did not occur until the 1950s. By 1970, was still officially regarded as uncontrolled. Some tribes remained uncontacted by Westerners until the 1960s and 1970s. The administration of the highlands led to a large expansion of coffee cultivation in the region. In-country migration during this time spread Tok Pisin further, even to Port Moresby. The 1966 census found that 37% spoke Tok Pisin, 13% English, and 8% Hiri Motu.\nLegislation was proposed to legalise commercial birds-of-paradise hunting in 1965, but it was defeated. In 1966, the birds came under the protection of the new Fauna Protection Ordinance of Papua and New Guinea (amended in 1968 to allow for traditional hunting and use).\nThe 1961 Papua New Guinean general election opened political participation to local people. Village council powers were expanded in 1963, and ward councils were made possible for village councils with large populations. The 1964 election, and the subsequent 1968 election, took place alongside political campaigns to introduce the political system to people in the territory. The 1964 election occurred alongside the Council being replaced by the 64-member House of Assembly of Papua and New Guinea, part elected part appointed, which for the first time had a majority of Papua New Guinean members. Tok Pisin was spoken by 89% of this parliament, although one representative could speak none of the three major languages and so had their own translator. Over time, Tok Pisin became the primary language of debate The Assembly increased to 84 members in 1967 and 100 by 1972, at which point all members were elected. The leadup to the 1968 election saw the formation of Pangu Pati, the first political party. Pangu advocated for independence. Other parties that subsequently emerged were mostly differentiated by varying positions regarding independence.\nMining exploration by Rio Tinto in Bougainville began in 1964. This faced resistance from local landowners, however the Bougainville Copper corporation was established and began to operate a large mine. Resistance became interlinked with a desire for greater autonomy. Bougainville was geographically close to the British Solomon Islands, and its people are more culturally linked to those of the Solomon Islands than to others in the territory. However, the mine was seen as crucial for diversifying the economic base of Papua New Guinea from agriculture alone. An unsuccessful call for a referendum on separation was made by Bougainvilleans in Port Moresby in 1968, and further political efforts led to a provisional district government being established in 1973.\nAustralian Opposition Leader Gough Whitlam visited Papua New Guinea in 1969. In 1970 and 1971, he visited the Tolai people in the Gazelle Peninsula, who were seeking more control. Whitlam made self-rule in the territory an election issue, and called for self-governance as early as 1972. United Nations visiting missions in the early 1970s called for further political education to better explain the meaning of self-governance and of independence. In March 1971 the House of Assembly recommended that the territory seek self-governance in the next parliament, which was agreed to by Australia. Political education campaigns at the time increased emphasis on the idea of national unity. In June 1971, the flag and emblem were adopted. In July 1971, the \"and\" was removed and territory was renamed to simply \"Papua New Guinea\".\nFollowing the time of Whitlam's first visit, political debate significantly intensified. This accompanied social change, such as an increase in education, symbolised by the first students graduating from the University of Papua New Guinea in 1970. District authorities (which would become provincial authorities) were established in 1970, helping develop provincial identity. A Constitutional Planning Committee made up of Papua New Guineans conducted domestic consultations while also looking for inspiration from post-colonial states in Africa. The committee settled upon a Westminster system, aiming to develop a political system where the legislature checks the executive.\nIn the 1972 Papua New Guinean general election in July, Michael Somare was elected as Chief Minister. Somare sought a better relationship with regional movements, negotiating to meet local needs rather than viewing such movements as an obstacle to a united independent state. His government announced specific plans to decentralise, and improve local self-sustainability. While these actions increased the number of local groups, they also decreased their salience and encouraged them to join the national political system. 1972 also saw a new economic strategy delivered to the government that recommended the indigenisation of the economy, an approach and rhetoric adopted by the Somare government. The Bank of Papua New Guinea was created in October. In December, Whitlam was elected as Prime Minister at the 1972 Australian federal election. The Whitlam Government then instituted self-governance in late 1973. The kina was introduced as a separate currency in April 1975.\nOn 1 September 1975, shortly before the scheduled date of Papua New Guinean independence, the government of Bougainville itself declared independence. Payments to the province were suspended in response. Other regional movements emerged prior to independence. The Papua Besena party sought to separate the territory of Papua from New Guinea. While the party symbolically declared independence prior to national independence, they later went on to participate in Papua New Guinean politics. The Highlands Liberation Front sought to prevent dominance of highland areas from the coast as well as from foreigners, although it sought more autonomy and representation rather than outright independence, and disappeared after independence. Smaller groups emerged in various areas to advocate for the creation of new provinces. The appearance of such groups was likely a combination of new ideas about politics, combined with little need for a united nationalist movement given the Australian agreement to independence.\nThe push for independence was driven by internal policies of the Whitlam government, rather than responding to particular calls from Papua New Guinea. The concept of a \"country\" remained foreign to many in the territory, and there was no strong shared national identity. In the early 1970s there were fears that independence would allow for large tribes to dominate others, and create more risk of foreign land acquisition. The subsequent creation of a local consensus for independence was due to the actions of local political leaders. Over the next two years, they advanced various arguments for independence. On 1 June 1974, the PNG government took control of civil aviation. The process culminated in the passing of the Papua New Guinea Independence Act 1975 in September 1975, citing the 16th of September 1975 as the date of independence.\nWhitlam and then-Prince Charles attended the independence ceremony, with Somare continuing as the country's first Prime Minister.\nIndependence.\nElections in 1972 resulted in the formation of a ministry headed by Chief Minister Michael Somare, who pledged to lead the country to self-government and then to independence. Papua New Guinea became self-governing on 1 December 1973 and achieved independence on 16 September 1975. The country joined the United Nations (UN) on 10 October 1975 by way of Security Council Resolution 375 and General Assembly resolution 3368.\nUpon independence, most Australian officials, including agricultural, economic, educational, and medicinal staff, left the territory. Very little training had been provided to their successors. This led to a restructuring and a loss of efficiency, particularly in serving rural areas. By the 1980s, the civil service, including the military, had become politicised, decreasing effectiveness and accountability.\nWhile optional preferential voting had been used since 1964, the voting system was changed to first past the post, as an unsuccessful attempt to encourage the development of a two-party system with clearly defined political parties. Elected provincial governments were created in 1976, including for Bougainville. National governments changed through constitutional means. Somare retained the prime ministership following the 1977 election, and was ousted through a vote of no confidence in 1980. He became prime minister again following the 1982 election, but lost another vote of no confidence in 1985.\nPolitical instability.\nThe 1977 national elections confirmed Michael Somare as Prime Minister at the head of a coalition led by the Pangu Party. However, his government lost a vote of confidence in 1980 and was replaced by a new cabinet headed by Sir Julius Chan as prime minister. The 1982 elections increased Pangu's plurality, and parliament again chose Somare as prime minister. In November 1985, the Somare government lost another vote of no confidence, and the parliamentary majority elected Paias Wingti, at the head of a five-party coalition, as prime minister. A coalition, headed by Wingti, was victorious in very close elections in July 1987. In July 1988, a no-confidence vote toppled Wingti and brought to power Rabbie Namaliu, who a few weeks earlier had replaced Somare as leader of the Pangu Party.\nA Leadership Code came into force on 3 March 1978, creating some disagreements.\nSuch reversals of fortune and a revolving-door succession of prime ministers continue to characterize Papua New Guinea's national politics. A plethora of political parties, coalition governments, shifting party loyalties and motions of no confidence in the leadership all lend an air of instability to political proceedings. Under legislation intended to enhance stability, new governments remain immune from no-confidence votes for the first 18 months of their incumbency.\nIn 1987, proposals were made to increase the election deposit required of political candidates tenfold, from K100 to K1000, in an attempt to reduce the growing number of candidates. Initially blocked by the judiciary, it past legislatively before the 1992 election, although the number of candidates continued to increase.\nChanges of government were frequent. In 1991, the period in which a government could not face a no confidence vote was increased from 6 months to 18 months. In 1993, Manus Province switched from first past the post to preferential voting.\nIn 1995, provincial governments were reformed, becoming made up of relevant national MPs and a number of appointed members. This followed frequent tensions emerging between elected provincial governments and national MPs from those provinces. Some of their responsibilities were devolved towards local governments, a factor that caused significant controversy due to an expected lack of capacity at this level. This lack of capacity has meant that national MPs gained significant powers at the local level. A 2000 legal seminar found that all provincial and local governments had been functioning illegally since 1997.\nIn the 1997 election, 73% of all candidates were independent, including 33% of winning candidates, reflecting a steady shift from party politics. The 2372 total candidates meant there was an average of 22 contestants per constituency, with Oro Province having the most, with 61 candidates. Only 4 candidates achieved overall majorities, with 95 (87%) of winners receiving less than 30% of the vote, and 16 (14%) receiving less than 10%. Of the 109 MPs elected, only 2 were women. Somare commented that this meant the parliament did not have much mandate, having been rejected by 80.20% of the population. After government changed mid-parliament in 1999, a Constitutional Development Commission was established to bring about political reform. The resulting Organic Law on the Integrity of Political Parties and Candidates created public funding for registered parties based on their elected members of parliament, incentivised the selection of women candidates, and instituted punishments for party hopping. It also barred independent MPs from voting for the prime minister, or from joining coalitions before a prime minister is elected. Another measure was to begin a shift from a simple first past the post voting system to a Limited Preferential Vote system (LPV), a version of the alternative vote. The 2007 general election was the first to be conducted using LPV, although it had already been used in 10 by-elections.\nBougainville Island revolt.\nAlthough an August 1976 agreement with the national government resolved the initial declaration of independence, the issue of Bougainville persisted past independence, with profits from the mine seeing as being of more a benefit to the national government than the people of Bougainville. Bougainville had been the primary mining region of the country, at one point generating almost 50% of exports and 20% of national revenue. A secessionist movement in 1975\u201376 on Bougainville Island resulted in a modification of the Constitution of Papua New Guinea, with the Organic Law on Provincial Government legally devolving power to the 19 provinces. The actual devolution happened on different timescales for each province, which had greatly varying capacities. Bougainville was the first, with a formal provincial government established in 1976. Some provincial governments were suspended in the 1980s, due to financial mismanagement. Somare's proposal to reduce provincial power brought further threats of secession from some of the country's island provinces.\nThe employment needs of the Bougainville mine decreased after construction was completed, leading younger individuals receiving little benefit from the presence of the mine. A renewed uprising on Bougainville started in 1988, fighting against both the Bougainville government and the national government. After the mine closed in May 1989, the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) declared independence, and the national government pulled out in 1990 and blockaded the province, the conflict shifted into a complex internal civil war. National security forces re-entered the island at the end of 1990, and together with local allies slowly gained more control. An agreement between the government and some rebels was reached in October 1994, and in 1995 a transitional Bougainville government is established, although fighting continued with the BRA. The head of the transitional government, Theodore Miriung, was assassinated in 1996.\nIn 1997, the Sandline affair over the hiring of mercenaries to intervene in Bougainville brought down the national government. Following New Zealand-mediated peace talks, a ceasefire was reached in January 1998. Around 20,000 are thought to have died before the conflict came to an end. The ceasefire also saw that Bougainville would establish a representative government and would not be subject to 1995 national legislation relating to provincial and local governments. The Bougainville People's Congress was formed to represent the province, however, disputes over the suspension of the previous government led to a compromise in the formation of the Bougainville Interim Provincial Government.\nAs a result of reports following the Sandline affair and tense civil-military relations, the PNGDF was shrunk from 3,700 people to 2,000. A peace agreement was signed in 2001, under which Bougainville would gain higher autonomy than other provinces, and it was agreed that an independence referendum would be held in the future. In 2003 the PNGDF participated in the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.\nA nine-year secessionist revolt on the island of Bougainville claimed some 20,000 lives. The rebellion began in early 1989, active hostilities ended with a truce in October 1997 and a permanent ceasefire was signed in April 1998. A peace agreement between the Government and ex-combatants was signed in August 2001. A regional peace-monitoring force and a UN observer mission monitors the government and provincial leaders who have established an interim administration and are working toward complete surrender of weapons, the election of a provincial government and an eventual referendum on independence.\nThe government and rebels negotiated a peace agreement that established the Bougainville Autonomous District and Province. The autonomous Bougainville elected Joseph Kabui as president in 2005, who served until his death in 2008. He was succeeded by his deputy John Tabinaman as acting president while an election to fill the unexpired term was organised. James Tanis won that election in December 2008 and served until the inauguration of John Momis, the winner of the 2010 elections. As part of the current peace settlement, a referendum on independence is planned to be held in Bougainville sometime before mid-2020. Preparations were underway in 2015.\nGovernance.\nWhile warfare significantly decreased under Australian governance, Tribal fighting in the highland areas increased in the 1970s. These areas had been under outside control for less time, meaning former tribal conflict was still remembered and restarted upon independence. The first state of emergency there was declared in 1979, although it and similar interventions did not quell the violence. Unemployment and imbalanced gender ratios in cities meant tribal fighting morphed into the emergence of gangs. Gang violence led to a state of emergency in Port Moresby in 1984, which led to the intervention of the Papua New Guinea Defence Force (PNGDF). This was effective, and led to further police and military interventions elsewhere. Both the police and military became more politicised, and less disciplined. Demand for private security increased as a response, and foreign investment was deterred. The re-emergence of such violence was likely exacerbated by population increases, the increasing value of land for resources and cash crops, the weakening of local traditional authority structures, electoral competition, the spread of cars and alcohol, and more powerful guns.\nA number of governmental changes were made as part of a World Bank Group programme put in place to help the government recover from its 1994 financial crisis. In June 1995, the Organic Law on Provincial and Local Level Governments (OLPLLG) was enacted. This effectively eliminated the former provincial governments, replacing them with bodies made up of national MPs from each province. The MP elected at-large from each province became the provincial Governor, while district MPs became Presidents of their district assemblies. The new provincial assemblies consisted of national MPs and representative from the district governments of each province. In many provinces, the institutional capacity needed to implement this reform was lacking. National legislation called for by OLPLLG also took many years to be produced, resulting in legal uncertainty at provincial and national levels. Aimed at reducing provincial mismanagement, the OLPLLG achieved this through increasing the financial power of MPs. At the same time, the increased responsibilities of district governments meant the potential for much mismanagement merely shifted.\nIn the 1996 budget, the Electoral Development Funds (EDF) that saw each MP have personal responsibility for the distribution of K300,000, were abolished. These were viewed as slush funds, and international creditors providing funds to the Papua New Guinean government sought their elimination. However, while EDFs were abolished, a new set of funds known as the Rural Action Programme (RAP) were created, effectively recreating EDFs. Proposed reforms to land tenure and the civil service were unsuccessful.\nEconomics.\nThe first decade of independence saw slow but steady economic growth. The Ok Tedi Mine opened in 1982. While Australian contribution to the budget dropped from 40% of government revenue in 1975 to 17% in 1988, improved taxation allowed for government expenditure to be maintained. The closure of the Bougainville mine led to issues with government finances, however an expansion of exports of oil, minerals, and forestry products led to economic recovery in the early 1990s. This growth did not decrease inequality however, and government services declined. This economic decline both caused and was exacerbated by increases in violence. Local violence damaged infrastructure, and defence expenditure increased. In 1986 the public services lost a significant degree of independence, leading to their becoming more politicised. Increasing government expense and resulting rising debt led to significant economic trouble. The Papua New Guinean kina was devalued and put on a floating exchange rate in 1994, and the country obtained an emergency loan from the World Bank in 1995.\nEthnic tensions.\nNumerous Chinese have worked and lived in Papua New Guinea, establishing Chinese-majority communities, and Chinese merchants became established in the islands before European exploration. Anti-Chinese rioting involving tens of thousands of people broke out in May 2009. The initial spark was a fight between ethnic Chinese and Papua New Guinean workers at a nickel factory under construction by a Chinese company. Native resentment against Chinese ownership of numerous small businesses and their commercial monopoly in the islands led to the rioting.\nNatural disasters.\nA drought in 1997 caused by the El Ni\u00f1o\u2013Southern Oscillation killed over 1,000 people. In 1998, an earthquake generated tsunamis that killed over 1,500 people. Rising sea levels led to the declaration that residents of the Duke of York archipelago would need to leave in 2000. Flooding caused by Cyclone Guba in 2007 displaced 13,000 people.\n2000s to present.\nIn 2001 an Australian detention centre was established on Manus Island. The 2002 election saw an uptick in violence. Australian police were brought to PNG to help train PNG police in 2004. While most left the next year after a Supreme Court ruling, this began a long-term Australian police presence in the country. The Manus detention centre was expanded in 2013, before growing controversy and legal action led to its closure in 2017.\nThe 2000s saw significant economic growth, in large part due to an expansion in the mining, oil, and gas sectors, although the country's Human Development Index (HDI) rating declined. The debt-to-GDP ratio dropped from 72 per cent in 2002 to 22 per cent in 2011. Gambling was legalised in 2007, and the first agreement to export LNG to China was signed in 2009.\nA peace agreement was signed with Bougainville in 2001. The first elections for the new autonomous government took place in 2005. The autonomous Bougainville elected Joseph Kabui as president, who served until he died in 2008. He was succeeded by his deputy John Tabinaman as acting president while an election to fill the unexpired term was organised. James Tanis won that election in December 2008 and served until the inauguration of John Momis, the winner of the 2010 elections, in June 2010.\nIn 2009, Parliament approved the creation of two additional provinces: Hela Province, consisting of part of the existing Southern Highlands Province, and Jiwaka Province, formed by dividing Western Highlands Province. Jiwaka and Hela officially became separate provinces on 17 May 2012. The declaration of Hela and Jiwaka is a result of the largest liquefied natural gas project in the country that is situated in both provinces.\nAlso in 2009, Papua New Guinea asked various southeast Asian nations for their support for Papua New Guinea's full membership bid in the ASEAN. Indonesia supported the bid after Papua New Guinea supported Indonesia's hold on its Papua region.\nIn 2011, there was a constitutional crisis between the parliament-elect Prime Minister, Peter O'Neill (voted into office by a large majority of MPs), and Somare, who was deemed by the supreme court to retain office. The stand-off between parliament and the Supreme Court continued, with both camps setting up rival governments. The courts ruled that legislation passed by the O'Neill government was void, while parliament passed legislation increasing its control over the judiciary. At one point the deputy prime minister Belden Namah entered the supreme court, escorted by police, ostensibly to arrest the chief justice Salamo Injia and fellow judge Nicholas Kirriwom. The judicial legislation effectively removed the chief justice, and other laws passed included limiting the age for a prime minister. In January 2012, a brief military mutiny emerged calling for the reinstation of Somare. The parliament voted to delay the upcoming elections, however they did not have the constitutional authority to do this, and the Papua New Guinea Electoral Commission continued to prepare. The parliament-elect prime minister eventually carried the votes for the writs for the new election to be issued slightly late but for the election itself to occur on time, thereby avoiding a continuation of the constitutional crisis. The 2012 national elections went ahead as scheduled, and O'Neill was once again elected as prime minister by a majority of parliament. Somare joined O'Neill's government, charges against the court judges and others who supported Somare were dropped, and the legislation asserting control of the judiciary and that affecting the office of the prime minister was repealed. Leo Dion, the former Governor of East New Britain Province, was deputy prime minister.\nIn the early years of independence, the instability of the party system led to frequent votes of no confidence in parliament, with resulting changes of the government, but with referral to the electorate through national elections only occurring every five years. In 1991, legislation was passed preventing such votes sooner than 18 months after a national election (successful votes within 12 months of the next election led to an automatic election). In November 2012, the first (of three) readings were passed to prevent votes of no confidence occurring within the first 30 months. The second reading passed in February 2013. Proponents argued that a restriction on votes of no confidence would provide greater stability, while opponents said such changes would reduce the accountability of the executive branch of government to parliament. In September 2015, the Supreme Court invalidated the change.\nLiquefied natural gas exports began in 2014, however falling prices as well as lower oil prices meant that government revenue was lower than expected. The debt-to-GDP ratio rose, and as of 2019, Papua New Guinea's HDI rating was the lowest in the Pacific. In March 2015 the Bougainville Mining Act shifted control over mining from the national government to the Bougainville government. It also stated that minerals belonged to customary landowners rather than the state, giving landowners vetos over future extraction.\nThe 2012\u20132017 O'Neill government was dogged by corruption scandals. The 2017 general election saw O'Neill return as prime minister, although initially with a smaller coalition. This election saw widespread voter intimidation in some regions, and delays in the reporting of seat results. Financial scandals, as well as criticism of the purchase of expensive cars for APEC Papua New Guinea 2018 meeting, created pressure on O'Neill and led to defections from government, although O'Neill was initially protected from deposition by the 18-month bar on no confidence votes. In May 2019, O'Neill resigned as prime minister and was replaced through a vote of Parliament by James Marape. Marape was a key minister in O'Neill's government, and his defection from the government to the opposition camp finally led to O'Neill's resignation from office. Davis Steven was appointed deputy prime minister, justice Minister and Attorney General. An Independent Commission Against Corruption was created through legislation in 2020.\nThe government set 23 November 2019 as the voting date for a non-binding independence referendum in the Bougainville autonomous region. The independence referendum took place between 23 November and 7 December 2019, providing a choice between greater autonomy within Papua New Guinea and full independence for Bougainville. Voters overwhelmingly voted for independence (98.31%). In December 2019, the autonomous region voted overwhelmingly for independence, with 97.7% voting in favour of obtaining full independence and around 1.7% voting in favour of greater autonomy. Negotiations between the Bougainville government and national Papua New Guinea on a path to Bougainville independence began in 2021.\nFrom February to March 2018, a chain of earthquakes hit Papua New Guinea, causing various damages. Various nations from Oceania, including Australia and New Zealand, immediately sent aid to the country.\nIn May 2019, James Marape was appointed as the new prime minister, after a tumultuous few months in the country's political life. Marape was a key minister in his predecessor Peter O\u2019Neill\u2019s government, and his defection from the government to the opposition camp had finally led to O\u2019Neill's resignation from office. In July 2022, Prime Minister James Marape's PANGU Party secured the most seats of any party in the election, meaning James Marape was elected to continue as PNG's Prime Minister.\nAfter an election widely criticised by observers for its inadequate preparation (including failure to update the electoral roll), abuses and violence, in July 2022, Prime Minister James Marape's PANGU Party secured the most seats of any party in the election, enabling James Marape to be invited to form a coalition government, which he succeeded in doing and he continued as PNG's Prime Minister. In the 2022 Election two women were elected into the eleventh Parliament, one, Rufina Peter, also became Provincial governor of Central Province.\nOn 10 January 2024 a riot broke out in Port Moresby where shops and cars were torched and supermarkets looted. Riots also occurred in the city of Lae. 22 lives were lost in the riots. They arose after police and members of the public sector protested over pay. The prime minister, James Marape, declared a 14-day state of emergency.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23402", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23402", "title": "Geography of Papua New Guinea", "text": " \nThe geography of Papua New Guinea describes the eastern half of the island of New Guinea, the islands of New Ireland, New Britain and Bougainville, and smaller nearby islands. Together these make up the nation of Papua New Guinea in tropical Oceania, located in the western edge of the Pacific Ocean.\nPapua New Guinea is largely mountainous, and much of it is covered with tropical rainforest. The New Guinea Highlands (or Central Range) run the length of New Guinea, and the highest areas receive snowfall\u2014a rarity in the tropics. Within Papua New Guinea Mount Wilhelm is the highest peak, at . There are several major rivers, notably the Sepik River, which is long, which winds through lowland swamp plains to the north coast, and the Fly River at in length, which flows through one of the largest swamplands in the world to the south coast. The Highlands consist of a number of smaller ranges running west to east, such as the Finisterre Range which dominates the Huon Peninsula to the north of the city of Lae. At it is the world's third largest island country.\nPapua New Guinea has one land border\u2014that which divides the island of New Guinea. Across the 820\u00a0km (509\u00a0mi) border is the Indonesian provinces of Papua, Highland Papua and South Papua. Papua New Guinea's border with Indonesia is not straight; the border loops slightly to the west along the Fly River in the south-central part of New Guinea, on the western edge of Papua New Guinea's Western Province. There are maritime borders with Australia to the south and Solomon Islands to the southeast.\nPhysical geography.\nPapua New Guinea extends over , including a large mainland a number of islands. The country lies just south of the equator, and shares a land border with Indonesia, and maritime borders with Australia, the Solomon Islands, and the Federated States of Micronesia. The island of New Guinea lies at the east of the Malay Archipelago. The country is separated from Australia's Cape York Peninsula by the shallow Torres Strait. To the west of this strait is the shallow Arafura Sea, while to its east is the much deeper Coral Sea. The Gulf of Papua covers much of the southern coast, while the Solomon Sea lies east of the mainland.\nThe total coastline is longer than , and the country has an exclusive economic zone of . the largest fisheries zone in the South Pacific. The territorial waters and exclusive economic zone were established by the National Seas Act 1977. The country covers two timezones, with the Autonomous Region of Bougainville an hour ahead of the rest of the country.\n is land and is water. This makes it the 3rd largest island country in the world. Its mainland coastline is long.\nGeologically, the island of New Guinea is a northern extension of the Indo-Australian tectonic plate, forming part of a single land mass which is Australia-New Guinea (also called \"Sahul\" or \"Meganesia\"). It is connected to the Australian segment by a shallow continental shelf across the Torres Strait, which in former ages lay exposed as a land bridge, particularly during ice ages when sea levels were lower than at present. As the Indo-Australian Plate (which includes landmasses of India, Australia, and the Indian Ocean floor in between) drifts north, it collides with the Eurasian Plate. The collision of the two plates pushed up the Himalayas, the Indonesian islands, and New Guinea's Central Range. The Central Range is much younger and higher than the mountains of Australia, so high that it is home to rare equatorial glaciers.\nThe geological history of New Guinea is complex. It lies where the north-moving Indo-Australian plate meets the west-moving Pacific plate. This has caused its highly variable geography both on the mainland and on its islands. Tectonic movement is also the origin of the country's active volcanos and frequent earthquakes. The country is situated on the Pacific Ring of Fire, with altogether 14 known active volcanos and 22 dormant ones. The area south of the mountainous spine is part of the Australian craton, with much of the land to the north being accreted terrain. Both the mainland and the main island groups of the Bismarck Archipelago and the Bougainville are dominated by large mountains. Altogether, one estimate mountains cover at least 72% of the country. Of the rest, 15% are plains and 11% swamps. The country includes about 600 islands of various sizes. Another suggests mountains and hills make up 52%, while defining 19% as plans and plateaus, and 18% as floodplains. The remaining land was classified as volcanic or littoral.\nThe New Guinea Highlands lie within a spine of mountain ranges which run along the centre of the island from Milne Bay in the very southeast of Papua New Guinea through to the western end of Indonesian New Guinea. One of these mountains is Mount Wilhelm, which at is the highest point in the country. Between these mountains are steep valleys, which have a variety of geological histories. The populous region referred to as the Highlands has shorter mountains than those to its northwest and southeast, and includes some relatively flat areas between the mountains.\nNorth of the central mountain belt, a large depression is drained by Sepik River in the west, and the Ramu and Markham Rivers flow through a graben in the east. The depression continues into the waters east of the mainland, forming the New Britain Trench. The northwest coast hosts the Bewani Mountains, Torricelli Range, and Prince Alexander Mountains, which the Sepik River separates from the Adelbert Range further east. East of this, the Huon Peninsula contains the Finisterre Range and the Saruwaged Range. Much of this northern coastline is made up of former seabed that has been raised, and the area remains tectonically active, prone to earthquakes and landslides. West of the Sepik river the northern coastline is highly exposed to the ocean, with no outlying islands, a lack of fringing reefs, and Sissano Lagoon the only sheltered bay. The Sepik river however is navigable for about half of its length. \nThe Sepik-Ramu river system extends across the north of the mainland, while the Fly River flows out the south. Both are surrounded by lowland plain and swamp areas. These form two of the nine drainage basins of the mainland. The other two major basins surround the Purari and Markham Rivers. Within this land lies over 5,000 lakes. Of these, only 22 exceed , the largest being Lake Murray at .\nThe only geologically stable part of the country is its southwestern lowlands, which form the largest contiguous lowland area. The volcanic Mount Bosavi lies in the north of these plains, and the coastal areas can be slightly hilly, especially towards the mouth of the Fly River. Forming a barrier between this area and the highland interior are the tall Southern Fold Mountains. Lake Kutubu lies within this mountain range. The Fly River, which originates in the central mountains, is navigable for the majority of its length.\nOther large rivers in the country include the Musa, Kikori, Turama, and Wawoi. \nThe Papuan Peninsula (considered the island's \"tail\", and thus also known as the \"Bird's Tail Peninsula\") in the east contains Mount Lamington volcano and the Hydrographers Range on its northern side. Further east, the area around Cape Nelson has more volcanoes, including Mount Victory and Mount Trafalgar. In its centre runs the Owen Stanley Range, It has a number of sheltered bays, including Milne Bay, Goodenough Bay, Collingwood Bay, and the Huon Gulf. The small islands off the southeast, including the D'Entrecasteaux Islands, the Trobriand Islands, Woodlark Island, and the Louisiade Archipelago total just over .\nThe major islands off the northeast of the mainland form along two arcs. One includes small islands near the mainland and the large island of New Britain. While New Britain is mostly not volcanic, volcanic activity along its north and especially in the Gazelle Peninsula around Rabaul has created fertile soil. The other island arc links Manus Island, New Hanover, New Ireland, and Bougainville. Bougainville hosts three large volcanoes. The area of these islands is around .\nThe capital of Port Moresby lies on the southern coast. The city of Lae lies towards the east on the northern coast. Only around 2% of the country is regularly cultivated.\nThe border between Papua New Guinea and Indonesia was confirmed by a treaty with Australia before independence in 1974. The land border comprises a segment of the 141\u00b0 E meridian from the north coast southwards to where it meets the Fly River flowing east, then a short curve of the river's thalweg to where it meets the 141\u00b001'10\" E meridian flowing west, then southwards to the south coast. The 141\u00b0 E meridian formed the entire eastern boundary of Dutch New Guinea according to its 1828 annexation proclamation. By the Treaty of The Hague (1895) the Dutch and British agreed to a territorial exchange, bringing the entire left bank of the Fly River into British New Guinea and moving the southern border east to the Torasi Estuary. The maritime boundary with Australia was confirmed by a treaty in 1978. In the Torres Strait it runs close to the mainland of New Guinea, keeping the adjacent North Western Torres Strait Islands (Dauan, Boigu and Saibai) under Australian sovereignty. Maritime boundaries with the Solomon Islands were confirmed by a 1989 treaty.\nIncluding all its islands, it lies between latitudes 0\u00b0 and 12\u00b0S, and longitudes 140\u00b0 and 160\u00b0E.\nThe northernmost point is Mussau Island (1\u00b023' S), southernmost point is Sudest Island (11\u00b065' S), easternmost point is Olava, Bougainville (155\u00b057' E) and the westernmost point is either Bovakaka along the Fly River border with Indonesia or Mabudawan (140\u00b054' E).\nPapua New Guinea has several volcanoes, as it is situated along the Pacific Ring of Fire. Volcanic eruptions are not rare, and the area is prone to earthquakes and tsunamis because of this. The volcanic disturbance can often cause severe earthquakes, which in turn can also cause tsunamis. Papua New Guinea is also prone to landslides, often caused by deforestation in major forests. The mountainous regions of Papua New Guinea are the areas most susceptible to landslides causing damage.\nOffshore islands include the small, forested Admiralty Islands, the largest of which is Manus, to the north of the main island of New Guinea. These have a distinct plant and animal life from the main island but the natural forest has been cleared in places for logging and agriculture.\nA 2019 global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were of tidal flats in Papua New Guinea, making it the 25th ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.\nSoil.\nSoil quality and composition in Papua New Guinea is highly varied, however the tectonic activity in the country means the soils are relatively young. Over half of the country has Inceptisol soils, while a quarter are Entisols. Around 14% are Ultisols, including a large area in Western Province. Of the rest, a quarter of New Ireland Province is covered in Alfisols, while a third of East New Britain Province is covered in Mollisols.\nNatural disasters.\nThe country is at risk of earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, floods, landslides, and droughts. Papua New Guinea is famous for its frequent seismic activity, being on the Ring of Fire. On 17 July 1998, a magnitude 7.0 earthquake struck north of Aitape. It triggered a 50-foot-high tsunami, which killed over 2,180 people in one of the worst natural disasters in the country.\nIn September 2002, a magnitude 7.6 earthquake struck off the coast of Wewak, Sandaun Province, killing six people.\nOn 25 February 2018, an earthquake of magnitude 7.5 and depth of 35 kilometres struck the middle of Papua New Guinea. The worst of the damage was centred around the Southern Highlands region.\nFrom March to April 2018, a chain of earthquakes hit Hela Province, causing widespread landslides and the deaths of 200 people. Various nations from Oceania and Southeast Asia immediately sent aid to the country.\nAnother severe earthquake occurred on 11 September 2022, killing seven people and causing damaging shaking in some of the country's largest cities, such as Lae and Madang, it was also felt in the capital Port Moresby.\nOn May 24, 2024, a landslide hit the village of Kaokalam in Enga Province, about 600 kilometers (372 miles) northwest of the capital, Port Moresby, at about 3 a.m. local time. The landslide buried more than 2000 people alive, caused major destruction to buildings, and food gardens and caused major impact on the economic lifeline of the country. The casualty figure surpasses the 2006 Southern Leyte mudslide tragedy where a total of 1,126 people lost their lives as the debris flow from a landslide followed 10 days of heavy rain. With over 2,000 reported dead by the Papua New Guinea government, this disaster has now emerged as the deadliest landslide of the 21st century.\nClimate change is leading to rising sea levels. It is expected that populations will soon be forced to move from some areas of Bougainville, such as the Carteret Islands.\nClimate.\nAs the country lies within the tropics, the overall climate is generally tropical, although it varies locally due to the highly variable geography. Lowland areas are generally , ranging from a maximum mean temperature of to a minimum of . In the highlands above , colder conditions prevail and night frosts are common, while the daytime temperature exceeds 22\u00a0\u00b0C, regardless of the season. Temperature roughly correlates mostly with altitude. Cloud cover is very common in mountainous areas.\nThere are two monsoon seasons. The wind generally blows southeast from May to October, and northwest from December to March. This drives overall rain patterns, however the large mountains and rugged terrain create local weather conditions and wide variations in annual rainfall. The area around Port Moresby receives less than per year, while some highland areas receive over . Lowland humidity averages around 80%, and cloud cover is very common. In some areas rain is highly seasonal, with a dry spell from May to November, while in other areas it is more regular. In a few locations, the wet and dry seasons are reversed. The period when the highest rainfall occurs differs by location. Rainfall of between is optimal for agriculture, which defines settlement patterns.\nClimate change has caused average temperatures to increase by per decade since the 1950s.\nVarious areas are affected by the Intertropical Convergence Zone, South Pacific convergence zone, and monsoon seasons. The climate in the Papuan Peninsula is relatively mild compared to coastal areas more to the west. The El Ni\u00f1o\u2013Southern Oscillation also sometimes affects rainfall.\nPapua New Guinea is one of the few regions close to the equator that experience snowfall, which occurs in the most elevated parts of the mainland.\nThere is a slight seasonal temperature variation. In lower altitudes, the temperature is around 80\u00a0\u00b0F (27\u00a0\u00b0C) year round. But higher altitudes are a constant 70\u00a0\u00b0F (21\u00a0\u00b0C), and the highest altitudes, especially of Mount Wilhelm and Mount Giluwe, can see snow.\nClimate change is expected to alter the temperature and precipitation of the country, with implications for wildlife, ecosystems and agriculture.\nHuman geography.\nMaritime claims:\nThese are measured from claimed archipelagic baselines.\n depth or to the depth of exploitation\n. nautical miles\n12 nautical miles (22\u00a0km)\nLand use.\nNatural resources:\ngold, copper, silver, natural gas, timber, oil, fisheries\nLand use:\nClassifications of land use can vary considerably depending on the methodology and definitions used.\nAs of 1975, 69.5% of land was considered totally unused. This was mostly forest. 25.6% was cultivated to different extents, although half was at very low levels, including land left to fallow to the extent it may have secondary forest. The remaining 4.9% was uncultivated, including grassland and sago stands. From 1975 to 1996, the amount of intensely cultivated land increased, although the overall amount of cultivated land remained mostly the same, indicating land use changes were predominantly taking place in already used land.\nThe region with the most intensely used land is the Highlands. Another hotspot is the area around Blanche Bay in East New Britain Province.\nBiodiversity.\nPapua New Guinea is a megadiverse country, containing perhaps 5% of global biodiversity. It hosts 4.5% of known mammal diversity, and perhaps 30,000 vascular plant species.\nA diverse variety of flora is found in the country, influenced by vegetation from Asia and Australia, and further varied by the country's rugged topography and distinct local climates. In areas heavily affected by human presence, \"Imperata\" and \"Themeda\" grasslands have formed. Cane grasses also grow in cleared areas, \"Miscanthus\" species in the highlands and \"Saccharum\" species in the lowlands. Such grasses often grow where land is left to fallow for 10 to 15 years.\nPapua New Guinea is part of the Australasian realm, which also includes Australia, New Zealand, eastern Indonesia, and several Pacific island groups, including the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu.\nThe forest of New Guinea are the third-largest contiguous rainforest area in the world, containing rich biodiversity and increasing global climatic stability. Different floral assemblages can be broadly delineated by altitude into lowland, lower montane, upper montane, and alpine. These forests continue to provide important ecosystem services, food, and natural resources for many communities. Bushmeat from the forests was estimated to provide $26 million in value as of 2008. Over 500 plant species are also used as food. The official definition of \"forest\" as of 2014 is \"Land spanning more than 1 hectare, with trees higher than 3 meters and the canopy cover of more than 10 percent\", and these forests are officially classified into 13 natural types plus plantations. \"Low altitude forest on uplands\" makes up 31.30% of all forest, \"Low altitude forest on plain and fans\" 24.7%, and \"Lower montane forest\" 22.30%. Of all forest in 2018, over three-quarters was old-growth forest; 11.9% was heavily logged, and 0.2% had been logged at a small scale. 7.9% was affected by temporary farming or gardening.\nAround of Mangroves stretch along the coast, and in the inland it is inhabited by nipa palm (Nypa fruticans), and deeper in the inland the sago palm tree inhabits areas in the valleys of larger rivers. Trees such as oaks, red cedars, pines, and beeches are becoming predominant in the uplands above 3,300 feet. Papua New Guinea is rich in various species of reptiles, indigenous freshwater fish and birds, but it is almost devoid of large mammals.\nThe country is part of the Malesia biogeographical area, with its plant species more similar to those of East Asia than Australasia, although there are exceptions, especially at higher altitudes. The Bougainville archipelago is biogeographically most closely related to the rest of the Solomon Islands archipelago, distinct from the rest of the country.\nThe complex geology and significant local variations in temperature, rainfall, and altitude mean the country has widely varying microclimates and numerous isolated habitats which host unique plant and animal assemblages. Broad classifications differentiate different coastal areas, the mountains, and different island groups as distinct.\nWithin Papua New Guinean rainforest, there are over 2,000 known species of orchids, around 2,00 species of ferns, over 700 birds, 600 reptiles and amphibians, and 300 mammals. The country is still believed to be the home of many undocumented species of plants and animals, with new species being regularly described. The western interior of the country is particularly poorly researched, although some taxa such as birds-of-paradise and bowerbirds are likely well-known. Different taxa have centres of endemism and diversity in different areas. For example, insect and lizard diversity is high north of the central mountain spine, marsupial, snake, and freshwater fish diversity is highest in areas south of the mountain spine such as the Fly lowlands, and frog diversity is generally highest in mountainous areas on the mainland and Bougainville (an exception being the highly diverse Huon peninsula).\nMany faunal species on New Guinea are part of the same taxonomic groups as species on Australia. One notable feature in common for the two landmasses is the existence of several species of marsupial mammals, including some kangaroos and possums, which are not found elsewhere.\nThree new species of mammals were discovered in the forests of Papua New Guinea by an Australian-led expedition in the early 2010s. A small wallaby, a large-eared mouse and a shrew-like marsupial were discovered. The expedition was also successful in capturing photographs and video footage of some other rare animals such as the Tenkile tree kangaroo and the Weimang tree kangaroo.\nThe large islands to the northeast are oceanic islands that have never been linked to New Guinea. As a consequence, they have their own flora and fauna; groups that are diverse on the mainland are often less so on the islands, and well-known mainland biota such as birds-and-paradise, bowerbirds, and monotremes are completely absent from these islands. The islands have their own significant endemic taxa, such as fruit bats and some frog groups. The distribution of various taxa, or lack of, is not well understood. It is likely a product of geological history as well as dispersal. Islands lying between the mainland Huon Peninsula and New Britain provide an avenue for some migration. The small islands to the southeast were possibly linked to the mainland in the past, and have similar wildlife.\nPapua New Guinea is surrounded by at least of coral reefs, although more may be unmapped. These reefs form part of the biodiverse Coral Triangle.\nAustralia and New Guinea are portions of the ancient supercontinent of Gondwana, which started to break into smaller continents in the Cretaceous period, 65\u2013130 million years ago. Australia finally broke free from Antarctica about 45 million years ago. All the Australasian lands are home to the Antarctic flora, descended from the flora of southern Gondwana, including the coniferous podocarps and \"Araucaria\" pines, and the broad-leafed southern beech (\"Nothofagus\"). These plant families are still present in Papua New Guinea. New Guinea is part of the humid tropics, and many Indomalayan rainforest plants spread across the narrow straits from Asia, mixing with the old Australian and Antarctic floras. New Guinea has been identified as the world's most floristically diverse island in the world, with 13,634 known species of vascular plants.\nNearly one-quarter of Papua New Guinea's rainforests were damaged or destroyed between 1972 and 2002, with around 15% being completely cleared. Up to a quarter of the forests are likely secondary forest, covering areas cultivated in the past. In these areas, cultivation cycles may include a fallow period of as long as 50 years. Clearing has turned a very small amount of forest area into savanna. \nPapua New Guinea includes several terrestrial ecoregions:\nEnvironmental issues.\nThe rainforest is subject to deforestation as a result of growing commercial demand for tropical timber; forest clearance, especially in coastal areas, for plantations; pollution from mining projects. If the trend continues, more than half the forest that existed when Papua New Guinea became independent from Australia in 1975 will be gone by 2021.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23403", "revid": "51018607", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23403", "title": "Demographics of Papua New Guinea", "text": "The indigenous population of Papua New Guinea is one of the most heterogeneous in the world. Papua New Guinea has several thousand separate communities, most with only a few hundred people. Divided by language, customs, and tradition. It is the second most populous nation in Oceania, with a total population estimated variously as being between 9.5 and 10.1 million inhabitants.\nThe isolation created by the mountainous terrain is so great that some groups, until recently, were unaware of the existence of neighboring groups only a few kilometers away. The diversity, reflected in a folk saying, \"For each village, a different culture\", is perhaps best shown in the local languages. The island of New Guinea contains about 850 languages. The languages that are neither Austronesian nor Australian are considered Papuan languages; this is a geographical rather than linguistic demarcation. Of the Papuan languages, the largest linguistic grouping is considered to be Trans-New Guinean, with between 300 and 500 languages likely belonging to the group in addition to a huge variety of dialects. The remainder of the Papuan languages belong to smaller, unrelated groupings as well as to isolates. Native languages are spoken by a few hundred to a few thousand, although the Enga language, used in Enga Province, is spoken by some 130,000 people.\nTok Pisin serves as the lingua franca. English is the language of business and government, and all schooling from Grade 2 Primary is in English.\nThe overall population density is low, although pockets of overpopulation exist. Papua New Guinea's Western Province averages one person per square kilometer (3 per sq. mi.). The Simbu Province in the New Guinea highlands averages and has areas containing up to 200 people farming a square kilometer of land. The highlands have 40% of the population.\nA considerable urban drift towards Port Moresby and other major centers has occurred in recent years. Between 1978 and 1988, Port Moresby grew nearly 8% per year, Lae 6%, Mount Hagen 6.5%, Goroka 4%, and Madang 3%. The trend toward urbanization accelerated in the 1990s, bringing in its wake squatter settlements, unemployment, and attendant social problems. Almost two-thirds of the population is Christian. Of these, more than 700,000 are Roman Catholic, more than 500,000 Lutheran, and the balance are members of other Protestant denominations. Although the major churches are under indigenous leadership, a large number of missionaries remain in the country. The non-Christian portion of the indigenous population practices a wide variety of indigenous religions that are an integral part of traditional culture. These religions are mainly types of animism and veneration of the dead.\nThe World Bank estimates the number of international migrants in Papua New Guinea to be about 0.3% of the population. According to the 2000 and 2011 census, the most common places of origin for international migrants were the United States, Australia, the Philippines, and Indonesia. Since independence, about 900 foreigners have become naturalized citizens as of August 1999. An estimated 20,000 Chinese people live in Papua New Guinea.\nThe traditional Papua New Guinea social structure includes the following characteristics:\nMost Papua New Guineans still adhere strongly to this traditional social structure, which has its roots in village life.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population estimate as of 2020 was 8.95 million inhabitants. Government estimates reported the country's population to be 11.8 million. With the National Census deferred during 2020/2021, ostensibly on the grounds of the COVID-19 pandemic, an interim assessment was conducted using satellite imagery. In December 2022, a report by the UN, based upon a survey conducted with the University of Southampton using satellite imagery and ground-truthing, suggested a new population estimate of 17 million, nearly double the country's official estimate. In July 2023 the UN officially revised its estimate to 11.8 million. While decadal censuses have been carried out since 1961, the reliability of past censuses is unsure. Nonetheless, the population is thought to have grown greatly since independence. Despite this growth, urbanisation remains either the same or only slightly increased. Papua New Guinea is the most populous Pacific island country.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2016) (Estimates are prepared by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community based on the last population and housing census.): \nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nThe gender ratio in 2016 was 51% male and 49% female. The number of households headed by a male was 82.5%, or 17.5% were headed by females. The median age of marriage is 20, while 18% of women are in polygynous relationships. The population is young, with a median age under 22 in 2011, when 36% of the population was younger than 15. The dependency ratio in urban areas was 64% in the late 2010s, while it was 83% in rural areas.\nUN estimates.\nRegistration of vital events in Papua New Guinea is not complete. The website Our World in Data prepared the following estimates based on statistics from the Population Department of the United Nations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nEthnic groups.\nPapua New Guinea is one of the most heterogeneous nations in the world. There are hundreds of ethnic groups indigenous to Papua New Guinea, the majority being from the group known as Papuans, whose ancestors arrived in the New Guinea region tens of thousands of years ago. The other indigenous peoples are Austronesians, their ancestors having arrived in the region less than four thousand years ago.\nEthnic identity in the country is complex. In some areas, it roughly correlates with linguistic diversity, which by itself creates hundreds of identities. However, ethnic identity is also shaped by the geography which physically divides different groups, by kinship ties, and by external pressures. Clan identity has become an important factor in politics, with politicians often relying on bloc voting from members of their clan. In turn, this has reinforced the practical importance of clan identity, and even spurred the creation of new clan identities.\nThere are also numerous people from other parts of the world now resident, including Chinese, Europeans, Australians, Indonesians, Filipinos, Polynesians, and Micronesians (the last four belonging to the Austronesian family). Around 50,000 expatriates, mostly from Australia and China, were living in Papua New Guinea in 1975, but most of these had moved by the 21st century. As of 2015, about 0.3% of the population was international migrants.\nImmigration.\nChinese.\nNumerous Chinese have worked and lived in Papua New Guinea, establishing Chinese-majority communities. Increasing migration and the perception that it affects business interests has led to small-scale anti-Chinese sentiment. Rioting involving tens of thousands of people broke out in May 2009. The initial spark was a fight between ethnic Chinese and indigenous workers at a nickel factory under construction by a Chinese company. There is native resentment against Chinese ownership of small businesses and their commercial monopoly in the islands.\nAfrican.\nThere is a thriving community of Africans who live and work in the country.\nUrbanisation.\nPapua New Guinea is one of the most rural countries, with only 13.25% of its population living in urban centres in 2019. Most of its people live in customary communities. The most populated region is the Highlands, with 43% of the population. The northern mainland has 25%, the southern region 18%, and the Islands Region 14%.\nAs of 2018, Papua New Guinea had the second lowest urban population percentage in the world, with 13.2%, only behind Burundi. The projected urbanisation rate from 2015 to 2020 was 2.51%. The biggest city is the capital Port Moresby, with other larger settlements including Lae, Mount Hagen, Madang, and Wewak. As of 2000, there were 40 urban areas with a population over 1,000. Around half of the houses in Port Moresby are informal.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTraditional small communities, usually under 300 people, often consist of a very small main village, surrounded by farms and gardens in which other dwellings are dispersed. These are lived in for some periods of the year, and villagers may have multiple homes. In communities which need to hunt or farm across wide areas, the main village may be as small as one or two buildings. An increase in urban populations has led to an average decrease in urban quality of life, even as the quality of life in rural areas has generally improved. Despite the widespread population, over four-fifths live within eight hours of a government service centre.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 2011 census found that 95.6% of citizens identified themselves as Christian, 1.4% were not Christian, and 3.1% gave no answer. Virtually no respondent identified as being non-religious. Religious syncretism is common, with many citizens combining their Christian faith with some traditional indigenous religious practices. Many different Christian denominations have a large presence in the country. The largest denomination is Roman Catholic, followed by 26.0% of the population. This was followed by the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Papua New Guinea (18.4%), the Seventh-day Adventist Church (12.9%), Pentecostal denominations (10.4%), the United Church in Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands (10.3%), \"Other Christian\" (9.7%), Evangelical Alliance (5.9%), the Anglican Church of Papua New Guinea (3.2%), the Baptist Union of Papua New Guinea (2.8%) and smaller groups.\nThe government and judiciary have upheld the constitutional right to freedom of speech, thought, and belief. However, Christian fundamentalism and Christian Zionism have become more common, driven by the spread of American prosperity theology by visitors and through televangelism. This has challenged the dominance of mainstream churches, and reduced the expression of some aspects of pre-Christian culture. A constitutional amendment in March 2025 recognised Papua New Guinea as a Christian country, with specific mention of \"God, the Father; Jesus Christ, the Son; and Holy Spirit\", and the Bible as a national symbol.\nEstimates of the number of Muslims in the country range from 1,000 to 5,000. The majority belong to the Sunni group. Non-traditional Christian churches and non-Christian religious groups are active throughout the country. The Papua New Guinea Council of Churches has stated that both Muslim and Confucian missionaries are highly active. Traditional religions are often animist. Some also tend to have elements of veneration of the dead, though generalisation is suspect given the extreme heterogeneity of Melanesian societies. Prevalent among traditional tribes is the belief in \"masalai\", or evil spirits, which are blamed for \"poisoning\" people, causing calamity and death, and the practice of \"puripuri\" (sorcery).\nThe first Bah\u00e1'\u00ed in PNG was Violete Hoenke who arrived at Admiralty Island, from Australia, in 1954. The PNG Bah\u00e1'\u00ed community grew so quickly that in 1969 a National Spiritual Assembly (administrative council) was elected. As of 2020 there are over 30,000 members of the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith in PNG. In 2012 the decision was made to erect the first Bah\u00e1'\u00ed House of Worship in PNG. Its design is that of a woven basket, a common feature of all groups and cultures in PNG. It is, therefore, hoped to be a symbol for the entire country. Its nine entrances are inspired by the design of Haus Tambaran (Spirit House). Construction began in Port Moresby in 2018.\n2020 figures from the Association of Religion Data Archives (relying on the \"World Christian Encyclopedia\")\nLanguages.\nThere are around 840 known languages of Papua New Guinea (including English), making it the most linguistically diverse country in the world. Papua New Guinea has more languages than any other country, with over 820 indigenous languages, representing 12% of the world's total, but most have fewer than 1,000 speakers. With an average of only 7,000 speakers per language, Papua New Guinea has a greater density of languages than any other nation on earth except Vanuatu. The most widely spoken indigenous language is Enga, with about 200,000 speakers, followed by Melpa and Huli. However, even Enga is divided into different dialects. Indigenous languages are classified into two large groups, Austronesian languages and Papuan, although \"Papuan\" is a group of convenience for local non-Austronesian languages, rather than defining any linguistic relationships.\nThere are four languages in Papua New Guinea with some recognition as national languages: English, Tok Pisin, Hiri Motu, and, since 2015, sign language (which in practice means Papua New Guinean Sign Language). However, there is no specific legislation proclaiming official languages. Language is only briefly mentioned in the constitution: section 2(11) (literacy) of its preamble mentions '...all persons and governmental bodies to endeavour to achieve universal literacy in Pisin, Hiri Motu or English' as well as \"tok ples\" and \"ita eda tano gado\" [the terms for local languages in Tok Pisin and Hiri Motu respectively]. Section 67 (2)(c) mentions \"speak and understand Pisin or Hiri Motu, or a vernacular of the country, sufficiently for normal conversational purposes\" as a requirement for citizenship by nationalisation; this is again mentioned in section 68(2)(h). Those arrested are required to be informed in a language they understand.\nEnglish is the language of commerce and the education system, while the primary lingua franca of the country is Tok Pisin (also referred to as Melanesian Pidgin or just Pidgin/Pisin). Parliamentary debated is usually conducted in Tok Pisin mixed with English. The national judiciary uses English, while provincial and district courts usually use Tok Pisin or Hiri Motu. Village courts may use a local language. Most national newspapers use English, although one national weekly newspaper, \"Wantok\", uses Tok Pisin. National radio and television use English and Tok Pisin, with a small amount of Hiri Motu. Provincial radio uses a mixture of these languages, in addition to local ones. Many information campaigns and advertisements use Tok Pisin. Over time, Tok Pisin has continued to spread as the most common language, displacing Hiri Motu, including in the former Hiri Motu-dominated capital, Port Moresby. The only area where Tok Pisin is not the prevalent lingua franca is the southern region of Papua, where people often use the third official language, Hiri Motu. Motu spoken as the indigenous language in outlying villages surrounding the capital.\nMost provinces do not have a dominant local language, although exceptions exist. Enga Province is dominated by Enga language speakers, however it adopted Tok Pisin as its official language in 1976. East New Britain Province is dominated by Tolai speakers, which has caused issues with minority speakers of the Baining languages or Sulka. However, in general language has not been a cause for conflict, with conflicts occurring between communities speaking the same language, and regional identities incorporating many different linguistic communities. English and Tok Pisin are generally seen as neutral languages, while local languages are considered culturally valuable and multilingualism is officially encouraged.\nThe use of almost all local languages, as well as Hiri Motu, is declining. Some local languages have fewer than 100 speakers. The use of local languages is encouraged by government, which encourages teaching in local languages before shifting to a more national language. As of April 2000, 837 languages had educational support, with few problems reported from schools covering two different local language communities. However, in 2013 education was shifted back towards English to try and improve low English literacy rates.\nEducation.\nA large proportion of the population is illiterate, with women predominating in this area. Much of the education in PNG is provided by church institutions. This includes 500 schools of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Papua New Guinea. Papua New Guinea has four public universities and two private ones, as well as seven other tertiary institutions. The two founding universities are the University of Papua New Guinea, based in the National Capital District, and the Papua New Guinea University of Technology, based outside of Lae, in Morobe Province.\nTuition fees were abolished in 2012, leading to an increase in educational attendance, but results were mixed and the fees were partially reintroduced in 2019. In the late 2010s, the share of the male population considered to be without education was around 32%, while for the female population it was 40%.\nThe four other universities were once colleges but have since been recognised by the government. These are the University of Goroka in the Eastern Highlands province, Divine Word University (run by the Catholic Church's Divine Word Missionaries) in Madang Province, Vudal University in East New Britain Province, and Pacific Adventist University (run by the Seventh-day Adventist Church) in the National Capital District.\nThe Human Rights Measurement Initiative reports that Papua New Guinea is achieving 68.5% of what should be possible for the right to education, based on their level of income.\nHealth.\nAs of 2019, life expectancy in Papua New Guinea at birth was 63 years for men and 67 for women. Government expenditure health in 2014 accounted for 9.5% of total government spending, with total health expenditure equating to 4.3% of GDP. There were five physicians per 100,000 people in the early 2000s. The 2008 maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births for Papua New Guinea was 250. This is compared with 270 in 2005 and 340 in 1990. The under-5 mortality rate, per 1,000 births is 69 and the neonatal mortality as a percentage of under-5s' mortality is 37. In Papua New Guinea, the number of midwives per 1,000 live births is 1 and the lifetime risk of death for pregnant women is 1 in 94. These national improvements in child mortality mostly reflect improvement in rural areas, with little change or slight worsening in some urban areas. As of 2016, the total fertility rate was 4.4.\nHealth infrastructure overall is poorly developed. There is a high incidence of HIV/AIDS, and there have been outbreaks of diseases such as cholera and tuberculosis. Vaccine coverage in 2016 was 35%, with 24% of children having no vaccines.\nThe Human Rights Measurement Initiative finds that Papua New Guinea is achieving 71.9% of what should be possible for the right to health, based on their level of income.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23404", "revid": "45331848", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23404", "title": "Politics of Papua New Guinea", "text": " \nThe politics of Papua New Guinea takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic multi-party system, whereby the prime minister is the head of government. Papua New Guinea is an independent Commonwealth realm, with the monarch serving as head of state and a governor-general, nominated by the National Parliament, serving as their representative. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament.\nConstitutional safeguards include freedom of speech, press, worship, movement, and association. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nExecutive branch.\nPapua New Guinea is a Commonwealth realm with Charles III as king. The monarch's representative is the governor-general of Papua New Guinea, who is elected by the unicameral National Parliament of Papua New Guinea. Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands are the only realms in which the governor-general is elected by parliament; the governor-general is still formally appointed by the monarch per parliamentary vote. The governor general acts on the advice of the prime minister and the cabinet.\nThe Constitution of Papua New Guinea provides for the executive to be responsible to parliament as the representative of the Papua New Guinean people. The National Parliament elects the prime minister of Papua New Guinea, who is then appointed by the governor-general. The other ministers are appointed by the governor-general on the prime minister's advice and form the National Executive Council of Papua New Guinea, which acts as the country's cabinet. The National Parliament has 111 seats, of which 22 are occupied by the governors of the 21 provinces and the National Capital District, and sits for a maximum of five years. Candidates for members of parliament are voted upon when the prime minister asks the governor-general to call a national election.\nThe governments of Papua New Guinea are characterized by weak political parties and highly unstable parliamentary coalitions.\nThe prime minister, elected by Parliament, chooses the other members of the cabinet. Each ministry is headed by a cabinet member, who is assisted by a permanent secretary, a career public servant, who directs the staff of the ministry. The cabinet consists of members, including the prime minister and ministers of executive departments. They answer politically to the parliament.\nThe governor general appoints the chief justice of the supreme court on the advice of the prime minister and the leader of the opposition. The governor general appoints the other justices with the advice of a judicial commission. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (based in the United Kingdom) serves as the highest appellate court.\nLegislative branch.\nPapua New Guinea has a unicameral National Parliament, previously known as the House of Assembly. It has 118 seats, with 96 elected from single-member \"Open\" electorates representing districts, and 22 from province-level \"Provincial\" electorates (20 provinces, the National Capital District, and the Autonomous Region of Bougainville). Members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms. The most recent election was held in June to July of 2022.\nMembers of Parliament are elected from the nineteen provinces and the National Capital District. After independence in 1975, members were elected by the first past the post system, with winners frequently gaining less than 15% of the vote. Electoral reforms in 2001 introduced the Limited Preferential Vote system (LPV), a modified version of alternative vote, where voters number their first three choices among the candidates. The first general election to use LPV was held in 2007.\nParliament introduced reforms in June 1995 to change the provincial government system, with provincial members of Parliament becoming provincial governors, while retaining their national seats in Parliament. However, if a provincial member accepts a position as a cabinet minister, the role of governor falls to one of the Open members of Parliament from the province.\nAs of 1 February 2019, Papua New Guinea was one of only three countries in the world out of 235 that had no women in its legislative branch or parliament. There have only been seven women elected to parliament ever, one of the lowest rates of legislative representation in the world. Proposals to have nominated (unelected) women MPs have not gained support.\nThe Speaker of the National Parliament of Papua New Guinea has considerable power, and can allow the executive to exercise considerable control over parliament. This has been described as a \"fatal flaw\" of the constitution.\nWhile dual citizens cannot hold office, naturalised citizens can if they renounce their other citizenship(s). As of 2023, many naturalised citizens had served as MPs, with 17 becoming ministers in government.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nPapua New Guinea has maintained continuous democratic elections and changes in government since independence. While seat results are often contested, the overall results of elections are accepted. Elections in PNG attract numerous candidates. After independence in 1975, members were elected by the first-past-the-post system, with many winners gaining less than 10% of the vote. In 1972, there was an average of six candidates contesting each seat; by 2002 that reached 26, with a higher proportion of independents. Voting now takes place through the Limited Preferential Vote system (LPV), a version of the alternative vote. Under this system, voters must give preference votes for at least three candidates. This is intended to reduce confrontation due to the need to court second and third preferences, as well as provide outlets for those, especially women, who might be pressured to select one candidate by others to also vote for their preferred candidate. Voting can take place over a few weeks, due to the time it can take to reach rural areas, and due to unexpected delays in voting logistics.\nWhile political parties exist, they are not ideologically differentiated. Instead they generally reflect the alliances made between their members, and have little relevance outside of elections. All governments since 1972 have been coalitions, and the number of independent candidates that run has increased. Having no party makes it easier for winning politicians to negotiate with those trying to establish a majority coalition. When formed, such coalitions are unstable due to the potential for party hopping, referred to as \"yo-yo\" politics. Almost all parties have formed coalition with the others, and some coalitions have consisted of up to 10 separate parties. Ministerial positions are valuable, and constituents may often have little issue with their elected representatives switching parties to join the government, as it gives their district more representation. Political parties can have MPs in government while others remain in opposition. Opposition MPs have been appointed to government.\nChanges in government mostly affected patronage and individual positions, rather than changing government priorities and programmes. Due to this, despite the fractiousness of politics, policy is relatively stable. Many parties might run on similar platforms, with common policies including rural development, better health, education, and other public services, and being anti-corruption. This further weakens policy debate, as candidates campaign on local representation rather than their platforms. Party whipping is uncommon. The lack of strong parties lasting between elections contributes to poor finances, meaning parties can not really support candidates outside of personal funds from party leaders. Pre-election coalitions are rare. A weak parliament has also resulted in a much stronger executive, a process strengthened by governments using procedural methods to control parliament. An increasing reliance on judicial methods to combat the government has increased the risk of the judiciary being seen as politicised.\nThe support bases of political parties are usually personal or geographical. Even when nominally national parties emerge, they are often strong in specific regions. Most parties exist only for a short time, and are highly dependent on their leaders. Conversely, initial governing coalitions are large, albeit fragile, as MPs seek to gain the benefits of being in government. Coalitions that emerge during mid-term political disputes however may be much closer to a basic majority.\nFor the first couple of decades of independence, there was at least one change of government within each parliamentary period. In total, only two prime ministers have finished a full term from election to election. Votes of no confidence are common, and while few are successful, multiple prime ministers have pre-emptively resigned to try and engineer reselection or adjourned parliament in order to avoid them. Prime ministers also engage in large-scale reshuffles to split opposition parties and craft new majorities. In October 2016, the government of Peter O'Neill launched a motion of no confidence against itself while much of the opposition was absent, which was voted down 78 to 2. The first successful vote of no confidence occurred in 1980, with one following in 1985, and the third in 1988, with many unsuccessful attempts in between. Motions of no confidence must be \"constructive\", ie. they must include a nomination for a replacement prime minister. (This does not apply in the final 12 months of a parliament, when a successful motion of no confidence would lead directly to an election.) Debate over a motion of no confidence is limited to seven days. They have historically been unpredictable, with embattled prime ministers sometimes surviving, and those with large coalitions sometimes falling.\nThe political culture is influenced by existing kinship and village ties, with communalism an important cultural factor given the many small and fragmented communities. Regional and local identities are strong, and traditional politics has integrated with the modern political system. There is a broad Papuan regional identity, and to some extent a highlands one, which can affect politics. However, outside of Bougainville, regional politics are autonomist rather than separatist, with separatism often used as rhetoric rather than as an ultimate goal. The importance of community ties to their land are reflected in the legal system, with 97% of the country designated as customary land, held by communities. Many such effective titles remain unregistered and effectively informal.\nVoting often occurs along tribal lines, an issue exacerbated by politicians who might be able to win off the small vote share provided by a unified tribe. Political intimidation and violence are common. Politicians have been prevented from campaigning in tribes with a rival candidate, and candidates are sometimes put up by opponents to split a different tribe's vote. The choice of who to select as a candidate can be an involved process, and subsequent elections can serve as a proxy for tribal conflicts. Bloc voting is practiced by some communities, especially in the highlands. Clan identities in the very populous highlands divide speakers of the same languages, which is less common elsewhere. Bloc voting is common enough to serve as a proxy for clan identity. The fragmentation of ethnic identity, and the subsequent fragmentation of politics, correlates with development, with more heterogenous provinces having lower overall development. One explanation might be that more division results in higher levels of rent-seeking politics. The link between political success and material benefits, with clans effectively functioning as political interest groups, has reinforced tribal identities. This creates social pressure within clans to all vote in the same direction, with such expectations sometimes enforced through violence. The political importance of clan identities has even spurred the creation of new identities. While heterogeneity also impedes national politics, it does so to a lesser extent than on the local-level, as no group can create a substantial bloc at the national level on its own.\nFor political parties, one saying to describe candidate choice is \"Candidates do not win because they are endorsed by parties; rather parties endorse candidates who are going to win\". Large numbers of independent candidates means that winners are often elected on very small pluralities, including winning less than 10% of votes. Such results raise concerns about the mandates provided by elections.\nIn every election prior to at least 2004, the majority of incumbents lost their seats. This has created an incentive for newly elected politicians to seek as much personal advantage as possible within their term. Each MP controls Rural Development Funds for their constituency, providing easy opportunities for corruption. It also means many prioritise new expenditure, rather than delivering existing services. This has led to the impression that politics is a type of business. Parties in parliament serve primarily as factions. They have no particular hold on MPs, except as a vehicle for personal advancement. Political strategy and tactics to achieve power as an end in itself matter more than questions of policy. This short-term procedural method of politics impedes long-term political strategy. The total amount of funding under the discretionary control of each MP is amongst the highest in the world. This has generated significant cynicism, and reduced the perceived legitimacy of the national government. The control of such funds may also contribute to commonality and severity of electoral violence. Other challenges to elections include issues with administration, issues with electoral rolls, and vote buying. The provision of constituency funds to MPs has been delayed by prime ministers to influence coalition-building.\nCorruption is a widespread issue within Papua New Guinea. While notable instances have been identified amongst high-profile individuals, spreading petty corruption has likely had a greater effect of degrading government services. While some corruption is for personal gain, other corruption emerges from the social obligations of the wantok system, with constituents expecting reciprocal benefits and loyalty from their elected officials and from others in their communities and kin networks. This exacerbates national political stability, keeping political contests local and focused on allegiances. Politicians jailed for corruption have been re-elected, as their corrupt activities were seen an expected part of benefiting their communities. This clash of individual community expectations and local acceptance of what might be called corruption with widespread disillusionment over national corruption is likely one reason that anti-corruption actions rarely match political rhetoric. These cultural expectations also sometimes clash with the formal legal and political system which inherited Australian norms. Resentment of elites and clear inequality also drive expectations of patronage. Former Prime Minister Mekere Morauta described corruption as \"systematic and systemic\".\nThe control of constituency funds has also resulted in MPs being seen as individually responsible for the delivery of government services, especially as few other pathways for government services exist, compounding the cultural importance of expectations of rewards for voting for a winning candidate. This responsibility for services is thought to contribute to high levels of absenteeism in parliament, and thus means MPs are not able to effectively act as lawmakers within the Westminster system of government. Instability in parliament further hampers lawmaking. A 2018 commission found 370 laws thought to be at least 50 years out of date. Constituency boundaries are the same as administrative boundaries, strengthening the conceptual link between elections and service provisions. This also distorts politics, by making electoral boundaries unresponsive to changes in population. Changing these boundaries to reflect population is hindered by the vested interests of those elected under the current system. While the Electoral Boundaries Commission proposed changes in 1981, 1986, 1991, and 2006, all were rejected by parliament. In 2021, an Electoral Boundaries Commission report proposed adding 12 districts. On 23 March 2022 Parliament approved the creation of seven new districts, the first change since independence, and occurring prior to the 2022 Papua New Guinean general election. This brought the number of districts to 96, meaning there were 118 seats total. The district creation was challenged with accusations of gerrymandering, especially as the COVID-19 pandemic in Papua New Guinea meant the 2021 census was postponed, meaning the district creation relied on outdated data. While the district creation is unlikely to directly benefit the government, the new districts were not concentrated in the most overpopulated districts of the 2011 census. Rural communities have a much more difficult time accessing government services, with facilities such as banking sometimes being days of travel away. In some rural areas, villages have little interaction with the state.\nThe Constitutional Planning Committee that decided to adopt a Westminster system expected that the legislature would act as a check on the executive, however political developments did not achieve this. Instead, the executive exerts significant control over parliament, especially with its ability to adjourn the parliament and thus prevent legislative scrutiny. Adjournments also avoid votes of no confidence, and can last for months.\nGovernments cannot face no confidence votes within six months of the most recent election. This was extended to 18 months in 1991, and 30 months in 2012, although in 2015 the supreme court ruled such changes were unconstitutional. Votes of no confidence are generally not held in the fifth year of a parliament, as this would trigger an immediate election, risking the seats of incumbent MPs.\nMinisterial tenures are often short, averaging half the length of a parliament from 1972 to 2016. This 29\u201330 months is reduced to just 24 months if considering service under one prime minister. The average length a minister spends at a particular portfolio is even shorter, at just 16 months, or 15 months under one prime minister. Excluding the unusual 1972\u201377 parliament, the average is just 12 months.\nThe Organic Law on the Integrity of Political Parties and Candidates, which passed in December 2000, incentivised the formation of political parties and barred independent MPs from electing the prime minister. Changes in 2003 barred party hopping and forced MPs to vote for prime ministers representing the party they had campaigned for. Such changes facilitate the relatively long time Michael Somare was prime minister. However, in 2010 these laws and related constitutional changes were deemed unconstitutional. The other prime minister with a long time in office, Peter O'Neill, had his position facilitated by constitutional changes restricting no confidence votes and reducing the parliamentary period. These changes were also later declared unconstitutional.\nUnder a 2002 amendment, the leader of the party, who wins the largest number of seats in the election, is invited by the governor-general to form the government if they can muster the necessary majority in parliament. Forming such a coalition involves considerable negotiations between party leaders, both to create and maintain coalitions.\nJudicial branch.\nPapua New Guinea's judiciary is independent of the government. It protects constitutional rights and interprets the laws. There are several levels, culminating in the Supreme Court of Papua New Guinea.\nThere is a Supreme Court of Papua New Guinea, not separately constituted but an appellate Full Court of the National Court. Its chief justice, also the chief justice of the National Court, is appointed by the governor general on the proposal of the National Executive Council after consultation with the minister responsible for justice. Other justices of the National Court, who are available to sit as members of ad hoc benches of the supreme court, are appointed by the Judicial and Legal Services Commission.\nLitigation has become common, increasing the cost of the judicial system. Government infrastructure, including schools and airstrips, often lead to demands for compensation from local communities, impeding development and creating local tensions. Media is generally free, but weak. Of national newspapers, there are two national English language daily newspapers, two English language weekly ones, and one weekly Tok Pisin newspaper. There are some local television services, as well as both government-run and private radio stations. There are 3 mobile carriers, although Digicel has a 92% market share due to its more extensive coverage of rural areas. Around two-thirds of the population is thought to have some mobile access, if intermittent.\nProvincial government.\nReforms in June 1995 changed the provincial government system. Regional (at-large) members of Parliament became provincial governors, while retaining their national seats in Parliament.\nWhile Papua New Guinea is a unitary state, it is highly decentralised. Papua New Guinea is divided into four regions. Although these are not the primary administrative divisions, they are significant in many aspects of government, commercial, sporting, and other activities. The nation has 22 province-level divisions: twenty provinces, the Autonomous Region of Bougainville and the National Capital District. Each province is divided into districts (with 89 overall), which in turn are divided into one or more Local-Level Government areas (LLGs). There are over 300 LLGs, which are divided between a small number of urban LLGs, and rural LLGs, which have slightly different governance structures. The smallest province by size and population, Manus, has just one coterminous district. Provinces are the primary administrative divisions of the country, with provincial governments consisting of the national MPs elected from that province. Local governments exist parallel to traditional tribal leadership. They are very dissimilar in population: the most populous six make up half of the national population, while the smallest six make up 14%. Provinces can levy their own taxes, and have some control over education, health, and development. The province-level divisions are as follows:\nNorth Solomons (Bougainville).\nOn Bougainville Island, initially focused on traditional land rights, environmental and economic issues stemming from the operation of the Panguna mine, (a \"Conzinc RioTinto Australia\" (now Rio Tinto Limited) and PNG government joint venture), a civil war quickly grew into a war for independence from PNG.\nFrom early 1989 until a truce came into effect in October 1997 and a permanent cease-fire was signed in April 1998 as many as 20,000 people were killed. Under the eyes of a regional peace-monitoring force and a United Nations observer mission, the government and provincial leaders established an interim government. In 2019 a non-binding referendum was held in which 98.31% of voters voted in favor of independence.\nThe people of Bougainville are closely related to those of the nearby Solomon Islands.\nInstability.\nThe Morauta government brought in a series of electoral reforms in 2001, designed to address instability and corruption. Among the reforms was the introduction of the Limited Preferential Vote system (LPV), a modified version of Alternative vote, for future elections in PNG. (The introduction of LPV was partly in response to calls for changes in the voting system by Transparency International and the European Union.) The first general election to use LPV was held in 2007.\nThere are many parties, but party allegiances are weak. Winning candidates are usually courted in efforts to forge the majority needed to form a government, and allegiances are fluid. No single party has yet won enough seats to form a government in its own right.\nPapua New Guinea has a history of changes in government coalitions and leadership from within Parliament during the five-year intervals between national elections. New governments are protected by law from votes of no confidence for the first 18 months of their incumbency, and no votes of no confidence may be moved in the 12 months preceding a national election.\nOn Bougainville Island, a rebellion occurred from early 1989 until a truce came into effect in October 1997 and a permanent cease-fire was signed in April 1998. Under the eyes of a regional peace-monitoring force and a United Nations observer mission, the government and provincial leaders established an interim government and made efforts toward toward election of a provincial government and a referendum on independence, the latter of which occurred in 2019. Michael Somare was reelected Prime Minister, a position he also held in the country's first parliament after independence, in 2002, where he won amidst violence-marred polling. Supplementary elections were held in Southern Highlands province in June 2003 after record levels of electoral fraud and intimidation during the 2002 polls.\nA study by the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, entitled \"Strengthening our neighbour: Australia and the future of Papua New Guinea\" and published in December 2004 found that PNG's weak government and policing has allowed organized crime gangs to relocate from Southeast Asia in recent years.\n2011\u201312 political crisis.\nFrom 2011 to 2012, there was a constitutional dispute between parliament and Peter O'Neill and the judiciary, governor-general and Sir Michael Somare. The crisis involved the status of the prime minister and who is the legitimate head of government between O'Neill and Somare.\nAfter 2019.\nIn May 2019, James Marape was appointed as the new prime minister, after a tumultuous few months in the country\u2019s political life. Marape was a key minister in his predecessor Peter O\u2019Neill\u2019s government, and his defection from the government to the opposition camp had finally led to O\u2019Neill\u2019s resignation from office. In July 2022, Prime Minister James Marape's PANGU Party secured the most seats of any party in the election, meaning James Marape was elected to continue as PNG's Prime Minister.\nForeign relations.\nPapua New Guinea has sought to maintain good relations with its neighbours Australia, Indonesia, and Solomon Islands, while also building links to Asian countries to the north. Tensions sometimes emerge with Australia due to changes in aid, while regional conflicts have complicated relations with Solomon Islands and Indonesia, due to the Bougainville conflict and the Papua conflict respectively. In 1986, Papua New Guinea became a founding member of the Melanesian Spearhead Group alongside Solomon Islands and Vanuatu, and the three signed a formal cooperation agreement in 1988. A cooperation treaty was signed with Indonesia in 1986, and Australia in 1987.\nPapua New Guinea has provided support to Indonesia's control of neighbouring Western New Guinea, the focus of the Papua conflict where numerous human rights violations have reportedly been committed by the Indonesian security forces. Those living in communities near the border are able to cross it for customary purposes. Australia remains linked to Papua New Guinea through institutional and cultural ties, and has remained the most consistent provider of foreign aid, as well as providing peacekeeping and security assistance. There are growing ties to China, mostly as a source of infrastructure investments. The strategic position of the country, linking Southeast Asia to the Pacific, has increased geopolitical interest in the 21st century.\nPapua New Guinea has been an observer state in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) since 1976, followed later by special observer status in 1981. It has filed its application for full membership status. Papua New Guinea is a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Pacific Community, the Pacific Islands Forum, APEC, and the United Nations.\nPapua New Guinea has been a member of the Forum of Small States (FOSS) since the group's founding in 1992. Papua New Guinea is part of the ACP forum associated with the European Union.\nInternational organization participation.\nACP, APEC, AsDB, ASEAN (observer), C, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, IFRCS, IMO, ICRM, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OPCW, SPF, Sparteca, SPC, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UN, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO\nMilitary.\nThe Papua New Guinea Defence Force is the military organisation responsible for the defence of Papua New Guinea. It consists of three wings. Its primary role is internal security, although it also patrols the border with Indonesia and the country's exclusive economic zone. The Land Element has seven units: the Royal Pacific Islands Regiment, a special forces unit, a battalion of engineers, three other small units primarily dealing with signals and health, and a military academy. The Air Element consists of one aircraft squadron, which transports the other military wings. The Maritime Element consists of four s, three ex-Australian landing craft, and one . One of the landing craft is used as a training ship. Three more Guardian-class patrol boats are under construction in Australia to replace the old Pacific-class vessels. The main tasks of the Maritime Element are to patrol inshore waters and to transport the Land Element. Because of its extensive coastline, Papua New Guinea has a very large exclusive economic zone. The Maritime Element relies heavily on satellite imagery to surveil the country's waters. Patrolling is generally ineffective because underfunding often leaves the patrol boats unserviceable. This problem will be partially corrected when the larger Guardian-class patrol boats enter service.\nLaw.\nThe unicameral Parliament enacts legislation like in other Commonwealth realms that use the Westminster system of government. The cabinet collectively agrees on government policy, and then the relevant minister introduces bills to Parliament, depending on which government department is responsible for implementing a particular law. Backbench members of parliament can also introduce bills. Parliament debates bills (section 110.1 of the Constitution), which become enacted laws when the Speaker certifies that Parliament has passed them. There is no Royal assent.\nAll ordinary statutes enacted by Parliament must be consistent with the Constitution. The courts have jurisdiction to rule on the constitutionality of statutes, both in disputes before them and on a reference where there is no dispute but only an abstract question of law. Unusually among developing countries, the judicial branch of government in Papua New Guinea has remained remarkably independent, and successive executive governments have continued to respect its authority.\nThe \"underlying law\" (Papua New Guinea's common law) consists of principles and rules of common law and equity in English common law as it stood on 16 September 1975 (the date of independence), and thereafter the decisions of PNG's own courts. The Constitution directs the courts and, latterly, the \"Underlying Law Act\" to take note of the \"custom\" of traditional communities. They are to determine which customs are common to the whole country and may also be declared to be part of the underlying law. In practice, this has proved difficult and has been largely neglected. Statutes are largely adapted from overseas jurisdictions, primarily Australia and England. Advocacy in the courts follows the adversarial pattern of other common-law countries. This national court system, used in towns and cities, is supported by a village court system in the more remote areas. The law underpinning the village courts is 'customary law'.\nCrime and human rights.\nPapua New Guinea is considered to have one of the highest rates of violence against women in the world. Such violence imposes both personal and communal costs, and is likely a reason why female participation in politics is the lowest in the region, and deters parents from sending their daughters to school. A 2013 study found that 27% of men on Bougainville Island reported having raped a non-partner, while 14.1% reported having committed gang rape. According to UNICEF, nearly half of reported rape victims are under 15 years old, and 13% are under 7 years old. Former Parliamentarian Carol Kidu stated that 50% of those seeking medical help after rape are under 16, 25% are under 12, and 10% are under 8. Under Dame Carol's term as Minister for Community Development, Parliament passed the Family Protection Act (2013) and the Lukautim Pikini Act (2015), although the Family Protection Regulation was not approved until 2017, delaying its application in the Courts. Changing views on violence being a normal part of relationships is a key part of efforts to decrease such violence.\nThe 1971 Sorcery Act allowed for accusations of sorcery to act as a defence for murder until the act was repealed in 2013. An estimated 50\u2013150 alleged witches are killed each year in Papua New Guinea. A Sorcery and Witchcraft Accusation Related National Action Plan was approved by the Government in 2015, although funding and application has been deficient. Both men and women can be accused of sorcery, although in some areas it is more common for one gender to be accused. Accusations in Bougainville generally target men, while in the Highlands such accusations generally target women. There are no protections given to LGBT citizens in the country. Homosexual acts are prohibited by law in Papua New Guinea.\nWhile tribal violence has long been a way of life in the highlands regions, an increase in firearms has led to greater loss of life. In the past, rival groups had been known to utilise axes, bush knives and traditional weapons, as well as respecting rules of engagement that prevented violence while hunting or at markets. These norms have been changing with a greater uptake of firearms. These are believed to be losses from government armouries, as well as sourced from smuggling operations over the border into Indonesia. Only 1/5th of 5000 Australian-made Self Loading Rifles and half of the 2000 M16s delivered to the PNGDF from the 1970s-1990s were found in government armouries during an audit in 2004 and 2005. The smuggling and theft of ammunition have also increased violence in these regions. The police forces and military find it difficult to maintain control. Village massacres have increased with 69 villagers killed in a single attack in February 2024 in Enga Province. Violence between raskol gangs occurs in both urban and rural areas, and some gangs have become linked to politicians. Raskol violence has had a marked impact on economic activity in rural areas. While in the past traditional dispute resolution mechanisms may have reduced violence, these likely have not persisted into the modern economic and social system.\nPapua New Guinea received a score of 5.6 out of 10 for safety from the state from the Human Rights Measurement Initiative.\nRoyal PNG Constabulary.\nThe Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary is responsible for maintaining law and order. It has been challenged in this as more advanced weaponry exacerbates tribal conflicts, as well as being unable to prevent violence against women. These challenges are compounded by underfunding, which has led to low morale. Issues have been raised regarding human rights abuses and destruction of property as a result of police actions.\nThe constabulary has been troubled in recent years by infighting, political interference and corruption. It was recognised from early after Independence (and hitherto) that a national police force alone could never have the capacity to administer law and order across the country, and that it would also require effective local-level systems of policing and enforcement, notably the village court magisterial service. The weaknesses of police capacity, poor working conditions and recommendations to address them were the subject of the 2004 Royal PNG Constabulary Administrative Review to the Minister for Internal Security.\nIn 2011, Commissioner for Police Anthony Wagambie took the unusual step of asking the public to report police asking for payments for performing their duties.\nIn September 2020, Minister for Police Bryan Jared Kramer launched a broadside on Facebook against his own police department, which was subsequently reported in the international media. In the post, Kramer accused the Royal PNG Constabulary of widespread corruption, claiming that \"Senior officers based in Police Headquarters in Port Moresby were stealing from their own retired officers\u2019 pension funds. They were implicated in organised crime, drug syndicates, smuggling firearms, stealing fuel, insurance scams, and even misusing police allowances. They misused tens of millions of kina allocated for police housing, resources, and welfare. We also uncovered many cases of senior officers facilitating the theft of Police land.\" Commissioner for Police David Manning, in a separate statement, said that his force included \"criminals in uniform\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23406", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23406", "title": "Communications in Papua New Guinea", "text": " \nCommunications in Papua New Guinea refers to the media in the country which are regulated by the Media Council of Papua New Guinea such as newspapers, radio, television, and the Internet.\nNewspapers.\nPapua New Guinea has two circulating newspapers: \nRadio.\nRadio broadcasting in Papua New Guinea was launched on 25 October 1935 by the Australian Broadcasting Commission (ABC). It was replaced by the National Broadcasting Commission which was formed under the Broadcasting Commission Act of 1973 (authority of Parliament). The commission was renamed as the National Broadcasting Corporation in 1994:\nInternet.\nCensorship.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight. Individuals and groups engage in the expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail.\nThe constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. Newspapers offer a variety of editorial viewpoints and report on controversial topics. There is no evidence of officially sanctioned government censorship, although newspaper editors complained of intimidation tactics aimed at influencing coverage. There were some examples of police officers targeting journalists who negatively covered police activities. Although the constitution prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, there are instances of abuse.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23407", "revid": "381401", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23407", "title": "Transport in Papua New Guinea", "text": "Overview of the transport system in Papua New Guinea\nTransport in Papua New Guinea is mainly based around roads (the vast majority of which is unpaved) and air travel. It is in many cases heavily limited by the mountainous terrain and copious amount of rainfall and frequent severe weather occurring in many locations, such as Lae. The capital, Port Moresby, is not linked by road to any of the other major towns and many highland villages can only be reached by light aircraft or on foot.\nGovernance.\nOne of the key recommendations of the 1964 World Bank mission was the creation of a new department to manage the development of all transport modes. While many of the World Bank mission's recommendations were much argued both locally and internationally, this proposal was widely accepted as it was clear that both political and economic advancement depended on greatly improved land, sea and air transport. Beginning in 1967 with the appointment of a Coordinator of Transport heading a policy unit, in 1968\u201369 the Department of Transport was fully established as for policy and investment in all transport modes, (civil aviation regulation remained with the Australian Department of Civil Aviation).\nIn the late 1960s, a large development program prepared by the Department of Transport as a result of the UNDP Transport Survey of Papua New Guinea was endorsed by the PNG House of Assembly, the Australian Parliament and multilateral agencies, and implementation continued through later decades. This and subsequent revisions provided the basis for loans from the multilateral agencies, in particular the World Bank, Asian Development Bank and UNDP, establishing a relationship which remains.\nMajor improvements were made to key highway links, notably between the coast and the highlands, to provide international standard port facilities at Port Moresby and Lae, and in lesser ports, for international and domestic airport upgradings, and for the regulation and management of transport services. The Department of Transport remains a key government agency. Transport assistance from Australia also continued. The Transport Sector Support Program is funded by the Australian Government and continues a long-term commitment to the sector. The Transport Sector Coordination, Monitoring and Implementation Committee (TSCMIC) brings together the heads of all the relevant agencies to coordinate work. This body was created after a National Executive Council decision and first met in July 2006. Maintenance of transport network assets remains a key challenge in order to get the best out of previous investments.\nAir travel.\nAir travel is a very important form of transport in Papua New Guinea, for the transport of humans and high density/value freight. Aeroplanes made it possible to open up the country during its early colonial period. Even today the two largest cities, Port Moresby and Lae, are only directly connected by planes. The biggest airport in the country is Jacksons International Airport in Port Moresby. The national airline is Air Niugini.\nAirports: 578 (2007 est.)\nHeliports: 2 (2007 est.)\nRoadways.\nAs of 1999, Papua New Guinea has a total of of all-weather highway, of which only is sealed/asphalted. Where there are roads there are many privately operated Public Motor Vehicles (PMVs), mostly minivans, which function as unscheduled buses.\nThe longest road in the country is the Highlands Highway, which links Lae and Madang to the Highlands region. The Boluminski Highway links Kavieng and Namatanai in New Ireland Province. A road linking Wewak in East Sepik Province and Vanimo in West Sepik Province was completed in September 2007, but by 2017, had fallen into disrepair and was no longer functional. The Kiunga-Tabubil Highway is a privately maintained road that links highland communities in the Western Province. As of June 2025, the Magi Highway is passable from East Cape at the tip of the Papuan Peninsula to Port Moresby, although much of the road is unsealed and the journey between Alotau and Port Moresby takes 13\u201314 hours.\nRailways.\nPapua New Guinea has no major railways, but some mine sites have disused tracks. During the period of German colonial control at the start of the 20th century numerous narrow-gauge plantation railways had been constructed in German New Guinea. These were built near the settlements of Madang and Rabaul. After the fall of German New Guinea to the Australians in the First World War the railways fell into disrepair.\nIn September 2007, a mining company proposed to build a new railway to link the coast with a copper-molybdenum mine at Yandera in Madang province. In 2023, a line from Lae to Vanimo was proposed by Morobe Province Governor Luther Wenge and Prime Minister James Marape with the goal of expanding the region\u2019s agricultural export opportunities.\nWaterways and ports.\nThe country has of waterways, and commercial port facilities at Port Moresby, Alotau, Oro Bay, Lae, Kimbe, Kieta Madang, Buka, Rabaul/Kokopo, Kiunga, Wewak and Vanimo.\nThe major exports are mining and raw materials, with some containerized trade through Port Moresby and Lae. Import volumes exceed exports, resulting in increased shipping costs as the inbound leg compensates for empty capacity on the outbound journey. Principal trade routes are southward to Australian ports, and northward to Singapore.\nMerchant marine:\n&lt;br&gt;\"Total:\"\n21 ships (1,000 GT or over) totaling 36,417 GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\n&lt;br&gt;\"Ships by type:\"\nbulk 2, cargo 10, chemical tanker 1, combination ore/oil 1, container 1, petroleum tanker 3, roll-on/roll-off 3 (1999 est.)\nIn coastal locations, small \"banana boat\" dinghies provide a local transport service.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23408", "revid": "26535467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23408", "title": "Papua New Guinea Defence Force", "text": "Military of Papua New Guinea\nThe Papua New Guinea Defence Force (PNGDF) is the military organisation responsible for the defence of Papua New Guinea. It originated from the Australian Army land forces of the territory of Papua New Guinea before independence, coming into being in January 1973 and having its antecedents in the Pacific Islands Regiment. The PNGDF is a small force, numbering around 3,600 personnel, and consists of a Land Element, an Air Element and a Maritime Element. It is a joint force tasked with defending Papua New Guinea and its territories against external attack, as well as having secondary functions including national-building and internal security tasks.\nDefence accounts for less than 2% of GDP, while also receiving significant assistance and training support from Australia, New Zealand, the United States, and other nations. \nThe PNGDF Land Element includes two infantry battalions, an engineer battalion, a signal squadron, an Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) unit, and a preventive medicine platoon. The Air Element is a small air wing operating three light transport aircraft and two leased helicopters. The Maritime Element consists of four s and two landing craft. The army is under the direct command of Headquarters PNGDF, while the air wing and navy have their own commanding officers. The PNGDF does not have a Commander-in-Chief but rather a Commander who advises the Minister for Defence. Allegiance is sworn to the King of Papua New Guinea, presently Charles III, and the realm of Papua New Guinea. The PNGDF is under the control of the National Executive Council through the Minister for Defence.\nHistory.\nThe PNGDF originated from the Australian Army land forces of the Territory of Papua New Guinea before independence, coming into being in January 1973 and having its antecedents in the Pacific Islands Regiment. At independence it numbered 3,750 all ranks, while another 465 Australian personnel augmented the force to assist in training and technical support. In the mid-1990s, the PNG economy was in crisis with financial support provided by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on the proviso of economic reform with the first phase in 1996 to include defence. Successive attempts to reduce the size of the PNGDF in response to the country's economic problems provoked fierce resistance. In 2000, the World Bank and the IMF provided loans with economic reform conditions and a Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group (CEPG) report recommended to government that the PNGDF strength be reduced by more than half. In March 2001, soldiers mutinied after learning the government had approved the CEPG report. The government capitulated after 10 days to the mutineers' demands, agreeing not to cut the army's strength. However, in 2002 it was announced that the PNGDF would be reduced from 4,000 to around 2,100 personnel. In early 2004 the government reaffirmed its commitment to implement cuts within the armed forces, with a definitive restructuring expected to take place. Chief of Staff Captain Aloysius Tom Ur told troops in January 2004 that the 2004 strength of 3,000 would be reduced by one-third, and that during 2004, the force's personnel branch would merge with the support branch into a new organisation. Ultimately the reduction-in-size target was reached in 2009.\nPNGDF capability is considered modest, with the army facing significant problems including a chronic budget crisis, a lack of experience in conventional operations, limited ability to be deployed independently overseas as well as internal tensions. The air force and navy also suffer major equipment and funding shortfalls\u2014to the point of sometimes almost being grounded\u2014and are both too small and poorly equipped to take part in operations overseas. Indeed, the entire PNGDF is badly in need of new equipment. Australia, New Zealand, France and several other nations are assisting in the training and the professionalisation of the PNGDF, while others\u2014including Germany and China\u2014provide budgetary assistance. Australia's aid for the PNGDF is currently worth AUD9.2\u00a0million with an additional AUD40\u00a0million committed the reform programme. AUD20\u00a0million was committed initially, mainly for paying off redundant personnel. A second tranche of AUD20\u00a0million is for the refurbishment of barracks over five years (AUD5\u00a0million). As of January 2006 29 Australian defence personnel were engaged in training and advising in areas including policy, management, maritime, infantry, engineering, personnel, logistic and finance areas of assistance. Two more Australian personnel were seconded as advisers on logistics and personnel matters in August 2006, while an Australian bureaucrat from the Department of Defence is posted to the PNG defence department. \"Australia is particularly interested in supporting Port Moresby in the areas of counter-terrorism, maritime patrols and defence organisation structures and procedures.\"\nDuring its history the PNGDF has sent 400 troops to assist the Vanuatu government put down a secessionist revolt in 1980 and was called out in aid to the civil power in Port Moresby in 1983. It has also conducted operations against the OPM (Organisasi Papua Merdeka or Free Papua Movement), based in Irian Barat, and which had been involved fighting the Indonesian armed forces. From 1989 to 1997 the PNGDF was involved in fighting the secessionist Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) on Bougainville and Buka. During these operations the PNGDF was criticised for its treatment of civilians, human rights violations and the use of mercenaries. More recently, following the passage of a constitutional amendment allowing the stationing of the PNGDF on foreign soil, 80 personnel joined the Australia-led Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI) in July 2003. As of 2008 PNGDF personnel remain in the Solomon Islands as part of the scaled down, rotational Pacific contingent.\nToday, the PNGDF is a small force numbering around 2,100 personnel, and consisting of a Land Element, an Air Element and a Maritime Element. It is a joint force tasked with defending Papua New Guinea and its territories against external attack, as well as having secondary functions including national-building and internal security tasks. Defence accounts for up to 4% of government expenditure, while also receiving significant assistance and training support from Australia, New Zealand, the United States and other nations. The army is under the direct command of Headquarters PNGDF, while the air force and navy have their own commanding officers. The PNGDF is under the political oversight of the Minister for Defence.\nOn 26 January 2012, military personnel under the command of the retired officer Colonel Yaura Sasa purported to arrest the commander of the Papua New Guinea Defence Force, Brigadier General Francis Agwi. It was reported that former Prime Minister Sir Michael Somare had ordered the operation in relation to his attempts to regain the leadership of the country, and had offered to appoint Sasa the commander of the PNGDF.\nIn 2013, the \"Defence White Paper 2013\" was released which called for the size of the PNGDF to be increased from 2,600 personnel to 5,000 personnel by 2017 back to the pre Reform Program level in 2002. Defence spending under the White Paper was to increase from 1.45% of GDP to 3% of GDP by 2017. The PNGDF was to be modernised under the White Paper with the Land Force to be reequipped with new weapons and equipment and vehicles, the Maritime Element was to acquire new vessels and the Air Element was to restore its fix wing fleet to flying status and acquire new aircraft. In 2017, the \"Post-Courier\" reported that the White Paper objectives to modernise and reequip the PNGDF had not been achieved as defence spending had remained the same due to economic challenges.\nLand Element.\nThe Land Element is the PNGDFs army land force, being primarily a light infantry force capable of conducting low-tempo operations only; it is the senior of the three services. The army has its origins in the Royal Pacific Islands Regiment, which was formed in 1951 as a component of the Australian Army. Since independence, the army has become an indigenous organisation with its own traditions and culture. Nonetheless, the force has adopted foreign ideas on the roles and needs of an armed force, leading to proposals for armour, artillery and attack helicopters. However, the army faces severe budgetary problems and has therefore had virtually no money for operations, training, and maintenance or capital equipment upgrades. In this context, proposals to develop the army into a well equipped, mobile conventional land force, are unlikely in the near to medium term. The army's role is to protect against external aggression, provide for internal security in support of the police, and to carry out civic action and relief operations when required. The engineer battalion is used for civic action with construction and reticulation capabilities, while the two infantry battalions also constructs roads, bridges and other infrastructure in regions where commercial companies are unwilling to work for security reasons.\nThe army has no significant experience in conventional operations and according to Janes it has limited ability to deploy overseas independently; \"it is not effective in internal security operations and has often shown scant regard for political authority. This was illustrated in August 2006 when the PNG government declared a state of emergency in the Southern Highlands province where a proposed gas pipeline has been planned. Troops were being deployed to restore law, order and good governance in the province. In these latter circumstances it has proven to be more of a threat to the state than an asset. For reasons of cultural diversity and rivalry, terrain and transport difficulties and the reduction and retaining of the smaller army\u2014a successful army coup would be extremely unlikely.\"\nDuring the 1990s the army's main role was internal security and counter-insurgency operations in Bougainville, where a secessionist movement was attempting to bring independence. This operation\u2014which lasted at varying levels of intensity until 1997\u2014revealed the army's ineffectiveness, lack of training and indiscipline. The army was accused of significant human rights violations and there were indications it was operating independently of the government. Indeed, in June 1991 Colonel L. Nuia was dismissed for killing civilians and using Australian-donated helicopters to dump their bodies at sea, while in September 1993 the PNG government offered to pay compensation for Solomon Island civilians killed by PNGDF forces who had pursued BRA members across the border. The fighting in Bougainville also exposed weaknesses in command, training, discipline and force structure. Later the army was also involved in the controversial Sandline affair of 1997, when the PNGDF Commander\u2014Jerry Singirok\u2014blocked the use of mercenaries to destroy the revolt on Bougainville. The current restructure has focused on the removal of men of a quality now judged to have been unsuitable for the Bougainville campaign and since the end of operations there the army has, with Australian assistance, attempted to reform all aspects of its training and administration.\nIn the early 21st century terrorism has become increasingly a concern for Papua New Guinea policy-makers and one of the major objectives of the army for 2008 is to prepare itself to deter any attack on its sovereignty but more particularly to terrorist attacks. Equally, although the army has no history of peace support contributions, its involvement in RAMSI has proven a catalyst to determine how it could train for and be used in UN operations. Despite these efforts the army is still not in a position to provide forces with the appropriate \"level of training and discipline\" without significant risk, according to Janes. To be sure, however, \"the army command views such deployment as their contribution to the 'economic well-being of PNG' and a way of maintaining any semblance of a proficient armed force.\"\nAs of 2015, women are permitted to serve in non-combat roles in the PNGDF's Land Element.\nCurrent organisation.\nThe Land Element is directly commanded by the Commander PNGDF, Brigadier General Gilbert Toropo, and has been significantly reduced in size due to restructuring (from 3,500 to 1,800 as of late 2007) and currently comprises the following:\nA ceremonial guard was established in 2015.\nThe army's main bases include Port Moresby, Wewak and Lae, while company strength outstations are located at Kiunga and Vanimo. Communications centres are found at all of these locations and also on Manus island. Papua New Guinea has large areas of uninhabited jungle suitable for training. A training depot is maintained at Goldie River near Port Moresby and at Lae.\nHistorically the army has been poorly trained; however Australia has recently made this the focus of the Enhanced Defence Partnership programme, supplying training, advisors and equipment. New Zealand is also contributing training assistance under its Mutual Assistance Programme. Equally army personnel have in the past trained with the French in New Caledonia, while US Special Forces have occasionally undertaken joint exercises in PNG. At present, however, over 90 per cent of the budget is dedicated to pay and retrenchments, and as a consequence there is little left to fund training exercises. While most soldiers are not currently formally qualified for their rank, there are determined moves to professionalise the army after the restructure is complete. Indeed, the army has an officer training academy and a small trade training capacity, which is being boosted by Australian personnel. A small number of officer candidates also undertake training at the Royal Military College \u2013 Duntroon, in Canberra. Australian procedures are followed as a matter of course, and their influence is increasing as more joint training exercises are held.\nLong Range Reconnaissance Unit.\nThe Long Range Reconnaissance Unit (LRRU) is the Land Element's special forces unit responsible for special reconnaissance and for providing the PNGDF's counter terrorism capability. In 1996, the Special Forces Unit (SFU) was formed which was later renamed the LRRU. The LRRU has trained with the Australian Special Air Service Regiment (SASR) and the New Zealand Special Air Service (NZSAS) in Papua New Guinea in its long-range reconnaissance role for many years. \nIn 2014, the LRRU commenced developing an urban counterterrorism and hostage rescue capability for the APEC Summit held in 2018, it received new equipment in preparation for this. The LRRU then provided a response capability for the Pacific Games in July 2015, with training provided by Australian Army Special Operations Command (SOCOMD) units and the NZSAS.\nThe Warrior Wing established in the 1990s by United States Army Special Forces (Green Berets) consists of experienced LRRU soldiers who provide reconnaissance training and coordinate exercises with foreign units.\nEquipment.\nThe army is only lightly equipped\u2014possessing no artillery, heavy weapons, anti-armour or anti-aircraft weapons. It is chronically short of equipment, maintaining just a few mortars, small arms and limited communications equipment. Because mobility is severely impaired due to PNG's mountainous geography, heavy rain forest, and the nation's underdeveloped transport infrastructure, artillery is not used by the New Guinea Defence Force.\nRegardless, while the army's equipment remains largely outdated and inadequate, some new equipment was procured in late 2003 was commissioned during 2004. PNGDF has fielded a new digital satellite communications network, enabling it to communicate with its personnel on the Solomon Islands, stationed there as part of PNG's commitment to the international intervention force. The army can also now communicate securely with its personnel located at seven fixed ground stations\u2014the barracks at Murray, Taurama, Goldie, Lombrum, Igam, Vanimo and Moem. The system also includes mobile units installed on small trucks which communicate from remote locations via the fixed ground stations. Equally in June 2007, the army received 32 new HF Barrett communication radios, at a cost of PGK800,000, in order to assist with providing security for the 2007 election.\nThe security of the PNGDF's weapons is also an issue, and it is alleged that various mortars, guns and small arms have been used in tribal conflicts and robberies. In response, more secure armouries have been provided by Australia, however weapon security remains elusive. Further attempts to improve weapons security were implemented during 2005 with fortnightly weapon checks and making unit commanders accountable for the return of weapons, with serious action threatened for any defaults. Also, soldiers are now forbidden to carry weapons in public without specific permission.\nThe Chinese government donated 40 military vehicles in December 2015. In 2017\u20132018, China donated armoured vehicles, troop carriers, buses, mobile kitchen vans and ambulances. Ten armoured vehicles were donated including four Norinco WZ-551 wheeled infantry fighting vehicles.\nIn May 2020, Australia donated 28 DJI Phantom drones to patrol its border with Indonesia.\nSmall arms.\nIn 2006, the PNGDF headquarters issued a directive to standardise weapons, with the number of small arms types to be reduced from 58 to 11, subsequently 3,418 weapons were disposed of.\nAir Element.\nThe Air Element of the PNGDF, operating a small number of light aircraft and rotary wing assets in support of army operations. Like the PNGDF in general the air element suffers from chronic equipment shortages and underfunding, but probably even more so than the other two branch elements. The role of the air force is to support army operations with transport, air re-supply and medical evacuation capabilities. In future it may also be used to bolster border security and conduct maritime surveillance missions.\nCurrent organisation.\nThe Air Element is commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Nancy Wii. It consists of the Air Transport Wing and has only one squadron\u2014the Air Transport Squadron\u2014with a strength of about 100 personnel, being based at Jackson Airport in Port Moresby. In recent years it has suffered from significant serviceability issues. Indeed, it only became airborne again in 2005 for the first time in five years, as funding shortages resulted in the small transport aircraft fleet being grounded for an extended period. By January 2006, one CN-235, one Arava and one UH-1H Iroquois helicopter had been made operational, with single examples of each of those three types also being returned to service by 2007.\nA 2003 review recommended the air element's strength be reduced to 65 personnel, a figure which the PNGDF is working towards as part of its current restructuring programme. By the end of 2004, the air element was suffering from an acute shortage of pilots, but recruitment in 2005 succeeded in raising the pilot pool to 10 by January 2006. After several years when no training was undertaken pilots are now sent to Singapore and Indonesia for instruction on simulators. Given its limited operational activity and the lack of combat equipment, little thought has been given to tactical doctrine however.\nSince 2012, the Australian government has facilitated the lease of two helicopters from Hevilift PNG to provide a rotary wing capability which in 2016 was extended until 2019. In February 2016, a contract was signed with New Zealand company Pacific Aerospace for four PAC P-750 XSTOL aircraft for search and rescue and surveillance and two PAC CT/4 Airtrainer aircraft. One PAC P-750 was delivered in 2018 and in 2021, with the assistance of the Royal Australian Air Force, its airworthiness was restored. In 2023, Australia donated two new PAC P-750s to the Air Element.\nRetired aircraft.\nPrevious aircraft operated by Papua New Guinea consisted of the Douglas C-47, GAF Nomad, IAI-201 Arava, and the Bell UH-1 Huey helicopter. The UH-1H Iroquois helicopters and IAI Arava fixed-wing aircraft were to be retired in 2016.\nMaritime Element.\nThe Maritime element is the naval branch of the PNGDF, being mainly a light patrol force and is responsible for defending local waters only. It too suffers from chronic equipment shortages and underfunding. The navy has three primary roles: support for military operations, EEZ protection, and heavy logistic support for the army and civil society.\nCurrent organisation.\nThe navy is commanded by Commander Sebastian Maru and consists of approximately 200 personnel and is based in Port Moresby (HMPNGS Basilisk) and Manus Island (HMPNGS Tarangau) and currently comprises the following:\nAccording to Janes, the navy is badly underfunded and the task of patrolling such a large Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is too great and they are heavily reliant for information about the presence of foreign ships on daily reports supplied by US satellite surveillance. The main concern is illegal tuna fishing by Japanese vessels. Australia continues to assist the navy patrol its waters and in the training of personnel. A Royal Australian Navy Officer has been seconded to PNG's National Co-ordination Centre and joint exercises are held regularly to review and strengthen current maritime border surveillance. The Australian Border Force also takes part in cross-border patrols. As a matter of course, Australian doctrine and procedures are used.\nIn November 2018, Australia donated to PNG the first of four Austal-built \"Guardian\"-class patrol boats to replace the four patrol boats donated to PNG in the late-1980s through the Pacific Patrol Boat Program. The first \"Guardian\"-class boat was commissioned in February 2019. In 2018, the first \"Pacific\"-class boat was decommissioned with the remaining three decommissioned in 2021. In June 2022, PNG commissioned HMPNGS \"Cape Gloucester\", a Malaysian-built landing craft donated to PNG by Australia. \"Cape Gloucester\" replaced two \"Balikpapan\"-class landing craft: decommissioned in 2020 and decommissioned in 2021. , a \"Balikpapan\"-class landing craft donated to PNG by Australia in 2014, remains in service as a training ship in addition to transporting equipment.\nAustralia is funding a A$175 million upgrade to the Lombrum Naval Base on Manus Island with construction commencing in mid-2020.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23410", "revid": "50840515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23410", "title": "Paracel Islands", "text": "Disputed islands in the South China Sea\nThe Paracel Islands, also known as the Xisha Islands () and the Ho\u00e0ng Sa Archipelago (), is a disputed archipelago in the South China Sea and currently controlled by the People's Republic of China.\nThe word \"paracel\" is of Portuguese origin, meaning placer (a submerged bank or reef), and appears on 16th-century Portuguese maps. The archipelago includes about 130 small coral islands and reefs, most grouped into the northeastern Amphitrite Group or the western Crescent Group. They are distributed over a maritime area of around , with a land area of approximately . The archipelago is located about 220 miles (350\u00a0km) southeast of Hainan Island, equidistant from the coastlines of the People's Republic of China (PRC) and Vietnam, and approximately one-third of the way between central Vietnam and the northern Philippines. A feature of the Paracel Islands is Dragon Hole, the second deepest blue hole (underwater sinkhole) in the world. Sea turtles and seabirds are native to the islands, which have a hot and humid climate, abundant rainfall and may experience annual typhoons. The archipelago is surrounded by productive fishing grounds and a seabed potentially containing unexplored oil and gas reserves.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nThe climate is different from nearby continental land masses with the lower air mass temperatures being cooler than land at the same latitude, and with higher relative humidity due to the maritime\nair mass. The air mass over the Paracel Islands has about a variation in annual temperature compared to the observed over the Spratly Islands.\nAmphitrite group.\nThe Amphitrite group was named after the French frigate \"Amphitrite\", which observed the islands while carrying a Jesuit mission to Canton in 1698\u20131700.\nLying in the northeast of the Paracel Islands at , the group consists of low, narrow islands with sand cays and enclosed shallow lagoons connected by reefs of rock. It is about northwest of Lincoln Island. The group approximately forms an ellipse with a north\u2013south axis of .\nThe northern section of the group comprises West Sand, Tree Island, and the Qilian Yu (\u4e03\u8fde\u5c7f, \"seven sisters\") sub-group: North Island, Middle Island, South Island, North Sand, Middle Sand, South Sand, and two small sands (New West Sand and New East Sand). The center of the group consists of Woody Island and Rocky Island, approximately south of the southern tip of the eastern extremity of the northern section. The southwest corner of the group is occupied by the Iltis Bank.\nThe largest island of the Paracels, Woody Island (which has an area of ), has over 1,000 residents including fishermen and their families, military personnel, and civilian administrators.\nCrescent group.\nLying about southwest of the Amphitrite group, at , the Crescent group consists of islands and reefs that form a crescent-like structure from west to east, enclosing a deep central lagoon. The group measures east-west and north\u2013south. All of the islands in the group support vegetation except on their small cays.\nThe islands are named after former senior figures in the British East India Company (EIC). Three were members of the EIC's 'Select Committee' in Canton: James Drummond, Thomas Pattle and John William Roberts. Jonathan Duncan was Governor in Council of Bombay, and William Taylor Money was Superintendent of the Bombay Marine.\nMoney Island lies at the southwest extremity of the group, and has some small cays on the southern side. While the island's English name was named after William Taylor Money, the Chinese name is Jin Yin Dao, a literal translation of \"money island\".\nAntelope Reef, submerged at high tide and containing a central lagoon, lies east of Money Island.\nNortheast of this are Robert Island (also named Round Island) and Pattle Island, separated from each other by a wide deep channel. A weather station was built on Pattle Island (by the French) in 1932, and a lighthouse and radio station in 1937.\nNortheast of this is Quanfu Dao (\"All Wealth Island\").\nObservation Bank, also named Silver Islet, and the Lesser Silver Islet, are the northernmost of the group and contain a small cay.\nJust south of them are Yagong Dao (He Duck) and Xianshe Yu (Salty Hut).\nAt the eastern side of the group lies a long boomerang shaped reef with Stone Islet at its north end and Drummond Island at its south end. Near the centre of the reef is Dragon Hole the second deepest known sinkhole in the world.\nThe Duncan Islands (), consisting of Duncan Island and Palm Island, lie approximately west of Drummond Island and about east of Antelope Reef. Kuangzai Shazhou (Little Basket) lies about halfway between Palm Island and Antelope Reef.\nOther features.\nTaking as the center of the Paracel Islands, then the Amphitrite Group is ENE, and the Crescent Group is West.\nEtymology.\nChinese.\nThe Chinese wrote about large groups of maritime features in the area. Names such as c\"hangsha\", s\"hitang\", s\"hichuang\" and others were used. The Song dynasty book \"Zhu Fan Zhi\" mentions \"Qianli Changsha\" (, \u00a0 \"Thousand-Mile Long Sands\") and \"Wanli Shichuang\" ( \u00a0\"Ten-Thousand-Mile Rock Bed\"). The Yuan dynasty travel book \"Daoyi Zhil\u00fce\" describes \"Wanli Shitang\" (, \u00a0\"Ten-Thousand Mile Rock Pool\") as comprising three veins extending from Chaozhou to Borneo, C\u00f4n S\u01a1n Island, and Java. The \"History of Yuan\" uses the terms \"Qizhouyang\" (\u4e03\u6d32\u6d0b, \"Ocean of Seven Islands\") and \"Wanli Shitang\". In the Mao Kun map depicting 15th century Ming Treasure Voyages, groups of islands were named \"Shitang\" (\u77f3\u5858), \"Wansheng Shitangyu\" (\u842c\u751f\u77f3\u5858\u5dbc), and \"Shixing Shitang\" (\u77f3\u661f\u77f3\u5858). Another Ming dynasty work, \"Haiyu\" (On the Sea), uses \"Wanli Shitang\" and \"Wanli Changsha\". Qing dynasty maps and book \"Hai Lu\" (Illustrations of the Sea) refer to islands and other features as \"Changsha\", \"Shitang\", and \"Qizhouyang\". A sea chart from the Daoguang era, \"Yiban Lu\" (Particular Illustrations) by Zheng Guangzu, uses \"Xisha\" (, \u00a0\"Western Sands/Shoals\" ) to refer to the Paracels. \"Xisha\" became the standard name for the Paracels in the 20th century and was used in maps published by the Republic of China in 1935 and 1947.\nEuropean.\nPortuguese maps from the early 16th century marked a group of \"ilhas allagadas\" ( \"alleged islands\") in the area. They were later named \"y as del atabalero\" after the atabaque hand drum, due to the concial shape assigned to the entire group. The Paracels and the Spratlys were not distinguished separately at the time. From the mid-1500s Portuguese cartographers began referring to the group as \"Ilhas do Pracel\", although \"y as del atabalero\" was still used for some time. The word \"Paracel\" is likely a variant of \"pracel\" or \"parcel\", from the Spanish word \"placer\" used by Portuguese and Spanish navigators to designate shallow sandy seas or submerged banks, such as the \"Placer de los Roques\".\nSimilar names entered Dutch and French maps, such as the 1617 \"Chart of Asia and eight city maps\" published by Willem Blaeu as well as the 1747 \"Kaart van de Kusten van Kochinchine, van Tunquin, en Gedeeltelyk van de Chineesse-kus\" \"/ Carte des Costes de Cochin chine, Tunquin, et Partie de celles de la Chine\" ( \"Map of the coasts of Cochinchina, Tonkin, and part of the Chinese coast\") published by Pieter de Hondt/Pierre d'Hondt.Before the 19th century, the area was primarily known only as \"dangerous grounds\" in English sources. In the late 1700s and early 1800s, greater attention was paid to mapping the islands in detail, notably by hydrographers such as Alexander Dalrymple and James Horsburgh, the latter of whom concluded that most of the Paracel islands indicated in earlier European maps were mistakes of sailors who really saw the tops of coastal mountains. A better picture of the area emerged in British charts by the mid-1800s.\nPhilippine.\nDue to confusion, the Spratly Islands were referred to as the Paracels in the mid-1900s.\nVietnamese.\nThe Vietnamese call the islands Hoang Sa, (\u9ec3\u6c99, Yellow Sands), and this name is found in Vietnamese documents dating back to 1483 and \"An Nam qu\u1ed1c h\u1ecda \u0111\u1ed3\" published in 1490. In the modern language system, it is written as Ho\u00e0ng Sa or C\u00e1t V\u00e0ng. They all have the same meaning\u2014the Yellow Sands or the Yellow Sandbank. Before the early 19th century, the Spratly Islands to the south were considered as part of the Ho\u00e0ng Sa. It was not until the reign of Emperor Minh M\u1ea1ng (1820\u20131841) that the Spratlys were distinctly designated as V\u1ea1n L\u00fd Tr\u01b0\u1eddng Sa (\u842c\u91cc\u9577\u6c99, Ten-Thousand-Mile Long Sands).\nInfrastructure and natural resources.\nInfrastructure.\nChina has historically had a presence in the islands and, as of 2016, was engaged in major infrastructure development to support its territorial claims over the archipelago, and as a result there has been, and continues to be, a lot of construction activity. In recent years Woody Island has acquired an upgraded airport, an upgraded sea port, and a city hall. There is a post office, hospital and a school on Woody Island.\nFresh water.\nThere is limited supply of fresh water on the islands. In 2012, it was reported that China (PRC) planned to build a solar-energy-powered desalination plant on the islands. In 2016, it was reported that the first desalination plant was activated. This reduces the occupant's reliance on water supply coming in barrels by boat.\nElectricity.\nBoth wind and solar powered facilities exist, but most of the electricity is supplied by diesel generators. This led to considerations by the Chinese government to use floating nuclear power plants. It was reported in October 2020 that an experimental wave power generator was installed off Woody Island.\nOn land, in August 2020, Millennium Energy Vi\u00eatnam Co., Ltd, a member of Millennium Petroleum Corporation announced plans to develop a 600 ha, US$15 billion LNG project in the south V\u00e2n Phong area of the Kh\u00e1nh H\u00f2a province, i.e. Nha Trang, near by Cam Ranh, with capacity of 9,600 MW, project which include a dock warehouse system, may be terminals, to provide gas to the power plant as well as distribute LNG in South-East Asia, supplied presumably by the offshore gas deposit along the coast of Qu\u1ea3ng Nam province, discovered by ExxonMobil in October 2011, at 200 nautical miles (roughly 370\u00a0km), amid the area disputed by China (PRC), surrounded the Paracel\nIslands, in Chinese maritime border sovereignty claimed by Beijing (refer to \"Battle of the Paracel Islands\"). Trung Nam Group also announced in early April 2021, a wind power 900 ha complex US$174 million with capacity of 423 GW/h/year, directly connected to the country's grid through Th\u00e1p Ch\u00e0m 220 kV transformer station.\nCommunication.\nThe Chinese postal zip code of the island is 572000, and the telephone area code is +86 (898). There is cellphone reception on the island.\nTransport.\nThere is an airport on Woody Island with a long runway, which can handle take-offs and landings of Boeing-737s or planes of similar size. Flight services operate on the Haikou \u2013 Xisha route. There are three main roads on Woody Island as well as an long cement causeway that connects Woody Island and Rocky Island. Extensive port facilities have been constructed on Duncan Island.\nEcology and tourism.\nParacel Islands' geographical and ecological traits are often likened as \"China's Maldives\", however, controversial conflicts between environment conservation and human activities including military operations, developments, and tourism on Paracel Islands have become public concerns in recent years. Local ecosystem include endangered fish such as whale sharks, oceanic birds, marine mammals (at least historically) such as blue whales, fin whales, and Chinese white dolphins, and marine reptile species such as critically endangered green sea turtles, hawksbill sea turtles, and Leatherback sea turtles; however, direct damaging of the ecosystem by military group and tourists has been documented. Governmental actions to cease illegal tourism are ongoing.\nThe islands have been open for tourists since 1997. Chinese tourists can take a 20-hour ferry to the Islands, paying up to US$2,000 for a 5-day cruise, and are placed on a long waitlist before being accepted. The BBC article states that \"Chinese tourism has strong political implications, as the Chinese tourists are being used as 'foot soldiers of China' by Beijing to further China's territorial claims there\". The video also states \"Vietnam is considered unlikely to send military vessels to stop them\".\nThere are two museums on Woody Island; a Naval Museum and a Maritime Museum. In April 2012, the Vice-Mayor and officials from the Haikou Municipal Government made several announcements about developing new docking facilities and hotels within the Crescent Group - on Duncan and Drummond Islands specifically. Promotion of the naturally unspoilt reef system was cited as the driver for new tourism potential with other such reefs, such as the Great Barrier Reef in Australia, now placed under threat of extinction due to human activities. However, according to \"The China Post\", this was denied by a PRC Government official in April 2012, due to sensitivities surrounding the islands.\nTerritorial disputes.\nClaims.\nThe ownership of the islands remains hotly contested. The People's Republic of China (PRC) on mainland China, Vietnam, and the Republic of China (ROC) on Taiwan all claim sovereignty. The PRC has controlled the entire archipelago since the Battle of the Paracel Islands in January 1974. In July 2012, China (PRC) established Sansha, Hainan Province, as administering the area. As of February 2017, 20 PRC outposts, including small harbours, built on reclaimed land have been reported in the Paracels. The majority of the Paracel islands lie within 200 nm of both China's and Vietnam's geographic baselines under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.\nHistorical perspectives.\nThe nation states involved have differing historic perspectives as to sovereignty of the Paracel Islands with the Chinese claiming an interest since their discovery of the islands in the second century BC. A Vietnamese interest was crystallised in the view of one commentator by the planting of their flag in 1816. In 1836, the Vietnamese installed ten 5-meter steles with inscriptions that claimed the islands. \nBetween 1881 and 1883 the German navy surveyed the islands continuously for three months each year without seeking the permission of either France or China. No protest was issued by either government and the German government published the results of the survey in 1885. After the 1884\u20131885 Sino-French War, France officially gained control of Annam and Tonkin as protectorates and fully established French colonial rule in Vietnam by signing a number of treaties with the Chinese and Vietnamese governments, including the Tientsin Accord, Treaty of Hu\u1ebf (1884) and Treaty of Tientsin (1885), stipulating that China was to give up their claims of suzerainty over Vietnam.\nIn 1909 the Chinese sent an expedition to claim and map the islands in reaction to Japanese interest in exploiting the guano there. In the 1910s and 20s, the French accepted Chinese sovereignty of the Paracels. Around 1930 the French authorities began to push for a claim on behalf of Annam based on the protectorate's activities in the seventeenth century but were skeptical because Annam had done little to uphold its past claims.\nIn 1932 France formally claimed the Paracel Islands and in 1933 the Spratly Islands. Initially there seems to have been confusion in China at the time as the Paracel Islands were not recognised as a separate geographical entity and formal protests did not immediately follow. China and Japan both protested. In 1933, France seized the Paracels and Spratlys, announced their annexation, formally included them in French Indochina, and built a couple of weather stations on them, but did not disturb the numerous Chinese fishermen it found there. In 1939 during the Second Sino-Japanese War, Japan took over the Paracel Islands on the pretext of them being a Chinese territory and placed them under the administration of either Taiwan or Hainan, then under its control.\nThe Paracels and Spratlys were handed over to the Republic of China's control after the 1945 surrender of Japan, since the Allied powers had assigned the Republic of China to accept the Japanese surrender in the area. At the end of the war (Asian-Pacific Region), the ROC occupied the Paracels, Spratlys, and other islands in the South China Sea in October and November 1946. During the San Francisco Peace Conference of 1951, the USSR motioned for the Paracels and the Spratlys to be awarded to China, but the motion was rejected by a vote of 46 to 3. In the Geneva accord of 1954, Japan formally renounced all of its claims to, inter alia, the South China Sea islands that it had occupied during World War II. After World War II ended, the Republic of China was consistently the \"most active claimant\" of the islands. It garrisoned Woody Island, the main island of the Amphitrite group, and posted Chinese flags and markers on it. France tried, but failed, to force the ROC to leave, although the weather station on Prattle Island continued to be operated by French Indochina. The aim of the ROC was to block French claims. In December 1947, the ROC drew up a map showing its eleven-dotted line U-shaped claim to the entire South China Sea, including the Spratly and Paracel Islands as Chinese territory.\nAfter the communists gained control of China in 1949 after victory in the Chinese Civil War, they occupied Woody Island. By 1955 South Vietnam had taken possession of the Crescent Group. North Vietnam's prime minister Ph\u1ea1m V\u0103n \u0110\u1ed3ng recognized Chinese sovereignty over the Paracels in 1958. After winning the Vietnam war, North Vietnam retracted its recognition, saying it had done so to receive aid from China in fighting the Americans, according to Pham's discussion in June 1977 with China's Li Xiannan.98\nAfter the Battle of the Paracel Islands in January 1974, the People's Republic of China expelled the Vietnamese from the Crescent Group and took full control of the Paracels. In 1976 the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) tried to persuade Beijing to acknowledge Vietnam's sovereignty over the Spratly Islands to the south, offering in return to recognize China's claim over the Paracel Islands. However, when this effort failed, Vietnam's government, now under CPV control, asserted its claim over both archipelagos.\nChina.\n618\u20131279.\nThere are some Chinese cultural relics in the Paracel islands dating from the Tang and Song eras, and there is some evidence of Chinese habitation on the islands during these periods, though the relics are more likely washed ashore from shipwrecked junks. According to the \"Wujing Zongyao\", a book published in the Northern Song dynasty in 1044, the Song government then included the Islands in the patrol areas of the Navy of the Court.\n1279\u20131368.\nThe Yuan dynasty travel book \"Daoyi Zhil\u00fce\" describes \"Wanli Shitang\" (, \u00a0\"Ten-Thousand Mile Rock Pool\") as comprising three veins extending from Chaozhou to Borneo, C\u00f4n S\u01a1n Island, and Java. In 1279 the Yuan emperor sent the high-level official and astronomer, Guo Shoujing, to the South China Sea to survey and measure the islands and the surrounding sea area. Guo's base of survey was claimed by China to be located in the Paracel Islands, although this is considered unlikely by many Chinese scholars. His activities were recorded in the \"Yuan Shi\", or History of Yuan. According to the \"Yuan Shi\", the South China Sea islands were within the boundary of the Yuan dynasty. Maps published in the Yuan era invariably included the \"Changsha\" (the Paracels) and the \"Shitang\" (the Spratlys) within the domain of Yuan.\n1368\u20131912.\nRelevant local annals and other historic materials of the Ming (1368\u20131644) and the Qing (1644\u20131912) dynasties continued to make reference to the South China Sea islands as China's territory. The Qiongzhou Prefecture (the highest administrative authority in Hainan), exercised jurisdiction over the Paracel and Spratly Islands in the Ming and Qing Dynasties.\nIn the 19th century, Europeans found that Chinese fishermen from Hainan annually sojourned on the Paracel and Spratly Islands for part of the year. For three months each year between 1881 and 1884, the German Imperial Navy sent two boats (the ship \"Freya\" and the warship \"Iltis\") to study and map the Paracel Islands without either seeking the permission of or incurring protest by the Chinese government. This mission was finished without any problems and the German Admiralty published the results in 1885 in a document called \"Die Paracel-Inseln\" (The Paracel Islands). In the period 1884 to 1885 the Tientsin Accord and Treaty of Tientsin were signed by Chinese representatives to attempt to address issues from an undeclared war between France acting on behalf of its protectorate territories in Vietnam and China. During this period between the treaties the Chinese did claim the Paracels. \nIn 1909, Zhang Renjun (), the Viceroy of Liangguang, ordered Guangdong Fleet Admiral Li Zhun () to sail to the Paracel Islands. In June, with over 170 sailors in three warships named \"Fubo\" (), \"Guangjin\" () and \"Shenhang\" (), he inspected 15 islands, erected stone tablets engraved with each island's name, raised China's flag and fired cannons to declare the islands \"sacred territory of China\", which France did not protest. In 1910, the Qing government decided to invite Chinese merchants to contract for the administration of the development affairs of the South China Sea islands, and demanded that officials shall provide protection and maintenance in order to highlight Chinese territory and protect its titles and interests.\n1912\u20131950s.\nAfter the fall of the Qing dynasty, the new Government of Guangdong Province decided to place the Paracel Islands under the jurisdiction of the Ya Xian County of Hainan Prefecture in 1911. The Southern Military Government in 1921 reaffirmed the 1911 decision. China continued to exercise authority over the South China Sea islands by such means as granting licenses or contracts to private Chinese merchants for the development and exploitation of guano and other resources on those islands and protesting against foreign nations' claims, occupations, and other activities. For example, in May 1928, the Guangdong provincial government sent a naval vessel, the \"Hai-jui\" (), with an investigation team organized by the provincial government and Sun Yat-Sen University to investigate and survey the islets, after which the investigation team produced a detailed Report of Surveys on the Paracel Islands.\nOn July27, 1932, the Chinese Foreign Ministry instructed the Chinese Envoy to France to lodge a diplomatic protest to the French Foreign Ministry and to deny France's claims to the Paracel Islands. On November 30 of the same year, Zhu Zhaoshen, a high-level inspection official of the Chinese Foreign Ministry, issued public correspondence Number 66 to the French Consul in Guangzhou, reiterating that \"it is absolutely beyond doubt that the Xisha [Paracel] Islands fall within the boundary of China\". Despite repeated Chinese protests, French troops, who had colonized French Indochina in the 19th century, invaded and occupied the Paracel Islands on July 3, 1938. This took place shortly after the breakout of the Second Sino-Japanese War, when the armed forces of China and Japan were busy elsewhere. Three days later, on July 6, the Japanese Foreign Ministry also issued a declaration in protest of the French occupation \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The statement of Great Britain and France made respectively in 1900 and 1921 already declared that the Xisha [Paracel] Islands were part of the Administrative Prefecture of Hainan Island. Therefore, the current claims made by An'nam or France to the Xisha Islands are totally unjustifiable.\nDuring the Second World War, the Japanese expelled the French troops and took over the islands in spite of the 1938 declarations. The Spratlys and the Paracels were conquered by Japan in 1939. Japan administered the Spratlys via Taiwan's jurisdiction and the Paracels via Hainan's jurisdiction. The Paracels and Spratlys were handed over to Republic of China control after the 1945 surrender of Japan, since the Allied powers had assigned the Republic of China to receive Japanese surrenders in that area. At the end of the war (Asian-Pacific Region), Nationalist China formally retook the Paracels, Spratlys and other islands in the South China Sea in October and November 1946. In the Geneva accord of 1954 Japan formally renounced all of its claims to, \"inter alia\", the South China Sea islands which it had occupied during the World War II. After WW2 ended, the Republic of China was the \"most active claimant\". The Republic of China then garrisoned Woody Island in the Paracels in 1946 and posted Chinese flags and markers on it; France tried, but failed, to make them leave Woody island. The aim of the Republic of China was to block the French claims. In December 1947, the Republic of China drew up a map showing its eleven-dotted line U-shaped claim to the entire South China Sea, including the Spratly and Paracel Islands as Chinese territory.\nThe Philippines and Vietnam promptly lodged diplomatic protests strongly opposing the establishment of the Sansha City under Chinese jurisdiction.\nAccording to reports from Chinese state media, at the beginning of May 2014, Chinese and Vietnamese naval vessels collided near the islands as Hanoi sought to prevent a Chinese oil rig from setting up in the area. On May 26, a Vietnamese fishing boat sank near the oil rig, after colliding with a Chinese vessel. As both sides imputed the blame to each other, Vietnam released a video footage in a week later, showing a Chinese vessel ramming into its ship before it sank; the Chinese said they were on the defensive while Vietnamese vessels were attacking the Chinese fishing boats.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23411", "revid": "10049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23411", "title": "Geography of the Paracel Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "23412", "revid": "90", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23412", "title": "History of the Paracel Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "23413", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23413", "title": "Paracel Islands/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "23414", "revid": "90", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23414", "title": "Government of the Paracel Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "23415", "revid": "90", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23415", "title": "Economy of the Paracel Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "23416", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23416", "title": "Transportation in the Paracel Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "23418", "revid": "29495429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23418", "title": "Paracel Islands/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "23419", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23419", "title": "Foreign relations of the Paracel Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "23420", "revid": "19614876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23420", "title": "Paraguay", "text": "Country in South America\nParaguay (), officially the Republic of Paraguay, is a landlocked country located in the central region of South America. It borders Bolivia to the northwest and north, Brazil to the northeast and east, and Argentina to the southeast, south, and west. Paraguay has access to the Atlantic Ocean via the Paran\u00e1\u2013Paraguay Waterway. The country is governed as a unitary presidential republic composed of a capital district and seventeen departments. Its capital and largest city is Asunci\u00f3n.\nThe indigenous Guaran\u00ed had been living in eastern Paraguay for at least a millennium before the arrival of Spanish conquistadores in 1524. The city of Asunci\u00f3n was founded in 1537 as the first capital of the Governorate of the R\u00edo de la Plata within the Spanish Empire. During the 17th\u00a0century, Paraguay was the center of Jesuit missions, where the natives were converted to Christianity and introduced to European culture. After the expulsion of the Jesuits from Spanish territories in 1767, Paraguay increasingly became a peripheral colony. Following independence from Spain in the early 19th\u00a0century, Paraguay was ruled by a series of authoritarian governments. This period ended with the disastrous Paraguayan War (1864\u20131870), during which the country lost half its prewar population and around 25\u201333% of its territory. In the 20th\u00a0century, Paraguay faced another major international conflict\u2014the Chaco War (1932\u20131935) against Bolivia\u2014in which Paraguay prevailed. It subsequently came under a succession of military dictators, culminating in the 35-year regime of Alfredo Stroessner, which lasted until his overthrow in 1989 by an internal military coup. This marked the beginning of Paraguay's current democratic era.\nParaguay is a developing country, ranking 99th in the Human Development Index, with the seventh highest GDP (PPP) per capita in South America. As of 2024, it had one of the fastest growing economies in the Western Hemisphere, driven by beef and soyabean exports, manufacturing, and construction. Paraguay is one of the world's leading exporters of hydroelectricity; the Itaipu Dam on the Paran\u00e1 River border with Brazil is the third largest hydroelectric dam in the world in terms of produced energy. Paraguay is a founding member of Mercosur, the United Nations, the Organization of American States, the Non-Aligned Movement and the Lima Group. Additionally, the city of Luque, in metropolitan Asunci\u00f3n, is the seat of the South American Football Confederation.\nThe majority of Paraguay's 6\u00a0million people are \"mestizo\", and Guarani culture remains widely influential; more than 90% of the population speak various dialects of the Guarani language alongside Spanish\u2014the highest rate of fluency in an indigenous language in Latin America. In a 2014 Positive Experience Index based on global polling data, Paraguay ranked as the \"world's happiest place\", and in 2024 placed 24th in the progress rankings of the World Happiness Report.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the name \"Paraguay\" is uncertain. One version postulates the name takes from Guaran\u00ed \"paragu\u00e1\" \"feather crown\" and \"y\" \"water\" thus \"paragua\u00ed\" \"feather crown of waters\". Other versions affirm that the name derives from the Payagu\u00e1 people, for the Paraguay River was called the \"Payagu\u00e1-y\", or \"river of the Payagu\u00e1s\" by the Guaran\u00ed and hence would have come the name for the country; or that, also from the Guaran\u00ed, \"para\" would mean sea, \"gua\", originates, and \"y\", river, thus Paraguay would mean \"river which gives birth to the sea\".\nHistory.\nPre-colonial era.\nThe indigenous Guaran\u00ed had been living in eastern Paraguay for at least a millennium before the arrival of the Spanish. Western Paraguay, the Gran Chaco, was inhabited by nomads of whom the Guaycuru peoples were the most prominent. The Paraguay River was roughly the dividing line between the agricultural Guarani people to the east and the nomadic and seminomadic people to the west in the Gran Chaco. The Mbay\u00e1 nomads were known for their warrior traditions and were not fully pacified until the late 19th century. These indigenous tribes belonged to five distinct language families, which were the bases of their major divisions. Differing language speaking groups were generally competitive over resources and territories. They were further divided into tribes by speaking languages in branches of these families. Today 17 separate ethnolinguistic groups remain.\nColonial era.\nThe first Europeans in the area were Spanish explorers in 1516. The Spanish explorer Juan de Salazar de Espinosa founded the settlement of Asunci\u00f3n on 15 August 1537. The city eventually became the center of a Spanish colonial province of Paraguay.\nAn attempt to create an autonomous Christian Indian nation was undertaken by Jesuit missions and settlements in this part of South America in the eighteenth century. They developed Jesuit reductions to bring Guarani populations together at Spanish missions and protect them from virtual slavery by Spanish settlers and Portuguese slave raiders, the \"bandeirantes\", in addition to seeking their conversion to Christianity. Catholicism in Paraguay was influenced by the indigenous peoples: The syncretic religion has absorbed native elements. The \"reducciones\" flourished in eastern Paraguay for about 150\u00a0years, until the expulsion of the Jesuits by the Spanish Crown in 1767. The ruins of two 18th\u00a0century Jesuit Missions of La Sant\u00edsima Trinidad de Paran\u00e1 and Jes\u00fas de Tavarangue have been designated as World Heritage Sites by UNESCO.\nIn western Paraguay, Spanish settlement and Christianity were strongly resisted by the nomadic Guaycuru and other nomads from the 16th century onward. Most of these peoples were absorbed into the mestizo population in the 18th and 19th centuries.\nIndependence and rule of Francia.\nParaguay overthrew the local Spanish administration on 14\u00a0May 1811. Paraguay's first dictator was Jos\u00e9 Gaspar Rodr\u00edguez de Francia, who ruled Paraguay from 1814 until his death in 1840 with very little outside contact or influence. He intended to create a utopian society based on the Genevan theorist Jean-Jacques Rousseau's \"Social Contract\". Rodr\u00edguez de Francia was nicknamed \"El Supremo\".\nRodr\u00edguez de Francia established new laws that greatly reduced the powers of the Catholic church (Catholicism was then an established state religion) and the cabinet, forbade colonial citizens from marrying one another and allowed them to marry only blacks, mulattoes or natives, in order to break the power of colonial-era elites and to create a mixed-race or mestizo society. He cut off relations between Paraguay and the rest of South America. Because of Francia's restrictions of freedom, Fulgencio Yegros and several other Independence-era leaders in 1820 planned a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" against Francia, who discovered the plot and had its leaders either executed or imprisoned for life.\nRule of the L\u00f3pez family.\nAfter Francia's death in 1840, Paraguay was ruled by various military officers under a new \"junta militar\", until Carlos Antonio L\u00f3pez (allegedly Rodr\u00edguez de Francia's nephew) came to power in 1841. L\u00f3pez modernized Paraguay and opened it to foreign commerce. He signed a nonaggression pact with Argentina and officially declared independence of Paraguay in 1842. After L\u00f3pez's death in 1862, power was transferred to his eldest son, Francisco Solano L\u00f3pez.\nThe regime of the L\u00f3pez family was characterized by pervasive and rigid centralism in production and distribution. There was no distinction between the public and the private spheres, and the L\u00f3pez family ruled the country as it would a large estate.\nThe government exerted control on all exports. The export of yerba mate and valuable wood products maintained the balance of trade between Paraguay and the outside world. The Paraguayan government was extremely protectionist, never accepted loans from abroad and levied high tariffs against imported foreign products. This protectionism made the society self-sufficient, and it also avoided the debt suffered by Argentina and Brazil. Slavery existed in Paraguay, although not in great numbers, until 1844, when it was legally abolished in the new constitution.\nFrancisco Solano L\u00f3pez, the son of Carlos Antonio L\u00f3pez, replaced his father as the President-Dictator in 1862, and generally continued the political policies of his father. Both wanted to give an international image of Paraguay as \"democratic and republican\", but in fact, the ruling family had almost total control of all public life in the country, including church and colleges.\nMilitarily, Carlos Antonio L\u00f3pez modernized and expanded industry and the Paraguayan Army and greatly strengthened the strategic defenses of Paraguay by developing the Fortress of Humait\u00e1. The government hired more than 200 foreign technicians, who installed telegraph lines and railroads to aid the expanding steel, textile, paper and ink, naval construction, weapons and gunpowder industries. The Ybycu\u00ed foundry, completed in 1850, manufactured cannons, mortars and bullets of all calibers. River warships were built in the shipyards of Asunci\u00f3n. Fortifications were built, especially along the Apa River and in Gran Chaco. Following the death of Carlos Antonio L\u00f3pez, these projects continued under his son Francisco Solano.\nIn terms of socio-economic development, the country was dubbed \"the most advanced Republic in South America\", notably by the British judge and politician Sir Robert Phillimore.\nAccording to George Thompson, Lieutenant Colonel of Engineers in the Paraguayan Army prior to and during the war, L\u00f3pez's government was comparatively a good one for Paraguay:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Probably in no other country in the world has life and property been so secure as all over Paraguay during his (Antonio Lopez's) reign. Crime was almost unknown, and when committed, immediately detected and punished. The mass of the people was, perhaps, the happiest in existence. They had hardly to do any work to gain a livelihood. Each family had its house or hut in its own ground. They planted, in a few days, enough tobacco, maize and mandioca for their own consumption [...]. Having at every hut a grove of oranges [...] and also a few cows, they were almost throughout the year under little necessity [...]. The higher classes, of course, lived more in the European way...\u2014\u200a\nParaguayan War (1864\u20131870).\nOn 12\u00a0October 1864, despite Paraguayan ultimatums, Brazil (allied with the Argentine Government under General Bartolom\u00e9 Mitre and the rebellious Uruguayan colorados led by Gen. Venancio Flores) invaded the Republic of Uruguay in order to overthrow the government of that time (which was under the rule of the Blanco Party, an ally of L\u00f3pez), thus starting the Paraguayan War.\nThe Paraguayans, led by the Marshal of the Republic Francisco Solano L\u00f3pez, retaliated by attacking Mato Grosso on 15 December 1864 and later declared war against Argentina on 23 March 1865. The Blanco Government was toppled and replaced by a Colorado government under General Venancio Flores on 22 February 1865. Afterward, the Argentine Republic, the Empire of Brazil and the Republic of Uruguay signed the Secret Treaty of the Triple Alliance against the Paraguayan Government on 1 May 1865.\nOn 24 May 1866, the Battle of Tuyut\u00ed led to the loss of 6,000 men when a Paraguayan attack was repelled by the Allies. It was marked as the bloodiest battle in South America during the war.\nThe Paraguayans put up a ferocious resistance but ultimately lost in 1870 in the Battle of Cerro Cor\u00e1, where Marshal Solano L\u00f3pez refused to surrender and died in action. The real causes of this war, which remains the bloodiest international conflict in the history of The Americas, are still highly debatable.\nParaguay lost 25\u201333% of its territory to Argentina and Brazil, paid an enormous war debt, and sold large amounts of national properties to stabilize its internal budget. The worst consequence of the war was the catastrophic loss of population. At least 50% of Paraguayans died during the conflict, numbers to which it took many decades for the country to return. Of the disaster suffered by the Paraguayans at the outcome of the war, William D. Rubinstein wrote:\n\"The normal estimate is that of a Paraguayan population of somewhere between 450,000 and 900,000, only 220,000 survived the war, of whom only 28,000 were adult males.\"\nDuring the pillaging of Asunci\u00f3n in 1869, the Imperial Brazilian Army packed up and transported the Paraguayan National Archives to Rio de Janeiro. Brazil's records from the war have remained classified. This has made Paraguayan history in the colonial and early national periods difficult to research and study.\n20th century.\nIn 1904, the Liberal revolution against the rule of Colorados broke out. The Liberal rule started a period of great political instability. Between 1904 and 1954, Paraguay had thirty-one presidents, most of whom were removed from office by force. Conflicts between the factions of the ruling Liberal party led to the Paraguayan Civil War of 1922.\nThe unresolved border conflict with Bolivia over the Chaco region finally erupted in the early 1930s in the Chaco War. After both sides suffered great losses, Paraguay defeated Bolivia and established its sovereignty over most of the disputed Chaco region. After the war, military officers used popular dissatisfaction with the Liberal politicians to seize the power for themselves. On 17\u00a0February 1936, the February Revolution brought colonel Rafael Franco to power. Between 1940 and 1948, the country was ruled by general Higinio Mor\u00ednigo. Dissatisfaction with his rule resulted in the Paraguayan civil war of 1947. In its aftermath Alfredo Stroessner began involvement in a string of plots, which resulted in his military coup d'\u00e9tat of 4\u00a0May 1954. In the aftermath of World War II, Paraguay became a hideout for Nazi fugitives accused of war crimes.\nStroessner era, 1954\u20131989.\nA series of unstable governments ensued until the establishment in 1954 of the regime of dictator Alfredo Stroessner, who remained in office for more than three decades until 1989. Paraguay was modernized to some extent under Stroessner's regime, although his rule was marked by extensive human rights abuses.\nStroessner and the \"Colorado\" party ruled the country from 1954 to 1989. The dictator oversaw an era of economic expansion, but also had a poor human rights and environmental record (see \"Political History\"). Paraguay actively participated in Operation Condor. Torture and death for political opponents was routine. After his overthrow, the \"Colorado\" continued to dominate national politics until 2008.\nThe splits in the \"Colorado\" Party in the 1980s, and the prevailing conditions \u2013 Stroessner's advanced age, the character of the regime, the economic downturn, and international isolation \u2013 were catalysts for anti-regime demonstrations and statements by the opposition prior to the 1988 general elections.\n\"PLRA\" leader Domingo La\u00edno served as the focal point of the opposition in the second half of the 1980s. The government's effort to isolate La\u00edno by exiling him in 1982 had backfired. On his sixth attempt to reenter the country in 1986, La\u00edno returned with three television crews from the U.S., a former United States ambassador to Paraguay, and a group of Uruguayan and Argentine congressmen. Despite the international contingent, the police violently barred La\u00edno's return.\nThe Stroessner regime relented in April\u00a01987, and permitted La\u00edno to return to Asunci\u00f3n. La\u00edno took the lead in organizing demonstrations and reducing infighting among the opposition party. The opposition was unable to reach agreement on a common strategy regarding the elections, with some parties advocating abstention, and others calling for blank voting. The parties held numerous 'lightning demonstrations' (\"m\u00edtines rel\u00e1mpagos\"), especially in rural areas. Such demonstrations were gathered and quickly disbanded before the arrival of the police.\nIn response to the upsurge in opposition activities, Stroessner condemned the Accord for advocating \"sabotage of the general elections and disrespect of the law\". He used national police and civilian vigilantes of the \"Colorado\" Party to break up demonstrations. A number of opposition leaders were imprisoned or otherwise harassed. Hermes Rafael Saguier, another key leader of the \"PLRA\", was imprisoned for four months in 1987 on charges of sedition. In early February 1988, police arrested 200\u00a0people attending a National Coordinating Committee meeting in Coronel Oviedo. La\u00edno and several other opposition figures were arrested before dawn on the day of the election, 14\u00a0February, and held for twelve hours. The government declared Stroessner's reelection with 89% of the vote.\nThe opposition attributed the results in part to the virtual Colorado monopoly on the mass media. They noted that 53% of those polled indicated that there was an \"uneasiness\" in Paraguayan society. 74% believed that the political situation needed changes, including 45% who wanted a substantial or total change. Finally, 31% stated that they planned to abstain from voting in the February elections.\nStroessner's overthrow, post-1989.\nOn 3 February 1989, Stroessner was overthrown in a military coup headed by General Andr\u00e9s Rodr\u00edguez. As president, Rodr\u00edguez instituted political, legal, and economic reforms and initiated a \"rapprochement\" with the international community. Reflecting the deep hunger of the rural poor for land, hundreds immediately occupied thousands of acres of unused territories belonging to Stroessner and his associates; by mid-1990, 19,000\u00a0families occupied . At the time, 2.06\u00a0million people lived in rural areas, more than half of the 4.1\u00a0million total population, and most were landless.\nThe June 1992 constitution established a democratic system of government and dramatically improved protection of fundamental human rights. In May 1993, Colorado Party candidate Juan Carlos Wasmosy was elected as Paraguay's first civilian president in almost forty years, in what international observers deemed free and fair elections.\nWith support from the United States, the Organization of American States, and other countries in the region, the Paraguayan people rejected an April 1996 attempt by then Army Chief General Lino Oviedo to oust President Wasmosy.\nOviedo was nominated as the Colorado candidate for president in the 1998 election. However, when the Supreme Court upheld in April his conviction on charges related to the 1996 coup attempt, he was not allowed to run and was detained in jail. His former running mate, Ra\u00fal Cubas, became the Colorado Party's candidate, and was elected in May in elections deemed by international observers to be free and fair. One of Cubas' first acts after taking office in August was to commute Oviedo's sentence and release him. In December 1998, Paraguay's Supreme Court declared these actions unconstitutional. In this tense atmosphere, the murder of Vice President and long-time Oviedo rival Luis Mar\u00eda Arga\u00f1a on 23 March 1999, led the Chamber of Deputies to impeach Cubas the next day. On 26 March, eight student anti-government demonstrators were murdered, widely believed to have been carried out by Oviedo supporters. This increased opposition to Cubas, who resigned on 28 March. Senate President Luis Gonz\u00e1lez Macchi, a Cubas opponent, was peacefully sworn in as president the same day.\nIn 2003, Nicanor Duarte was elected as president.\nElection of Fernando Lugo.\nFor the 2008 general elections, the Colorado Party was favored in polls. Their candidate was Minister of Education Blanca Ovelar, the first woman to be nominated as a candidate for a major party in Paraguayan history. After sixty years of Colorado rule, voters chose Fernando Lugo, a former Roman Catholic Bishop and not a professional politician in civil government, and a member of the Authentic Radical Liberal Party, Paraguay's largest opposition party. Lugo was an adherent of liberation theology. Lugo achieved a historic victory in Paraguay's presidential election, defeating the ruling party candidate, and ending 61 years of conservative rule. Lugo won with nearly 41% of the vote, compared to almost 31% for Blanca Ovelar of the Colorado party. Outgoing President Nicanor Duarte Frutos hailed the moment as the first time in the history of the nation that a government had transferred power to opposition forces in a constitutional and peaceful fashion.\nLugo was sworn in on 15 August 2008. The Lugo administration set its two major priorities as the reduction of corruption and economic inequality.\nPolitical instability following Lugo's election and disputes within his cabinet encouraged some renewal of popular support for the Colorado Party. Reports suggested that the businessman Horacio Cartes became the new political figure amid disputes. Despite the US Drug Enforcement Administration's strong accusations against Cartes related to drug trafficking, he continued to amass followers in the political arena.\nOn 14 January 2011, the Colorado Party convention nominated Horacio Cartes as the presidential candidate for the party. However, the party's constitution did not allow it.\nOn 21 June 2012, impeachment proceedings against President Lugo began in the country's lower house, which was controlled by his opponents. Lugo was given less than twenty-four hours to prepare for the proceedings and only two hours in which to mount a defense. Impeachment was quickly approved and the resulting trial in Paraguay's Senate, also controlled by the opposition, ended with the removal of Lugo from office and Vice President Federico Franco assuming the duties of president. Lugo's rivals blamed him for the deaths of 17\u00a0people \u2013 eight police officers and nine farmers \u2013 in armed clashes after police were ambushed by armed peasants when enforcing an eviction order against rural trespassers.\nOn 14 May 2011, Paraguay celebrated its bicentenary on the 200th anniversary of independence from the Spanish Empire as a sovereign state.\nLugo's supporters gathered outside Congress to protest the decision as a \"politically motivated coup d'\u00e9tat\". Lugo's removal from office on 22\u00a0June 2012 is considered by UNASUR and other neighboring countries, especially those currently governed by leftist leaders, as a coup d'\u00e9tat. However, the Organization of American States, which sent a mission to Paraguay to gather information, concluded that the impeachment process was not a coup d'\u00e9tat, as it had been carried out in accordance with the Constitution of Paraguay.\nPresent day.\nFrom August 2013 to 15 August 2018, the President of Paraguay was Horacio Cartes. Since 15 August 2018, the President of Paraguay has been Mario Abdo Ben\u00edtez. They are both from the conservative Colorado Party. President Mario Abdo enjoyed a close relationship with the Brazilian far-right president (in power 2019\u20132022), Jair Bolsonaro. In February 2019, President Mario Abdo Benitez was at Bolsonaro's side when Bolsonaro praised Paraguayan military dictator Alfredo Stroessner, calling him \"a man of vision\". In 2021, Paraguay became the first country in South America to produce electric energy in its 100% renewable energy supply. In May 2023, Santiago Pe\u00f1a of the long-ruling Colorado Party, won the presidential election to succeed Mario Abdo as the next President of Paraguay. On 15 August 2023, Santiago Pe\u00f1a was sworn in as Paraguay's new president.\nGeography.\nParaguay is divided by the R\u00edo Paraguay into two well differentiated geographic regions. The eastern region (Regi\u00f3n Oriental); and the western region, officially called Western Paraguay (Regi\u00f3n Occidental) and also known as the Chaco, which is part of the Gran Chaco. The country lies between latitudes 19\u00b0 and 28\u00b0S, and longitudes 54\u00b0 and 63\u00b0W.\nThe terrain consists mostly of grassy plains and wooded hills in the eastern region. To the west are mostly low, marshy plains. Paraguay contains six terrestrial ecoregions: Alto Paran\u00e1 Atlantic forests, Chaco, Cerrado, Humid Chaco, Pantanal, and Paran\u00e1 flooded savanna. It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.39/10, ranking it 74th globally out of 172 countries. The Guarani Aquifer is an important exorheic basin to the region.\nAlthough Paraguay is landlocked, there are a number of noteworthy lakeside beaches.\nClimate.\nThe overall climates are semi-arid, tropical and subtropical. Winds play a major role in influencing Paraguay's weather: between October and March, warm winds blow from the Amazon Basin in the north, while the period between May and August brings cold winds from the Andes.\nThe absence of mountain ranges to provide a natural barrier allows winds to develop speeds as high as . This also leads to significant changes in temperature within a short span of time; between April and September, temperatures will sometimes drop below freezing. January is the hottest summer month, with an average daily temperature of 28.9 degrees Celsius (84 degrees F).\nRainfall varies dramatically across the country, with substantial rainfall in the eastern portions, and semi-arid conditions in the far west. The far eastern forest belt receives an average of of rain annually, while the western Chaco region typically averages no more than a year. The rains in the west tend to be irregular and evaporate quickly, contributing to the aridity of the area.\nFauna.\nWildlife in Paraguay include marsh deer, monkeys, armadillos, anteaters, otters, wild boars, tapirs, jaguars, ocelots, bats, and the coypu.\nGovernment and politics.\nParaguay is a representative democratic republic, with a multi-party system and separation of powers across three branches. Executive power is exercised solely by the President, who is head of state and head of government. Legislative power is vested in the two chambers of the National Congress. The judiciary is vested on tribunals and Courts of Civil Law and a nine-member Supreme Court of Justice, all of them independent of the executive and the legislature.\nSince the end of the 1947 civil war, the country's politics have generally been dominated by the conservative Colorado Party.\nAdministrative divisions.\nParaguay consists of seventeen departments and one capital district (\"distrito capital\").\nIt is also divided into two regions: The \"Occidental Region\" or Chaco (Boquer\u00f3n, Alto Paraguay and Presidente Hayes), and the \"Oriental Region\" (the other departments and the capital district).\nThese are the departments, with their capitals, population, area and the number of districts: \nAlto Paraguay \nBoquer\u00f3n \nPresidente Hayes \nAmambay \nConcepci\u00f3n \nSan Pedro \nDistrito Capital \nGuair\u00e1 \nCaazap\u00e1 \nAltoParan\u00e1 \nCaaguaz\u00fa \nCanindey\u00fa \nItap\u00faa \nParaguar\u00ed \nMisiones \n\u00d1eembuc\u00fa \nCordillera \nCentral \n\"Brazil\" \n\"Bolivia\" \n\"Argentina \" \nMilitary.\nThe military of Paraguay consist of an army, navy (including naval aviation and marine corps) and air force. Paraguay's constitution establishes the president of Paraguay as commander-in-chief of the armed forces.\nParaguay has compulsory military service; all 18-year-old males, as well as 17-year-old males in the year of their 18th birthday, are liable for one year of active duty. While the constitution allows for conscientious objection, no enabling legislation has yet been approved.\nParaguay has partnered with Argentina, Brazil, and the United States in regional anti-terrorism and anti-narcotics efforts. In July 2005, U.S. special forces began arriving at Paraguay's Mariscal Estigarribia air base to support joint training and humanitarian operations In 2019, Asuncion hosted the first meeting of the Regional Security Mechanism (RSM), which promotes cooperation between Paraguay, Argentina, Brazil, and the U.S. in addressing transnational crime and terrorism in the \"triple frontier\" region.\nParaguay is the 73rd most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.\nEconomy.\nFor many years, the country's image was associated with the illicit trade in electronic products, weapons and drugs. However, this scenario began to change in the 2000s, with the rise of legalized businesses such as the production of soy, maize, beef, among others. Data from the Central Bank of Paraguay (BCP) showed that, in 2006, exports related to the triangulation trade (China-Paraguay-Brazil), treated by Brazil \u2013 in most cases \u2013 as smuggling and embezzlement, represented 22% of the country's GDP. In 2016, this percentage dropped to 12%. With higher tax collections through legalized employment, the country has been able to improve its infrastructure, which was precarious. Paraguay has an economic development policy based on exports and dependence on the Brazilian market prevails. The triangulation trade has in its essence the export of products originating in China, with Brazil as its main destination. The energy exported is essentially the hydroelectric surplus generated by the Itaipu Power Plant, for which Brazil is the main buyer. And maquilas, whose main investors are Brazilians, also have a large consumer market in Brazil for their products. Therefore, in these three pillars of Paraguay's development strategy, there is the outstanding characteristic of reexports. In the case of agricultural commodities, it is the export of products originating in Paraguay.\nIn the 2010s, the economy, largely directed towards soybean production, grew by an average of 4%. The economic growth did not, however, reduce poverty, which in 2018, according to official figures, reached more than 26% of the population. According to \"The New York Times\", Paraguay is \"one of the Latin American countries where the gap between rich and poor has widened the most in recent years\". In the countryside, 85% of agricultural land is owned by 2.6% of the owners. In addition, people of indigenous descent have been expelled to make way for soybean companies.\nThe soybean export market is largely dominated by multinationals (Cargill, Archer Daniels Midland, Bunge Limited, etc.) and therefore benefits few Paraguayans. Export companies and landowners pay little tax. For example, a study by ECLAC (a UN agency) released in 2018 indicates that Paraguay is one of the countries where companies participate the least in the state budget.\nPesticides and other chemicals are used heavily in soybean fields. The country's environmental standards are not met by companies and agrochemicals contaminate the environment. In 2019, the United Nations Human Rights Committee issued a ruling urging Paraguay to undertake an investigation into the massive fumigation of agrochemicals and the poisoning of the population. However, the situation is not improving: \"The high level of political corruption, the extreme fragility of institutions, the high level of social vulnerability, the omnipotence of economic interests in political decisions, as well as the location [of the country] in the geographic heart of the Southern Cone and its abundance of natural resources, make Paraguay an attractive target for imperial geopolitical interests\", says sociologist Tom\u00e1s Palau. Academic Jos\u00e9 Luis Insfr\u00e1n also notes that the country's politicians \"are subsidized by big business; they are the ones who implement the policies\".\nIn 2005, the International Monetary Fund stated that fewer than 10% of workers in Paraguay participate in the pension system, 95% of which is administered by two institutions. Both are financed on a pay as you go system by worker contributions; the first, Instituto de Previsi\u00f3n Social is for private sector employees, and the for public employees (including university professors, teachers, judicial employees, army officers and police officers) and veterans of the Chaco War (or their descendants).\nThe market economy is distinguished by a large informal sector, featuring reexport of imported consumer goods to neighboring countries, as well as the activities of thousands of microenterprises and urban street vendors. Nonetheless, over the last 10 years the Paraguayan economy diversified dramatically, with the energy, auto parts and clothing industries leading the way.\nParaguay's most important urban areas are located along the Argentina-Paraguay border: Asunci\u00f3n, Alberdi, Encarnaci\u00f3n, Pilar and Ciudad del Este, the latter being the third most important free commercial zone in the world, only trailing behind Miami and Hong Kong. A large percentage of the population, especially in rural areas, derives its living from agricultural activity, often on a subsistence basis. Because of the importance of the informal sector, accurate economic measures are difficult to obtain. The economy grew rapidly between 2003 and 2013 as growing world demand for commodities combined with high prices and favorable weather to support Paraguay's commodity-based export expansion.\nIn 2012, Paraguay's government introduced the MERCOSUR (FOCEM) system in order to stimulate the economy and job growth through a partnership with both Brazil and Argentina.\nOne economic partnership that has been on the rise is the one between Paraguay and neighboring Bolivia. \nThe Central Bank of Paraguay is Paraguay's highest monetary authority, and the country's governing body, in finances and economics. Its headquarters are in Asunci\u00f3n's Carmelitas neighborhood.\nAgriculture.\nParaguay is the sixth-largest soybean producer in the world, the second-largest producer of stevia and the ninth-largest exporter of beef.\nIn 2018, in addition to soy, the country had a large production of maize and sugar cane, where it positioned itself as the 21st largest producer in the world; other important cultures of the country are cassava, rice, wheat, orange, yerba mate, and sorghum. In livestock, Paraguay produced, in 2020, 481 thousand tons of beef, being the 26th largest producer in the world.\nSoy farming was largely introduced by Brazilians: in 2019, almost 70% of soy and rice producers in Paraguay were people from Brazil, or descendants of Brazilians (also known as brasiguaios). The first Brazilian producers began to arrive in the country in the 1980s, causing a social disruption up to nowadays. Before the Brazilian influx, much of the land in Paraguay was uncultivated.\nMore than 80% of the cultivable land is owned by 2.6% of landowners. Nearly 8\u00a0million hectares were illegally granted, in violation of the agrarian law, to regime supporters during the dictatorship of Alfredo Stroessner (1954\u20131989), and the state has done nothing since to identify the beneficiaries of this illicit enrichment. These owners include generals, businessmen, and politicians, former presidents of the Republic, Nicaraguan dictator Anastasio Somoza Debayle, and even the ruling Colorado Party. More than 130\u00a0peasant leaders have been assassinated since the fall of Stroessner in 1989.\nThe methods of appropriating land in Paraguay are numerous. Economist Luis Rojas says that the most common method is to buy land from small producers: \"The peasant is offered a sum of money he has never seen in his life. He imagines it's a fortune, leaves for the city, spends it all in three or four months and makes the misery belts grow, because there is no work.\" Oxfam estimates that 900,000\u00a0people have been evicted from the countryside in the last ten years, which represents nearly one-seventh of the population. This crowd of landless peasants is swelling the poverty belts around Asunci\u00f3n, the capital.\nIndustry and manufacturing.\nThe World Bank lists the top producing countries each year, based on the total value of production. By the 2019 list, Paraguay had the 79th\u00a0most valuable industry in the world ($6.9 billion). The country was the seventh largest producer of soybean oil in the world in 2018.\nThe mineral industry of Paraguay produces about 25% of the country's gross domestic product (GDP) and employs about 31% of the labor force. Production of cement, iron ore, and steel occurs commonly throughout Paraguay's industrial sector. The growth of the industry was further fueled by the maquila industry, with large industrial complexes located in the eastern part of the country. Paraguay put in place many incentives aimed to attract industries to the country. One of them is the so-called \"Maquila law\", by which companies can relocate to Paraguay, enjoying minimal tax rates.\nIn the pharmaceutical industry, Paraguayan companies now meet 70% of domestic consumption and have begun to export drugs. Paraguay is quickly supplanting foreign suppliers in meeting the country's drug needs. Strong growth also is evident in the production of edible oils, garments, organic sugar, meat processing, and steel.\nIn 2003, manufacturing comprised 13.6% of the GDP and it employed about 11% of the working population in 2000. Paraguay's primary manufacturing focus is on food and beverages. Wood products, paper products, hides and furs, and nonmetallic mineral products also contribute to manufacturing totals. Steady growth in the manufacturing GDP during the 1990s (1.2% annually) laid the foundation for 2002 and 2003, when the annual growth rate rose to 2.5%. Paraguay was ranked 103rd in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nSocial issues of the indigenous.\nLiteracy rates have been extremely low among Paraguay's indigenous population, who had a literacy rate of 7.1% compared to the 51% rate of the general population as of the 2002 census.\nOnly 2.5% of Paraguay's indigenous population had access to clean drinking water and only 9.5% had electricity as of 2002[ [update]].\nTransportation.\nAccording to official data from the M.O.P.C (Ministry of Public Works and Communications of Paraguay), in 2019, there were a total of of roads, of which were paved. One of the most important recent investments in the country's history is the construction of the Bioceanic Corridor, which will cross the north of Paraguay in a horizontal line, connecting Brazil to Argentina, reaching both the ports of northern Chile, as to Brazilian ports. The work will open a new route for exports of products to Asia, and will enable the development of an isolated region of Paraguay, the Chaco. In February 2022, Paraguay inaugurated 275\u00a0km of the road (about half of the route), connecting Carmelo Peralta (Alto Paraguay), on the border with Brazil, to Loma Plata (Boquer\u00f3n), in the center of the country. Paraguay has also been implementing the country's first double highway: 149\u00a0km of the Route\u00a02, which connects the capital Asunci\u00f3n to Ciudad del Este, on the border with Brazil (the highway that also connects with port of Paranagu\u00e1). In January\u00a02022, there were almost 100\u00a0km duplicated.\nThe Paraguay-Paran\u00e1 waterway system is a natural north\u2013south downstream waterway of 1,600\u00a0km of a navigable network area, that gives the region direct access to the ocean, therefore, river transport is important and extensive, concentrating the most commercial maritime traffic to the port of Buenos Aires. Asunci\u00f3n is one of the main ports of Paraguay.\nAsunci\u00f3n airport is an important stopover for international airlines and Guaran\u00ed International Airport is an important international air cargo hub.\nEnergy.\nAll of Paraguay's electricity is generated by hydropower, making it one of the cleanest in the world. \nParaguay has an installed electrical production capacity of 8,110\u00a0MW, producing 63\u00a0billion kWh/year in 2016; with domestic consumption of just 15\u00a0billion kWh, the excess production is sold to Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay, making Paraguay the world's largest exporter of electric power. This production is from two large hydroelectric power projects along its borders, including the Itaipu Dam, the world's second largest generating station.\nDemographics.\nParaguay's population is distributed unevenly through the country, with the vast majority of people living in the eastern region near the capital and largest city, Asunci\u00f3n, which accounts for 10% of the country's population. The Gran Chaco region, which includes the Alto Paraguay, Boquer\u00f3n and Presidente Hayes Department, and accounts for about 60% of the territory, is home to less than 4% of the population. About 63% of Paraguayans live in urban areas, making Paraguay one of the least urbanized nations in South America.\nFor most of its history, Paraguay has been a recipient of immigrants owing to its low population density, especially after the demographic collapse caused by the Paraguayan War. Immigrants include Italians, Germans, , English, Russians, Koreans, Chinese, Arab, Japanese, Ukrainians, Poles, Jews, Brazilians, Bolivians, Americans, Colombians, Mexicans, Venezuelans, Chileans, Taiwanese, Peruvians, Asian people, Uruguayans and the largest group of all; Argentines. Along with German Argentines, German Paraguayans are one of the most prominent and growing German communities in South America, with some 25,000\u00a0German-speaking Mennonites living in the Paraguayan Chaco. German settlers founded several towns, such as Hohenau, Filadelfia, Neuland, Obligado and Nueva Germania. Several websites that promote German immigration to Paraguay claim that 5\u20137% of the population is of German ancestry, including 150,000\u00a0people of German-Brazilian descent. Similarly, from the 1920\u201330s, Paraguay received of Slavic immigrants who settled in Asunci\u00f3n and Southern Paraguay (Itap\u00faa, Misiones and \u00d1eembuc\u00fa), especially in the towns of Fram, Coronel Bogado, Encarnaci\u00f3n, San Juan del Paran\u00e1, San Ignacio, and Pilar. Paraguay has also been a haven for communities persecuted for the religious faith, like the Bruderhof who were forced to leave England in 1941 because of their pacifist beliefs. Many of these communities have retained their languages and culture, particularly the Brazilians, who represent one of the largest immigrant groups. Many Brazilian Paraguayans are of German, Italian and Polish descent. There are an estimated 8,000\u00a0Afro-Paraguayans, comprising 0.13% of the population.\nThere is no official data on the ethnic composition of the Paraguayan population, as the Department of Statistics, Surveys and Censuses of Paraguay does not ask about \"race\" and \"ethnicity\" in census surveys, although it does inquire about the indigenous population. According to the 2022\u00a0census, indigenous people made up 2.3% of Paraguay's total population.\nTraditionally, the majority of the Paraguayan population is considered mixed (\"mestizo\" in Spanish). According to the 2022 census, Paraguay has a population of 6\u00a0109\u00a0944, of which 95% are Mestizo/White and 5% are labeled \"other\", which includes members of 17\u00a0distinct ethnolinguistic indigenous groups.\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguages.\nSpanish and Guaran\u00ed are the two main languages in Paraguay, with both having official status. The Guaran\u00ed language is a remarkable trace of the indigenous Guaran\u00ed culture that has endured in Paraguay. Guaran\u00ed is one of the last commonly used indigenous national languages in South America. In 2015, Spanish was spoken by about 87% of the population, while Guaran\u00ed is spoken by more than 90%, or slightly more than 5.8 million speakers. Of rural Paraguayans, 52% are bilingual in Guaran\u00ed and Spanish. While Guaran\u00ed is still widely spoken, Spanish is generally given a preferential treatment in government, business, media and education as a South American lingua franca.\nPortuguese is the third most used language, spoken by 10% in the country, mostly in the departments bordering Brazil. It is spoken by the so-called \"Brasiguayos\", Brazilians or descendants who crossed west of the border from the 1970s seeking cheap land.\nThere are also approximately 19 other indigenous languages spoken in Paraguay, many of which are threatened by extinction. Languages such as Guana, Ayoreo, and Ishir (Chamacoco) are considered endangered.\nParaguay ranks relatively well at the EF English Proficiency Index, being at the top 50, as it is the third most English proficient country in South America, after Argentina and Uruguay.\nReligion.\nChristianity, particularly Catholicism, is the dominant religion in Paraguay. According to the 2002 census, 89.9% of the population was Catholic, 6.2% was Evangelical Protestant, 1.1% identified with other Christian sects, and 0.6% practiced indigenous religions. A U.S. State Department report on Religious Freedom names Catholicism, evangelical Protestantism, mainline Protestantism, Judaism (Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform), The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith as prominent religious groups. It also mentions a large Muslim community in Alto Paran\u00e1 (as a result of Middle-Eastern immigration, especially from Lebanon) and a prominent Mennonite community in Boquer\u00f3n.\nEducation.\nLiteracy was about 93.6% and 87.7% of Paraguayans finished the fifth grade according to UNESCO's Educational Development Index 2008. Literacy does not differ much by gender. A more recent study reveals that attendance at primary school by children between 6 and 12 years old is about 98%. Primary education is free, mandatory and takes nine years. Secondary education takes three years.\nMain universities, all in the capital city, in Paraguay include:\nThe net primary enrollment rate was at 88% in 2005. Public expenditure on education was about 4.3% of GDP in the early 2000s.\nHealth.\nAverage life expectancy in Paraguay is rather high given its poverty: as of 2006[ [update]], it was 75\u00a0years, equivalent to far wealthier Argentina, and the eighth highest in the Americas according to World Health Organization. Public expenditure on health is 2.6% of GDP, while private health expenditure is 5.1%. Infant mortality was 20 per 1,000\u00a0births in 2005. Maternal mortality was 150 per 100,000\u00a0live births in 2000.\nThe World Bank has helped the Paraguayan government reduce the country's maternal and infant mortality. The \"Mother and Child Basic Health Insurance Project\" aimed to contribute to reducing mortality by increasing the use of selected life-saving services included in the country's Mother and Child Basic Health Insurance Program (MCBI) by women of child-bearing age, and children under age six in selected areas. To this end, the project also targeted improving the quality and efficiency of the health service network within certain areas, in addition to increasing the Ministry of Public Health and Social Welfare's (MSPandBS) management.\nCulture.\nParaguay's cultural heritage can be traced to the extensive intermarriage between the original male Spaniard settlers and indigenous Guaran\u00ed women. Their culture is highly influenced by various European countries, including Spain. Therefore, the Paraguayan culture is a fusion of two cultures and traditions: one European, the other, Southern Guaran\u00ed. Although this is common throughout the country, it is more visible around the towns of Atyr\u00e1, Tobat\u00ed and Altos. More than 93% of Paraguayans are \"mestizos\", making Paraguay one of the most homogeneous countries in Latin America. A characteristic of this cultural fusion is the extensive bilingualism present to this day: more than 80% of Paraguayans speak both Spanish and the indigenous language, Guaran\u00ed. Jopara, a mixture of Guaran\u00ed and Spanish, is also widely spoken.\nThis cultural fusion is expressed in arts such as embroidery (\"ao po'\u00ed\") and lace making (\"\u00f1andut\u00ed\"). The music of Paraguay, which consists of lilting polkas, bouncy \"galopas,\" and languid \"guaranias\", is played on the native harp. Paraguay's culinary heritage is also deeply influenced by this cultural fusion. Several popular dishes contain manioc, a local staple crop similar to the yuca, also known as cassava root, found in the Southwestern United States and Mexico, as well as other indigenous ingredients. A popular dish is \"sopa paraguaya\", similar to a thick corn bread. Another notable food is \"chipa\", a bagel-like bread made from cornmeal, manioc, and cheese. Many other dishes consist of different kinds of cheeses, onions, bell peppers, cottage cheese, cornmeal, milk, seasonings, butter, eggs and fresh corn kernels.\nThe 1950s and 1960s were the time of the birth of a new generation of Paraguayan novelists and poets such as Jos\u00e9 Ricardo Maz\u00f3, Roque Vallejos, and Nobel Prize nominee Augusto Roa Bastos. Several Paraguayan films have been made.\nInside the family, conservative values predominate. In lower classes, godparents have a special relationship to the family, since they are typically chosen because of their favourable social position, in order to provide extra security for the children. Particular respect is owed them, in return for which the family can expect protection and patronage.\nThe most popular instruments in Paraguayan music are the harp and the guitar. The native genres are the Paraguayan polka and the guarania, characterized by a slow song that was developed by Jos\u00e9 Asunci\u00f3n Flores around the 1920s.\nSports.\nSports are integral to the national culture; soccer and\nbasketball are most popular. Other sports such as volleyball, handball, futsal, swimming and tennis are also popular.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23421", "revid": "26442387", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23421", "title": "History of Paraguay", "text": "The history of Paraguay encompasses thousands of years of human habitation. Both agricultural and nomadic Guaycuruan lived in the region at the time of the Spanish Conquest. It became a relatively neglected part of the Spanish Empire due to its isolation and lack of mineral wealth, nonetheless a small group of Spanish settlers came to reside in the area, increasingly intermarrying with native women to produce a mestizo population. In the 17th and 18th centuries, Jesuit missionaries organized the natives into planned communities known as reducciones, and the experiment gained notable attention in Enlightenment Era Europe.\nIn the early nineteenth century, Paraguay participated in the uprisings across the Spanish Empire against Spanish rule, and newly independent Paraguay came under the domination of Jose Gaspar Rodriguez de Francia, who in his absolute rule almost entirely cut off the new nation from the world. After Dr. Francia's death in 1840, Paraguay eventually came under the rule of Francisco Solano Lopez in 1862, who proceeded to embroil the nation in a war against Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay which culminated in a Paraguayan defeat with massive population and territorial losses.\nMilitary rule continued into the 20th century, which in the 1930s also saw Paraguay embroil itself in the Chaco War with Bolivia, which ended in a Paraguayan victory. General Alfredo Stroessner came to power in 1954, and military rule continued until 1989 upon which the nation moved toward a multi party democracy with a new constitution adopted in 1992. Paraguay in the 21st century has largely avoided the political strife and strong-man rule that characterizes much of its history. The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Paraguay a \"hybrid regime\" in .\nColonial era.\nNative peoples.\nThe homeland of the Guarani people was eastward from the Paraguay River, in the Misiones Province of Argentina and southern Brazil and as far east as the Atlantic coast near Rio de Janeiro. Their pre-Columbian population is estimated at between 300,000 and one million. With the arrival of Europeans, the population rapidly decreased due to epidemics of European diseases. The Guaran\u00ed were united only by language and cultural similarities. No political structure existed above the village level. The Guaran\u00ed were a semi-sedentary agricultural people.\nAlthough the Guaran\u00ed initially resisted Spanish incursions into their lands, two characteristics influenced their early cooperation with the Spanish and missionaries. First, the Guaran\u00ed were themselves warlike, but they were threatened by hostile tribes around them and by slave raiders. The Spanish, especially Christian missionaries, afforded a degree of security to the Guaran\u00ed. Secondly, the Guaran\u00ed had a custom of exchanging women among themselves and with outsiders to cement alliances. This facilitated a proliferation of sexual relations of Guaran\u00ed women with Spanish men who had an average of 10 concubines each. In Paraguay, the mestizo offspring of Spanish/Guaran\u00ed unions had the legal rights of Spaniards. Coupled with the lack of interest by Spain and Spanish entrepreneurs in Paraguay, which produced neither mineral wealth nor agricultural exports, Paraguay became a mestizo society by 1580. Unique to Latin American countries, an indigenous language, Guaran\u00ed, is an official language alongside Spanish. The Spanish and mestizos subjected the Guaran\u00ed population to the encomienda system of forced labor after 1556 and the reductions of Christian missionaries beginning in the 1580s.\nThe Gran Chaco, a semi-arid flatland west of the Paraguay River, was the home of the Guaycur\u00fa peoples. The most important of the Guaycur\u00faans in Paraguay were the Payagu\u00e1, a riverine people ranging for up and down the Paraguay River, and the Mbay\u00e1 who lived in northwest Paraguay. The Guaycuru tribes were nomadic and warlike. The Mbay\u00e1 developed a horse culture in the 17th century while the Payagu\u00e1 made travel up and down the Paraguay River dangerous. These tribes frequently raided the Spanish settlers and Guaran\u00ed farmers. They resisted the reductions and Christianity of the missionaries and were a threat to the Spanish and other native peoples for more than 300 years. The name of Paraguay is probably derived from the Payagu\u00e1s.\nEarly explorers and conquistadors.\nMuch of the earliest written history of Paraguay comes from records of the Spanish colonization, beginning in 1516 with the Juan D\u00edaz de Sol\u00eds' failed expedition to the R\u00edo de la Plata. On the home voyage, after Sol\u00eds' death, one of the vessels was wrecked off Santa Catarina Island near the Brazilian coast. Among the survivors was Aleixo Garcia, a Portuguese adventurer who acquired a working knowledge of the Guaran\u00ed language. Garcia was intrigued by reports of \"the White King\" who supposedly lived far to the west and governed cities of wealth and splendor, a reference to the Inca Empire.\nIn 1524, Garcia joined a Guaran\u00ed invasion of the Inca Empire. Garcia's group discovered Iguaz\u00fa Falls, crossed the R\u00edo Paran\u00e1 and arrived at the site of Asunci\u00f3n, the future capital of the country, thirteen years before it was founded. At Asunci\u00f3n, the Guaran\u00ed gathered an army of 2,000 men and penetrated the outer defenses of the Inca Empire on the eastern slopes of the Andes. After Garcia's murder by his Indian allies, news of the raid reached the Spanish explorers on the coast. The explorer Sebastian Cabot was attracted to the R\u00edo Paraguay two years later. Cabot was sailing to the Orient in 1526 when he heard of Garcia's exploits. He decided that the R\u00edo de la Plata might provide passage to the Pacific, and, eager to win the riches of the Incas, became the first European to explore that estuary.\nLeaving a small force on the northern shore of the broad estuary, Cabot proceeded up the R\u00edo Paran\u00e1 for about , where he founded a settlement he named \"Sancti Spiritu\". He continued upstream for another , past the junction with the R\u00edo Paraguay. When navigation became difficult, Cabot turned back, after having obtained some silver objects that the Indians said came from a land far to the west. Cabot retraced his route on the R\u00edo Paran\u00e1 and entered the R\u00edo Paraguay, trading freely with the Guaran\u00ed tribes until a strong force of Agaces (Payagu\u00e1) Indians attacked them. About below the site of Asunci\u00f3n, Cabot encountered a tribe of Guaran\u00ed in possession of silver objects, perhaps some of the spoils of Garcia's treasure. Imagining that he had found the route to the riches of Peru, Cabot renamed the river R\u00edo de la Plata.\nCabot returned to Spain in 1530 and told Emperor Charles V about his discoveries. Charles gave permission to Don Pedro de Mendoza to mount an expedition to the Plata basin. The emperor also named Mendoza governor of the Governorate of New Andalusia and granted him the right to name his successor. Mendoza proved to be utterly unsuitable as a leader, and his cruelty nearly undermined the expedition. Choosing what was possibly the worst site for the first Spanish settlement in South America, in February 1536 Mendoza built a fort at a place of poor anchorage on the southern side of the Plata estuary on an inhospitable dead-level plain. Dusty in the dry season, a bog in the rains, the place was inhabited by the fierce Querand\u00ed tribe, who resisted the Spaniards. Ignoring these conditions, the Spanish named the outpost Buenos Aires (\"Nuestra Se\u00f1ora del Buen Ayre\").\nMeanwhile, Juan de Ayolas, who was Mendoza's second-in-command and who had been sent upstream to reconnoiter, returned with corn and news that Cabot's fort at Sancti Spiritu had been abandoned. Mendoza dispatched Ayolas to explore a possible route to Peru. Accompanied by Domingo Mart\u00ednez de Irala, Ayolas again sailed upstream until he reached a small bay on the R\u00edo Paraguay, which he named Candelaria, the present-day Fuerte Olimpo. Appointing Irala his lieutenant, Ayolas ventured into the Chaco and was never seen again.\nAfter Mendoza unexpectedly returned to Spain, two other members of the expedition\u2014Juan de Salazar de Espinosa and Gonzalo de Mendoza\u2014explored the R\u00edo Paraguay and met up with Irala. Leaving him after a short time, Salazar and Gonzalo de Mendoza descended the river, stopping at a fine anchorage. They commenced building a fort on 15 August 1537, the date of the Feast of the Assumption, and called it Asunci\u00f3n (\"Nuestra Se\u00f1ora Santa Mar\u00eda de la Asunci\u00f3n\", in full, Our Lady Saint Mary of the Assumption).\nWithin 20 years, the new town had a population of about 1,500. Transcontinental shipments of silver passed through Asunci\u00f3n en route from Peru to Europe. Asunci\u00f3n became the center of a Spanish province that encompassed a large portion of central South America\u2014\"La Provincia Gigante de Indias\". Asunci\u00f3n also was the base for colonization of this part of South America. Spaniards moved northwestward across the Chaco to found Santa Cruz in present-day Bolivia; eastward to occupy the rest of present-day Paraguay; and southward along the river to re-found Buenos Aires, which its inhabitants had abandoned in 1541 to move to Asunci\u00f3n.\nYoung colony.\nUncertainties over the departure of Pedro de Mendoza led Charles V to promulgate a \"c\u00e9dula\" (decree) that was unique in colonial Latin America. The \"c\u00e9dula\" granted colonists the right to elect the governor of R\u00edo de la Plata Province either if Mendoza had failed to designate a successor or if a successor had died. Two years later, the colonists elected Irala as governor. His domain included all of present-day Paraguay, Argentina, Uruguay, most of Chile, as well as large parts of Brazil and Bolivia. In 1542 this province became part of the newly established Viceroyalty of Peru, with its seat in Lima. Beginning in 1559 the Real Audiencia of Charcas based in present-day Sucre controlled the province's legal affairs.\nIrala's rule set the pattern for Paraguay's internal affairs until Independence. In addition to the Spaniards, Asunci\u00f3n's population included immigrants, mostly men, from present-day France, Italy, Germany, England, and Portugal. This community of about 350 chose wives and concubines from Guaran\u00ed women. Paraguay soon became a colony of mestizos. Continued arrivals of Europeans resulted in development of a criollo elite.\nThe peace that had prevailed under Irala ended in 1542 when Charles V appointed Alvar N\u00fa\u00f1ez Cabeza de Vaca, one of the most renowned conquistadors of his age, as governor of the province. Cabeza de Vaca arrived in Asunci\u00f3n after having lived for eight years among the natives of Spanish Florida. Almost immediately the Rio de la Plata Province \u2013 now consisting of 800 Europeans \u2013 split into two warring factions. Cabeza de Vaca's enemies accused him of cronyism and opposed his efforts to protect the interests of native tribes. Cabeza de Vaca tried to placate his enemies by launching an expedition into the Chaco in search of a route to Peru. This antagonized Chaco tribes so much that they started a two-year war against the colony, which threatened its survival. In the colony's first of many revolts against the crown, the settlers seized Cabaza de Vaca, sent him back to Spain in fetters, and returned the governorship to Irala.\nA Guaran\u00ed woman from the early-colonial era, known as Juliana, is regarded as one of the most prominent female figures in the history of Paraguay. She is famous for killing her Spaniard master or husband between 1539 and 1542 and inciting other Indigenous women to do the same. Despite having confessed to the crime, Juliana was set free, although Cabeza de Vaca had her arrested and executed upon taking command of Asunci\u00f3n in 1542.\nIrala ruled without further interruption until his death in 1556. His governorship was one of the most humane in the Spanish New World at that time, and marked the transition among the settlers from conquerors to landowners. Irala maintained good relations with the Guaran\u00ed, pacified hostile tribes, explored the Chaco, and began trade relations with Peru. He encouraged beginnings of a textile industry and the introduction of cattle, which flourished in the country's fertile hills and meadows. Father Pedro Fern\u00e1ndez de la Torre arrived on 2 April 1556, as the first bishop of Asunci\u00f3n, marking the official establishment of the Roman Catholic Church in Paraguay. Irala presided over the construction of the cathedral, two churches, three convents, and two schools.\nIrala eventually antagonized the native peoples. In the last years of his life he yielded to pressure from settlers and established the \"encomienda\" system, under which Spanish settlers received estates of land along with the right to the labor and produce of natives living on this land. Although \"encomenderos\" were expected to care for the spiritual and material needs of natives, the system quickly degenerated into virtual slavery. 20,000 natives were divided among 320 \"encomenderos,\" which sparked a full-scale tribal revolt in 1560 and 1561.\nPolitical instability began troubling the colony and revolts became commonplace. Given his limited resources and manpower, Irala could do little to check the raids of Portuguese marauders along his eastern borders. Irala left Paraguay prosperous for the Europeans and relatively at peace.\nJesuit missions among the Guaran\u00ed.\nThe Guaran\u00ed people of eastern Paraguay and neighboring Brazil and Argentina were in crisis in the early 17th century. Recurrent epidemics of European diseases had reduced their population by up 50 percent and the forced labor of the encomiendas by the Spanish and mestizo colonists had made virtual slaves of many. Franciscan missionaries began establishing missions called reductions in the 1580s. The first Jesuits arrived in Asunci\u00f3n in 1588 and founded their first mission (or reduction) of San Ignacio Guaz\u00fa in 1609. The objectives of the Jesuits were to make Christians of the Guaran\u00ed, impose European values and customs, and isolate and protect the Guaran\u00ed from European colonists and slavers.\nIn addition to recurrent epidemics, the Guaran\u00ed were threatened by the slave-raiding Bandeirantes from Brazil, who captured natives and sold them as slaves to work in sugar plantations or as concubines and household servants. Having depleted native populations near S\u00e3o Paulo, they discovered the richly populated Jesuit missions. Initially, the missions had few defenses against the slavers and thousands of Guaran\u00ed were captured and enslaved. Beginning in 1631, the Jesuits moved their missions from the Guayr\u00e1 province (present day Brazil and Paraguay), about southwest to the three borders region of Paraguay, Argentina, and Brazil. About 10,000 of 30,000 Guaran\u00ed in the missions chose to accompany the Jesuits. In 1641 and 1642, armed by the Jesuits, Guaran\u00ed armies defeated the Bandeirantes and ended the worst of the slave trade in their region. From this point on the Jesuit missions enjoyed growth and prosperity, punctuated by epidemics. At the peak of their importance in 1732, the Jesuits presided over 141,000 Guaran\u00ed (including a sprinkling of other peoples) in about 30 missions.\nThe missions are much-romanticized. \"Proponents...highlight that the Jesuits protected the Indians from exploitation and preserved the Guaran\u00ed language and other aspects of indigenous culture.\" \"By means of religion,\" wrote the 18th century philosopher d'Alembert, \"the Jesuits established a monarchical authority in Paraguay, founded solely on their powers of persuasion and on their lenient methods of government. Masters of the country, they rendered happy the people under their sway.\" Voltaire called the Jesuit missions \"a triumph of humanity\". Detractors say that 'the Jesuits took away the Indians' freedom, forced them to radically change their lifestyle, physically abused them, and subjected them to disease.\" Moreover, the missions were inefficient and their economic success \"depended on subsidies from the Jesuit order, special protection and privileges from the Crown, and the lack of competition\" The Jesuits are portrayed as \"exploiters\" who \"sought to create a kingdom independent of the Spanish and Portuguese Crowns.\"\nThe Comunero Revolt (1721\u20131735) was a serious protest by Spanish and mestizo Paraguayans against the Jesuit missions. The residents of Paraguay violently protested the pro-Jesuit government of Paraguay, Jesuit control of Guaran\u00ed labor, and what they regarded as unfair competition for the market for products such as yerba mate. Although the revolt ultimately failed and the missions remained intact, the Jesuits were expelled from institutions they had created in Asunci\u00f3n. In 1756, the Guaran\u00ed protested the relocation of seven missions, losing a brief war with both the Spanish and Portuguese. The Jesuits were accused of inciting the Guaran\u00ed to rebel. In 1767, Charles III of Spain expelled the Jesuits from the Americas. The expulsion was part of an effort in the Bourbon Reforms to assert more Spanish control over its American colonies. In total, 78 Jesuits departed from the missions leaving behind 89,000 Guaran\u00ed in 30 missions. \nAccording to historian Sarreal, most Guaran\u00ed initially welcomed the expulsion of the Jesuits. Spanish authorities made promises to Guaran\u00ed leaders and gained their support. Within two years, however, the financial situation of the former missions was deteriorating and Guaran\u00ed began leaving the missions seeking both freedom and higher wages. A decree in 1800 freed the Guaran\u00ed still in the missions from their communal obligation to labor. By 1840, the former missions were in ruins. While some Guaran\u00ed were employed outside the missions, many families were impoverished. A growing number of mestizos occupied what had formerly been mission lands. in 1848, Paraguayan President Carlos Antonio L\u00f3pez declared that all Indians were citizens of Paraguay and distributed the last of the missions' communal lands. The ruins of Jesuit Missions of La Sant\u00edsima Trinidad de Paran\u00e1 and Jes\u00fas de Tavarangue have been designated World Heritage Sites by UNESCO.\nColonial decline.\nThe Comuneros revolt was symptomatic of the province's decline. Since the re-founding of Buenos Aires in 1580, the steady deterioration in the importance of Asunci\u00f3n contributed to growing political instability within the province. In 1617, the Governorate of the R\u00edo de la Plata was divided into two smaller provinces: Governorate of Paraguay, with Asunci\u00f3n as its capital, and R\u00edo de la Plata, with headquarters in Buenos Aires. With this decision, Asunci\u00f3n lost control of the R\u00edo de la Plata estuary and became dependent on Buenos Aires for maritime shipping. In 1776, the crown created the Viceroyalty of R\u00edo de la Plata; Paraguay, which had been subordinate to Lima, now became a provincial outpost of Buenos Aires. Located at the periphery of the empire, Paraguay served as a buffer state. The Portuguese blocked Paraguayan territorial expansion in the north, native tribes blocked it \u2013 until their expulsion \u2013 in the south, and the Jesuits blocked it in the east.\nThe Viceroyalty of Peru and the Real Audiencia of Charcas had nominal authority over Paraguay, while Madrid largely neglected the colony. Madrid preferred to avoid the effort and expense of governing and defending a remote colony that had proved to have little value. The governors of Paraguay had no royal troops at their disposal and were instead dependent on a colonist militia . Paraguayans were forced into the colonial militia to serve extended tours of duty, contributing to a severe labor shortage. Paraguayans claimed that the 1537 \"c\u00e9dula\" gave them the right to choose and depose their governors. The colony, and in particular the Asunci\u00f3n municipal council (\"cabildo\"), earned a reputation for being in continual revolt against the Crown.\nAs a result of its distance from the rest of the empire, Paraguay had little control over important decisions that affected its economy. Spain appropriated much of Paraguay's wealth through burdensome taxes and regulations. Yerba mat\u00e9, for instance, was practically priced out of the regional market. At the same time, Spain was using most of its wealth from the New World to import manufactured goods from the more industrialized countries of Europe, notably Britain. Spanish merchants borrowed from British merchants to finance their purchases; merchants in Buenos Aires borrowed from Spain; those in Asunci\u00f3n borrowed from the \"porte\u00f1os\" (residents of Buenos Aires), and Paraguayan \"peones\" (landless peasants in debt to landlords) bought goods on credit. The result was dire poverty in Paraguay and an increasingly impoverished empire.\nIndependence of 1811.\nThe French Revolution, the rise of Napoleon Bonaparte, and the subsequent wars in Europe weakened Spain's ability to maintain contact with and defend and control its colonies. British invasions of the River Plate of 1806\u20137 were repulsed by the local colonial troops and volunteer militias without help from Spain.\nAmong the many causes of the May Revolution were Napoleon's invasion of Spain in 1808, the capture of the Spanish king, Ferdinand VII, and Napoleon's attempt to put his brother Joseph Bonaparte on the Spanish throne, which severed the major remaining links between the metropolis and the colonies as Joseph had no supporters in Spanish America. Without a king, the entire colonial system lost its legitimacy, and colonies revolted. The Buenos Aires open cabildo deposed the Spanish viceroy on 25 May 1810, vowing to rule in the name of Ferdinand VII. The May Revolution led to the creation of the United Provinces of the R\u00edo de la Plata which wanted to bring the province of Paraguay under its control. This \"porte\u00f1o\" action had unforeseen consequences for the histories of Argentina and Paraguay. News of the revolutionary events in Buenos Aires stunned royalist citizens of Asunci\u00f3n. Discontent with the Spanish monarchy was put aside because of the much bigger rivalry with the city of Buenos Aires.\nThe \"porte\u00f1os\" bungled their effort to extend control over Paraguay by choosing Jos\u00e9 Esp\u00ednola y Pe\u00f1a as their spokesman in Asunci\u00f3n. Esp\u00ednola was \"perhaps the most hated Paraguayan of his era\", in the words of historian John Hoyt Williams. Esp\u00ednola's reception in Asunci\u00f3n was less than cordial, partly because he was closely linked to the ex-governor L\u00e1zaro de Rivera, who had arbitrarily executed hundreds of citizens until he was forced from office in 1805. Barely escaping arrest in Paraguay, Esp\u00ednola fled back to Buenos Aires and lied about the extent of \"porte\u00f1o\" popularity in Paraguay, causing the Buenos Aires Primera Junta to make a disastrous decision to launch the Paraguay campaign and send 1,100 troops under General Manuel Belgrano to subdue Asunci\u00f3n. Led by royalists, Paraguayan troops reinforced by local militias soundly thrashed the \"porte\u00f1os\" at Battle of Paraguar\u00ed and Battle of Tacuar\u00ed. Officers from both sides openly fraternized during the campaign and from these contacts Paraguayans learned that Spanish dominance in South America was ending, and that they now held the real power.\nThe actions of the last Spanish governor Bernardo de Velasco only further agitated local politicians and military officers. Believing that Paraguayan officers posed a threat to his rule, Governor Velasco dispersed and disarmed local forces and sent most of the soldiers home without paying them for their eight months of service. Velasco previously had lost face when, believing that Belgrano had won at Paraguar\u00ed, he fled the battlefield and caused a panic in Asunci\u00f3n. The last straw were Velasco's negotiations with Brazilian Portuguese during which he asked for military and financial help. This move ignited a military uprising in Asunci\u00f3n on 14 May 1811 and formation of a power-sharing junta. On 17 May a public proclamation informed people that a ruling junta, consisting of Governor Velasco, Gaspar Rodriguez de Francia and Army captain Juan Valeriano de Zeballos, had been created.\nEra of dictatorships (1814\u20131870).\nAfter the first revolutionary years, Congress in 1814 elected Jos\u00e9 Gaspar Rodr\u00edguez de Francia to be the \"Supreme and Perpetual Dictator\" (\"El Supremo\") of Paraguay. Under the dictatorships of Francia (1814\u20131840), Carlos Antonio L\u00f3pez (1841\u20131862), and Francisco Solano L\u00f3pez (1862\u20131870), Paraguay developed quite differently from other South American countries. The regimes encouraged self-sufficient economic development, state ownership of most industries, and imposed a high level of isolation from neighboring countries. The regime of the L\u00f3pez family was characterized by a harsh centralism in the production and distribution of goods. There was no distinction between the public and the private sphere, and the L\u00f3pez family ruled the country as it would a large estate.\nFrancia, 1814\u201340.\nUpon its independence, Paraguay was underdeveloped in comparison with its neighbors. Most residents of Asunci\u00f3n and virtually all rural inhabitants were illiterate. University education was limited to the few who could afford studies at the National University of C\u00f3rdoba, in present-day Argentina. Very few people had any experience in government, finance, or diplomacy. The country was surrounded by hostile neighbors, from the indigenous tribes in the Chaco to the Argentine Confederation and the Empire of Brazil. Strong measures were needed to save the country from disintegration. Jos\u00e9 Gaspar Rodr\u00edguez de Francia served from 1811 until his death in 1840 and built a strong, prosperous, secure nation. Francia was popular with the lower classes of \"criollos\" and indigenous peoples. Despite his popularity, Francia's dictatorship trampled on human rights and imposed a police state based on espionage, threats and use of force. Under Francia, Paraguay underwent a social upheaval that overthrew the colonial elites.\nAfter the uprising of 14\u201315 May 1811 which brought independence, Francia became a member of the ruling junta. Although the military had the real power, Francia attracted support from the nation's farmers. Francia built his power base on his organizational abilities and his forceful personality. By outwitting \"porte\u00f1o\" diplomats in the negotiations that produced the treaty of 11 October 1811 (in which Argentina implicitly recognized Paraguayan independence in return for vague promises of a military alliance), Francia demonstrated that he possessed skills crucial to the future of the country.\nFrancia consolidated his power by convincing Paraguayans that he was indispensable. By the end of 1811, dissatisfied with the political role that military officers were playing, he resigned from the junta. He told Paraguayans that their revolution had been betrayed, that the change in government had only traded a Spanish-born elite for a criollo one, and that the junta was incompetent. The Brazilians were threatening to overrun the northern frontiers, and after realizing that Paraguay would not fulfill the 11 October treaty and join their federation, the United Provinces of the R\u00edo de la Plata started a trade war by closing R\u00edo de la Plata to Paraguayan commerce, levying taxes and seizing ships.\nWhen the Paraguayan junta learned that a \"porte\u00f1o\" diplomat was coming to Asunci\u00f3n, they realized that they were not competent to negotiate. In November 1812, junta members invited Francia to take charge of foreign policy. The junta agreed to place half of the army and half of the available munitions under Francia's command. Francia now controlled the government. When the Argentine envoy \u2014 Nicol\u00e1s de Herrera \u2014 arrived in May 1813, he was told that all important decisions had to wait for the meeting of a Paraguayan Congress in late September.\nThe Second National Congress was held from 30 September until 12 October 1813. It was attended by 1100 delegates, chosen by universal male suffrage and presided over by Pedro Juan Caballero. The congress rejected a proposal for Paraguayan participation at a constitutional congress at Buenos Aires and approved the new constitution on 12 October 1813, when the Paraguayan Republic (the first in South America) was officially proclaimed. It also created a two-man executive body with two consuls \u2013 Fulgencio Yegros and Francia. The Third National Congress was held on 3\u20134 October 1814 and replaced the two-man consulate with a one-man dictatorship, to which Franzia was elected.\nEl Supremo Dictador.\nFrancia detested the political culture of the old regime and considered himself a revolutionary. He admired and emulated the most radical elements of the French Revolution. Although some commentators have compared him to the Jacobin Maximilien de Robespierre (1758\u20131794), Francia's policies and ideas perhaps were closest to those of Fran\u00e7ois-No\u00ebl Babeuf, the French utopian who wanted to abolish private property and to communalize land as a prelude to founding a \"republic of equals\". The government of \"Cara\u00ed Guaz\u00fa\" (\"Great Se\u00f1or\", as the poor Guaran\u00eds called Francia) was a dictatorship that destroyed the power of the colonial \u00e9lite and advanced the interests of common Paraguayans. In contrast to other states in the region, Paraguay was efficiently and honestly administered, stable, and secure (by 1827 army grew to 5000 men with 20 000 in reserve). The justice system treated criminals leniently. Murderers, for example, were put to work on public projects. Asylum to political refugees from other countries was granted, as in the notable case of Uruguayan patriot Jos\u00e9 Gervasio Artigas.\nAt the same time, a system of internal espionage destroyed free speech. People were arrested without charge and disappeared without trial. Torture in the so-called \"Chamber of Truth\" was applied to those suspected of plotting to overthrow Francia. He sent political prisoners, numbering approximately 400 in any given year, to a detention camp where they were shackled in dungeons and denied medical care and even the use of sanitary facilities.\nIn 1820, four years after the Congress had named Francia dictator for life with the title \"Supremo Dictator Perpetuo de la Republica del Paraguay\" (Supreme Dictator in Perpetuity), Francia's security system uncovered and quickly crushed a plot by the \u00e9lite to assassinate El Supremo. Francia arrested almost 200 prominent Paraguayans among whom were all the leading figures of the 1811 independence movement, and executed most of them. In 1821 Francia struck against the Spanish-born elite, summoning all of Paraguay's 300 or so \"peninsulares\" to Asunci\u00f3n's main square, where he accused them of treason, had them arrested, and held them in jail for 18 months. They were released only after agreeing to pay an enormous collective indemnity of 150,000 pesos (about 75 percent of the annual state budget), an amount so large that it broke their predominance in the Paraguayan economy.\nIn order to destroy the colonial racial hierarchy which had discriminated against him because of his mixed blood, Francia forbade Europeans from marrying other Europeans, thus forcing the \u00e9lite to choose spouses from the local population. He sealed Paraguay's borders to the outside world and executed anyone who attempted to leave. Foreigners who managed to enter Paraguay had to remain there in virtual arrest for years. Both of these decisions actually helped to solidify the Paraguayan identity. There no longer were separate racial identities; all inhabitants had to live within the borders of Paraguay and build a new society which has created the modern Paraguayan society in which Hispanic and Guaran\u00ed roots were equally strong.\nParaguayan international trade stopped almost completely. The decline ruined exporters of yerba mat\u00e9 and tobacco. These measures fell most harshly on the members of the former ruling class of Spanish or Spanish-descended church officials, military officers, merchants, and \"hacendados\" (large landowners). The state soon developed native industries in shipbuilding and textiles, a centrally planned and administered agricultural sector, which was more diversified and productive than the prior export monoculture, and other manufacturing capabilities. These developments supported Francia's policy of economic self-sufficiency.\nTargeting the Church.\nOne of Francia's special targets was the Roman Catholic Church, which had provided an essential support to Spanish rule by spreading the doctrine of the \"divine right of kings\" and inculcating the native masses with a resigned fatalism about their social status and economic prospects. In 1824 Francia banned all religious orders, closed the only seminary, \"secularized\" monks and priests by forcing them to swear loyalty to the state, abolished the \"fuero eclesi\u00e1stico\" (the privilege of clerical immunity from civil courts), confiscated Church property, and subordinated its finances to state control.\nThe common people benefited from the suppression of the traditional elites and from the expansion of the state. Francia took land from the elite and the church and leased it to the poor. About 875 families received homesteads from the lands of the former seminary. The various fines and confiscations levied on the elites helped to reduce taxes for everyone else. As a result, Francia's attacks on the elite and his state-socialist policies provoked little popular resistance. The state quickly became the nation's largest landowner, eventually operating forty-five animal-breeding farms. Run by army personnel, these farms were so successful that surplus animals were given away to the peasants.\nLegacy.\nFrancia left the state treasury with at least twice as much money in it as when he took office, including 36,500 pesos of his unspent salary, the equivalent of several years' salary. His greatest accomplishment \u2014 the preservation of Paraguayan independence \u2014 was a result of his non-interventionist foreign policy. Regarding Argentina as a potential threat to Paraguay, he shifted his foreign policy toward Brazil by quickly recognizing Brazilian independence in 1822. This move, however, resulted in no special favors for the Brazilians from Francia, who was also on good, if limited, terms with Juan Manuel Rosas, the Argentine governor. Francia prevented civil war and secured his role as dictator when he severed the ties between his internal enemies and their friends in Buenos Aires. Despite his isolationist policies, Francia conducted significant trade with both Brazil and Argentina to obtain key foreign goods, particularly armaments. Paraguay\u2019s political and economic progress during the years of the \"Franciata\" took place because of complete submission to Francia's will. \"El Supremo\" personally controlled every aspect of Paraguayan public life. No decision at the state level, no matter how small, could be made without his approval.\nCarlos Antonio L\u00f3pez, 1841\u201362.\nConfusion ensued after Francia's death on 20 September 1840, because he had left no successor. After a few days, a junta led by Manuel Antonio Ortiz emerged. The junta freed some political prisoners and arrested Francia's secretary Polycarpo Pati\u00f1o, but soon proved ineffectual at governing. On 22 January 1841, Ortiz was overthrown by Juan Jos\u00e9 Medina who in turn was overthrown on 9 February in a coup led by Mariano Roque Alonso.\nOn 14 March 1841, the Fifth National Congress re-established the two-man consulate of the early independence era, appointing Alonso and Carlos Antonio L\u00f3pez as joint consuls for a three-year term. This Second Consulate lasted until 13 March 1844, when Congress named L\u00f3pez the president of the Republic \u2014 a post he held until his death in 1862.\nWhile maintaining a strong political and economic grip on the country, L\u00f3pez worked towards strengthening Paraguay's independence. L\u00f3pez's government was similar to Francia's, but his appearance, style, and policies were different. Francia had pictured himself as the first citizen of a revolutionary state, whereas L\u00f3pez was a despot who treated Paraguay like a personal fiefdom, using the state to enrich himself and his family. L\u00f3pez soon became the largest landowner and cattle rancher in the country, amassing a fortune, which he augmented with profits from the state's monopoly on the yerba mat\u00e9 trade.\nDespite his greed, Paraguay prospered under \"El Excelent\u00edsimo\" (the Most Excellent One), as L\u00f3pez was known: the population increased from about 220,000 in 1840 to about 400,000 in 1860. During his time in office, L\u00f3pez strengthened national defense, abolished the remnants of the \"reducciones\", stimulated economic development, and improved relations with foreign countries. He also tried to reduce the threat from the indigenous tribes in the Chaco.\nWhen L\u00f3pez took office, Asunci\u00f3n had only one primary school. During L\u00f3pez's reign, more than 400 schools were built for 25,000 primary students, and the state re-instituted secondary education. L\u00f3pez's educational development plans progressed with difficulty, because Francia had purged the country of the educated elite, which included teachers. L\u00f3pez loosened restrictions on foreign relations, boosted exports, invited foreign physicians, engineers, and investors to settle in Paraguay, and paid for students to study abroad. In 1853 he sent his son Francisco Solano to Europe to buy guns. L\u00f3pez was worried about the possibility of a war with Brazil or Argentina, so he built an army of 18,000 soldiers with a reserve of 46,000, at that time the largest army in South America.\n\"As British and other foreign technicians poured into the country, they were set to work almost entirely on the creation of a military\u2013industrial complex, and the greatest project of the era was a huge, sprawling fortress of Humait\u00e1, the 'Sevastopol of the Americas'.\" Several highways and a telegraph linking Asunci\u00f3n with Humait\u00e1 were built. A British firm began building a railroad from Asunci\u00f3n to Paraguar\u00ed, one of South America's first, in 1858. On 22 September 1861, the railway station was opened in Asunci\u00f3n. Foreign experts helped build an iron factory at Ybycu\u00ed and a large armory.\nSlavery.\nSlavery had existed in Paraguay since the early colonial days. Settlers had brought slaves to work as domestic servants, but they were generally lenient about their bondage. Conditions worsened after 1700, however, with the importation of about 50,000 African slaves to be used as agricultural workers. Under Francia, the state acquired about 1,000 slaves when it confiscated property from the elite. L\u00f3pez enacted a freedom of wombs law in 1842, which ended the slave trade and guaranteed that the children of slaves would be free at age twenty-five. The new law served only to increase the slave population and depress slave prices as the slave birth rates soared.\nForeign relations.\nDespite being \"de facto\" independent since 1811 and having proclaimed a Republic in 1813, Paraguay formally declared independence only on 25 November 1842 and in 1844 adopted a new constitution that replaced the Constitution of 1813. Based on this, Paraguay started to gain official international recognition.\nForeign relations began to increase in importance under L\u00f3pez, who retained Paraguay's traditional mistrust of the surrounding states, yet lacked Francia's diplomatic skills. Initially, L\u00f3pez feared an attack by the Buenos Aires dictator Juan Manuel de Rosas. With Brazilian encouragement, L\u00f3pez dropped Francia's policy of neutrality and began meddling in Argentine politics. Using the slogan \"Independence or Death\", L\u00f3pez declared war against Rosas in 1845 to support what was ultimately an unsuccessful rebellion in the Argentine province of Corrientes. Although Britain and France prevented him from moving against Paraguay, Rosas established a trade embargo on Paraguayan goods.\nAfter Rosas was ousted in 1852, L\u00f3pez signed a treaty with Buenos Aires that recognized Paraguay's independence, although the Argentine Confederation never ratified it. In the same year, L\u00f3pez signed treaties of friendship, commerce, and navigation with France and the United States. On 1 October 1853, the US warship arrived on a visit in Asunci\u00f3n.\nDespite these treaties, growing tensions with several countries characterized the second half of L\u00f3pez's rule. In 1858 the United States sent a flotilla to Paraguayan waters in a successful action to claim compensation for an American sailor who had been killed three years earlier when USS \"Water Witch\" had entered Paraguayan waters despite prohibition from L\u00f3pez.\nL\u00f3pez had recklessly dropped his policy of neutrality without determining where his allegiances lay. He allowed controversies and boundary disputes with Brazil and Argentina to smolder. The two regional giants had tolerated Paraguayan independence, partly because Paraguay served to check the expansionist tendencies of both opponents. Both were satisfied if the other could not dominate Paraguayan affairs, while a Paraguay that was antagonistic to both Brazil and Argentina would give these countries a reason for uniting.\nFrancisco Solano L\u00f3pez, 1862\u201370.\nFrancisco Solano L\u00f3pez became the second and final ruler of the L\u00f3pez dynasty. After his father's death on 10 September 1862, the Paraguayan Congress elected him president on 16 October 1862. Solano L\u00f3pez consolidated his power by imprisoning his critics.\nThe export of yerba mate and wood products maintained the balance of trade between Paraguay and the outside world. The Paraguayan government was protectionist, never accepting loans from abroad, and employed high tariffs against the importation of foreign products. This protectionism made the nation self-sufficient, while avoiding the debt incurred by Argentina and Brazil.\nSolano L\u00f3pez had as a lover an Irish woman, Eliza Lynch. \"La Lynch\", as she became known in Paraguay, was a strong-willed, charming, witty, intelligent woman who became a person of enormous influence. Lynch bore Solano L\u00f3pez five sons and one daughter, although the two never married.\nSolano L\u00f3pez is a controversial historical figure. George Thompson, an English engineer who worked for the younger L\u00f3pez, called him \"a monster without parallel\". Solano L\u00f3pez's conduct laid him open to such charges: his miscalculations and ambitions plunged Paraguay into a war with Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay. The war resulted in the loss of roughly half of Paraguay's population and almost erased the country from the map. During the war, Solano L\u00f3pez ordered the executions of his own brothers and had his mother and sisters tortured when he suspected them of opposing him. Thousands of others, including Paraguay's bravest soldiers and generals, also went to their deaths before firing squads or were hacked to pieces on Solano L\u00f3pez's orders. Others saw Solano L\u00f3pez as a paranoid megalomaniac, a man who wanted to be the \"Napoleon of South America\".\nHowever, others portray Solano L\u00f3pez as a patriot who resisted Argentine and Brazilian designs on Paraguay. They view him as a tragic figure caught in a web of Argentine and Brazilian duplicity who mobilized the nation to repel its enemies, holding them off for five years until Paraguay was finally overrun and prostrate. Paraguayans today regard Solano L\u00f3pez as the nation's foremost hero.\nParaguayan War.\nSolano L\u00f3pez assessed the 1864 Brazilian intervention in Uruguay as a threat not only to Uruguay but also to Paraguay. Believing that preserving Uruguayan independence was crucial to Paraguay's future as a nation, he committed Paraguay to the aid of Uruguay.\nDespite L\u00f3pez\u2019 warning against intervening in Uruguay's internal conflict, Brazil invaded Uruguay in October 1864. On 12 November 1864, L\u00f3pez ordered the seizure of a Brazilian warship in Paraguayan territorial waters. He followed this in March 1865 with an invasion of the Mato Grosso province of Brazil.\nWhen Argentina refused Solano L\u00f3pez's request for permission for his army to cross Argentine territory to attack the Brazilian province of Rio Grande do Sul, Solano L\u00f3pez had himself declared a Field marshal and declared war against Argentina. This set the stage for the May 1865 signing by Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay of the Treaty of the Triple Alliance. Under the treaty, these nations vowed to destroy Solano L\u00f3pez's government.\nParaguay was not prepared for such a war. Its army lacked leadership and adequate reserves. Importantly, it lacked the industrial base to replace weapons lost in battle, and the Argentine-Brazilian alliance prevented Solano L\u00f3pez from receiving arms from abroad. Paraguay's population of about 450,000 was dwarfed by the allied population of 11 million. Even after conscripting every able-bodied male and forcing women to perform all nonmilitary labor, Solano L\u00f3pez was unable to field an army as large as those of his adversaries.\nApart from some victories on the northern front, the war was a disaster for Paraguay. Paraguayan army units arrived in the Argentine province of Corrientes in April 1865. By July, more than half of Paraguay's 30,000-man invasion force had been killed or captured. By 1867, Paraguay had lost 60,000 men to casualties, disease, or capture, and another 60,000 people \u2013 slaves and children \u2013 were called to duty.\nIn February 1868 two Brazilian warships sailed up the Paraguay River. On 24 February they entered the port of Asunci\u00f3n, shelled the city and left, without attempting to capture it. During this time L\u00f3pez was not in Asunci\u00f3n and perceived the defensive actions that were taken by his government, including his vice-president and brothers, as a conspiracy against his rule. In his base at San Fernando, L\u00f3pez organized a wave of torture and executions against the supposed conspirators. Many victims were stabbed to death in order to save ammunition, their bodies dumped in mass graves. Solano L\u00f3pez's hostility even extended to Charles Ames Washburn, the United States Ambassador to Paraguay. Only the timely arrival of the United States gunboat \"Wasp\" saved him from arrest.\nBy the end of 1868, the Paraguayan army had shrunk to a few thousand soldiers, many of them children and women. Cavalry units operated on foot for lack of horses. Infantry battalions armed only with machetes attacked Brazilian ironclad warships. \"Conquer or die\" became the order of the day. On 30 December, the Paraguayan Army was defeated at the Battle of Angostura and the Allies entered Asunci\u00f3n. Solano L\u00f3pez held out in the northern jungles for another fourteen months, while the Paraguayan population endured another massacre under Solano L\u00f3pez's orders, as well as more humiliating losses on the battlefield (e.g., the Battle of Piribebuy and the Battle of Acosta \u00d1u).\nSolano L\u00f3pez's death on 1 March 1870 at the Battle of Cerro Cor\u00e1 marked the end of the Paraguayan War. 1870 marked the lowest point in Paraguayan history. Hundreds of thousands of Paraguayans had died. Paraguay endured a lengthy occupation by foreign troops and ceded large patches of territory to Brazil and Argentina.\nUnder occupation, 1870\u201376.\nThe allied occupation of Asunci\u00f3n in 1869 put the victors in direct control of Paraguayan affairs. While Bolivia and Argentina pressed their claims to the Gran Chaco, Argentina (with the Macha\u00edn-Irigoyen Treaty) and Brazil (with the Loizaga \u2013 Cotegipe Treaty) swallowed 154,000 square kilometers of Paraguayan territory.\nBrazil had borne the brunt of the fighting, with perhaps 150,000 dead and 65,000 wounded. It had spent US$200\u00a0million, and its troops formed the largest army of occupation in the country; as a result Brazil temporarily overshadowed Argentina in control of the country. Sharp disagreements between the two powers prolonged the Allied occupation until 1876.\nRuined by war, pestilence, famine, and unpaid foreign indemnities, Paraguay was on the verge of disintegration in 1870. Its fertile soil and the country's overall backwardness helped it survive. Paraguay's mostly rural populace continued to subsist as it had done for centuries, eking out a meager existence under difficult conditions.\nDuring the Presidency of Juan Bautista Gill (1874\u201377), after the Macha\u00edn-Irigoyen Treaty was signed, the occupying Brazilian troops finally left the country in May 1876.\nLegionnaires.\nThe post-war political vacuum was initially dominated by survivors of the anti-L\u00f3pez Paraguayan Legion. This group of exiles, based in Buenos Aires, had regarded Solano L\u00f3pez as a mad tyrant and fought on the Allied side during the war. This group signed the 1870 peace accords, which guaranteed Paraguay's independence and free river navigation. Believing that more freedom would cure Paraguay's ills, they abolished slavery and founded a constitutional government as soon as they came to power. They based the new government on the standard classical liberal prescriptions of free enterprise, free elections, and free trade.\nThe Legionnaires, however, had no more experience in the principles of republics than other Paraguayans. The 1870 constitution quickly became irrelevant. Politics degenerated into factionalism, and cronyism and intrigue prevailed. Presidents still acted like dictators, elections did not stay free, and the Legionnaires were out of power in less than a decade.\nFree elections were a startling, and not altogether welcome, innovation for ordinary Paraguayans, who had always allied themselves with a \"patr\u00f3n\" (benefactor) for security and protection. At the same time, Argentina and Brazil were not content to leave Paraguay with a truly free political system. Pro-Argentine militia chief Benigno Ferreira for a short time emerged as \"de facto\" dictator until his overthrow by Bernardino Caballero with Brazilian help in 1874. Ferreira later returned to lead the 1904 Liberal uprising, which ousted the Colorados. Ferreira then served as president between 1906 and 1908.\nProvisional government, 1869\u201370.\nWith Solano L\u00f3pez on the run, the country lacked a government. Pedro II sent his foreign minister Jos\u00e9 Paranhos to Asunci\u00f3n where he arrived on 20 February 1869, and began consultations with the local politicians. On 31 March a petition was signed by 335 leading citizens asking the Allies for a provisional government. This was followed by negotiations between the Allied countries who put aside some of more controversial points of the Treaty of the Triple Alliance and on 11 June an agreement was reached with Paraguayan opposition figures that a three-man provisional government would be established. On 22 July a National Assembly met in the National Theatre and elected a \"Junta Nacional\" of 21 men, which then selected a five-man committee to select three men for the provisional government. They selected Carlos Loizaga, Juan Francisco Decoud, and Jos\u00e9 D\u00edaz de Bedoya. Decoud was unacceptable to Paranhos, who had him replaced with Cirilo Antonio Rivarola. The government was finally installed on 15 August, but was just a front for the continued Allied occupation.\nThe provisional government consisted of:\nAfter the death of L\u00f3pez, the provisional government issued a proclamation on 6 March 1870, in which it promised to support political liberties, to protect commerce and to promote immigration, but the Provisional government did not last. In May 1870 Jos\u00e9 D\u00edaz de Bedoya resigned and on 31 August 1870, Carlos Loizaga also resigned. The remaining member Antonio Rivarola was then relieved of his duties by the National Assembly which established a provisional Presidency to which Facundo Macha\u00edn was elected. He assumed the post on 31 August 1870, but was overthrown the next day in a coup which restored Rivarola to power.\nPost-war political conflicts.\nThe politics of the first post-war decade were heavily influenced by deeply personal conflicts between L\u00f3pez loyalists and their more liberal opponents, but just as important was the backing of various politicians by Argentina and Brazil. In the end the Brazilian-supported politicians won, and established the rule of the Colorado party.\nAfter Cirilo Antonio Rivarola resigned from the presidency in December 1871, Salvador Jovellanos came to power, backed by General Benigno Ferreira. Jovellanos was an accidental president, and after facing repeated revolts form L\u00f3pez loyalists in 1873 and 1874, first Ferreira and then Jovellanos fled into exile. General Bernardino Caballero was the power behind the throne during terms of President Juan Bautista Gill, who was assassinated in 1877, and his political mentor, President C\u00e1ndido Bareiro, who died from a stroke in 1880. At this point Caballero assumed the presidency and laid the foundations of the two-party system, remaining one of the most influential politicians until the 1904 Liberal revolution.\nLiberals versus Colorados.\nThe era of party politics in Paraguay was free to begin in earnest. Nonetheless, the evacuation of foreign forces did not mean the end of foreign influence. Both Brazil and Argentina remained deeply involved in Paraguay as a result of their connections with Paraguay's rival political forces. The political rivalry between future Liberals and Colorados started already in 1869 before the war was over, when the terms \"Azules\" (Blues) and \"Colorados\" (Reds) first appeared.\nFactions.\nThe remaining L\u00f3pez loyalists gathered around C\u00e1ndido Bareiro who, on 31 March 1869, founded the \"Republican Union Club\" which in early 1870 became the \"Club del Pueblo\" and after 17 February 1878, \"Club Libertad\" and who published their newspaper \"La Voz del Pueblo\". The Bareiro faction was also known as \"lopiztas\" because of their loyalty to the memory of President L\u00f3pez and it was opposed to the Decoud faction who had established their rival \"Club del Pueblo\" (after 23 March 1870, the \"Gran Club del Pueblo\").\nOn 26 June 1869, the Decoud faction, centered around young liberals Facundo Macha\u00edn, Jos\u00e9 Segundo Decoud and the latter's father Juan Francisco, established their \"Club del Pueblo\", and on 1 October 1869, they started publishing the newspaper \"La Regeneraci\u00f3n\". Their rivals, L\u00f3pez loyalists, established \"Club Uni\u00f3n\" with Cayo Miltos as president. So the two currents that eventually led to the Liberal and Colorado Parties began.\nIn the decade following the war, the principal political conflicts within Paraguay reflected the Liberal-Colorado split, with Legionnaires battling Lopiztas (ex-followers of Solano L\u00f3pez) for power, while Brazil and Argentina maneuvered in the background. The Legionnaires saw the Lopiztas as reactionaries. The Lopiztas accused the Legionnaires of being traitors and foreign puppets. Many people constantly changed political sides. Political and financial opportunism characterized this era, not ideological purity.\nThe Liberal and Colorado Parties were officially established in 1887. Both parties had former L\u00f3pez supporters and Paraguayan Legion veterans in their ranks. The Liberal party came to be divided among \"civicos\" (civics) and \"radicales\" (radicals) factions, while Colorados were split among \"caballeristas\" (supporters of president Bernardino Caballero) and \"egusquicistas\" (supporters of president Juan Bautista Egusquiza).\nThe National Republican Association-Colorado Party (Asociaci\u00f3n Nacional Republicana-Partido Colorado) dominated Paraguayan political life from the mid-1870s (despite still not existing formally then) until 1904, when Liberals overthrew it. The following ascent of Liberal Party marked the decline of Brazilian influence, which had supported the Colorados as the principal political force in Paraguay, and the rise of Argentine influence.\nFirst Colorado era.\nC\u00e1ndido Bareiro, L\u00f3pez's former commercial agent in Europe, returned to Paraguay in 1869 and around him grew a group of L\u00f3pez loyalists, including Bernardino Caballero and Patricio Escobar but also L\u00f3pez opponents, including Juan Bautista Gill, who eventually was elected to the presidency. After President Juan Bautista Gill was assassinated in 1877, Caballero used his power as army commander to guarantee Bareiro's election as president in 1878. When Bareiro died from a stroke in 1880, Caballero seized power in a bloodless coup and dominated Paraguayan politics for most of the next two decades. His accession to power is notable because he brought political stability, founded the Colorado Party in 1887 to regulate the choice of Presidents and the distribution of spoils, and began a process of economic reconstruction.\nIn 1878, the international commission led by US president Rutherford B. Hayes awarded Paraguay the disputed Chaco area between the R\u00edo Verde and R\u00edo Pilcomayo. In his honor the Presidente Hayes Department was created.\nGovernments led by two former L\u00f3pez-era officers Bernardino Caballero (1880\u201386) and Patricio Escobar (1886\u201390) started a more earnest national reconstruction. A general political amnesty was proclaimed and opposition allowed in Parliament. National University was founded in 1889. A census in 1886\u201387 showed a population of 329,645. To improve this, foreign immigration was encouraged.\nThe Colorados dismantled Francia's unique system of state socialism. Desperate for cash because of heavy debts incurred in London in the early postwar period, the Colorados lacked a source of funds except through the sale of the state's vast holdings, which comprised more than 95% of Paraguay's total land. Caballero's government sold much of this land to foreigners in huge lots. While Colorado politicians raked in the profits and themselves became large landowners, peasant squatters who had farmed the land for generations were forced to vacate and, in many cases, to emigrate. By 1900, seventy-nine people owned half of the country's land.\nAlthough the Liberals had advocated the same land-sale policy, the unpopularity of the sales and evidence of pervasive government corruption produced a tremendous outcry from the opposition. Liberals became bitter foes of selling land, especially after the 1887 elections, which were marked by State-sponsored violence against the opposition. Ex-Legionnaires, idealistic reformers, and former Lopiztas joined in July 1887, shortly after these elections, to form the \"Centro Democr\u00e1tico\" (Democratic Center), a precursor of the Liberal party, demanding free elections, an end to land sales, civilian control over the military, and clean government. Caballero responded, along with his principal adviser, Jos\u00e9 Segundo Decoud, and Escobar, by forming the Colorado Party one month later, thus formalizing the two party system. Both parties had internal divisions and very little ideology separated them, allowing Colorado and Liberal members to change sides whenever it proved advantageous. While the Colorados reinforced their monopoly on power and spoils, Liberals called for reform.\nElectoral violence provoked an aborted Liberal revolt in 1891; then Lieutenant Colonel Juan Bautista Egusquiza, who commanded the capital's troops and was responsible for fighting off the revolt, gained massive political capital and, in 1894, overthrew Caballero's chosen president, Juan Gualberto Gonz\u00e1lez. Egusquiza startled Colorado stalwarts by sharing power with the Liberals, a move that split both parties. Ex-Legionnaire Ferreira along with the \"c\u00edvico\" (civic) wing of the Liberals joined the government of Egusquiza, who left office in 1898 to allow a civilian, Emilio Aceval, to become president. Liberal \"radicales\" (radicals) who opposed compromising with their Colorado enemies boycotted the new arrangement. Caballero, also boycotting the alliance, plotted to overthrow civilian rule and succeeded when Colonel Juan Antonio Escurra seized power in 1902. This victory was Caballero's last, however. In 1904 the old nemesis of Caballero, General Benigno Ferreira, with the support of \"c\u00edvicos\", \"radicales\", and \"egusquistas\", invaded from Argentina. After four months of fighting, Escurra signed the Pact of Pilcomayo aboard an Argentine gunboat on 12 December 1904, and handed power to the Liberals.\nLiberal era, 1904\u201336.\nThe Liberal Revolution of August 1904 began as a popular movement, but Liberal rule quickly degenerated into factional feuding, military coups, and civil wars. Political instability was extreme in the Liberal era, which saw twenty-one governments in thirty-six years. During the period 1904 to 1922, Paraguay had fifteen presidents.\nRevolution of 1904.\nThe 1904 Revolution was organized in Buenos Aires by Paraguayan exiles led by Manuel J. Duarte who was serving in the Argentine navy. The Rebels used the Paraguayan merchant ship \"Sajonia\", whose captain was a Liberal supporter. On 4 August 1904 the rebels took control of the ship in the port of Buenos Aires. The ship later was boarded by Liberal soldiers who brought thousands of rifles, machine guns and small artillery guns on board.\nAfter learning about this ship, President Juan Antonio Escurra declared a state of siege on 8 August. The Paraguayan army at that time had some 1500 personnel and no real navy, so another merchant ship, \"Villa Rica\", was used for military purposes and sent towards \"Sajonia\". Both ships met on 11 August near town of Pilar and very quickly \"Villa Rica\" was sunk, killing 28 government sailors. The Rebels then left the ship and for the next five months continued a war with the government. The fighting ended on 12 December 1904, when in a deal negotiated by Brazilian diplomat Bras\u00edlio Itiber\u00ea da Cunha, the Pilcomayo Pact, Escurra resigned and a temporary president, Juan Bautista Gaona, from the Liberal party was sworn in on 19 December 1904.\nLiberal rule.\nOn 25 November 1906, the old Liberal hero, General Benigno Ferreira, was elected to the presidency. By 1908, the Liberal \"radicales\" had overthrown him and the \"c\u00edvicos\", however. The Liberals had disbanded Caballero's army when they came to power and organized a completely new one. Nevertheless, by 1910 army commander Colonel Albino Jara felt strong enough to stage a coup against President Manuel Gondra. Jara's coup backfired as it touched off an anarchic two-year period in which every major political group seized power at least once and led to the Civil War of 1912. The \"radicales\" again invaded from Argentina, and when the charismatic Eduardo Schaerer became president, Gondra returned as Minister of War to reorganize the army once more. Schaerer became the first president since Egusquiza to finish his four-year term.\nThe new political calm was shattered, however, when the \"radicales\" split into Schaerer and Gondra factions. Gondra won the Presidential election in 1920, but the \"schaereristas\" undermined his power and forced him to resign. A full-scale civil war between the factions broke out in May 1922 and lasted fourteen months. The \"gondristas\" beat the \"schaereristas\" decisively and held on to power until 1936.\nLaissez-faire Liberal policies had permitted a handful of \"hacendados\" to exercise almost feudal control over the countryside, while peasants had no land and foreign interests manipulated Paraguay's economic fortunes. The Liberals, like the Colorados, were a deeply factionalized political oligarchy. Social conditions \u2013 always marginal in Paraguay \u2013 deteriorated during the Great Depression of the 1930s. The country clearly needed reforms in working conditions, public services, and education.\nChaco War.\nParaguay's dispute with Bolivia over the Chaco, brewing for decades, finally derailed the Liberals. Wars and poor diplomacy had prevented the settling of boundaries between the two countries. Although Paraguay had held the Chaco, the country did little to develop the area. Aside from scattered Mennonite colonies and nomadic Indian tribes, few people lived there. Bolivia's claim to the Chaco became more urgent after it lost its sea coast (the Atacama region) to Chile during the 1879\u201384 War of the Pacific. Left without any outlet to the sea, Bolivia wanted to absorb the Chaco and expand its territory up to the Paraguay river in order to gain a river port. In addition, oil had been discovered there by Standard Oil in the 1920s, and people wondered whether an immense pool of oil was lying beneath the entire area.\nWhile Paraguayans were busy fighting among themselves during the 1920s, Bolivians established a series of forts in the Paraguayan Chaco. In addition, they bought armaments from Germany and hired German military officers to train and lead their forces. Frustration in Paraguay with Liberal inaction boiled over in 1928 when the Bolivian army established a fort on the Paraguay river called Fort\u00edn Vanguardia. In December of that year, Paraguayan major (later colonel) Rafael Franco led a surprise attack on the fort, and succeeded in destroying it. The routed Bolivians responded quickly by seizing two Paraguayan forts. Both sides mobilized but the Liberal government felt unprepared for war so it agreed to the humiliating condition of rebuilding Fort\u00edn Vanguardia for the Bolivians. The Liberal government also provoked criticism when it forced Franco, by then a national hero, to retire from the army.\nAs diplomats from Argentina, the United States, and the League of Nations conducted fruitless \"reconciliation\" talks, Colonel Jos\u00e9 F\u00e9lix Estigarribia, Paraguay's deputy army commander, ordered his troops into action against Bolivian positions early in 1931. Meanwhile, nationalist agitation led by the National Independent League (\"Liga Nacional Independiente\") increased. Formed in 1928 by a group of intellectuals, the League sought a new era in national life that would witness a great political and social rebirth. Its adherents advocated a \"new democracy\" that, they hoped, would sweep the country free of petty partisan interests and foreign encroachments. An amalgam of diverse ideologies and interests, the League reflected a genuine popular wish for social change. When government troops fired on a mob of League students demonstrating in front of the Government Palace in October 1931, the Liberal administration of President Jos\u00e9 Guggiari lost what little legitimacy it retained. The students and soldiers of the rising \"New Paraguay\" movement (which wanted to sweep away corrupt party politics and introduce nationalist and socialist reforms) would thereafter always see the Liberals as morally bankrupt.\nWhen war finally broke out officially in July 1932, the Bolivians were confident of a rapid victory. Their country was richer and more populous than Paraguay, and their armed forces were larger, had a superior officer corps, and were well-trained and well-equipped. The highly motivated Paraguayans knew the geography of the Chaco better than the Bolivians and easily infiltrated Bolivian lines, surrounded outposts, and captured supplies. Long supply lines, poor roads, and weak logistics hindered the Bolivian campaign. The Paraguayans proved more united than the Bolivians, at least initially, as President Eusebio Ayala and Colonel (later Marshal) Estigarribia worked well together.\nAfter the December 1933 Paraguayan victory at Campo Via, Bolivia seemed on the verge of surrender. At that moment, however, President Ayala agreed to a truce. His decision was greeted with derision in Asunci\u00f3n. Instead of ending the war with a swift victory that might have boosted their political prospects, the Liberals signed a truce that seemed to allow the Bolivians to regroup. The war continued until July 1935. Although the Liberals had successfully led Paraguay's occupation of nearly all the disputed territory and had won the war when the last truce went into effect, they were finished politically. In many ways, the Chaco War acted as a catalyst to unite the political opposition with workers and peasants, who furnished the raw materials for a social revolution. The government offended the army rank-and-file by refusing to fund pensions for disabled war veterans in 1936 while awarding 1,500 gold pesos a year to Estigarribia. Colonel Franco, back on active duty since 1932, became the focus of the nationalist rebels inside and outside the army. The final spark to rebellion came when Franco was exiled for criticizing Ayala. On 17 February 1936, units of the army descended on the Presidential Palace and forced Ayala to resign, ending thirty-two years of Liberal rule.\nMilitary dictatorships.\nFebruary Revolution.\nThe revolution of February 1936 overthrew Liberal Party politicians who had won the war. The soldiers, veterans, students, and others who revolted actually felt that victory had come despite the Liberal government. Promising a national and social revolution, they occupied Asunci\u00f3n and brought Colonel Rafael Franco to power.\nDuring its 18 months of existence, the Franco government showed that it was serious about social justice by expropriating more than 200,000 hectares of land and distributing it to 10,000 peasant families. In addition, the new government guaranteed workers the right to strike and established an eight-hour work day.\nPerhaps the government's most lasting contribution affected national consciousness. In a gesture calculated to rewrite history and erase seven decades of national shame, Franco declared Francisco Solano L\u00f3pez a national hero \"sin ejemplar\" (without precedent) because he had stood up to foreign threats, and sent a team to Cerro Cor\u00e1 to find his unmarked grave. His remains, along with those of his father, were buried in the National Pantheon of the Heroes. A monument to him was erected on Asunci\u00f3n's highest hill.\nDespite the popular enthusiasm that greeted the February Revolution, Franco's government lacked a clear program. When he published his distinctly fascist-sounding Decree Law No. 152 promising a \"totalitarian transformation\" similar to those in Europe, protests erupted. The youthful, idealistic elements that had come together to produce the Febrerista movement were actually a hodgepodge of conflicting political tendencies and social opposites, and Franco was soon in deep political trouble.\nA new party of regime supporters, the Revolutionary National Union (Uni\u00f3n Nacional Revolucionaria), was founded in November 1936. Although the new party called for representative democracy, rights for peasants and workers, and socialization of key industries, it failed to broaden Franco's political base. In the end, Franco lost his popular support because he failed to keep his promises to the poor. He dared not expropriate the properties of foreign landowners, who were mostly Argentines. In addition, the Liberals, who still had influential support in the army, agitated constantly for Franco's overthrow. When Franco ordered Paraguayan troops to abandon the advanced positions in the Chaco that they had held since the 1935 truce, the army revolted in August 1937 and returned the Liberals to power.\nThe army, however, did not hold a unified opinion about the Febreristas. Several attempted coups served to remind President F\u00e9lix Paiva (the former dean of law at the National University) that although the February Revolution was out of power, it was far from dead. People who suspected that the Liberals had learned nothing from their term out of office soon had proof: a peace treaty signed with Bolivia on 21 July 1938, fixed the final boundaries behind the Paraguayan battle lines.\nEstigarribia.\nIn 1939 the Liberal politicians, recognizing that they had to choose someone with national stature and popularity to be president if they wanted to keep power, picked General Jos\u00e9 F\u00e9lix Estigarribia as their candidate on 19 March 1939. This hero of the Chaco War was serving as a special envoy to the United States, and on 13 June Estigarribia and US Secretary of State Cordell Hull signed the Export-Import Bank loan of US$3.5\u00a0million. This greatly increased US influence in the country where Nazi sympathies were common. On 15 August 1939, he assumed the presidency and quickly realized that he would have to continue many of the ideas of the February Revolution to avoid political anarchy. He began a program of land reform that promised a small plot of land to every Paraguayan family. He reopened the university, implemented monetary and municipal reforms, balanced the budget, financed the public debt, increased the capital of the Central Bank of Paraguay, and drew up plans to build highways and public works with the loan from the United States.\nEstigarribia faced sharp criticism from the conservative Catholic intellectuals and their newspaper \"El Tiempo\" as well as leftist \"febrerista\" student activists in the university. After anti-government demonstrations broke out in Asunci\u00f3n, the army suppressed them and arrested Catholic and \"febrerista\" leaders. This led to a withdrawal of Colorado support for Estigarribia, and an attempted coup on 14 February 1940 broke out in Campo Grande military base.\nOn the same day Estigarribia proposed to establish a temporary dictatorship. This proposal split the Liberal party leadership, many of whom supported this idea, and on 18 February 1940 he established a temporary dictatorship, dismissing the 1870 Constitution and promising a new Constitution.\nOn 10 July the project of the new Constitution was published and on 4 August 1940, approved in the referendum. The new Constitution was based on the 1937 authoritarian Constitution of Brazil's Estado Novo and established a corporativist state. The Constitution of 1940 promised a \"strong, but not despotic\" President and a new state empowered to deal directly with social and economic problems. But by greatly expanding the power of the executive branch it served to legitimize open dictatorship. It greatly increased the powers of the Presidency, eliminated the vice-presidency, created a unicameral parliament, and increased the state's power over individual and property rights. It also gave the military the duty to protect the Constitution, thus giving it a role in politics.\nMor\u00ednigo, 1940\u201348.\nThe era of the New Liberals, as Estigarribia's supporters were called, came to a sudden end on 7 September 1940, when the President and his wife died in an airplane crash. Hoping to maintain their control over government through a more submissive military man, the Old Liberal ministers and army leadership decided on the War Minister Higinio Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo as the temporary president until new elections could be held in two months.\nThe apparently genial Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo quickly proved himself a shrewd politician, and Liberal ministers resigned on 30 September, when they realized that they could not impose their will on him. Having inherited Estigarribia's near-dictatorial powers provided by the new 1940 Constitution, Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo quickly banned \"febreristas\" and Liberals and clamped down drastically on free speech and individual liberties.\nA non-party dictator without a large body of supporters, Mor\u00ednigo survived politically \u2013 despite many plots against him \u2013 because of his astute handling of an influential group of young military officers who held key positions of power.\nThe Allied victory in World War II pressured Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo to liberalize his regime in 1946. Paraguay experienced a brief period of openness as he relaxed restrictions on free speech, allowed political exiles to return, and formed a coalition government with Liberals and \"febreristas\". Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo's intentions about stepping down were unclear, however, and he maintained a \"de facto\" alliance with Colorado Party hardliners and their right-wing \"Gui\u00f3n Rojo\" (Red Banner) paramilitary group led by Juan Natalico Gonzalez, which antagonized and terrorized the opposition. The result was a failed coup d'\u00e9tat in December 1946 and full-scale civil war erupted in March 1947. Led by the exiled dictator Rafael Franco, the revolutionaries were an unlikely coalition of \"febreristas\", Liberals and Communists, united only in their desire to overthrow Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo.\nThe Colorados helped Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo crush the insurgency, but the man who saved Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo's government during crucial battles was the commander of the General Br\u00fagez Artillery Regiment, Lieutenant Colonel Alfredo Stroessner. When a revolt at the Asunci\u00f3n Navy Yard put a strategic working-class neighborhood in rebel hands, Stroessner's regiment quickly reduced this area to rubble. When rebel gunboats threatened to dash upriver from Argentina to bombard the capital into submission, Stroessner's forces battled furiously and destroyed them.\nBy the end of the rebellion in August 1948 the Colorado Party, which had been out of power since 1904, had almost total control in Paraguay. The fighting had simplified politics by eliminating all other parties and by reducing the size of the army. As 90% of the officer corps had joined the rebels, fewer individuals were now in a position to compete for power.\nHowever, the Colorados were split into rival factions. The hardline \"guionistas\", headed by the fiery left-leaning nationalist writer and publisher Juan Natalicio Gonz\u00e1lez, opposed democratic practices. The moderate \"democr\u00e1ticos\", led by Federico Chaves, favored free elections and a power-sharing arrangement with the other parties.\nWith Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo's backing, Gonz\u00e1lez used his \"Gui\u00f3n Rojo\" paramilitary to intimidate \"democr\u00e1ticos\" and gain his party's presidential nomination. He ran unopposed in the long-promised 1948 elections. Suspecting that Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo would not relinquish power to Gonz\u00e1lez, a group of Colorado military officers, including Stroessner, removed Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo from office on 3 June 1948. After a short Presidency, Gonz\u00e1lez joined Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo in exile and Chaves assumed Presidency on 10 September 1949.\nMor\u00ed\u00f1igo had maintained order by severely restricting individual liberties, but as a result, he created a political vacuum. When he tried to fill it with the Colorado Party, he split the party in two, and neither faction could establish itself in power without help from the military. The creation of one-party rule and order at the expense of political liberty and acceptance of the army's role as the final political arbiter created conditions for the emergence of Stroessner's regime.\nPolitical consequences.\nWithin a couple of decades, Paraguayan politics had come to a full-circle. The Chaco War had sparked the February Revolution, which signaled the end of Liberal rule and ushered in a revived Paraguayan nationalism that revered the dictatorial past of the L\u00f3pez era. The result was the Constitution of 1940, which returned near-dictatorial powers to the Presidency, that the Liberals had stripped away. When a brief flirtation with multi-party democracy led to the Civil war, the Colorado Party, loyal to the memory of L\u00f3pez, was once again running Paraguay. Meanwhile, the influence of the armed forces in the domestic politics had increased dramatically as no Paraguayan government since the Chaco War held the power without its consent.\nStroessner dictatorship, 1954\u201389.\nAs one of the few officers who had remained loyal to Mor\u00ed\u00f1igo, Stroessner became a formidable player once he entered the higher echelons of the armed forces. On 4 May 1954, Alfredo Stroessner enacted a coup d'\u00e9tat against then-President Federico Chaves. Fierce resistance by police left almost fifty dead.\nBrazil's financing of the US$19\u00a0billion Itaip\u00fa Dam on the Paran\u00e1 River between Paraguay and Brazil had far-reaching consequences for Paraguay; it had no means of contributing financially to the construction, but its cooperation, including controversial concessions regarding ownership of the construction site and the rates for which Paraguay agreed to sell its share of the electricity, was essential. Itaip\u00fa gave Paraguay's economy a new source of wealth. The construction produced a tremendous economic boom, as thousands of Paraguayans who had never before held a regular job went to work on the enormous dam. From 1973 (when construction began) until 1982 (when it ended), gross domestic product grew more than 8% annually, double the rate for the previous decade and higher than growth rates in most other Latin American countries. Foreign exchange earnings from electricity sales to Brazil soared, and the newly employed Paraguayan workforce stimulated domestic demand, bringing about a rapid expansion in the agricultural sector.\nBeyond the financial support he received from the United States \u2013 which supported his anti-communist struggle \u2013, Stroessner's dictatorship was characterized by corruption and the distribution of favors among what was known as \"the trilogy\": the government, the Colorado Party and the armed forces. Smuggling \u2013 geographically favoured by Paraguay's location between Brazil, Argentina and Bolivia \u2013 became one of the main sources of income, from alcohol and drugs to cars and exotic animals. Some estimate that the volume of smuggling was three times the official export figure, and Stroessner used some of that money, as well as slices of major infrastructure works and the delivery of land, to buy the loyalty of his officers, many of whom amassed huge fortunes and large estates.\nThe concentration of wealth and land in the hands of a few made Paraguay the most unequal country on the planet. Humanitarian organizations such as Oxfam and Amnesty International have denounced that it continues to have one of the highest rates of land concentration in Latin America. According to Oxfam, 1.6% of the population owns 80% of the land. And, according to Oxfam, stronism is directly responsible: between 1954 and 1989 some 8 million hectares were distributed irregularly among friends of power, he says. That's a third of arable land.\nOn 3 February 1989, Stroessner was overthrown in a counter-coup headed by his close associate General Andr\u00e9s Rodr\u00edguez. He went into exile in Brazil, where he died in 2006. At the time of his death, Stroessner was the defendant in several human rights cases in Paraguay. President Rodr\u00edguez instituted political, legal, and economic reforms and initiated a rapprochement with the international community. In the municipal elections of 1991, opposition candidates won several major urban centers, including Asunci\u00f3n.\nModern Paraguay.\nThe June 1992 constitution established a democratic system of government and dramatically improved protection of fundamental rights. In May 1993, Colorado Party candidate Juan Carlos Wasmosy was elected as Paraguay's first civilian president in almost 40 years in what international observers deemed fair and free elections. The newly elected majority-opposition Congress quickly demonstrated its independence from the executive by rescinding legislation passed by the previous Colorado-dominated Congress. With support from the United States, the Organization of American States, and other countries in the region, the Paraguayan people rejected an April 1996 attempt by then Army Chief General Lino Oviedo to oust President Wasmosy.\nOviedo became the Colorado candidate for president in the 1998 election, but when the Supreme Court of Paraguay upheld in April his conviction on charges related to the 1996 coup attempt, he was not allowed to run and remained in confinement. His former running mate, Ra\u00fal Cubas, became the Colorado Party's candidate and was elected in May in elections deemed by international observers to be free and fair. One of Cubas' first acts after taking office in August was to commute Oviedo's sentence and release him from confinement. In December 1998, Paraguay's Supreme Court declared these actions unconstitutional. After delaying for two months, Cubas openly defied the Supreme Court in February 1999, refusing to return Oviedo to jail. In this tense atmosphere, the murder of vice president and long-time Oviedo rival Luis Mar\u00eda Arga\u00f1a on 23 March 1999, led the Chamber of Deputies to impeach Cubas the next day. The 26 March murder of eight student anti-government demonstrators, widely believed to have been carried out by Oviedo supporters, made it clear that the Senate would vote to remove Cubas on 29 March, and Cubas resigned on 28 March. Despite fears that the military would not allow the change of government, Senate President Luis Gonz\u00e1lez Macchi, a Cubas opponent, was sworn in as president that day. Cubas left for Brazil the next day and has since received asylum. Oviedo fled the same day, first to Argentina, then to Brazil. In December 2001, Brazil rejected Paraguay's petition to extradite Oviedo to stand trial for the March 1999 assassination and \"Marzo Paraguayo\" incident.\nGonz\u00e1lez Macchi offered cabinet positions in his government to senior representatives of all three political parties in an attempt to create a coalition government. While the Liberal Party pulled out of the government in February 2000, the Gonzalez Macchi government has achieved a consensus among the parties on many controversial issues, including economic reform. Liberal Julio C\u00e9sar Franco won the August 2000 election to fill the vacant vice presidential position. In August 2001, the lower house of Congress considered but did not pass a motion to impeach Gonz\u00e1lez Macchi for alleged corruption and inefficient governance. In 2003, Nicanor Duarte was elected and sworn in as president.\nOn 1 August 2004 a supermarket in Asunci\u00f3n burned down, killing nearly 400 people and injuring hundreds more.\nOn 1 July 2005, the United States reportedly deployed troops and aircraft to the large military airfield of Mariscal Estigarribia as part of a bid to extend control of strategic interests in the Latin American sphere, particularly in Bolivia. A military training agreement with Asunci\u00f3n, giving immunity to US soldiers, caused some concern after media reports initially reported that a base housing 20,000 US soldiers was being built at Mariscal Estigarribia within 200\u00a0km of Argentina and Bolivia, and 300\u00a0km of Brazil, near an airport which could receive large planes (B-52, C-130 Hercules, etc.) which the Paraguayan Air Force does not have. The governments of Paraguay and the United States subsequently declared that the use of an airport (Dr Lu\u00eds Mar\u00eda Arga\u00f1a International) was a point of transfer for few soldiers in Paraguay at the same time. According to the \"Clar\u00edn\" Argentinian newspaper, the US military base is strategic because of its location near the \"Triple Frontera\" between Paraguay, Brazil, and Argentina; its proximity towards the Guarani aquifer; and, finally, its closeness toward Bolivia (less than 200\u00a0km) at the same \"moment that Washington's magnifying glass goes on the \"Altiplano\" and points toward Venezuelan Hugo Ch\u00e1vez as the instigator of the instability in the region\" (\"El Clar\u00edn\"), making a clear reference to the Bolivian Gas War.\nFor the 2008 general elections, the Colorado Party had as a candidate Minister of Education Blanca Ovelar, the first woman to appear as a candidate for a major party in Paraguayan history. Former Roman Catholic bishop Fernando Lugo, a long time follower of the controversial Liberation Theology but backed by the center-right Liberal Party, was elected. Outgoing President Nicanor Duarte reflected on the defeat and hailed the moment as the first time in the history of his nation that a government handed power to opposition forces in an orderly and peaceful fashion. Lugo was sworn in on 15 August 2008 but later impeached in 2012, succeeded by Vice President Federico Franco.\nAs a result of the 2013 elections, Horacio Cartes was elected president, returning the Colorado Party to power. Cartes wanted to amend the constitution to allow for presidential re-elections, but widespread protests and political opposition led him to abandon this goal and he agreed to not seek another term. In August 2018, Mario Abdo Ben\u00edtez sworn in as his successor after winning 2018 presidential election. The 2023 elections resulted in Santiago Pe\u00f1a, a right-wing candidate of the long-ruling Colorado Party, being elected as next president. On 15 August 2023, Santiago Pe\u00f1a was sworn in as Paraguay's new president.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23422", "revid": "1312864270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23422", "title": "Geography of Paraguay", "text": "Paraguay is a country in South America, bordering Argentina, Bolivia and Brazil. The Paraguay River (Spanish: \"R\u00edo Paraguay\") divides the country into strikingly different eastern and western regions. Both the eastern region (officially called Eastern Paraguay, \"Paraguay Oriental\", and known as the Parane\u00f1a region) and the western region (officially Western Paraguay, \"Paraguay Occidental\", and known as the Chaco) gently slope toward and are drained into the Paraguay River, which separates and unifies the two regions. With the Parane\u00f1a region reaching southward and the Chaco extending to the north, Paraguay straddles the Tropic of Capricorn and experiences both subtropical and tropical climates.\nBorders.\nParaguay borders on three substantially larger countries: Bolivia, Brazil, and Argentina. The country has three tripoints: Argentina-Bolivia-Paraguay, Bolivia-Brazil-Paraguay and Paraguay-Argentina-Brazil. The definition of the northwestern boundary with Bolivia, extending through the low hills of the Chaco region, dates from 1938. The boundary between the Chaco and Brazil was defined in 1927; it continues from the confluence of the Apa River (\"R\u00edo Apa\") and Paraguay River northward along the course of the Paraguay River to the border with Bolivia. The northern border of the Parane\u00f1a region, set in 1872, follows the course of the Paran\u00e1 River (\"R\u00edo Paran\u00e1\"), the ridges of the mountains in the northeast region, and finally the course of the Apa River until it empties into the Paraguay River. The large Argentina\u2013Paraguay border comprises the Pilcomayo River (\"R\u00edo Pilcomayo\"), Paran\u00e1 River, and Paraguay River. Argentina and Paraguay agreed on these boundaries in 1876.\nNatural regions.\nParaguay contains six terrestrial ecoregions: Alto Paran\u00e1 Atlantic forests, Chaco, Cerrado, Humid Chaco, Pantanal, and Paran\u00e1 flooded savanna which fall into two main natural regions, divided by the Paraguay River: the region (a mixture of plateaus, rolling hills, and valleys) and the Chaco region (an immense piedmont plain).\nAbout 95 percent of Paraguay's population resides in the Parane\u00f1a region, which has all the significant orographic features and a more predictable climate. The Parane\u00f1a region can be generally described as consisting of an area of highlands in the east that slopes toward the R\u00edo Paraguay and becomes an area of lowlands, subject to floods, along the river.\nThe Chaco consists predominantly of lowlands, also inclined toward the R\u00edo Paraguay, that are alternately flooded and parched.\nThe Eastern Region: Parane\u00f1a.\nThe Eastern region extends from the R\u00edo Paraguay eastward to the R\u00edo Paran\u00e1, which forms the border with Brazil and Argentina. The eastern hills and mountains, an extension of a plateau in southern Brazil, dominate the region. They reach to about above sea level at their highest point. The Eastern region also has spacious plains, broad valleys, and lowlands. About 80% of the region lies below in elevation; the lowest elevation, , occurs in the extreme south at the confluence of the R\u00edo Paraguay and R\u00edo Paran\u00e1.\nThe Eastern region is drained primarily by rivers that flow westward to the R\u00edo Paraguay, although some rivers flow eastward to the R\u00edo Paran\u00e1. Low-lying meadows, subject to floods, separate the eastern mountains from the R\u00edo Paraguay.\nThe Eastern region as a whole naturally divides into five physiographic subregions:\nIn the east, the heavily wooded Paran\u00e1 Plateau occupies one-third of the region and extends its full length from north to south and up to westward from the Brazilian and Argentine borders. The Paran\u00e1 Plateau's western edge is defined by an escarpment that descends from an elevation of about in the north to about at the subregion's southern extremity. The plateau slopes moderately to east and south, its remarkably uniform surface interrupted only by the narrow valleys carved by the westward-flowing tributaries of the R\u00edo Paran\u00e1.\nThe Northern Upland, the Central Hill Belt, and the Central Lowland constitute the lower terrain lying between the escarpment and the R\u00edo Paraguay. The first of these eroded extensions stretching westward of the Paran\u00e1 Plateau\u2014the Northern Upland\u2014occupies the portion northward from the Aquidab\u00e1n River (\"R\u00edo Aquidab\u00e1n\") to the Apa River on the Brazilian border. For the most part it consists of a rolling plateau about above sea level and above the plain farther to the south. The Central Hill Belt encompasses the area in the vicinity of Asunci\u00f3n. Although nearly flat surfaces occur in this subregion, the rolling terrain is extremely uneven. Small, isolated peaks are numerous, and it is here that the only lakes of any size are found. Between these two upland subregions lies the Central Lowland, an area of low elevation and relief, sloping gently upward from the R\u00edo Paraguay toward the Paran\u00e1 Plateau. The valleys of the Central Lowland's westward-flowing rivers are broad and shallow, and periodic flooding of their courses creates seasonal swamps. This subregion's most conspicuous features, its flat-topped hills, project from the grassy plain. Thickly forested, these hills cover areas ranging from a hectare to several square kilometers (acres to square miles). Apparently the weathered remnants of rock related to geological formations farther to the east, these hills are called \"islas de monte\" (mountain islands), and their margins are known as \"costas\" (coasts).\nThe remaining subregion\u2014the \u00d1eembuc\u00fa Plain\u2014lies in the southwest corner of the Parane\u00f1a region. This alluvial flatland has a slight westerly-southwesterly slope obscured by gentle undulations. The Tebicuary River (\"R\u00edo Tebicuary\")\u2014a major tributary of the R\u00edo Paraguay \u2013 bisects the swampy lowland, which is broken in its central portion by rounded swells of land up to three meters in height.\nThe main orographic features of the Parane\u00f1a region include the Cordillera de Amambay, the Cordillera de Mbaracay\u00fa, and the Cordillera de Caaguaz\u00fa. The Cordillera de Amambay extends from the northeast corner of the region south and slightly east along the Brazilian border. The mountains reach on average above sea level, although the highest point reaches . The main chain, long, has smaller branches that extend to the west and die out along the banks of the R\u00edo Paraguay in the Northern Upland.\nThe Cordillera de Amambay merges with the Cordillera de Mbaracay\u00fa, which reaches eastward to the R\u00edo Paran\u00e1. The average height of this mountain chain is ; the highest point of the chain, , lies within Brazilian territory. The R\u00edo Paran\u00e1 forms the Salto del Guair\u00e1 waterfall where it cuts through the mountains of the Cordillera de Mbaracay\u00fa to enter Argentina.\nThe Cordillera de Caaguaz\u00fa falls where the other two main mountain ranges meet and extends south, with an average height of . Its highest point, Cerro de San Joaqu\u00edn, reaches above sea level. This chain is not a continuous massif but is interrupted by hills and undulations covered with forests and meadows. The Cordillera de Caaguaz\u00fa reaches westward from the Paran\u00e1 Plateau into the Central Hill Belt.\nA lesser mountain chain, the Serran\u00eda de Mbaracay\u00fa, also rises at the point where the Cordillera de Amambay and Cordillera de Mbaracay\u00fa meet. The Serran\u00eda de Mbaracay\u00fa extends east and then south to parallel the R\u00edo Paran\u00e1; the mountain chain has an average height of .\nThe eastern region has a population of 7,232,890 and an area of 159,827\u00a0km2, the population density is 45.25/km2.\nThe Western Region: Chaco.\nSeparated from the Eastern region by the Paraguay River, the Chaco region is a vast plain with elevations reaching no higher than and averaging . Covering more than 60 percent of Paraguay's total land area, the Chaco plain slopes gently eastward to the R\u00edo Paraguay.\nThe Paraguayan Chaco is subdivided into two parts. The \"Alto Chaco\" (Upper Chaco), also called \"Chaco Seco\" (Dry Chaco) is the western three-quarters of the region, bordering on Bolivia, while the \"Bajo Chaco\" (Lower Chaco) or \"Chaco H\u00famedo\" (Humid Chaco) borders on the Paraguay River. The low hills in the northwestern part of the Alto Chaco are the highest parts in the Gran Chaco. One prominent wetland of the Bajo Chaco is the Estero Pati\u00f1o, which at forms the largest swamp in the country.\nThe Paraguay Chaco's western two-thirds belong to the semi-arid tropics with annual precipitations between , vegetation being dry low scrub in the west to higher growth xerophytic (semi-arid impenetrable thorn) forest towards the east. The eastern third belongs to the semi-humid tropics, with rainfall between , taller vegetation, and tropical semi-humid forest. A belt about in length along the Paraguay River again has a different evergreen vegetation of wetlands and palm tree forests (\"Bajo Chaco\").\nAnnual evaporation is around . The very pronounced dry season lasts from May to October, and a wet season occurs from November to April, when the vegetation turns green and abundant.\nThe soils of the Chaco are very deep sedimentary soils rich in nutrients, including luvisols, cambisols, and regosols, and are in general very fertile and apt for agriculture and pasture (always presuming responsible and sustainable techniques), more so than most of the world's semi-arid tropics. Limiting factors include a lack of ground freshwater in most of the Paraguay's Chaco, except in the north and the west. The lowlands facing the Paraguay River have insufficient drainage and seasonal flooding (which again increases soil fertility) as a constraint.\nThe western region has a population of 220,805 and an area of 246,925\u00a0km2, the population density is 0.89/km2.\nDrainage.\nThe word Paraguay can be translated as the \"Paradise of Waters\", as there is plenty to be found all around the country, including underneath it; see Guarani Aquifer. The Paraguay River has a total course of 2600\u00a0km, 2300\u00a0km of which are navigable and 1200\u00a0km of which either border on or pass through Paraguay. During most years vessels with 21 m drafts can reach Concepci\u00f3n without difficulty. Medium-sized ocean vessels can sometimes reach Asunci\u00f3n, but the twisting meanders and shifting sandbars can make this transit difficult. Although sluggish and shallow, the river sometimes overflows its low banks, forming temporary swamps and flooding villages. River islands, meander scars, and oxbow (U-shaped) lakes attest to frequent changes in course.\nThe major tributaries entering the Paraguay River from the Parane\u00f1a region\u2014such as the Apa, Aquidab\u00e1n, and Tebicuary Rivers\u2014descend rapidly from their sources in the Paran\u00e1 Plateau to the lower lands. There they broaden and become sluggish as they meander westward. After heavy rains these rivers sometimes flood nearby lowlands.\nAbout 4700\u00a0km long, the Paran\u00e1 River is the second major river in the country. From Salto del Guair\u00e1, where the former Guair\u00e1 Falls were located, the river enters Paraguay and flows 800\u00a0km to its juncture with the Paraguay River and then continues southward to the R\u00edo de la Plata Estuary at Buenos Aires, Argentina. In general, the R\u00edo Paran\u00e1 is navigable by large ships only up to Encarnaci\u00f3n in Southern Paraguay but smaller boats may go somewhat further north. In summer months the river is deep enough to permit vessels with drafts of up to three meters to reach Salto del Guair\u00e1, but seasonal and other occasional conditions severely limit the river's navigational value. On the upper course, sudden floods may raise the water level by as much as five meters in twenty-four hours; west of Encarnaci\u00f3n, however, the rocks of the riverbed sometimes come within one meter of the surface during winter and effectively sever communication between the upper river and Buenos Aires.\nThe rivers flowing eastward across the Parane\u00f1a region as tributaries of the Paran\u00e1 River are shorter, faster-flowing, and narrower than the tributaries of the Paraguay River, except the Iguazu River at the Iguazu Falls. Sixteen of these rivers and numerous smaller streams enter the Paran\u00e1 River above Encarnaci\u00f3n.\nParaguay's third largest river, the Pilcomayo River, flows into the Paraguay River near Asunci\u00f3n after demarcating the entire border between the Chaco region and Argentina. During most of its course, the river is sluggish and marshy, although small craft can navigate its lower reaches. When the Pilcomayo River overflows its low banks, it feeds the Pati\u00f1o Estuary (\"Estero Pati\u00f1o\").\nDrainage in the Chaco region is generally poor because of the flatness of the land and the small number of important streams. In many parts of the region, the water table is only a meter beneath the surface of the ground, and there are numerous small ponds and seasonal marshes. As a consequence of the poor drainage, most of the water is too salty for drinking or irrigation.\nBecause of the seasonal overflow of the numerous westward-flowing streams, the lowland areas of the Parane\u00f1a region also experience poor drainage conditions, particularly in the \u00d1eembuc\u00fa Plain in the southwest, where an almost impervious clay subsurface prevents the absorption of excess surface water into the aquifer. About 30 percent of the Parane\u00f1a region is flooded from time to time, creating extensive areas of seasonal marshlands. Permanent bogs are found only near the largest geographic depressions, however.\nClimate.\nParaguay experiences a subtropical climate in the Parane\u00f1a region, and tropical and semi-arid climates in the Chaco. The Parane\u00f1a region has a humid climate, with abundant precipitation throughout the year. During the Southern Hemisphere's summer, which corresponds to the northern winter, the dominant influence on the climate is the warm sirocco winds blowing out of the northeast. During the winter, the dominant wind is the cold pampero from the South Atlantic, which blows across Argentina and is deflected northeastward by the Andes in the southern part of that country. Because of the lack of topographic barriers within Paraguay, these opposite prevailing winds bring about abrupt and irregular changes in the usually moderate weather. Winds are generally brisk. Velocities of 160\u00a0km/h (100\u00a0mph) have been reported in southern locations, and the town of Encarnaci\u00f3n was once leveled by a tornado.\nDuring the mild winters, July is the coldest month, with a mean temperature of about in Asunci\u00f3n and on the Paran\u00e1 Plateau. The number of days with temperatures falling below freezing ranges from as few as three to as many as sixteen yearly, and with even wider variations deep in the interior. Some winters are very mild, with winds blowing constantly from the north, and little frost. During a cold winter, however, tongues of Antarctic air bring subfreezing temperatures to all areas. No part of the Parane\u00f1a region is entirely free from the possibility of frost and consequent damage to crops, and snow flurries have been reported in various locations.\nMoist tropical air keeps the weather warm in the Parane\u00f1a region from October through March. In Asunci\u00f3n the seasonal average is about , with January\u2014the warmest month\u2014averaging . Villarrica has a seasonal mean temperature of and a January mean of . During the summer, daytime temperatures reaching are fairly common. Frequent waves of cool air from the south, however, cause weather that alternates between clear, humid conditions and storms. Skies will be almost cloudless for a week to ten days as temperature and humidity rise continually. As the soggy heat nears intolerable limits, thunderstorms preceding a cold front will blow in from the south, and temperatures will drop as much as in a few minutes.\nRainfall in the Parane\u00f1a region is fairly evenly distributed. Although local meteorological conditions play a contributing role, rain usually falls when tropical air masses are dominant. The least rain falls in August, when averages in various parts of the region range from . The two periods of maximum precipitation are March through May and October to November.\nFor the region as a whole, the difference between the driest and the wettest months ranges from . The annual average rainfall is , although the average on the Paran\u00e1 Plateau is greater. All subregions may experience considerable variations from year to year. Asunci\u00f3n has recorded as much as and as little as of annual rainfall; Puerto Bertoni on the Paran\u00e1 Plateau has recorded as much as and as little as .\nIn contrast to the Parane\u00f1a region, the Chaco has a tropical wet-and-dry climate bordering on semi-arid. The Chaco experiences seasons that alternately flood and parch the land, yet seasonal variations in temperature are modest. Chaco temperatures are usually high, the averages dropping only slightly in winter. Even at night the air is stifling despite the usually present breezes. Rainfall is light, varying from per year, except in the higher land to the northwest where it is somewhat greater. Rainfall is concentrated in the summer months, and extensive areas that are deserts in winter become summer swamps.\nEnvironment.\nCurrent environmental issues include deforestation (Paraguay lost an estimated 20,000\u00a0km2 of forest land between 1958 and 1985) and water pollution (inadequate means for waste disposal present health risks for many urban residents). Paraguay is a party to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, the Law of the Sea, and the Ozone Layer Protection. It has also signed, but not ratified, the Nuclear Test Ban.\nStatistics.\nGeographic coordinates: \nArea:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n406,750\u00a0km2\n&lt;br&gt;\"land:\"\n397,300\u00a0km2\n&lt;br&gt;\"water:\"\n9,450\u00a0km2\nLand boundaries:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n3,920\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"border countries:\"\nArgentina 1,880\u00a0km, Bolivia 750\u00a0km, Brazil 1,290\u00a0km\nCoastline:\n0\u00a0km (landlocked)\nElevation extremes:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest point:\"\njunction of Rio Paraguay and Rio Paran\u00e1 46 m\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest point:\"\nCerro Per\u00f3 842 m\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\"\n6%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\"\n0%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent pastures:\"\n55%\n&lt;br&gt;\"forests and woodland:\"\n32%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n7% (1993 est.)\nIrrigated land:\n670\u00a0km2 (1993 est.)\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Paraguay, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23423", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23423", "title": "Demographics of Paraguay", "text": "Paraguay's population is distributed unevenly through the country. The vast majority of the people live in the eastern region, most within of Asunci\u00f3n, the capital and largest city, which borders on Argentina to the south and west. The Gran Chaco in the north-west, which accounts for about 60% of Paraguayan territory, is home to less than 4% of the population.\nEthnically, culturally, and socially, Paraguay has one of the most homogeneous populations in South America. About 75% of the people are mestizo (mixed Spanish and Guaran\u00ed Native American descent), 20% are Whites, and the rest are small minorities of Indigenous or Afro Paraguayan origin. Little trace is left of the original Guaran\u00ed culture except the language, which is spoken by 90% of the population. About 75% of all Paraguayans also speak Spanish. Guaran\u00ed and Spanish are official languages.\nParaguay has a history of foreign settlement, especially in the 20th century: Italians (around 40% of the total Paraguayan population is of full or partial Italian descent); Germans (the majority are Mennonites) with long-time Paraguayan dictator Alfredo Stroessner (President, 1954\u20131989) himself of German ancestry; Japanese with Okinawans; Koreans; Chinese; Arabs, Ukrainians; Poles; Southern Europeans; Jews; Brazilians; and Argentines are among those who have settled in Paraguay. There are also an estimated 234,000 Afro-Paraguayans, or 4% of the population.\nEuropean and Middle Eastern immigrants began making their way to Paraguay in the decades following the Paraguayan War of 1864\u20131870 (from 1870 onward). Only 28,000 men and 200,000 women had survived the war, the reason why Paraguay had since then a high rate of illegitimate births. The government pursued a pro-immigration policy in an effort to increase population. Government records indicated that approximately 12,000 immigrants entered the port of Asunci\u00f3n between 1882 and 1907, of whom almost 9,000 came from Italy, Germany, France, and Spain. Migrants also arrived from neighboring Spanish American countries, especially Argentina. The immigrant ethnic groups kept their cultures and languages to some extent, especially Brazilians \u2013 known as \"Brasiguayos\".\nOfficial records gave an imprecise sense of the number of Brazilians who came to the country. According to the 1982 census, 99,000 Brazilians resided in Paraguay. Most analysts discounted this figure, however, and contended that between 300,000 and 350,000 Brazilians lived in the eastern border region.\nAnalysts also rejected government figures on the number of immigrants from South Korea, Hong Kong and Taiwan. The 1982 census reported that there were 2,700 Koreans in Paraguay, along with another 1,100 non-Japanese or non-Korean Asian immigrants. Virtually all Koreans and Chinese lived in Ciudad del Este or Asunci\u00f3n and played a major role in the importation and sale of electronic goods manufactured in Asia.\nParaguay became the site of radical and progressive colonies inspired by political thinkers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. A group of radical socialist Australians in the 1890s voluntarily went to create a failed master-planned community, known as \"Nueva (New) Australia\" (1893 -1897); and Elisabeth Nietzsche, a German racial ideologist and sister of philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche came to Paraguay in her attempt to build a colony, \"Nueva Germania (Neues Deutschland)\" (founded 1886) devoted to a hypothetical pure white \"Nordic\" society.\nA 2022 census found that Paraguay's population shrank as a production of migration and having smaller families, as well as better data integrity, resulting in a loss of over one million.\nPopulation size and structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 1,473,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 33.5%, 61.4% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 5.1% was 65 years or older\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2013) (Projections based on the 2002 Population Census.):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021) (Estimates or projections considering also the results of the 2012 Population Census.):\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of vital events in Paraguay are not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.\nRegistered births and deaths.\nNote that the numbers of births and deaths below are considered incomplete by the UN and by year of registration rather than by year of occurrence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n(ca) = 2022 census adjusted population.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (Wanted Fertility Rate):\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Paraguay's predominant ancestry is European, which represents a large part of the population, mainly descendants of Spaniards and Italians (who have contributed to repopulating the country after the Triple Alliance War) but there are also a large number of people of German ancestry, due to the German Mennonites (majority in the western part of the territory). There are 17 Mennonite colonies, only in the Paraguayan Chaco. It is one of the Latin American countries with the least indigenous traits (due to the fact that the traditional Paraguayan population; the Spanish mixture of Guaran\u00ed, had been annihilated by the war in 1870, which is why the country had to repopulate by resorting to immigration, especially the Italian in that country.) Taking into account the high fertility, Paraguay registers a majority young population structure. Of every ten people, four are under the age of 15 (2,339,000) and the population aged 15 to 29 represents a quarter of the total population. According to the Census (ECLAC, 1998), the population of indigenous nature that year was 29,482 people, that is, about 0.7% of the national population. There is a low percentage of people with distinctively Amerindian features and the absence of people with African features. The majority of the population is made up of mestizos who are descendants of the original population, the Guarani, and Europeans.\"\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23424", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23424", "title": "Politics of Paraguay", "text": " \nPolitics of Paraguay takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic. The National Constitution mandates a separation of powers in three branches. Executive power is exercised solely by the President. Legislative power is vested in the two chambers of the National Congress. The Judiciary power is vested on Tribunals and Courts of Civil Law and a nine-member Supreme Court of Justice, all of them independent of the executive and the legislature.\nHistorically, Paraguay has been characterized by civil wars, coups and authoritarianism. Paraguay was for several decades under dictatorial rule by Alfredo Stroessner and his Colorado Party until he was ousted from power in 1989, which set off a democratization process. \nSince 1989, there has been an expansion of civil and political liberties, as well as elections at presidential, congressional, and municipal levels. However, the democratization process has been limited due to the firm control of the Colorado Party on the Paraguay state. The Colorado Party retains power through clientelistic practices. Corruption is widespread in Paraguay. The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Paraguay a \"flawed democracy\" in . After having been rated a \"flawed democracy\" for 1 year, the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) returned Paraguay's rating to \"hybrid regime\" in 2024.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president, popularly elected for one 5-year term with no chance of re-elections, appoints a cabinet. The president nominates the Council of Ministers. The presidential elections of 2008 were won by Fernando Lugo, a Roman Catholic bishop whose ministerial duties have been suspended on his request by the Holy See. It was the first time in 61 years that the Colorado Party lost a presidential election in Paraguay, and only a second time that a leftist served as president after 1936\u201337, and the first time one was ever freely elected. In 2013, Lugo was removed from office through the process of impeachment. This action was widely hailed as a coup d'\u00e9tat by heads of state throughout Latin America, with leaders from nations such as Argentina and Ecuador announcing they would refuse to recognize his successor as the legitimate President of Paraguay. \nIn May 2023, Santiago Pe\u00f1a of the long-ruling Colorado Party, won the presidential election to succeed Mario Abdo as the next President of Paraguay. On 15 August 2023, Santiago Pe\u00f1a was sworn in as Paraguay's new president.\nThe workplace of the President of Paraguay is the Palacio de los L\u00f3pez, in Asunci\u00f3n. The Presidential Residence is Mburuvich\u00e1 Roga, also in Asunci\u00f3n. Once presidents leave office, they are granted by the Constitution the speaking-but-non-voting position of Senator for life.\nOffice of the First Lady.\nIn Paraguay, the post of the First Lady of Paraguay is official.\nLegislative branch.\nThe National Congress (\"Congreso Nacional\") has two chambers. The Chamber of Deputies (\"C\u00e1mara de Diputados\") has 80 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation. The Chamber of Senators (\"C\u00e1mara de Senadores\") has 45 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation.\nJudicial branch.\nParaguay's highest court is the Supreme Court of Paraguay.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe Constitution of Paraguay states \"The law will regulate the various areas in which these officials and employees can provide their services, including the judicial, the diplomatic and consular professions, the areas of scientific and technological research, civil services, military and police. This will not preclude others.\n\" Each of Paraguay's 17 departments is headed by a popularly elected governor. Paraguay is divided in 17 departments (departamentos, singular \u2013 departamento) and one capital city; Alto Paraguay, Alto Paran\u00e1, Amambay, Asunci\u00f3n (city), Boquer\u00f3n, Caaguaz\u00fa, Caazap\u00e1, Canindey\u00fa, Concepci\u00f3n, Cordillera, Guair\u00e1, Itap\u00faa, \u00d1eembuc\u00fa, Paraguar\u00ed, Presidente Hayes, San Pedro.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23425", "revid": "38427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23425", "title": "Economy of Paraguay", "text": "The economy of Paraguay is a market economy that is highly dependent on agriculture products. In recent years, Paraguay's economy has grown as a result of increased agricultural exports, especially soybeans. Paraguay has the economic advantages of a young population and vast hydroelectric power. Its disadvantages include the few available mineral resources, and political instability. The government welcomes foreign investment.\nAgriculture represents 30% of its GDP. According to official figures, 5% of landowners own 90% of the land.\nOverview.\nParaguay is a middle-income country that changed rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s as a result of hydroelectric development, agricultural colonization, construction, and cash crop exports. Nevertheless, the country's gross domestic product (GDP) in 1986 was approximately US$3.4 billion, or roughly US$1,000 per capita, ranking Paraguay only ahead of Bolivia among countries of South America. Paraguay was the most agricultural economy of South America, and that sector influenced the performance of virtually every other sector of the economy. The over dependence on agricultural economy and low tax collections deteriorated the already wide gap wealth distribution. The extreme poverty increased from 16% to 20% during 2001 to 2012, even as the economy grew. By 2013, it has a human development index of 0.669 which is even lower than Bolivia.\nThe Paraguayan economic miracle of the 1970s came to a halt in 1982 because of the completion of construction at Itaip\u00fa, lower commodity prices for cotton and soybeans, and a global recession. The economy recovered in 1984 and 1985, stagnated in 1986, and continued to expand in 1987 and 1988. Despite its rapid growth, the Paraguayan economy became increasingly dependent on soybeans and cotton for exports and overall economic dynamism. These two crops, however, remained subject to external price fluctuations and local weather conditions, both of which varied considerably.\nEconomic growth in the post-World War II period occurred in the context of political stability characterized by authoritarian rule and patronage politics. Government economic policies deviated little from 1954 to the late 1980s, consistently favoring a strong private-enterprise economy with a large role for foreign investment. Unlike most other Latin American economies, in Paraguay import tariffs were generally low, fiscal deficits manageable, and exchange rates not overvalued. These trends faltered in the 1980s as the government took a more active part in industry, deficits rose, and the national currency was generally overvalued and devalued numerous times. Throughout the post-World War II era, Paraguay had no personal income tax, and government revenues as a percentage of GDP were among the lowest in the world.\nDespite the sustained economic growth that marked the postwar period, the distribution of economic benefits was highly inequitable. Although GDP expanded rapidly in the 1970s, most economists estimated that income distribution worsened during the decade. Government spending on social services was particularly lacking. Paraguay's poverty was mostly a rural phenomenon, which increasingly involved competition for land in the eastern region near the Brazilian border, especially in the departments (administrative divisions) of Alto Paran\u00e1, Canendiy\u00fa, and Caaguaz\u00fa. Nonetheless, land tenure was not generally the acute social problem it was in many developing countries.\nAlthough Paraguay faced significant obstacles to future economic development, it displayed extraordinary potential. Paraguay contained little oil and no precious metals or sea coasts, but the country was self-sufficient in many areas and was endowed with fertile land, dense forests, and swift rivers. The process of opening up the eastern border region to economic activity and continued agricultural expansion was expected to effect rapid changes in once-isolated Paraguay. Likewise, the development of a series of hydroelectric plants along the R\u00edo Paran\u00e1 linked Paraguay to its neighbors and provided it access to cherished energy resources and badly needed export revenues. Finally, road construction united different departments of Paraguay and provided the country its first access to the Atlantic Ocean via Brazil. These processes of infrastructure development, hydroelectric expansion, agricultural colonization, and a cash crop explosion allowed Paraguay by the late 1980s to begin to tap its potential\nHistory of economic advancement.\nUntil the Spanish established Asunci\u00f3n in 1537, economic activity in Paraguay was limited to the subsistence agriculture of the Guaran\u00ed Indians. The Spanish, however, found little of economic interest in their colony, which had no precious metals and no sea coasts. The typical feudal Spanish economic system did not dominate colonial Paraguay, although the encomienda system was established. Economic relations were distinguished by the reducciones (reductions or townships) that were established by Jesuit missionaries from the early seventeenth century until the 1760s. The incorporation of Indians into these Jesuit agricultural communes laid the foundation for an agriculture-based economy that survived in the late twentieth century.\nThree years after Paraguay overthrew Spanish authority and gained its independence, the country's economy was controlled by the autarkic policies of Jos\u00e9 Gaspar Rodr\u00edguez de Francia (1814\u201340), who closed the young nation's borders to virtually all international trade. Landlocked, isolated, and underpopulated, Paraguay structured its economy around a centrally administered agricultural sector, extensive cattle grazing, and inefficient shipbuilding and textile industries. After the demise of de Francia, government policies focused on expanding international trade and stimulating economic development. The government built several roads and authorized British construction of a railroad.\nThe War of the Triple Alliance (1865\u201370) fundamentally changed the Paraguayan economy. Economic resources were employed in and destroyed by the war effort. Paraguay was occupied by its enemies in 1870; the countryside was in virtual ruin, the labor force was decimated, peasants were pushed into the environs of Asunci\u00f3n from the east and south, and the modernization of the preceding three decades was undone. Sleepy, self-sufficient Paraguay, whose advances in agriculture and quality of life had been the envy of many in the Southern Cone, became the most backward nation in that subregion.\nTo pay its substantial war debt, Paraguay sold large tracts of land to foreigners, mostly Argentines. These large land sales established the base of the present-day land tenure system, which is characterized by a skewed distribution of land. Unlike most of its neighbors, however, Paraguay's economy was controlled not by a traditional, landed elite, but by foreign companies. Many Paraguayans grew crops and worked as wage laborers on latifundios (large landholdings) typically owned by foreigners.\nThe late 1800s and the early 1900s saw a slow rebuilding of ports, roads, the railroad, farms, cattle stock, and the labor force. The country was slowly being repopulated by former Brazilian soldiers who had fought in the War of the Triple Alliance, and Paraguay's government encouraged European immigration. Although few in number, British, German, Italian, and Spanish investors and farmers helped modernize the country. Argentine, Brazilian, and British companies in the late 1800s purchased some of Paraguay's best land and started the first large-scale production of agricultural goods for export. One Argentine company, whose owner had purchased 15 percent of the immense Chaco region, processed massive quantities of tannin, which were extracted from the bark of the Chaco's ubiquitous quebracho (break-axe) hardwood. Large quantities of the extract were used by the region's thriving hide industry. Another focus of large-scale agro-processing was the yerba mat\u00e9 bush, whose leaves produced the potent tea that is the national beverage. Tobacco farming also flourished. Beginning in 1904, foreign investment increased as a succession of Liberal Party (Partido Liberal) administrations in Paraguay maintained a staunch laissez-faire policy.\nThe period of steady economic recovery came to an abrupt halt in 1932 as the country entered another devastating war. This time Paraguay fought Bolivia over possession of the Chaco and rumors of oil deposits. The war ended in 1935 after extensive human losses on both sides, and war veterans led the push for general social reform. During the 1930s and 1940s, the state passed labor laws, implemented agrarian reform, and assumed a role in modernization, influenced in part by the leadership of Juan Per\u00f3n in Argentina and Get\u00falio Vargas in Brazil. The 1940 constitution, for example, rejected the laissez-faire approach of previous Liberal governments. Reformist policies, however, did not enjoy a consensus, and by 1947 the country had entered into a civil war, which in turn initiated a period of economic chaos that lasted until the mid-1950s. During this period, Paraguay experienced the worst inflation in all of Latin America, averaging over 100 percent annually in the 1950s.\nAfter centuries of isolation, two devastating regional wars, and a civil war, in 1954 Paraguay entered a period of prolonged political and economic stability under the authoritarian rule of Alfredo Stroessner. Stroessner's economic policies took a middle course between social reform, desarrollismo, and laissez-faire, all in the context of patronage politics. Relative to previous governments, Stroessner took a fairly active role in the economy but reserved productive activities for the local and foreign private sectors. The new government's primary economic task was to arrest the country's rampant and spiraling price instability. In 1955 Stroessner fired the country's finance minister, who was unwilling to implement reforms, and in 1956 accepted an International Monetary Fund (IMF) stabilization plan that abolished export duties, lowered import tariffs, restricted credit, devalued the currency, and implemented strict austerity measures. Although the sacrifice was high, the plan helped bring economic stability to Paraguay. Labor unions retaliated with a major strike in 1958, but the new government, now firmly established, quelled the uprising and forced many labor leaders into exile; most of them remained there in the late 1980s.\nBy the 1960s, the economy was on a path of modest but steady economic growth. Real GDP growth during the 1960s averaged 4.2 percent a year, under the Latin American average of 5.7 percent but well ahead of the chaotic economy of the two previous decades. As part of the United States-sponsored Alliance for Progress, the government was encouraged to expand its planning apparatus for economic development. With assistance from the Organization of American States (OAS), the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), and the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA), in 1962 Paraguay established the Technical Planning Secretariat (Secretar\u00eda T\u00e9cnica de Planificaci\u00f3n\u2014STP), the major economic planning arm of the government. By 1965 the country had its first National Economic Plan, a two-year plan for 1965\u201366. This was followed by another two-year plan (1967\u201368) and then a series of five-year plans. Five-year plans\u2014only general policy statements\u2014were not typically adhered to or achieved and played a minimal role in Paraguay's economic growth and development. Compared with most Latin American countries, Paraguay had a small public sector. Free enterprise dominated the economy, export promotion was favored over import substitution, agriculture continued to dominate industry, and the economy remained generally open to international trade and market mechanisms.\nIn an economic sense, the 1970s constituted Paraguay's miracle decade. Real GDP grew at over 8 percent a year and exceeded 10 percent from 1976 to 1981\u2014a faster growth rate than in any other economy in Latin America. Four coinciding developments accounted for Paraguay's rapid growth in the 1970s. The first was the completion of the road from Asunci\u00f3n to Puerto Presidente Stroessner and to Brazilian seaports on the Atlantic, ending traditional dependence on access through Argentina and opening the east to many for the first time. The second was the signing of the Treaty of Itaip\u00fa with Brazil in 1973. Beyond the obvious economic benefits of such a massive project, Itaip\u00fa helped to create a new mood of optimism in Paraguay about what a small, isolated country could attain. The third event was land colonization, which resulted from the availability of land, the existence of economic opportunity, the increased price of crops, and the newly gained accessibility of the eastern border region. Finally, the skyrocketing price of soybeans and cotton led farmers to quadruple the number of hectares planted with these two crops. As the 1970s progressed, soybeans and cotton came to dominate the country's employment, production, and exports.\nThese developments shared responsibility for establishing thriving economic relations between Paraguay and the world's sixth largest economy, Brazil. Contraband trade became the dominant economic force on the border between the two countries, with Puerto Presidente Stroessner serving as the hub of such smuggling activities. Observers contended that contraband was accepted by many Paraguayan government officials, some of whom were reputed to have benefited handsomely. Many urban dwellers' shelves were stocked with contraband luxury items.\nThe Paraguayan government's emphasis on industrial activity increased noticeably in the 1970s. One of the most important components of the new industrial push was Law 550, also referred to as Law 550/75 or the Investment Promotion Law for Social and Economic Development. Law 550 opened Paraguay's doors even further to foreign investors by providing income-tax breaks, duty-free capital imports, and additional incentives for companies that invested in priority areas, especially the Chaco. Law 550 was successful. Investments by companies in the United States, Europe, and Japan comprised, according to some estimates, roughly a quarter of new investment. Industrial policies also encouraged the planning of more state-owned enterprises, including ones involved in producing ethanol, cement, and steel.\nMuch of Paraguay's rural population, however, missed out on the economic development. Back roads remained inadequate, preventing peasants from bringing produce to markets. Social services, such as schools and clinics, were severely lacking. Few people in the countryside had access to potable water, electricity, bank credit, or public transportation. As in other economies that underwent rapid growth, income distribution was believed to have worsened in Paraguay during the 1970s in both relative and absolute terms. By far the greatest problem that the rural population faced, however, was competition for land. Multinational agribusinesses, Brazilian settlers, and waves of Paraguayan colonists rapidly increased the competition for land in the eastern border region. Those peasants who lacked proper titles to the lands they occupied were pushed to more marginal areas; as a result, an increasing number of rural clashes occurred, including some with the government.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2018, Paraguay was the 6th largest producer of soy in the world, with 11 million tons produced (behind the US, Brazil, Argentina, China and India). In the same year, the country produced 5.3 million tons of maize, and 6.1 million tons of sugarcane, ranking 21st in the world in both; this year, the country also produced 3.3 million tons of cassava, 892 thousand tons of rice, 722 thousand tons of wheat, 223 thousand tons of orange, 116 thousand tons of yerba mate, 107 thousand tons of sorghum, in addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.\nIndustry.\nIndustry, especially the manufacturing sector, historically was linked to agricultural processing until the 1970s, when the construction of hydroelectric plants and new industrial incentives began to broaden the industrial base. Industry was composed principally of manufacturing and construction. Paraguay had no real mining sector, but the manufacture of construction materials included limited mining activity. Manufacturing and construction in the economy in the late 1980s remained dependent on developments in other sectors, such as agriculture and energy, for their growth. Although industry was becoming more visible in Paraguay in the 1980s, industry's share of GDP actually declined in the 1970s and 1980s because of more rapid growth in agriculture.\nManufacturing.\nManufacturing accounted for 16.3 percent of GDP in 1986 and employed roughly 13 percent of the labor force, making Paraguay one of the least industrialized nations in Latin America. Manufactured exports, by most definitions, accounted for less than 5 percent of total exports; when semiprocessed agricultural products were included, however, that figure reached 77 percent. The growth of the country's manufacturing industries was hampered by numerous structural obstacles. These included a small internal market, limited physical infrastructure, costly access to seaports, a historical lack of energy production, and the openness of Paraguay's economy to the more industrialized economies of Brazil and Argentina. Another significant factor was the ubiquity and profitability of smuggling operations, which encouraged importing and reexporting rather than production.\nParaguay's earliest manufacturing industries processed hides and leather from its abundant cattle and tannin from quebracho trees. Small-scale manufacturing, especially textiles, flourished under the Francia dictatorship, when the nation's borders were closed. The War of the Triple Alliance, however, devastated what little industry and infrastructure the country had, causing Paraguay to enter the twentieth century as an almost completely agricultural society. Land sales to foreigners stimulated increased agricultural processing in the early twentieth century, including meat packing and the processing of flour, oilseeds, sugar, beer, and pectin extract. After the early 1900s, small-scale manufacturing in all subsectors grew at a slow, but steady pace, with some of the fastest growth occurring because of the shortages during World War II.\nThe government's role in promoting industry increased in the postwar era, and in 1955 the Stroessner government undertook the country's first industrial census. Over the next twenty years, the government enacted a number of industrial incentive measures, the most important of which was Law 550. Law 550 promoted export-oriented industries or those that would save foreign exchange. It also provided liberal fiscal incentives for companies to develop specific areas of the country, especially the departments of Alto Paraguay, Nueva Asunci\u00f3n, Chaco, and Boquer\u00f3n. Incentives for business were related mostly to import-duty exemptions, but they included a variety of tax breaks and placed no restrictions on foreign ownership. Approximately one-fourth of all new manufacturing investment from 1975 to 1985 was registered under Law 550. Most foreign investments originated from Brazil, West Germany, the United States, Portugal, and Argentina in that order of importance. The dynamic processes of agricultural colonization and hydroelectric development, combined with such attractive industrial incentives, caused manufacturing to grow at an unprecedented rate in the late 1970s and early 1980s.\nUnlike many other Latin American governments, which followed an import-substitution industrial policy, the Paraguayan government had played a minimalist role in the economy through most of the postwar era, curtailing import tariffs and maintaining a realistic exchange rate. In the 1980s, however, Paraguay's exchange rate became overvalued and several state-owned heavy industry plants became operational.\nIn the late 1980s, the major subsectors of manufacturing were food, beverages, and tobacco; textiles, clothing, leather, and shoes; wood and related products; and chemicals, petroleum, and plastics. Despite some increases in heavy industry in the economy during the 1970s and 1980s, Paraguayan industry was generally small-scale. Manufacturing production remained focused on consumer goods, and capital goods comprised under 5 percent of industrial output. In fact, in the 1980s Paraguay did not contain even one of Latin America's 1,000 largest companies, at least some of which were found in most other countries in the region. Virtually every subsector of Paraguay's manufacturing was characterized by numerous small- to medium-sized firms and a few large firms, which often were foreign owned. Most companies operated well below their capacity.\nThe food, beverages, and tobacco subsector has been the core manufacturing activity throughout Paraguay's history. In the late 1980s, this subsector continued to dominate, accounting for about 45 percent of industrial activity, depending on agricultural output in a given year. Agro-processing involved a large number of small, inefficient, and often family-run firms as well as a small number of large, efficient, and usually foreign-owned firms. The larger firms produced only the most lucrative items, such as oilseeds, meats, and various beverages, often for export. Some of the most common small-scale producers manufactured milled items, baked goods, sugar and molasses, dairy products, candy, manioc flour, vinegar, coffee, and tobacco. Along with raw agricultural produce, processed and semiprocessed food generated nearly all of the country's exports in the late 1980s. But, as with other manufacturing subsectors, the profitability of the food subsector often was impaired by contraband items from Brazil and Argentina, such as flour, meat, or dairy products. Paraguayan goods crossed borders unofficially, as well, thus lowering official exports.\nThe second most important manufacturing activity also relied on agricultural inputs for its base. Utilizing Paraguay's rich endowment of hardwood trees, the wood subsector represented about 15 percent of all industrial activity and contributed over 8 percent of exports in the 1980s. The most voluminous wood export was lumber, which was produced by hundreds of small sawmills throughout the central and eastern border regions. In addition to saw wood, mills also produced a variety of milled wood, plywood, chipboard, and parquet flooring. Although the country cut and processed only a fraction of its hundreds of species, Paraguayan wood was known for its quality. The country also contained several small paper companies and one large paper and cardboard factory located at Villeta.\nTextiles, clothing, leather, and shoes comprised the third largest manufacturing subsector. These industries were traditional, grounded in the nation's abundance of inputs like cotton fibers, cattle hides, and tannin extract. The subsector accounted for about 10 percent of all manufacturing. The textile industry performed spinning, weaving, and dyeing operations and produced finished fabrics that amounted to over 100 million tons in 1986. Most fabrics were derived from cotton fibers, but a growing number of synthetic and wool fibers also were produced. Textile production provided inputs to approximately sixty clothing firms that operated under capacity and were generally inefficient. As with so many other manufacturers, clothing companies met stiff competition from widespread unregistered imports, which often originated in Asia and typically entered across the Brazilian border. The leather industry was characterized by 200 or so small tanneries dotting the Paraguayan countryside. In addition, many medium and two large tanneries fashioned leather goods. The leather industry operated at only about 40 percent of capacity, however. The shoe industry comprised a few hundred small workshops and a dozen or so medium sized firms, which produced some 5 million pairs of leather and synthetic shoes a year.\nThe processing of petroleum, chemicals, and plastics repeated an increasing activity. In the late 1980s, this subsector represented less than 5 percent of industrial activity, but its share of manufacturing output was expanding because of the growth of heavy industry in Paraguay, especially industry related to the energy sector. The country also produced fertilizers, industrial gases, tanning chemicals, varnishes, and detergents. In 1987 a group of Japanese investors was considering the construction of a new fertilizer plant with a 70,000-ton capacity per year. Since the early 1980s, ethanol was being produced in large quantities, and the government was considering producing methanol. Also processed were paints, soaps, candles, perfumes, and pharmaceuticals. One of Paraguay's fastest growing industries was the new, relatively modern plastics subsector, which supplied a wide variety of goods to the local market.\nStructure of the economy.\nThe most important component of the Paraguayan economy is the farming sector, which contributed 27% to GDP in 2006. The participation of commerce was 20.2%, and that of other services, including government, 38.4%. Industry's part (including mining and construction) was about 20%.\nAfter years of economic crisis, between 1999 and 2002, the Paraguayan economy grew at between 2.9 and 4.1% per year from 2003 to 2006. For 2007, the estimated growth is about 6.4%. Inflation in 2007 reached 6.0%.\nMost enterprises are small, micro and individual ones, including subsistence jobs like street vendors. Only 4% of the Paraguayan labor force works in companies with more than 50 employees.\nIn June 2007 external foreign exchange reserves amounted to US$2153 million, and the foreign official debt US$2154 million, close to parity. The fiscal surplus is provisionally reported as 0.5% of GDP in 2006 and 2007. Paraguay's economy (GDP) grew 5.8% in 2008, fastest growing sector being agriculture with 10.5% growth.\nAgriculture accounts for about 20 percent of Paraguay's annual gross domestic product (25 percent in 2004) and virtually all of the country's export earnings. It is Paraguay's largest and most consistent source of employment, employing about 45 percent of the working population. In addition to those engaged in the formal agricultural sector, thousands of Paraguayan families survive through subsistence farming.\nParaguay produces enough basic food to be largely self-sufficient. Corn, cassava, and wheat are the main food crops for local consumption. \nThe global surge in grain prices 2007/2008 was a major impulse for the agricultural sector. Wheat cultivation expanded, so did rice. Most significant was the increase of soy production. In 2004 Paraguay had about 1.6 million hectares dedicated to genetically modified (GM) crops. Export value of soy and its derivates increased from US$1,25 billion in 2007 to US$2,54billion in 2008 \nParaguay's eastern plains as well as the Chaco support the country's dairy and ranching industry. Behind soybeans, beef exports make up a significant part of Paraguay's agriculture sector. Additionally, Paraguay produces an adequate supply of beef, pork, and dairy products to meet domestic needs. The discovery of cases of foot-and-mouth disease in 2002 and 2003 led to a ban on Paraguayan beef in many countries. However, in 2004 Paraguay's meat production and exports rebounded. As a result of rising international prices and the recovery of important markets like Chile or Russia, Paraguay's meat exports rose to US$143 million in 2004. They reached US$353 million in 2007 and US$597 million in 2008. Presently, Paraguay has a national herd numbering between 9 and 10 million head of cattle.\nParaguay's forests adequately meet domestic needs for lumber and fuelwood. However, logging for export, both legally and illegally, has thinned Paraguay's once abundant forests, resulting in a ban on the export of logs since the 1970s. \nMore than 90% of the native rainforest of Paraguay's eastern half have been lost between 1975 and 2008. In the western half, the Chaco, virgin forest is lost to cattle ranching at an annual rate of more than 200.000 hectare (2008). Sustainable wood cultivation is now on the increase.\nThe fishing industry in Paraguay exists almost solely to meet domestic demand.\nMining and minerals.\nUnlike many South American countries, Paraguay has few mineral resources and very little history of mining success. Foreign companies have explored Paraguay in recent years, searching for overlooked mineral deposits. Small extraction projects exist, seeking lime, clay, and the raw materials necessary to make cement, but the country's iron and steel manufacturers must import raw materials from neighboring countries.\nIn 2010 CIC Resources Inc., the same company that discovered the copper deposits in Chile, claims to have discovered 21 billion metric tons of titanium, which could be the biggest titanium deposit in the world, in Alto Parana near frontier with Brazil.\nIndustry and manufacturing.\nThe industrial sector produces about 25 percent of Paraguay's gross domestic product (GDP) and employs about 31 percent of the labor force. Output grew by 2.9 percent in 2004, after five years of declining production. Traditionally an agricultural economy, Paraguay is showing some signs of long-term industrial growth. The pharmaceutical industry is quickly supplanting foreign suppliers in meeting the country's drug needs. Paraguayan companies now meet 70 percent of domestic consumption and also have begun exporting drugs. Strong growth also is evident in the production of edible oils, garments, organic sugar, meat processing, and steel. Nevertheless, capital for further investment in the industrial sector of the economy is scarce. Following the revelation of widespread financial corruption in the 1990s, the government is still working to improve credit options for Paraguayan businesses.\nIn 2003 manufacturing made up 13.6 percent of the GDP, and the sector employed about 11 percent of the working population in 2000. Paraguay's primary manufacturing focus is on food and beverages. Wood products, paper products, hides and furs, and non-metallic mineral products also contribute to manufacturing totals. Steady growth in the manufacturing GDP during the 1990s (1.2 percent annually) laid the foundation for 2002 and 2003, when the annual growth rate rose to 2.5 percent.\nEnergy.\nParaguay relies almost solely on hydroelectric power to meet its energy needs. The Itaip\u00fa Dam, completed in 1984, has the world's second largest power-generating capacity: 13.3 gigawatts. The dam is located on the Paraguay River, and Paraguay and Brazil evenly share the ownership, operation, and electricity generated. Additionally, Paraguay co-owns another major hydropower plant, Yacyret\u00e1, with Argentina. Paraguay uses only a small portion of the energy it generates through Itaip\u00fa and Yacyret\u00e1. In 2002 Paraguay generated more than 48 billion kilowatt-hours of energy. It consumed only 2.5 billion kilowatt-hours while exporting 45.9 billion kilowatt-hours. Paraguay will have even more hydroelectricity to export when planned new turbines are installed at Itaip\u00fa and the Yacyret\u00e1 dam is fully completed. In 2007 electricity production rose to 70 TWh, and exports reached 64 TWh which put Paraguay in second place worldwide as an exporter of electrical power (And in the first place as a net exporter since France, the Number one exporter in the World with 67 TWh, also imports 10 TWh, while Paraguay does not import any).\nParaguay has no oil reserves; it relies on imported oil to meet its limited need for oil-produced energy. The Paraguayan government owns Petr\u00f3leos Paraguayos, which is responsible for all distribution of oil products. The state accepts bids from international oil companies, selecting a few companies annually to meet the country's demand. Presently, Paraguay does not produce or consume natural gas, but consumes LPG imported mainly from Argentina.\nServices.\nThe services sector made up nearly 50 percent of Paraguay's gross domestic product in 2004 and employed about 19 percent of Paraguay's working population. The importation of goods, especially from Argentina and Brazil, for sale and illegal reexportation creates service industry jobs. The services sector had a moderate growth rate of 0.9 percent from 1990 to 2003. The sector decreased by 7.8 percent in 2002, before rebounding in 2003 with a 1.6 percent growth rate. Instability in the economy and a large black market have hampered development of the formal services sector in Paraguay.\nTourism.\nParaguay has a small tourism industry. Total tourism receipts declined annually from 2000 through 2002. In 2003 Paraguay's hotel occupancy rate was 38 percent. It increased by 15 percent in 2004. Small gains in tourism have come from business rather than leisure travellers. For many years, Paraguay served as a central market for trafficable, duty-free goods. However, crackdowns by the governments of Brazil and Argentina have stemmed the flow of shoppers travelling to Paraguay looking for trafficable items.\nBanking and finance.\nParaguay's banking and financial services industry is still recovering from the liquidity crisis of 1995, when news of widespread corruption resulted in the closure of several significant banks. Reform efforts spurred by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank helped restore some credibility to Paraguay's banking industry. Still, a paucity of credit options hinders the overall economy. Paraguay has a long history as a money-laundering center. The government has taken steps to curb the problem, but enforcement of anti-laundering legislation remains inconsistent.\nForeign companies either partially or wholly own most banks and financial institutions in Paraguay. Paraguayan banks hold less than 10 percent of deposits. Of the 16 banks operating in Paraguay in 2003, 50 percent were wholly foreign-owned and 25 percent were partially owned by foreign companies. Paraguay's Central Bank exists to stabilize the financial sector, making sure that another run on banks, such as the one that occurred in 1995, does not recur. The Superintendencia de Bancos regulates the banking system, monitoring the percentage of non-performing loans in the banking system. Bank deposits rose significantly in 2004, along with the percentage of local currency in total deposits. Local currency deposits increased by 26 percent in 2004, a sign that Paraguayans are gaining confidence in the stability of Paraguayan currency. In another promising development, interest rates dropped dramatically in 2004, from 50 percent in 2003 to 27 percent in 2004.\nParaguay's stock market, the Bolsa de Valores y Productos de Asunci\u00f3n, began trading in October 1993. The tradition of family-owned companies and economic instability kept investment low throughout the 1990s. The value of shares on the Asunci\u00f3n stock exchange rose by 390 percent in 2004, reaching US$17.5 million.\nLabor.\nParaguay's formal labour force was estimated to total about 2.7 million workers in 2004. About 45 percent worked in the agricultural sector, 31 percent in the industrial sector, and 19 percent in the services sector. Unemployment was estimated at 15 percent. Paraguay's constitution guarantees the right of workers to unionize and bargain collectively. About 15 percent of workers are members of one of Paraguay's 1,600 unions. Strikes are legal and not uncommon.\nThe 2001 census found that 5 percent of Paraguay's workforce was under the age of 14. Although Paraguay ratified the International Labour Organization's Minimum Age Convention in 2004, child labour continues to be prevalent. Nearly 14 percent of children between the ages of 5 and 17 are employed, many in poor conditions and for negligible pay. The government has mandated a minimum wage of approximately US$158 per month for private-sector employees. Government employees have no minimum wage. The standard workweek is 48 hours. In 2004 Paraguay's unemployment rate stood at 15 percent.\nCurrency, exchange rate, and inflation.\nParaguay's currency is the guarani (PYG). In mid-October 2005, US$1 equaled about PYG6155.\nPrice inflation fell dramatically between 2003 and 2004, from 14.2 percent to a 30-year low of 4.3 percent. President's Duarte's economic reforms and austerity programs have produced results more rapidly than many expected. As of 2005, experts forecast that the inflation rate in Paraguay likely would rise in coming years but has remained below 10 percent.\nForeign economic relations.\nParaguay is a member of the Common Market of the South (Mercado Com\u00fan del Sur or Mercosur). Most of Paraguay's trade takes place with Uruguay, Brazil and Argentina. In 2002 Paraguay conducted more than US$400 million in trade with Argentina and nearly US$800 million with Brazil. Paraguay is also a member of the Inter-American Development Bank, Latin American Integration Association, and Latin American Economic System and a signatory to the agreement creating the South American Community of Nations. In 2004 Paraguay signed an energy cooperation agreement with Venezuela to purchase oil and petroleum. Venezuela agreed to concessional financing that allowed Paraguay to pay over a 15-year period at a nominal interest rate.\nImports totaled US$3.3 billion in 2004. Principal import commodities included automobiles, chemical products, consumer goods, tobacco, petroleum, and machinery. Brazil was the leading source of imports to Paraguay (24.3 percent), followed by the United States (22.3 percent), Argentina (16.2 percent), China (9.9 percent), and Hong Kong (5 percent). Experts note that import statistics are difficult to confirm for Paraguay because as much as half of all imports are illegally re-exported to Argentina or Brazil. Imports from Mercosur countries continue to rise, up to 57 percent in 2003.\nParaguay's export revenues totaled about US$2.9 billion in 2004. Agricultural commodities continue to drive Paraguay's export totals. Soybeans are particularly vital, accounting for 35 percent of total export revenues in 2003. Other agricultural cash crops include cotton, sugarcane, cassava, sunflowers, wheat, and corn. Other significant exports include feed, meat, edible oils, electricity, wood, and leather. Even as Paraguayan export revenue has fluctuated, Brazil remained Paraguay's principal export destination (27.8 percent in 2004), followed by Uruguay (15.9 percent), Italy (7.1 percent), Switzerland (5.6 percent), Argentina \n(4.3 percent), and the Netherlands (4.2 percent). In 2003 nearly 60 percent of Paraguayan exports went to Mercosur countries.\nParaguay had a negative trade balance of about US$400 million in 2004. Higher earnings from soybeans and cotton could not offset the surge in imported consumer goods and petroleum products.\nAfter years of negative balances, Paraguay achieved a positive balance of payments totaling US$234 million in 2003. In 2004, however, the current account had an estimated deficit of US$35.1 million.\nParaguay has a sustainable debt level according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). External debt totaled about US$3.4 billion in 2004, low compared to most Latin American countries. Continued reductions in Paraguay's debt to gross domestic product ratio are expected in coming years. Paraguay paid US$412 million in debt service to the IMF in 2004.\nForeign investment in Paraguay nearly disappeared in 2002. After direct foreign investment of US$84 million in 2001, only US$9 million in investment came from abroad in 2002. This drop was largely the result of the financial crisis in Argentina and the banking collapse in Paraguay. Direct foreign investment rebounded in 2003, reaching US$90.8 million for the year.\nParaguay has depended on the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank for economic development assistance. The World Bank has promised Paraguay assistance totaling US$325 million between 2003 and 2007. Projects currently underway in Paraguay aim to improve education, transportation, and rural development.\nTransport.\nThe Paraguayan road network includes almost 4,500 kilometers of paved roads and nearly 60,000 kilometers of secondary roads. The density of the road network is higher in the oriental region, and lower in the Chaco area. However, in 2007 a paved connection to the Bolivian border was completed across the Chaco region.\nThe Paraguay-Paran\u00e1 waterway constitutes an essential route for the transport of exported and imported goods.\nThe railway which connects Asunci\u00f3n to Encarnaci\u00f3n actually does not operate, but there is still a connection between Encarnaci\u00f3n and Posadas (Argentina) for the transport of agricultural goods.\nParaguay has two international airports, Silvio Pettirossi International Airport, in Asunci\u00f3n, and Guarani International Airport, in Ciudad del Este, and several secondary airports in other parts of the country.\nMedia and communications.\nThere are five national newspapers and a larger number of local publications. There are five Paraguayan TV stations. Additionally, essential international stations can be received by cable in the main urban areas.\nThe fixed line network is controlled by the state-owned COPACO Company. The cell phone network is open to private operators. There are four competing mobile phone operators in Paraguay. During the last few years mobile phone coverage of the population has been far more extensive than fixed line coverage.\nStatistics.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132019 (with FMI estimates for 2020-2026). \nGDP - composition by sector:\nLabor force:\n3.428 million (2017 est.)\nLabor force - by occupation:\nUnemployment rate:\n6.5% (2017 est.)\nPopulation below poverty line:\n22.2% (2015 est.)\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\nDistribution of family income - Gini index:\n51.7 (2015)\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n3.6% (2017 est.)\nInvestment (gross fixed):\n21.2% of GDP (2005 est.)\nBudget:\nPublic debt:\n25.6% of GDP (2017 est.)\nAgriculture - products:\ncotton, sugarcane, soybeans, corn, wheat, tobacco, cassava (tapioca), fruits, vegetables; beef, pork, eggs, milk; timber\nIndustries:\nsugar, cement, textiles, beverages, wood products, steel, metallurgic, electric power\nIndustrial production growth rate:\n6% (2017 est.)\nElectricity:\nElectricity - production by source:\nOil:\nCurrent account balance:\n$543 million (2017 est.)\nExports:\n$11.53 billion f.o.b. (2017 est.)\nExports - partners:\nBrazil 31.9%, Argentina 15.9%, Chile 6.9%, Russia 5.9% (2017)\nImports:\n$10.37 billion f.o.b. (2017 est.)\nImports - partners:\nChina 31.3%, Brazil 23.4%, Argentina 12.9%, US 7.4% (2017)\nReserves of foreign exchange and gold:\n$7.504 billion (2017 est.)\nDebt - external:\n$17.35 billion (2017 est.)\nEconomic aid - recipient:\nNA\nCurrency:\n1 guarani (G) = 100 centimos\nExchange rates:\nguarani (G) per US$ - 5,628.1 (2017) 4,555.00 (2011), 6,158.47 (2005), 5,974.6 (2004), 6,424.34 (2003), 5,716.26 (2002), 4,105.92 (2001), 3,332.0 (January 2000), 3,119.1 (1999), 2,726.5 (1998), 2,177.9 (1997), 2,056.8 (1996), 1,963.0 (1995); note - since early 1998, the exchange rate has operated as a managed float; prior to that, the exchange rate was determined freely in the market\nFiscal year:\ncalendar year\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23426", "revid": "11099276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23426", "title": "Telecommunications in Paraguay", "text": "Telecommunications in Paraguay are meager. Paraguay has the lowest fixed-line telephone density in South America, with 5.6 lines per 100 residents, compared with 8.7 per 100 in Bolivia, 21.9 in Brazil, and 24.9 in Argentina.\nTelephones.\nThe state-owned Corporaci\u00f3n Paraguaya de Comunicaciones (Copaco) is known for inefficiency and overstaffing. Privatization was attempted in 2002, but failed in the midst of the banking scandal.\nWith only 5.6 percent of the population having access to a land-line connection, the meager telephone network has resulted in rapid growth in mobile phone use.\nRadio and television.\nAs in many South American countries, radio is an important disseminator of information in Paraguay.\nCensorship.\nThe law provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. Individuals criticize the government publicly and privately, generally without reprisal or impediment. There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitored e-mail or Internet chat rooms. Individuals and groups could engage in the expression of views via the Internet, including by\ne-mail.\nMedia crackdown following June 2012 Impeachment of Fernando Lugo.\nFollowing 22 June 2012 parliamentary coup that ousted President Fernando Lugo and made then Vice President, Federico Franco, the new president, the new government appears to be in the process of assuming complete control of the state-owned media and its hostility is affecting journalists with the privately owned media as well.\nIn what is seem as an attempt by the government to further control the media, the leader of the Paraguay Broadcasters Union (URP) has called for action against \"more than 1,200 pirate radios operating in the country\" which he accused of \"inciting crime\" on many occasions. He also asked the telecoms watchdog CONATEL to withdraw the licences of all stations implicated in what he termed illegal acts, without specifying what they were. There is tension between community radio stations, many of which were staunch opponents of 22 June coup, and the new government due to changes in the recently amended Telecommunications law that could adversely affect the future of community radio stations, many of which are poorly funded and not yet in possession of broadcasting licences. New clauses in the law place a ban on advertising on such stations, restrict their transmission range, and open the possibility of legal action against their representatives if they broadcast without a licence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23427", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23427", "title": "Transport in Paraguay", "text": " \nParaguay's transportation system ranges from adequate to poor, largely depending on the region of the country. The country has a network of roads, railroads, rivers, and airports, but significant infrastructure and regulation improvements are needed.\nRoads.\nEstimates vary on the total extent of Paraguay's road system, from more than to less than . The discrepancies seem to be the result of differing standards regarding what constitutes a road. Thousands of kilometers of unpaved rural roads exist. Paraguay has about of paved, major feeder roads. The core network connects Asunci\u00f3n, Encarnaci\u00f3n, and Ciudad del Este, on the border with Brazil, where it connects later with the Port of Paranagu\u00e1. In 2024, the first duplicated highway in Paraguay was created, the PY-02. The Trans-Chaco highway is only partially finished, the paved portion ending at Mariscal Estigarribia. Bolivia's portion of the highway, in contrast, is entirely paved. For trade purposes, the paved highways from Ciudad del Este to the Brazilian port of Paranagu\u00e1 are particularly important. Additionally, the roads connecting Paraguay to Buenos Aires are adequate.\nRoute 15 has been one of the central points in the country's road advancement. This highway (currently under construction) is expected to become an international logistics center by becoming part of the Bi-Oceanic Corridor, and being the shortest passage between the Chilean ports of Antofagasta and Iquique on the Pacific Ocean and the Brazilian port of Santos on the Atlantic Ocean. In February 2022, Paraguay inaugurated 275\u00a0km of the road (about half of the route), connecting Carmelo Peralta (Alto Paraguay), on the border with Brazil, to Loma Plata (Boquer\u00f3n), in the center of the country. In 2025, another 224\u00a0km were already being paved between the cities of Mariscal Estigarribia and Pozo Hondo, on the border with Argentina, with completion scheduled for 2026, basically completing the road.\nRailways.\nThe government owns the country's sole railroad company, including a line from Asunci\u00f3n to Encarnaci\u00f3n. An effort to privatize the company in 2002 failed when no buyer could be secured because of the steep investment required to make the line profitable. Currently, only a small section of the line is open. It is used for tourist traffic. Paraguay's railroads operate on a standard 1.435-meter gauge.\nThe total length of rail in Paraguay is . of that is standard gauge at . Another is narrow-gauge at , and of the total railway is privately owned.\nInland waterways.\nParaguay has of inland waterways. The Paraguay and Paran\u00e1 are the country's two main rivers. The Paraguay River, with headwaters at Mato Grosso, Brazil, flows southward, converging with the Paran\u00e1 in southwestern Paraguay, and then flowing to the R\u00edo de la Plata estuary in Argentina, the entrance for the great majority of ships servicing Paraguay's ports.\nPorts and harbors.\nVilleta, located on the Paraguay River south of Asunci\u00f3n, serves as Paraguay's primary port. Asunci\u00f3n, long the country's only modern port, Encarnaci\u00f3n (on the Paran\u00e1 River), and San Antonio serve as the country's other major ports. Paraguay's ports are split between state and private ownership. The country's twenty private ports, however, are far more efficient, handling nearly 90% of soybean exports.\nMerchant marine.\n\"Total\": 110\n\"Container ship\": 3\n\"General cargo\": 25\n\"Oil tanker\": 5\n\"Other\": 77 (2021)\nAirports.\nAs of 2013, Paraguay has 799 airports but only 15 with paved runways. The airport serving Asunci\u00f3n, Silvio Pettirossi International Airport, is the country's major airport for international and domestic flights. Another airport is Guaran\u00ed International Airport, located near Ciudad del Este and the Brazilian border, but it has been unable to compete with the nearby international airport at Foz do Igua\u00e7u in Brazil. Improvements in technology are needed to bring Paraguay's airports up to international standards. Paraguay privatized the state-owned L\u00edneas A\u00e9reas Paraguayas in 1994."}
{"id": "23428", "revid": "50561474", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23428", "title": "Armed Forces of Paraguay", "text": "Combined military forces of Paraguay\nThe Armed Forces of Paraguay () officially the Armed Forces of the Nation () consist of the Paraguayan army, Paraguayan navy (including naval aviation and marine corps) and air force.\nThe constitution of Paraguay establishes the president of Paraguay as the commander-in-chief.\nParaguay has compulsory military service, and all 18-year-old males and 17-year-olds in the year of their 18th birthday are liable for one year of active duty. The 1992 constitution allows for conscientious objection to obligatory military service, it was legislated and sanctioned by both chambers of the Congress, to be promulgated by the Executive Power on June the 17th of 2010. This law is known as Law number 4013/10 \"\"That established the exercise of the right to conscientious objection to obligatory military service and establishes the substitute service for it for the benefit of the civilian population\".\"\nIn July 2005, military aid in the form of U.S. Special Forces began arriving at Paraguay's Mariscal Estigarribia air base, a sprawling complex built in 1982.\nArmy.\nIn land forces the Paraguayan Army is composed of a Presidential Guards Regiment, composed two battalions (infantry and military police), an armored squadron, and a battery of field artillery, plus the operationally attached Mounted Ceremonial Squadron \"Aca Caraya\" (which serves independently but as the mounted escort in state events, and serves as part of the 4th Cavalry Regiment). Their equipment includes three Argentinean modified M-4 tanks, four EE-9 armored cars, four EE-11 armored personnel carriers (APCs), three M-9 half-tracks mounting 20mm guns, and four M-101 105\u00a0mm howitzers. Arguably, this \"flagship\" of military rule is structurally and physically the strongest of the EP. The REP is an independent unit from other commands. The EP features two artillery groups (GAC 1\u201312 88\u00a0mm QF-25 and GAC 2\u201312 105mm M-101) and one antiaircraft artillery group (GAA 13 40\u00a0mm L 40/60, Oerlikon 20\u00a0mm cannons, and six M-55 4x12, 7.0\u00a0mm).\nSix battalions of combat engineers, one communications battalion, one Special Forces battalion, seven regiments of infantry, six regiments of cavalry (R.C.-2 equipped with 12 M3A1, five operational, 20 M9 half-tracks modernized and R.C.-3: 24 EE-9 Cascavels, eight EE-11 Urutu APCs plus utility trucks for motorized infantry). This has little organic aviation available to it.\nEach corps has a weapons school run by its command. The logistical command manages 10 addresses materials, mobilization, health care, etc. The command of the Army Institute of Education administers three schools, commissioned and noncommissioned officers, a military academy, and the CIMEFOR (a center for pre-military study that trains Reserve officers).\nEach of the nine divisions that make up the three corps has one or two regiments of infantry or cavalry, its platoon of engineers, its communications section, military police units, etc.\nNavy.\nAlthough Paraguay is a landlocked country, it has a strong naval tradition by virtue of the fact that it has access to the Atlantic Ocean through the Paraguay\u2013Paran\u00e1 rivers. The Paraguayan Navy has twelve bases. The main base is the Puerto Sajonia in Asunci\u00f3n, followed by Bahia Negra, Ciudad del Este, Encarnacion, Salto del Guaira. It also has facilities in Puerto Sajonia for helicopters and airplanes in SGAS. Naval personnel including Marine Corps aviation personnel, and the naval inward waters prefecture equal about 8,950. The Marine Corps have 800 marines, of which 400 are assigned to one commando unit with the rest being organized into a single battalion consisting of three companies.\nIn terms of vessels, the Navy has 34 surface ships, some of which have reached centenarian age. (This is due in part to limited use and floating in fresh water.) The main vessels and the flagship of the Paraguay Navy is still \"Paraguay\", which was commissioned prior to Paraguay's involvement in the Chaco War. It has a further four patrol vessels, of which the oldest was commissioned in 1908 and the newest in 1985. The Navy has 17 patrol boats of various drafts, four of which were donated by Taiwan and the United States, while the other 13 were built locally. The rest of the fleet is composed of tugboats, barges, landing craft, transports, and a presidential yacht. The new additions are four Croc-class riverine vessels from Australia, plus 43 locally built riverline patrol vessels constructed from 2006 to 2009. For air support, one Helibras HB350 helicopter is used to provide SAR, MEDEVAC and utility work\nParaguay (C1) has a sister ship, Humaita (C2), that was turned into a museum ship after she ceased operations in 1983, but hasn't functioned as such this last decade. Humaita is in poor shape. (ABC Color News, 12/28/22)\nOrder of battle.\nCOMANFLOT: .(Fleet Forces Command)\nCOMIM: .(Fleet Marine Command)\n (GAHE), Sajonia\n (EHA)\n (EPG)\n (GAPROGEN)\n (GAEN)\n (Command)\n (HQ)\n (Pilar Naval Prefecture)\n (Alberdi Naval Prefecture)\n (Central Naval Prefecture)\n (Cencepcion Naval Prefecture)\n (Olimpo Naval Prefecture)\nAs of 2022, the Commander of the Paraguayan Navy is Rear Admiral Carlos Diaz. He is \"Contraalmirante, Comandante de la Flota de Guerra de la Armada\". (ABC Color, 12/28/22: \"Gunboat 'Humaita' returns to its normal position after worrying inclination\")\nAir Force.\nThe air force, the newest and smallest of the services, has about 1,100 personnel as of 2012. The Paraguayan Air Forces is organised in an Air Brigade of seven air groups and a brigade of paratroopers on battalion level. Almost all operating units are based in or around the Silvio Pettirossi International Airport (SGAS) in Asunci\u00f3n.\nThe units comprising the force are: the (TAG) with three fighter squadrons (numbered 1 to 3), respectively equipped with the MB-326, T-33 and EMB-312. The first two are not in operation, due to the withdrawal of their aircraft. The squadron \"Moros\", equipped with Tucanos, has only one squadrille (3 airplanes active). The Air Transport Group (GTA) operates aircraft of the CASA, DHC-6, and Beechcraft types. The Helicopter air group (HLG) has a SAR squadron, a utility squadron, and a squadron of attack craft, and is equipped with ex-Taiwanese UH-1H and Brazilian HB-350B aircraft. The Air Group Instruction (AFI) has T-25 and T-35 aircraft. Photogrammetric called air group (GAF) and group aviation maintenance section (SEMAER) do not have aircraft assigned. The Parachute Brigade operates CASA aircraft.\nBesides these groups is a command of Institutes of Education and one of regions air, this latter has nominal jurisdiction over 12 tracks and airports as six of these are considered Air Bases.\nPer Arasunu (December 2021-No. XVI), the magazine of the PAF, the current organizational structure:\n- Comandante Interino de la Fuerza Aerea Paraguaya (CC-Gral Div Aer)\n-- Jefe del Estado Mayor General de la Fuerza Aerea Paraguaya (CV-Gral Div Aer)\n--- Comandante de la Brigada Aerea (Gral Brig Aer)\n--- Comandante del Comando de Regiones Aereas (Gral Brig Aer)\n--- Comandante Interino de la Brigada Aerotransportada \"SP\" (CNEL DCEM)\n--- Comandante Interino del Comando de Instituteos Aeronauticos de Ensenanza (CNEL DCEM)\n--- Comandante Interino de la Brigada Logistica (CNEL DCEM)\nThe current PAF/CC is Arturo Javier Gonzalez Ocampo. The PAF/CV is Ruben Dario Piris Fernandez.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23429", "revid": "46505507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23429", "title": "Foreign relations of Paraguay", "text": "Paraguayan foreign policy has concentrated on maintaining good relations with its neighbors, and it has been an active proponent of regional co-operation. It is a member of the United Nations and has served one term in the UN Security Council in 1967\u20131969. It maintains membership in several international financial institutions, including the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, and the International Monetary Fund. It also belongs to the Organization of American States, the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), the Rio Group, INTERPOL, MERCOSUR (the Southern Cone Common Market) and UNASUR.\nAt the political level, diplomatic affairs and international relations of Paraguay are officially handled by the Ministry of Foreign Relations, which answers to the executive branch of the government. Minister of Foreign Relations 2018 -2019 was Luis Alberto Castiglioni.\nUnlike any other country in South America, Paraguay recognizes the Republic of China instead of the People's Republic of China. Paraguay presently is the largest country maintaining official diplomatic relations with the Republic of China.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Paraguay maintains diplomatic relations with:\nInternational organizations.\nParaguay is a member of the following international organizations:\nCAN (associate), FAO, G-11, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD (also known as the World Bank), ICAO, ICCt, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, IPU, ISO (correspondent), ITSO, ITU, ITUC, LAES, LAIA, Mercosur, MIGA, MINURSO, MINUSTAH, MONUSCO, NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, Rio Group, UN, UNASUR, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNIDO, Union Latina, UNMIL, UNMIS, UNOCI, UNWTO, UPU, WCO, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23431", "revid": "41307770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23431", "title": "History of Peru", "text": "The history of Peru spans 15 millennia, extending back through several stages of cultural development along the country's desert coastline and in the Andes mountains. Peru's coast was home to the Norte Chico civilization, the oldest civilization in the Americas and one of the six cradles of civilization in the world. When the Spanish arrived in the sixteenth century, Peru was the homeland of the highland Inca Empire, the largest and most advanced state in pre-Columbian America. After the conquest of the Incas, the Spanish Empire established a Viceroyalty with jurisdiction over most of its South American domains. Peru declared independence from Spain in 1821, but achieved independence only after the Battle of Ayacucho three years later.\nModern historiography of Peru divides its history into three main periods:\nPre-Hispanic era.\nPre-Columbian cultures.\nHunting tools dating back to more than 11,000 years ago have been found inside the caves of Pachacamac, Telarmachay, Junin, and Lauricocha. Some of the oldest civilizations appeared 6000 BC in the coastal provinces of Chilca and Paracas, and in the highland province of Callej\u00f3n de Huaylas. Over the next three thousand years, inhabitants switched from nomadic lifestyles to cultivating land, as evidenced from sites such as Jiskairumoko, Kotosh, and Huaca Prieta. Cultivation of plants such as corn and cotton (\"Gossypium barbadense\") began, as well as the domestication of animals such as the wild ancestors of the llama, the alpaca and the guinea pig, as seen in the 6000 BC dated Camelid relief paintings in the Mollepunko caves in Callalli. Inhabitants practiced spinning and knitting of cotton and wool, basketry, and pottery.\nAs these inhabitants became sedentary, farming allowed them to build settlements. As a result, new societies emerged along the coast and in the Andean mountains. The first known city in the Americas was Caral, located in the Supe Valley 200\u00a0km north of Lima. It was built in approximately 2500 BC.\nThe remnants of this civilization, also known as Norte Chico, consists of approximately 30 pyramidal structures built up in receding terraces ending in a flat roof; some of them measuring up to 20 meters in height. Caral is regarded as one of several cradles of civilization around the world where civilization emerged independent of other civilizations.\nIn the early 21st century, archeologists discovered new evidence of ancient pre-Ceramic complex cultures: three irrigation canals that were 5400 years old, and a possible fourth that was 6700 years old in the Za\u00f1a Valley in northern Peru. This was the evidence of community agricultural improvements that occurred at a much earlier date than previously believed.\nIn 2006, a research team discovered a 4200-year-old observatory at Buena Vista. They believe the observatory was related to the society's reliance on agriculture and understanding of the seasons. The site includes the oldest three-dimensional sculptures found thus far in South America. In 2007, the archaeologist Walter Alva and his team found a 4000-year-old temple with painted murals at Ventarr\u00f3n, in the northwest Lambayeque region. The temple contained ceremonial offerings gained from an exchange with Peruvian jungle societies, as well as those from the Ecuadorian coast. Such finds show sophisticated, monumental construction requiring large-scale organization of labor, suggesting that hierarchical complex cultures arose in South America much earlier than previously thought.\nMany other civilizations developed and were absorbed by the most powerful ones such as Kotosh; Chavin; Paracas; Lima; Nasca; Moche; Tiwanaku; Wari; Lambayeque; Chimu and Chincha, among others. The Paracas culture emerged on the southern coast around 300 BC. They are known for their use of vicu\u00f1a fibers instead of just cotton to produce fine textiles\u2014innovations that did not reach the northern coast of Peru until centuries later. Coastal cultures such as the Moche and Nazca flourished from about 100 BC to about AD 700: the Moche produced impressive metalwork, as well as some of the finest pottery seen in the ancient world, while the Nazca are known for their textiles and the enigmatic Nazca lines.\nThese coastal cultures eventually began to decline as a result of recurring \"el Ni\u00f1o\" floods and droughts. In consequence, the Huari and Tiwanaku, who dwelt inland in the Andes, became the predominant cultures of the region encompassing much of modern-day Peru and Bolivia. They were succeeded by powerful city-states such as Chancay, Sip\u00e1n, and Cajamarca, and two empires: Chimor and Chachapoyas. These cultures developed relatively advanced techniques of cultivation, gold and silver craft, pottery, metallurgy, and knitting. Around 700 BC, they appear to have developed systems of social organization that were the precursors of the Inca civilization.\nIn the highlands, both the Tiahuanaco culture, near Lake Titicaca in both Peru and Bolivia, and the Wari culture, near the present-day city of Ayacucho, developed large urban settlements and wide-ranging state systems between 500 and 1000 AD.\nWhile in the forested region of the Amazon, architectural excavations from the Chachapoya and the Wari culture allow for the evidence of complex societal presences prior to the conquest of Amazonas region by the Incan Empire.\nAs the Incan empire expanded, it defeated and assimilated Andean cultures like the Chachapoyas culture.\nArchaeologists revealed the largest mass child sacrifice with more than 140 child skeletons and 200 Llamas dating to the Chim\u00fa culture. In September 2021, archaeologists announced the remains of eight 800-year-old bodies nearby ancient town of Chilca. Researchers think remains belong to the Chilca culture, which was apart from other pre-Hispanic cultures in the area.\nIn July 2025, a prehistoric urban center named Pe\u00f1ico, dating back approximately 3,500 years, was identified in northern Peru by a team of Peruvian and international archaeologists. Located approximately 600\u202fm above sea level, the site consists of 18 structures including a circular ceremonial plaza, temples, and residential buildings constructed between 1800 and 1500\u202fBC. According to the archaeologists, the settlement demonstrates that early Andean societies engaged in complex societal organization, serving as a cultural bridge between coastal and Amazonian communities during the early Formative stage.\nInca Empire (1438\u20131532).\nThe Incas built the largest and most advanced empire and dynasty of pre-Columbian America. The Tahuantinsuyo\u2014which is derived from Quechua for \"The Four United Regions\"\u2014reached its greatest extension at the beginning of the 16th century. It dominated a territory that included (from north to south) the southwest part of Ecuador, part of Colombia, the main territory of Peru, the northern part of Chile, and the northwest part of Argentina; and from east to west, from the southwest part of Bolivia to the Amazonian forests.\nThe empire originated from a tribe based in Cusco, which became the capital. Pachacuti wasn't the first Inca regent, but he was the first ruler to considerably expand the boundaries of the Cusco state. His offspring later ruled an empire by both violent invasions and peaceful conquests, that is, intermarriages among the rulers of small kingdoms and the current Inca ruler.\nIn Cuzco, the royal city was created to resemble a cougar; the head, the main royal structure, formed what is now known as Sacsayhuam\u00e1n. The empire's administrative, political, and military center was located in Cusco. The empire was divided into four quarters: Chinchaysuyu, Antisuyu, Kuntisuyu and Qullasuyu.\nThe official language was Quechua, the language of a neighbouring tribe of the original tribe of the empire. Conquered populations\u2014tribes, kingdoms, states, and cities\u2014were allowed to practice their own religions and lifestyles, but had to recognize Inca cultural practices as superior to their own. Inti, the sun god, was to be worshipped as one of the most important gods of the empire. His representation on earth was the Inca (\"Emperor\").\nThe Tawantinsuyu was organized in dominions with a stratified society in which the ruler was the Inca. It was also supported by an economy based on the collective property of the land. The empire, being quite large, also had an impressive transportation system of roads to all points of the empire called the Inca Trail, and chasquis, message carriers who relayed information from anywhere in the empire to Cusco.\nMachu Picchu (sometimes called the \"Lost City of the Incas\") is a well-preserved pre-Columbian Inca ruin located on a high mountain ridge above the Urubamba Valley, about 70\u00a0km (44\u00a0mi) northwest of Cusco. Elevation measurements vary depending on whether the data refer to the ruin or the extremity of the mountain; Machu Picchu tourist information reports the elevation as 2,350\u00a0m (7,711\u00a0ft)[1]. Forgotten for centuries by the outside world (although not by locals), it was brought back to international attention by Yale archaeologist Hiram Bingham III. Bingham, often cited as the inspiration for Indiana Jones, \"scientifically rediscovered\" the site in 1911 and brought international attention to the site with his best-selling book \"Lost City of the Incas\". However, Agust\u00edn Liz\u00e1rraga already reached the site on July 14, 1902 and left the inscription \"A. Liz\u00e1rraga 1902\" on the Temple of Three Windows. Peru is pursuing legal efforts to retrieve thousands of artifacts that Bingham removed from the site and sold to the current owners at Yale University.\nSpanish era.\nSpanish conquest (1532\u20131572).\nThe word \"Peru\" may be derived from \"Bir\u00fa\", the name of a local ruler who lived near the Bay of San Miguel, Panama, in the early 16th century. When his possessions were visited by Spanish explorers in 1522, they were the southernmost part of the New World yet known to Europeans. Thus, when Francisco Pizarro explored the regions farther south, they came to be designated Bir\u00fa or Peru. An alternative history is provided by the contemporary writer Inca Garcilasco de la Vega, son of an Inca princess and a conquistador. He says the name \"Bir\u00fa\" was that of a common Indian happened upon by the crew of a ship on an exploratory mission for governor Pedro Arias de \u00c1vila, and goes on to relate many more instances of misunderstandings due to the lack of a common language. The Spanish Crown gave the name legal status with the 1529 \"Capitulaci\u00f3n de Toledo\", which designated the newly encountered Inca Empire as the province of Peru. Under Spanish rule, the country adopted the denomination Viceroyalty of Peru, which became Republic of Peru after independence.\nWhen the Spanish landed in 1531, Peru's territory was the nucleus of the highly developed Inca civilization. Centered at Cuzco, the Inca Empire extended over a vast region, stretching from southwest Ecuador to northern Chile.\nFrancisco Pizarro and his brothers were attracted by the news of a rich and fabulous kingdom. In 1532, they arrived in the country, which they called Peru. (The forms \"Biru\", \"Pir\u00fa\", and \"Ber\u00fa\" are also seen in early records.) According to Ra\u00fal Porras Barrenechea, Peru is not a Quechuan nor Caribbean word, but Indo-Hispanic or hybrid.\nIn the years between 1524 and 1526, smallpox, introduced from the conquistadors in Panama and preceding the Spanish conquerors in Peru through transmission among natives, had swept through the Inca Empire. Smallpox caused the death of the Inca ruler Huayna Capac as well as most of his family including his heir, caused the fall of the Inca political structure and contributed to the civil war between the brothers Atahualpa and Hu\u00e1scar. Taking advantage of this, Pizarro carried out a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\". On 16 November 1532, while the Atahualpa's victorious army was in an unarmed celebration in Cajamarca, the Spanish lured Atahualpa into a trap during the Battle of Cajamarca. The well-armed 168 Spaniards killed thousands of barely armed Inca soldiers and captured the newly minted Inca ruler, causing a great consternation among the natives and conditioning the future course of the fight. When Hu\u00e1scar was killed, the Spanish tried and convicted Atahualpa of the murder, executing him by strangulation.\nFor a period, Pizarro maintained the ostensible authority of the Inca, recognizing T\u00fapac Huallpa as the Sapa Inca after Atahualpa's death. But the conqueror's abuses made this facade too obvious. Spanish domination consolidated itself as successive indigenous rebellions were bloodily repressed. By 23 March 1534, Pizarro and the Spanish had re-founded the Inca city of Cuzco as a new Spanish colonial settlement.\nEstablishing a stable colonial government was delayed for some time by native revolts and bands of the \"Conquistadores\" (led by Pizarro and Diego de Almagro) fighting among themselves. A long civil war developed, from which Pizarro emerged victorious at the Battle of Las Salinas. In 1541, Pizarro was assassinated by a faction led by Diego de Almagro II (\"El Mozo\"), and the stability of the original colonial regime was shaken up in the ensuing civil war.\nDespite this, the Spaniards did not neglect the colonizing process. Its most significant milestone was the foundation of Lima in January 1535, from which the political and administrative institutions were organized. The new rulers instituted the \"encomienda\" system, by which the Spanish extracted tribute from the local population, part of which was forwarded to Seville in return for converting the natives to Christianity. Title to the land itself remained with the king of Spain. As governor of Peru, Pizarro used the \"encomienda\" system to grant virtually unlimited authority over groups of native Peruvians to his soldier companions, thus forming the colonial land-tenure structure. The indigenous inhabitants of Peru were now expected to raise Old World cattle, poultry, and crops for their landlords. Resistance was punished severely, giving rise to the \"Black Legend\".\nThe necessity of consolidating Spanish royal authority over these territories led to the creation of a Real Audiencia (Royal Audience). In 1542 or 1543, the Viceroyalty of Peru (\"Virreinato del Per\u00fa\") was established, with authority over most of Spanish-ruled South America. Colombia, Ecuador, Panama (after 1571) and Venezuela were split off as the Viceroyalty of New Granada (\"Virreinato de Nueva Granada\") in 1717, and Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay, and Uruguay were set up as the Viceroyalty of the R\u00edo de la Plata in 1776).\nAfter Pizarro's death, there were numerous internal problems, and Spain finally sent Blasco N\u00fa\u00f1ez Vela to be Peru's first viceroy in 1544. He was later killed by Pizarro's brother, Gonzalo Pizarro, but a new viceroy, Pedro de la Gasca, eventually managed to restore order. He captured and executed Gonzalo Pizarro.\nA census taken by the last Quipucamayoc indicated that there were 12 million inhabitants of Inca Peru; 45 years later, under viceroy Toledo, the census figures amounted to only 1,100,000 Inca. Historian Noble David Cook estimates that their population decreased from an estimated 9 million in the 1520s to around 600,000 in 1620 mainly because of infectious diseases. While the attrition was not an organized attempt at genocide, the results were similar. Scholars now believe that, among the various contributing factors, epidemic disease such as smallpox (unlike the Spanish, the Amerindians had no immunity to the disease) was the overwhelming cause of the population decline of the American natives. Inca cities were given Spanish Christian names and rebuilt as Spanish towns centered around a plaza with a church or cathedral facing an official residence. A few Inca cities like Cuzco retained native masonry for the foundations of their walls. Other Inca sites, like Huanuco Viejo, were abandoned for cities at lower altitudes more hospitable to the Spanish.\nViceroyalty of Peru (1542\u20131824).\nIn 1542, the Spanish Crown created the Viceroyalty of Peru, which was reorganized after the arrival of Viceroy Francisco de Toledo in 1572. He put an end to the indigenous Neo-Inca State in Vilcabamba and executed Tupac Amaru I. He also sought economic development through commercial monopoly and mineral extraction, mainly from the silver mines of Potos\u00ed. He reused the Inca \"mita\", a forced labor program, to mobilize native communities for mining work. This organization transformed Peru into the principal source of Spanish wealth and power in South America.\nThe town of Lima, founded by Pizarro on 18 January 1535 as the \"Ciudad de Reyes\" (City of Kings), became the seat of the new viceroyalty. It grew into a powerful city, with jurisdiction over most of Spanish South America. Precious metals passed through Lima on their way to the Isthmus of Panama and from there to Seville, Spain for the Atlantic route. For the Pacific, it passed to Mexico and disembarked from the port of Acapulco and eventually arrived at the Philippines. By the 18th century, Lima had become a distinguished and aristocratic colonial capital, seat of a university and the chief Spanish stronghold in the Americas. Peru was thus wealthy and highly populated. Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, governor of Panama settled Zamboanga City in the Philippines, where residents now speak a Spanish Creole, by employing soldiers and colonists recruited from the towns of Peru.\nNevertheless, throughout the eighteenth century, further away from Lima in the provinces, the Spanish did not have complete control. The Spanish could not govern the provinces without the help of local elite. This local elite, who governed under the title of Curaca, took pride in their Incan history. Additionally, throughout the eighteenth century, indigenous people rebelled against the Spanish. Two of the most important rebellions were that of Juan Santos Atahualpa in 1742 in the Andean jungle provinces of Tarma and Jauja, which expelled the Spanish from a large area, and the Rebellion of T\u00fapac Amaru II in 1780 around the highlands near Cuzco.\nAt the time, an economic crisis was developing due to creation of the Viceroyalties of New Granada and Rio de la Plata (at the expense of its territory), the duty exemptions that moved the commercial center from Lima to Caracas and Buenos Aires, and the decrease of the mining and textile production. This crisis proved favorable for the indigenous rebellion of T\u00fapac Amaru II and determined the progressive decay of the Viceroyalty of Peru.\nIn 1808, Napoleon invaded the Iberian Peninsula and took the king, Ferdinand VII, hostage. Later in 1812, the Cad\u00edz Cortes, the national legislative assembly of Spain, promulgated a liberal Constitution of Cadiz. These events inspired emancipating ideas between the Spanish Criollo people throughout the Spanish America. In Peru, the Creole rebellion of Hu\u00e1nuco arose in 1812 and the rebellion of Cuzco arose between 1814 and 1816. Despite these rebellions, the Criollo oligarchy in Peru remained mostly Spanish loyalist, which accounts for the fact that the Viceroyalty of Peru became the last redoubt of the Spanish dominion in South America.\nWars of independence (1811\u20131824).\nPeru's movement toward independence was launched by an uprising of Spanish-American landowners and their forces, led by Jos\u00e9 de San Mart\u00edn of Argentina and Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar of Venezuela. San Mart\u00edn, who had displaced the royalists of Chile after the Battle of Chacabuco, and who had disembarked in Paracas in 1819, led the military campaign of 4,200 soldiers. The expedition, which included warships, was organized and financed by Chile which sailed from Valpara\u00edso in August 1820. San Martin proclaimed the independence of Peru in Lima on 28 July 1821, with the words \"... From this moment on, Peru is free and independent, by the general will of the people and the justice of its cause that God defends. Long live the homeland! Long live freedom! Long live our independence!\". San Mart\u00edn received the title of \"Protector of Peruvian Freedom\" in August 1821 after partially liberating Peru from the Spanish.\nOn 26 and 27 July 1822, Bol\u00edvar held the Guayaquil Conference with San Mart\u00edn and attempted to decide the political fate of Peru. San Mart\u00edn opted for a constitutional monarchy, whilst Bolivar (Head of the Northern Expedition) favored a republic. Nonetheless, they both followed the notion that it was to be independent of Spain. Following the interview, San Martin abandoned Peru on 22 September 1822 and left the whole command of the independence movement to Simon Bolivar. \nThe Peruvian congress named Bolivar dictator of Peru on 10 February 1824, which allowed him to reorganize the political and military administration completely. Assisted by general Antonio Jos\u00e9 de Sucre, Bol\u00edvar decisively defeated the Spanish cavalry at the Battle of Jun\u00edn on 6 August 1824. Sucre destroyed the still numerically superior remnants of the Spanish forces at Ayacucho on 9 December 1824. The war would not end until the last royalist holdouts surrendered the Real Felipe Fortress in 1826.\nThe victory brought about political independence, but there remained indigenous and mestizo supporters of the monarchy and in Huanta Province, they rebelled in 1825\u201328, which is known as \"the war of the punas\" or the Huanta Rebellion.\nSpain made futile attempts to regain its former colonies, such as the Battle of Callao (1866), and only in 1879 finally recognized Peruvian independence.\nRepublican era.\nThe republican era of Peru is usually considered to begin after the declaration of independence or the Battle of Ayacucho in 1824, and its periods are modelled after Jorge Basadre's work, \"Historia de la Rep\u00fablica del Per\u00fa\".\nBeginnings of the Republic (1824\u20131836).\nAfter the Battle of Ayacucho, Spanish General Jos\u00e9 de Canterac signed the final capitulation of the Royalist Army in Peru. Despite the Spanish capitulation, relations between both states would not be established until 1879. During this era, the First Militarism (), a period where several military figures held control of the country, started in 1827, with Jos\u00e9 de La Mar's presidency.\nSpanish resistance.\nBy the time the capitulation had been signed, the royalist forces in Peru occupied the southern provinces, slowly surrendering to the rebels. Despite the apparent end of the successful patriot campaigns, two Spanish figures refused to accept the capitulation and established themselves in Callao and Upper Peru: Jos\u00e9 Ram\u00f3n Rodil and Pedro Antonio Ola\u00f1eta, respectively. Additionally, a resistance in Ayacucho led by Antonio Huachaca would remain until its dissolution in 1839.\nOla\u00f1eta, who established himself in Potos\u00ed, soon became the focus of a campaign commanded by Antonio Jos\u00e9 de Sucre. The campaign began in January and ended in April 1825, with the battle of Tumusla of April 1, where Ola\u00f1eta was fatally wounded after being shot and died the day after.\nRodil, on the other hand, established himself in the Real Felipe Fortress of the port of Callao, near Lima, expecting Spanish reinforcements that would never come. The capital city itself had been retaken by Royalist troops until the arrival of reinforcements for the Patriot side. This led to Rodil's forces being besieged from December 5, 1824, to January 23, 1826, and becoming the final Spanish stronghold in South America. The deteriorating conditions of the besieged fortress eventually led to the surrender of Rodil and his forces due to their inability to continue the siege alive.\nBolivarian era.\nSim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar, who became dictator of Peru on January 17, 1824, notified the Constituent Congress of his resignation of his office, which was not accepted, instead being extended until 1827. During this time, he travelled to southern and Upper Peru, and the final flag and coat of arms of Peru was established on February 25, 1825, the latter designed by Jos\u00e9 Gregorio Paredes.\nUpper Peru, whose public opinion was split between joining Peru or the United Provinces, soon saw a new train of thought establish itself, which suggested that the region become an independent state. Soon, the State of Upper Peru was established as an independent state, later becoming Bolivia. Bol\u00edvar was in charge of the constitution, as well as Peru's and later Colombia's. The similarities between the constitutions was related to his desire to establish a federation in America, which led to the Congress of Panama and later the anti-Bolivarian sentiment that led to him leaving Peru on September 3, 1826. A year later, the Constituent Congress was dissolved.\nConflict with Bolivia and Colombia.\nJos\u00e9 de La Mar became president of Peru on August 22, 1827, having been chosen by the new Congress. Under his presidency, Peru went to war with Bolivia and Colombia due to the perceived disadvantage that Peru saw itself in due to being surrounded by Bolivarian countries.\nA Peruvian invasion of Bolivia headed by Agust\u00edn Gamarra began on May 1, 1828. The Peruvian Army soon occupied the Bolivian department of La Paz, established a pro-Peruvian government and successfully deported the Colombian troops stationed in the country via ships paid by Bolivia that departed from the Peruvian port of Arica.\nThe events in Bolivia led to war between Peru and Colombia, which ended with the Battle of Tarqui on February 27, 1829, after which an armistice was signed. The breach of the armistice almost led to a continuation of the war, an event that was prevented by the political instability in Peru that led to the deposition of La Mar by Agust\u00edn Gamarra, who signed a peace treaty with Colombia.\nLater instability.\nA civil war broke out in 1834, by revolutionaries who opposed Orbegoso as a successor of Gamarra. Orbegoso proved popular with the population, and the revolution was eventually repressed, with Orbegoso, who had established himself in the Real Felipe Fortress, returning to Lima on May 3, 1834.\nDesires to unite the regions of lower and upper Peru eventually led to the Salaverry-Santa Cruz War, which itself led to the establishment of the Republic of South Peru on March 17, 1836, and the Republic of North Peru on August 11, 1836, with Andr\u00e9s de Santa Cruz appointing himself the Supreme Protector of both states. The establishment of these states later ended with the establishment of the Peru\u2013Bolivian Confederation.\nPeru-Bolivian Confederation (1836\u20131839).\nThe establishment of the Peru-Bolivian Confederation soon led to war, as Peruvian exiles, as well as neighboring Chile and Argentina opposed the existence of the state.\nPeruvian opposition manifested itself in the War of the Confederation, which included the secession of North Peru, whose president, Luis de Orbegoso, established the Restoration Army of Peru that was defeated at the Battle of Gu\u00edas; and the establishment by Peruvian exiles in Chile of the United Restoration Army, which fought against the confederation until its defeat in the Battle of Yungay, which led to its dissolution.\nThe conflict against the confederation also saw a southern theater, known as the War of Tarija, which was the conflict between Argentina and the Confederation over the territory of Tarija. Argentina annexed the territory as a result of the war, later being returned to Bolivia in March 1839.\nIn addition to the conflict in Tarija, the conflict also began the Second Iquicha War, which led to the disestablishment of the royalist autonomy\u2014that had seen conflict a decade earlier\u2014led by Huachaca, who fled to the Apur\u00edmac jungle, choosing to remain there while denouncing the republicans as the \"antichrists\".\nRestoration (1839\u20131841).\nAfter the demise in the War of the Confederation, the states of Peru and Bolivia were re-established as independent and separate from each other. The Constituent Congress meeting in Huancayo ratified Agust\u00edn Gamarra as Provisional President on August 15, 1839, while the new Constitution was being written. Once this was approved, and after a general election, Gamarra was proclaimed Constitutional President of Peru on July 10, 1840.\nDuring this second government, treaties were signed with Brazil, the Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de Guadalupe school opened its doors, and \"El Comercio\" began its publications in 1839. Gamarra followed the same guidelines as his first government, being authoritarian and conservative, as circumstances required, after several years of civil war. He faced the challenge of pacifying the country, having to face the \"regenerative\" revolution that Manuel Ignacio de Vivanco led in Arequipa, where he proclaimed himself Supreme Chief of the Republic, in January 1841. To combat it, Gamarra sent his war minister, Ram\u00f3n Castilla, who after first suffering a defeat in Cachamarca, triumphed over the \"Vivanquistas\" in Cuevillas. After his defeat, Vivanco fled to Bolivia.\nGamarra's desire to unite Bolivia and Peru dovetailed into an attempt to annex Bolivia that ultimately failed and turned into a protracted war. After reaching La Paz without resistance, Gamarra participated in the Battle of Ingavi, where he was killed in action. In the aftermath of this battle, Bolivia occupied the south of Peru until a Peruvian resistance was established, which led to a counterattack that was ultimately successful due to the limited number of Bolivian troops.\nThe two nations signed the Treaty of Puno on June 7, 1842, officially ending the war. Both countries agreed to remain as separate sovereign states and the retreat of troops in Peruvian territory was accomplished eight days later. Bolivia unconditionally renounced all claims in southern Peruvian territory, but nevertheless, the treaty did not manage to solve the border problem or the unionist movement between the two states.\nThe conflict ended with a return to the situation before the war. Despite this, Peruvian historiography argues that the victories seen in all the battles in Peruvian soil overshadow the defeat at Ingavi, leaving Peru in a more favorable outcome after the end of the war.\nMilitary anarchy (1841\u20131845).\nAfter Gamarra's death, Manuel Men\u00e9ndez was recognized as provisional president. However, several military leaders became involved in a struggle for power: in the north, Juan Cris\u00f3stomo Torrico; in the south, Antonio Guti\u00e9rrez de La Fuente, Domingo Nieto and Juan Francisco de Vidal; and in Arequipa, Manuel Ignacio de Vivanco. Men\u00e9ndez could not maintain power, as he was deposed by Torrico.\nThe anarchy led to the Peruvian Civil War of 1843\u20131844. By then, a government had been established by Vivanco, known as the Directory (). In contrast to this new government, a rebellion led by Domingo Nieto also sought to establish itself as the legitimate government. On September 3, 1843, the revolutionaries constituted a Provisional Government Junta of the Free Departments in Cuzco (), whose presidency was assumed by Domingo Nieto, who would be succeeded by Castilla after his death in 1844.\nThe civil war reached its end in the Battle of Carmen Alto of July 22, 1844, between Vivanco and Castilla's troops near Arequipa. After the defeat of Vivanco's troops, Vivanco himself arrived in Callao on July 27, being arrested by Prefect of Lima, Domingo El\u00edas and exiled to Chile a few days later. With Castilla as the country's new leader, the anarchy came to an end.\n\"Fallacious prosperity\" and the Guano Era (1845\u20131866).\nAfter Castilla assumed the presidency of Peru, Peru entered a period of peace and economic prosperity, as the anarchic period had been put to an end, and Peru established a virtual international monopoly in the trade of guano. This allowed the government to repay its external debt, earning it international economic prestige. Several reforms, including education, were put into place, and the economy continued to grow until the 1860s.\nCastilla was replaced by his advisor Jos\u00e9 Rufino Echenique in 1851, who continued his work, as the economy continued to grow. His government was of a conservative nature, which eventually led to conflict with the liberals. On October 23, 1851, Peru signed its first border treaty with Brazil, where it ceded territory in the Amazon rainforest disputed by Ecuador, who claimed the territory as its own.\nLiberal Revolution (1854\u20131855).\nEchenique was accused of corruption by its opponents, with some pointing out a lavish party that had been hosted by his wife, Victoria Trist\u00e1n, as proof of his reckless spending, which appeared as an insult to the general poverty of the country. Others, such as Domingo El\u00edas, made the accusation on the basis of Echenique being \"too generous\" regarding his payment of the country's external debt. Amid the growing conflict between the conservative government and the liberal opposition, the Liberal Revolution of 1854 broke out, with the liberals, soon headed by Castilla, defeating the government at the Battle of La Palma and Castilla being reinstated as president.\nCastilla summoned a National Convention whose representatives were elected by direct and universal suffrage, settling on July 14, 1855. This Convention authored the Liberal Constitution of 1856. Dissatisfied with the liberal regime that was being established, the conservatives rose up in Arequipa, led by the caudillo Manuel Ignacio de Vivanco, an old rival of Castilla. A bloody civil war broke out, culminating in the triumph of Castilla after the capture of Arequipa on March 7, 1858.\nEcuadorian\u2013Peruvian War (1857\u20131860).\nBetween 1857 and 1860 a war broke out against Ecuador over disputed territories in the Amazon that Ecuador had allegedly sold to British companies to pay for its foreign debt. The Peruvian victory in the war prevented the Ecuadorian claims to settle in the area.\nWar with Spain.\nIn 1865, civil war broke out, waged by the forces headed by Colonel Mariano Ignacio Prado against the government of President Juan Antonio Pezet, due to the weakness that he was alleged to have shown in solving the crisis caused by the Spanish occupation of the Chincha Islands, most specifically due to the signing of the Vivanco\u2013Pareja Treaty. As a result, Pezet was overthrown, and Prado declared an alliance against Spain, alongside Chile, Bolivia and Ecuador, also declaring war on Spain. On May 2, 1866, the Battle of Callao took place, and a peace treaty was signed in 1879. The expenses caused by the war severely affected the Peruvian economy, which began to decline.\nEconomic and international crisis (1866\u20131884).\nWith Prado as provisional and later constitutional president, a new constitution was adopted. Its extremely liberal nature led to a civil war headed by Pedro Diez Canseco and Jos\u00e9 Balta, which ended Prado's presidency and re-established the 1860 constitution.\nThe new Balta government appointed a young Nicol\u00e1s de Pi\u00e9rola as Minister of Economy, who signed a treaty with the Jewish\u2013French businessman Auguste Dreyfus. For its part, the House of Dreyfus paid S/. two million in advance, and undertook to pay at a rate of S/. 700 thousand each month and to cover the interest on the Peruvian foreign debt.\nAs a result of the income from the Dreyfus contract, Peru embarked on a railroad-building program. The American entrepreneur Henry Meiggs built a standard gauge line from Callao across the Andes to the interior, Huancayo; he built the line and controlled its politics for a while; in the end, he bankrupted himself and the country. Financial problems forced the government to take over in 1874. The labor conditions were complex, with conflicts arising from different levels of skill and organization among the North Americans, Europeans, Blacks, and the Chinese. Conditions were very brutal for the Chinese, and led to strikes and violent suppression.\nElections were held in 1872, with Manuel Pardo of the Civilista Party being elected as the first civilian president of Peru. The ascension of a civil government disturbed many members of the military, who believed they would lose the privileges that they had enjoyed until then. Among the concerned were the Guti\u00e9rrez brothers, originally from Huancarqui. The brothers, headed by Colonel Tom\u00e1s Guti\u00e9rrez, carried out a coup d'\u00e9tat against Balta on July 22, 1872. The new government lasted until the 26th, when the brothers were overthrown, with three of them being killed and only one surviving.\nPardo became president on August 2, ending the \"First Militarism\" that had existed since 1827. Under his government, the Treaty of Defensive Alliance was signed with Bolivia, which would lead Peru to fight against Chile 7 years later.\nWar of the Pacific.\nIn 1879, Peru entered the War of the Pacific, after Bolivia invoked its alliance with Peru against Chile. The Peruvian Government tried to mediate the dispute by sending a diplomatic team to negotiate with the Chilean government, but the committee concluded that war was inevitable. On 14 March 1879, Bolivia declared war and Chile, in response, declared war on Bolivia and Peru on 5 April 1879 with Peru following with its own declaration of war the next day.\nThe Chilean land campaigns in Tarapac\u00e1, Tacna and Arica, Lima and Bre\u00f1a eventually led to the Chilean occupation of these territories, which were administered from occupied Lima. In parallel with the occupying administration, a collaborationist government was also established in Lima under the protection of Chile. The government was initially based in La Magdalena, and then in Cajamarca. This government's legitimacy was disputed by the Peruvian Resistance, which continued fighting in the \"sierra\". The Chilean naval campaign also proved crucial, and allowed for attacks in the northern coast of the country. One notable figure of this campaign, who is held in high esteem by Peruvians and Chileans alike, was Miguel Grau, who was killed in action during the Battle of Angamos, and whose ship, the \"Hu\u00e1scar\", was captured by the Chilean Navy.\nThe war reached its peak after the Battle of Tacna, which effectively destroyed the Peruvian\u2013Bolivian alliance, and ended with a Chilean victory over Peru and Bolivia, with the former's government in Lima signing the Treaty of Anc\u00f3n in 1883, where the Department of Tarapac\u00e1 was ceded to Chile and the fates of the provinces of Tacna and Arica were to be decided by a plebiscite that was meant to take place ten years after the treaty, but would eventually never take place.\nThe question over the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica would manifest itself as the Chilean\u2013Peruvian territorial dispute, while the Bolivian reaction to the loss of its Litoral Department, and thus, its access to the sea, would manifest itself as the Bolivian\u2013Chilean territorial dispute, and commemorated annually with the \"D\u00eda del Mar\".\nNational reconstruction (1884\u20131895).\nAfter the War of the Pacific, an extraordinary effort of rebuilding began, and military figures once again assumed control of the government due to the perceived weakness of civilian heads of state in a period of constant war, beginning the Second Militarism (). In contrast to the \"First Militarism\", the military leaders returned to the political arena, but no longer as triumphant heroes, but as the defeated. The government started to initiate a number of social and economic reforms in order to recover from the damage of the war.\nDuring this period, the occupied provinces of Tacna and Arica were subject to a process known as Chilenization, where Chilean culture was promoted in order to replace Peruvian culture. Groups known as Patriotic Leagues were also established in order to encourage Peruvians to leave, while Chilean families soon began to emigrate to the region. Those who left established themselves mainly in Callao or participated in the colonization project carried out by the local government in Loreto to counter Colombian claims over the region, establishing the settlements of Puerto Arica and Tarapac\u00e1. After the signing of the Salom\u00f3n\u2013Lozano Treaty in 1922, these settlements would be ceded to Colombia, with some settlers moving to Peru and establishing the settlements of Nuevo Tarapac\u00e1 and Puerto Arica.\nDue to Iglesias' re-establishment of the indigenous tribute and abuses committed against Indians by landowners, on March 1, 1885, a rebellion in Huaraz headed by Pedro Pablo Atuspar\u00eda began, with the conflict coming to an end only in 1887.\nConflict between Iglesias and C\u00e1ceres.\nMiguel Iglesias' Regenerator Government that had been established under Chilean occupation and signed the Treaty of Anc\u00f3n continued to function as the constitutional government of Peru. During this period, Andr\u00e9s Avelino C\u00e1ceres, who had fought the Bre\u00f1a campaign and was known as the \"Hero of Bre\u00f1a\", opposed Iglesias and received more popular support than Iglesias' government.\nIglesias attempted to negotiate with C\u00e1ceres for his support. Eventually, negotiations failed and he demanded his unconditional submission. For his part, C\u00e1ceres proceeded to proclaim himself President on July 16, 1884, arguing the breakdown of the constitutional order. This disagreement led to the Peruvian Civil War of 1884\u20131885.\nThe forces of Iglesias and C\u00e1ceres initially clashed in Lima and later in Trujillo. Faced with his defeats on the north coast, C\u00e1ceres withdrew to the south center: Cuzco, Arequipa, Apur\u00edmac and Ayacucho, where he was able to reorganize his army to attack again. He ordered his troops to be defeated near Jauja while he moved his best troops to Huaripampa, who cut off bridges that would've allowed Iglesias' troops return and eventually moved to Lima where they carried out a successful offensive against Iglesias, ending the civil war. Iglesias would be exiled to Spain, only returning in 1895 after being elected as senator for Cajamarca, dying later in 1909.\nConflict between C\u00e1ceres and de Pi\u00e9rola.\nC\u00e1ceres assumed the presidency for the second time, on August 10, 1894. But he lacked legitimacy and popularity. The Anti-Cacerists formed the National Coalition, made up of democrats and civil supporters, who elected Nicol\u00e1s de Pi\u00e9rola as leader, then exiled in Chile. Throughout Peru, groups of \"Montoneros\" arose that joined the cause of the Coalition. Pi\u00e9rola returned to Peru, disembarked in Puerto Caballas, in Ica, and went to Chincha, where he gave a Manifesto to the Nation, taking the title of National Delegate, and immediately campaigning on Lima, leading the Montoneros. They attacked the capital from March 17 to 19, 1895. Seeing himself deprived of the support of the people, turned massively towards the coalition partners, C\u00e1ceres resigned and went into exile.\nA Government Board was installed after the victory in Lima of Pi\u00e9rola's montoneros and the departure of C\u00e1ceres into exile, and Manuel Candamo was elected president of a Government Board, to which he did not belong, taking charge of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; He spent six months in that position, from March 20 to September 8, 1895, when he handed over the command to Pi\u00e9rola, winner of the elections. After a brief period in which the military once again controlled the country, civilian rule was permanently established with Pierola's election in 1895. His second term was successfully completed in 1899 and was marked by his reconstruction of a devastated Peru by initiating fiscal, military, religious, and civil reforms. With the county in a delicate state, political stability was achieved only in the early 1900s.\nAristocratic Republic (1895\u20131919).\nWith de Pi\u00e9rola elected president of Peru, the country began its period known as the \"Aristocratic Republic\" (), owing its name to the fact that most of the presidents that ruled the country during this period were from the country's social elite.\nEconomic dependence on English and American capitalism was accentuated and new economic activities were developed: agro-export (sugar and cotton), rubber extraction and oil extraction. However, the country did not industrialize due to the fact that a purely economistic development perspective was formed through a rentier and primary exporter state, which increased discrimination and exploitation of indigenous peoples through \"Correr\u00edos\", \"Yanaconajes\" and \"Enganches\". One such example was the Putumayo genocide, which took place during the Amazon rubber boom. The discomfort of the popular classes was manifested in the emergence of the anarcho-syndicalist labor movement and the outbreak of strikes.\nThis period of history soon saw its first conflicts, with its first one taking place in 1896. Separatists in Loreto revolted against the government, seceded from Peru, and established the short lived Federal State of Loreto. The government's response was to send troops to the area in order to suppress the insurrection, which was accomplished. A couple of years later, Colonel and Prefect of Loreto Emilio Vizcarra seceded from Peru and proclaimed the Jungle Republic, an unrecognized secessionist state whose declared borders coincided with those of the Loreto Department, at the time composed of the modern departments of Loreto, San Mart\u00edn, and Ucayali. President Eduardo L\u00f3pez de Roma\u00f1a immediately sent troops to deal with the situation and the state ceased to exist in 1900.\nAnother conflict took place in Huanta, as a result of reforms, that included the establishment of a salt tax and the ban on circulation of Bolivian currency in the region. Among the participants of this conflict were veterans of previous conflicts, such as the Bre\u00f1a campaign and of the civil war of 1884\u201385.\nThe twenty-four friends.\nOne group prevalent in the country's aristocracy was known as \"the twenty-four friends\" (), whose members were affiliated with the Civilista Party. Traditionally it is said that it was founded in a meeting on July 28, 1892. Most of the families that belonged to this group were rentiers, landowners, bankers, businessmen who produced sugar and cotton, newspaper owners, and renowned intellectuals and professionals who belonged to the National Club, where they met weekly on Fridays. The members of the club were:\nOther characters that also would make up the select group were:\nTerritorial disputes.\nAugusto B. Legu\u00eda's first presidency took place during this period, during which he was faced with territorial disputes between all neighboring countries of Peru, of which only the Brazilian and Bolivian territorial disputes were solved on September 8 and 17 September, 1909, respectively. Skirmishes took place in 1910 with Ecuador and in 1911 with Colombia, the latter of which became known as the La Pedrera conflict. Due to Chile's continuing Chilenization policies in Tacna and Arica, relations between both states were severed.\nLegu\u00eda also had to face internal conflict, including an attempted coup d'\u00e9tat in 1909, carried out by Nicol\u00e1s de Pi\u00e9rola's brother Carlos with his children. Legu\u00eda separated from the Civilista Party, which split into two factions: those loyal to Pardo and those loyal to Legu\u00eda. In the last two years of his government, an acute economic crisis manifested itself, motivated by accelerated internal indebtedness, national defense expenses and the budget deficit.\nGuillermo Billinghurst wanted to favor the working class, which earned him opposition from conservative elements. He had a tenacious struggle with Congress, dominated by \"civilistas\" and \"leguiistas\", his political enemies. It was then proposed to dissolve parliament and summon the people to carry out fundamental constitutional reforms, which provoked the military uprising of Colonel \u00d3scar R. Benavides, known as the \"hero of La Pedrera\", who overthrew Billinghurst on February 4, 1914.\nAfter assuming control of the government, Benavides faced the monetary problem and promised to restore the legal order. In 1915 he convened a Convention of the civilist, liberal and constitutional parties, so that they could launch a unified candidacy. The chosen one was former president Jos\u00e9 Pardo y Barreda, of the Civilista Party, who overwhelmingly won the elections that year, defeating the symbolic candidacy of Carlos de Pi\u00e9rola, of the Democratic Party.\nThe second government of Jos\u00e9 Pardo was characterized by political and social violence, a symptom of the exhaustion of civil society and the world crisis. As a result of the First World War, the economic condition of the working class worsened and the field was prepared for the development of trade union action. There were successive strikes that demanded the reduction of subsistence prices and the implementation of the \"8-hour work\" day; the latter was finally granted, by decree of January 15, 1919. In the southern Andes, the abuses of landowners and gamonales on the native and peasant population motivated many indigenous uprisings, such as the one led in 1915 by Teodomiro Guti\u00e9rrez Cuevas, also known by his pseudonym \"Rumi Maqui\".\nPardo called for elections in 1919, in which former president Augusto B. Legu\u00eda ran, who faced the official candidacy represented by \u00c1ntero Asp\u00edllaga. The elections, which were not deemed very fair, declared Legu\u00eda the winner, but numerous votes were annulled in the official recount. Faced with the danger that the elections would be annulled and that they would be transferred to Congress, where the civilistas had a majority, Legu\u00eda and his supporters staged a coup, with the support of the gendarmerie, on July 4, 1919. Thus ended the \"Aristocratic Republic\" and began what would become Legu\u00eda's \"Oncenio\".\nThe \"Oncenio\" (1919\u20131930).\nAs had happened with his previous government, the entrance of American capital became general and the bourgeoisie was favored. This policy, along with increased dependence on foreign investment, focused opposition from the most progressive sectors of Peruvian society against the landowner oligarchy.\nThe presidency of Legu\u00eda coincided with the centennial celebrations of Peru's independence on July 28, 1921, and in 1924, commemorating the Battle of Ayacucho. Legu\u00eda referred to his government as the New Motherland (), which became known for its urban transformation of Lima to coincide with the aforementioned centennial.\nTerritorial disputes.\nA final peace treaty was signed between Peru and Chile in 1929, known as the Treaty of Lima. As per the treaty, Tacna returned to Peru and Peru yielded permanently the formerly rich provinces of Arica and Tarapac\u00e1, but kept certain rights to the port activities in Arica and restrictions on what Chile can do on those territories. The treaty was controversial in Peru, but nevertheless put a major end to the Chilean\u2013Peruvian territorial dispute.\nIn 1921, Peruvian captain Guillermo Cervantes declared the Federal State of Loreto, which existed as a \"de facto\" autonomous region of the country. The rebel authorities authorized the distribution of provisional banknotes made out of cardboard used by locals as currency, and local ports were ordered shut, with local trade and navigation being tightly controlled. The revolution was quickly accepted by the local population, but was met negatively by Peru's president Augusto Legu\u00eda, who sent a few troops to the area, and shut down trade to the region. The local guerrillas' military inferiority soon became apparent, and by early 1922, a famished Iquitos had been occupied by Peruvian troops headed by Peruvian Captain Genaro Matos, while Cervantes had escaped on January 9 and sought refuge in the Ecuadorian jungle and his army soon became little more than an insurgency.\nIn 1922, another treaty, the Salom\u00f3n\u2013Lozano Treaty, was signed between Peru and Colombia with the United States acting as a mediator, where a large amount of territory was ceded to Colombia allowing them access to the Amazon River, further reducing Peru's territory with the exception of a \"de jure\" exclave in Sucumb\u00edos. This treaty also proved controversial, most notably in Loreto, as protests took place and local dissatisfaction would eventually lead to the Leticia Incident in 1932. Nevertheless, the treaty also ended the Colombian\u2013Peruvian territorial dispute, although it was also disputed by Ecuador.\nIn 1924, from Mexico, university reform leaders in Peru who had been forced into exile by the government founded the American People's Revolutionary Alliance (APRA), which had a major influence on the country's political life. APRA is largely a political expression of the university reform and workers' struggles of the years 1918\u20131920. The movement draws its influences from the Mexican Revolution and its 1917 Constitution, particularly on issues of agrarianism and indigenism, and to a lesser extent from the Russian Revolution. Close to Marxism (its leader, Haya de la Torre, declares that \"APRA is the Marxist interpretation of the American reality\"), it nevertheless moves away from it on the question of class struggle and on the importance given to the struggle for the political unity of Latin America.\nIn 1928, the Peruvian Socialist Party was founded, notably under the leadership of Jos\u00e9 Carlos Mari\u00e1tegui, himself a former member of APRA. Shortly afterwards, in 1929, the party created the General Confederation of Workers.\nAfter the worldwide crisis of 1929, numerous brief governments followed one another. The APRA party had the opportunity to cause system reforms by means of political actions, but it was not successful. This was a nationalistic movement, populist and anti-imperialist, headed by V\u00edctor Ra\u00fal Haya de la Torre in 1924. The Socialist Party of Peru, later the Peruvian Communist Party, was created four years later and it was led by Jos\u00e9 Carlos Mari\u00e1tegui.\nThis period would come to an end after a coup d'\u00e9tat carried out by Lieutenant colonel Luis Miguel S\u00e1nchez Cerro and his sympathizers, with General Manuel Mar\u00eda Ponce Brousset assuming the interim Presidency for two days until S\u00e1nchez Cerro's return to Lima from Arequipa.\nThird Militarism (1930\u20131939).\nWith Legu\u00eda overthrown, the country entered its Third Militarism (), as military figures once again took control of the government. A military junta was established, and Manuel Mar\u00eda Ponce Brousset was the first to assume the presidency, being succeeded by the more popular Luis Miguel S\u00e1nchez Cerro, who was the first Peruvian President to have Indigenous Peruvian ancestry as well as allegedly also being of Afro-Peruvian Malagasy descent based on a rumour he was from a part of Piura populated by descendants of Malagasy slaves. Other major events of this period were the beginning of the irruption of the organized masses in politics and the growth of the middle classes.\nS\u00e1nchez Cerro called for elections while in power, intending to run as a candidate. Due to this, a revolt took place in Arequipa, where S\u00e1nchez Cerro was forced to resign. As a result, then Archbishop of Lima, Monsignor Mariano Holgu\u00edn took over the junta on April 1, 1931. After a few hours, Holgu\u00edn transferred his power to Leoncio El\u00edas. El\u00edas had called a meeting where it was agreed that David Samanez Ocampo would become the new head of state, but arrangements for this never took place, as he was overthrown by Gustavo Jim\u00e9nez, who had returned from Arequipa, where he had travelled to stop the revolt. Nevertheless, Samanez Ocampo, who was chosen due to his popularity, assumed the presidency on March 11, 1931, and called for elections on October 11 of the same year. As a result, S\u00e1nchez Cerro was elected president of Peru.\nS\u00e1nchez Cerro's government was opposed by the left-wing American Popular Revolutionary Alliance, and, as a result, political repression was brutal in the early 1930s, with tens of thousands of \"Apristas\" were executed or imprisoned. A revolt that took place in Trujillo and was brutally repressed was one such example.\nThis period was also characterized by a sudden population growth and an increase in urbanization. According to Alberto Flores Galindo, \"By the 1940 census, the last that utilized racial categories, mestizos were grouped with whites, and the two constituted more than 53 percent of the population. Mestizos likely outnumbered the indigenous peoples and were the largest population group.\"\nUnder S\u00e1nchez Cerro's constitutional government, a new constitution would be adopted, and works such as the construction of the \"Carretera Central\", which connected Lima with La Oroya, Tarma and La Merced and the investment in the Peruvian Armed Forces took place. The latter proved to be an important part of the government, as all three branches of the Armed Forces would soon become involved in the conflict with Colombia, that would erupt into armed conflict in September 1932.\nConflict with Colombia.\nThe foreign policy of S\u00e1nchez Cerro's government was initially intended to respect the border treaties signed up to that point, but public opposition to the Salom\u00f3n\u2013Lozano Treaty eventually led to a civilian takeover of the port town of Leticia, which ended up being supported by the government. The event led to protests in Colombia, and the beginning of the Colombia\u2013Peru War on September 1, 1932.\nOn April 30, 1933, while reviewing troops in the Santa Beatriz Hipodrome, S\u00e1nchez Cerro was assassinated by Abelardo Gonz\u00e1lez Leiva, who shot him three times. It was later publicized that Gonz\u00e1lez was a member of the APRA Party, leading to speculation on whether he had been ordered to carry out the attack or had acted alone. S\u00e1nchez Cerro's was succeeded as Supreme Chief of his political party, Revolutionary Union, by Luis A. Flores, who reconstructed the party into a more fascist direction, modelling it after the National Fascist Party of Italy.\nFinal years.\n\u00d3scar R. Benavides assumed the presidency as a result of S\u00e1nchez Cerro's assassination and upheld the Salom\u00f3n\u2013Lozano Treaty with Colombia, leading to the end of the war. He also signed the General Amnesty Law on August 9, 1933, which favored the \"Apristas\". But after a revolutionary attempt in El Agustino, the anti-\"Aprista\" persecution resumed. The \"Apristas\" responded with terrorist acts throughout the country, including the assassination of Antonio Mir\u00f3 Quesada, owner of \"El Comercio\", and his wife on May 15, 1935.\nUnder Benavides' government, new ministries were created and tourism was promoted. The Government Palace was renovated in 1937, the Legislative Palace and Palace of Justice were finished, and social works were put into place, including the construction of dining rooms and sewers.\nDuring this period, the Spanish Civil War began in 1936. As a result, pro-Republican and pro-Nationalist factions were established by the Spanish residents in Peru, as well as their Peruvian sympathizers. The former was more popular among left-leaning groups, including the \"Apristas\", while the latter was more popular among the aristocracy and the Spanish expatriates living in Peru, evoking the feeling of the \"Hispanidad\". A \"Spanish\u2013Peruvian Clothing Fund\" () was established in Lima, which was nominally in charge of delivering clothing to the children of both factions, but ended up assisting the Nationalist faction almost exclusively. As a result of its support of the Francoist side, Peru did not receive Republican exiles after the war, instead continuing its relations with the new government in Spain. The conflict increased the divide between the right and left-leaning sectors of society, most notably in cities such as Arequipa.\nDuring the last years of the Benavides government, the weariness of the population became noticeable. On February 19, 1939, General Antonio Rodr\u00edguez Ram\u00edrez attempted a coup, apparently with great support from various sectors. Although said caudillo was killed in the Government Palace after being machine-gunned by a police officer, Benavides understood the message and called for general elections, that took place on October 22 of the same year. The government's candidate and the son of former President Mariano Ignacio Prado, banker Manuel Prado Ugarteche, easily beat his opponent, lawyer Jos\u00e9 Quesada Larrea. As a result, there was talk of electoral fraud.\nDemocratic Spring (1939\u20131948).\nWith Prado as president, the Democratic Spring () began. Despite the new civilian government, this era would be characterized by two major military conflicts: the Ecuadorian\u2013Peruvian War and World War II.\nManuel Prado assumed the presidency on December 8, 1939, beginning what would be his first government. A previously largely unknown politician, he was predicted to not last long in office, but he displayed a strategic flexibility that eventually earned him support. His government largely continued the work started by General Benavides, maintaining strong links with the oligarchy. It was a relative democracy. He kept the Aprista Party outlawed and received the support of the Communist Party.\nDuring his tenure as president, skirmishes took place with Ecuador starting on July 5, 1941, beginning the Ecuadorian\u2013Peruvian War. With the events escalating to a point where the Peruvian Air Corps was bombarding Ecuadorian outposts along the border, an offensive by Peru began on July 23, with Peruvian troops marching into the Ecuadorian provinces of El Oro, as well as Loja, Santiago Zamora and Napo Pastaza. A ceasefire was declared effective on the afternoon of July 31, which was preceded by an aerial assault carried out by Peruvian paratroopers on the port of Puerto Bol\u00edvar, near Machala, which was also occupied.\nAn agreement known as the \"Talara Accord\" () was signed on October 2, under which a demilitarized zone was established in Ecuador under Ecuadorian administration, and the province of El Oro was occupied by Peru until the signing of the Rio Protocol in January 1942, with Peruvian troops withdrawing the following month. The treaty signed in Rio established a border commission in charge of delimiting the border between Ecuador and Peru, which was accomplished with the exception of a small part of the border that eventually continued the dispute. As a result of the delimitation of the border in the coast, integration between both countries continued to grow during the following years.\nPeru remained neutral during World War II, continuing its relations with countries in both factions, but nevertheless favoring the Allied faction. On 12 February 1945, Peru was the fourth South American nation to join the Allied forces against the Axis \u2013 following Brazil on 22 August 1942, Bolivia on 7 April 1943 and Colombia on 26 November 1943. As part of the Japanese-American internment program, the country rounded up around 2,000 of its Japanese immigrant population and shipped them to the United States, where they were placed in concentration camps. Despite the late entry of the country into the conflict, some volunteers had already left for Europe beforehand. One example was Jorge Sanjinez Lenz, who enlisted in the Belgian Piron Brigade, and fought in the Battle of Normandy.\nBustamante administration.\nFollowing the Allied victory in World War II by 2 September 1945, V\u00edctor Ra\u00fal Haya de la Torre (founder of the APRA), together with Jos\u00e9 Carlos Mari\u00e1tegui (leader of the Peruvian Communist Party), were two major forces in Peruvian politics. Ideologically opposed, they both managed to create the first political parties that tackled the social and economic problems of the country. Although Mari\u00e1tegui died at a young age, President Bustamante y Rivero hoped to create a more democratic government by limiting the power of the military and the oligarchy. Elected with the cooperation of the APRA, conflict soon arose between the President and Haya de la Torre. Without the support of the APRA party, Bustamante y Rivero found his presidency severely limited. The President disbanded his \"Aprista\" cabinet and replaced it with a mostly military one. In 1948, Minister Manuel A. Odr\u00eda and other right-wing elements of the Cabinet urged Bustamante y Rivero to ban the APRA, but when the President refused, Odr\u00eda resigned his post.\nThe \"Ochenio\" (1948\u20131956).\nIn a military coup on 27 October, Gen. Manuel A. Odr\u00eda became the new president. Odr\u00eda's presidency was known as the \"Ochenio\". He cracked down on APRA members and sympathizers, momentarily pleasing the oligarchy and all others on the right, but followed a populist course that won him great favor with the poor and lower classes. A thriving economy allowed him to indulge in expensive but crowd-pleasing social policies. At the same time, however, civil rights were severely restricted and corruption was rampant throughout his r\u00e9gime.\nIt was feared that his dictatorship would run indefinitely, so it came as a surprise when Odr\u00eda allowed new elections. During this time, Fernando Bela\u00fande Terry started his political career, and led the slate submitted by the National Front of Democratic Youth. After the National Election Board refused to accept his candidacy, he led a massive protest, and the striking image of Bela\u00fande walking with the flag was featured by news magazine \"Caretas\" the following day, in an article entitled \"As\u00ed Nacen Los Lideres\" (\"Thus Are Leaders Born\"). Bela\u00fande's 1956 candidacy was ultimately unsuccessful, as the dictatorship-favored right-wing candidacy of Manuel Prado Ugarteche took first place.\nModerate civil reform (1956\u20131968).\nBela\u00fande ran for president once again in the national elections of 1962; this time with his own party, Acci\u00f3n Popular (Popular Action). The results were very tight; he ended in second place, following V\u00edctor Ra\u00fal Haya de la Torre (APRA), by less than 14,000 votes. Since none of the candidates managed to get the constitutionally established minimum of one third of the vote required to win outright, selection of the President should have fallen to Congress; the long-held antagonistic relationship between the military and APRA prompted Haya de la Torre to make a deal with former dictator Odria, who had come in third, which would have resulted in Odria taking the Presidency in a coalition government.\nHowever, widespread allegations of fraud prompted the Peruvian military to depose Prado and install a military \"junta\", led by Ricardo Perez Godoy. Godoy ran a short transitional government and held new elections in 1963, which were won by Bela\u00fande by a more comfortable but still narrow five percent margin. Bela\u00fande took office on July 28 of the same year. His presidency would continue until its interruption in 1968.\nThroughout Latin America in the 1960s, communist movements inspired by the Cuban Revolution sought to win power through guerrilla warfare. The Revolutionary Left Movement, or MIR, launched an insurrection that had been crushed by 1965, but Peru's internal strife would only accelerate until its climax in the 1990s.\nRadical military reform (1968\u20131980).\nAfter a crisis involving the missing last page of a document signed between the Peruvian government and the International Petroleum Company, General Juan Velasco Alvarado overthrew elected President Fernando Bela\u00fande Terry in a successful coup d'\u00e9tat in 1968. As part of what has been called the \"first phase\" of the military government's nationalist program, Velasco undertook an extensive agrarian reform program and nationalized the fish meal industry, some petroleum companies, and several banks and mining firms. The Velasco administration saw its worst moment during the \"Limazo\", a period of civil unrest and rioting in Lima after a strike carried out by members of the Civil Guard and the Republican Guard.\nIn 1971, the country celebrated its 150th anniversary since its independence. As a result, the Revolutionary Government established the \"National Commission for the Sesquicentennial of the Independence of Peru\" () to manage the celebrations.\nGeneral Francisco Morales Berm\u00fadez overthrew Velasco in 1975, citing Velasco's economic mismanagement and deteriorating health. Morales Berm\u00fadez moved the revolution into a more conservative \"second phase\", tempering the radical measures of the first phase and beginning the task of restoring the country's economy. A constitutional assembly was created in 1979, which was led by V\u00edctor Ra\u00fal Haya de la Torre. Morales Berm\u00fadez presided over the return to civilian government in accordance with a new constitution drawn up in 1979, calling a general election in 1980.\nTerrorism and the \"Fujimorato\" (1980\u20132000).\nDuring the 1980s, cultivation of illicit coca was established in large areas on the eastern Andean slope. Rural insurgent movements, like the Shining Path (\"Sendero Luminoso\", SL) and the T\u00fapac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) increased and derived significant financial support from alliances with the narcotics traffickers, leading to the Internal conflict in Peru.\nIn the May 1980 elections, President Fernando Bela\u00fande Terry was returned to office by a strong plurality. One of his first actions as president was the return of several newspapers to their respective owners. In this way, freedom of speech once again played an important part in Peruvian politics. Gradually, he also attempted to undo some of the most radical effects of the \"Agrarian Reform\" initiated by Velasco and reversed the independent stance that the military government of Velasco had with the United States.\nBela\u00fande's second term was also marked by the unconditional support for Argentine forces during the Falklands War with the United Kingdom in 1982. Bela\u00fande declared that \"Peru was ready to support Argentina with all the resources it needed\". This included a number of fighter planes and possibly personnel from the Peruvian Air Force, as well as ships, and medical teams. Belaunde's government proposed a peace settlement between the two countries, but it was rejected by both sides, as both claimed undiluted sovereignty of the territory. In response to Chile's support of the UK, Bela\u00fande called for Latin American unity.\nThe nagging economic problems left over from the previous military government persisted, worsened by an occurrence of the \"El Ni\u00f1o\" weather phenomenon in 1982\u201383, which caused widespread flooding in some parts of the country, severe droughts in others, and decimated the schools of ocean fish that are one of the country's major resources. After a promising beginning, Bela\u00fande's popularity eroded under the stress of inflation, economic hardship, and terrorism.\nIn 1985, the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) won the presidential election, bringing Alan Garc\u00eda to office. The transfer of the presidency from Bela\u00fande to Garc\u00eda on 28 July 1985 was Peru's first exchange of power from one democratically elected leader to another in 40 years.\nWith a parliamentary majority for the first time in APRA's history, Alan Garc\u00eda started his administration with hopes for a better future. However, economic mismanagement led to hyperinflation from 1988 to 1990. Garc\u00eda's term in office was marked by bouts of hyperinflation, which reached 7,649% in 1990 and had a cumulative total of 2,200,200% between July 1985 and July 1990, thereby profoundly destabilizing the Peruvian economy.\nOwing to such chronic inflation, the Peruvian currency, the sol, was replaced by the \"Inti\" in mid-1985, which itself was replaced by the nuevo sol (\"new sun\") in July 1991, at which time the new \"sol\" had a cumulative value of one billion old soles. During his administration, the \"per capita\" annual income of Peruvians fell to $720 (below the level of 1960) and Peru's GDP dropped 20%. By the end of his term, national reserves were a negative $900 million.\nThe economic turbulence of the time exacerbated social tensions in Peru and partly contributed to the rise of the violent rebel movement Shining Path. The Garc\u00eda administration unsuccessfully sought a military solution to the growing terrorism, committing human rights violations which are still under investigation.\nIn June 1989, demonstrations for free education were severely repressed by the army: 18 people were killed according to official figures, but non-governmental estimates suggest several dozen deaths. This event led to a radicalization of political protests in the countryside and ultimately led to the outbreak of the Shining Path's armed and terrorist actions.\nFujimori's presidency and the Fujishock (1990\u20132000).\nConcerned about the economy, the increasing terrorist threat from Sendero Luminoso and MRTA, and allegations of official corruption, voters chose a relatively unknown mathematician-turned-politician, Alberto Fujimori, as president in 1990. The first round of the election was won by well-known writer Mario Vargas Llosa, a conservative candidate who went on to receive the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2010, but Fujimori defeated him in the second round. Fujimori implemented drastic measures that caused inflation to drop from 7,650% in 1990 to 139% in 1991. The currency was devalued by 200%, prices were rising sharply (especially gasoline, whose price is multiplied by 30), hundreds of public companies were privatized and 300,000 jobs were being lost. The majority of the population had not benefited from the years of strong growth, which ultimately only widened the gap between rich and poor. The poverty rate remained at around 50%.\nFujimori dissolved Congress in the self-coup of 5 April 1992, in order to have total control of the government of Peru. He then eliminated the constitution; called new congressional elections; and implemented substantial economic reform, including privatization of numerous state-owned companies, creation of an investment-friendly climate, and sound management of the economy.\nFujimori's administration was dogged by several insurgent groups, most notably Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path), which carried on a terrorist campaign in the countryside throughout the 1980s and 1990s. He cracked down on the insurgents and was successful in largely quelling them by the late 1990s, but the fight was marred by atrocities committed by both the Peruvian security forces and the insurgents: the Barrios Altos massacre and La Cantuta massacre by government paramilitary groups, and the bombings of Tarata and Frecuencia Latina by Shining Path. Those examples subsequently came to be seen as symbols of the human rights violations committed during the last years of violence. With the capture of Abimael Guzm\u00e1n (known as \"President Gonzalo\" to the Shining Path) in September 1992, the Shining Path received a severe blow which practically destroyed the organization.\nIn December 1996, a group of insurgents belonging to the MRTA took over the Japanese embassy in Lima, taking 72 people hostage. Military commandos stormed the embassy compound in April 1997, which resulted in the death of all 15 hostage takers, one hostage, and 2 commandos. It later emerged, however, that Fujimori's security chief Vladimiro Montesinos may have ordered the killing of at least eight of the rebels after they surrendered.\nFujimori's constitutionally questionable decision to seek a third term and subsequent tainted victory in June 2000 brought political and economic turmoil, including the Four Quarters March of July 26\u201328, which left several dead and injured, and destroyed the building of the \"Banco de la Naci\u00f3n\" (Bank of the Nation). A bribery scandal that broke just weeks after he took office in July forced Fujimori to call new elections in which he would not run. The scandal involved Vladimiro Montesinos, who was shown in a video broadcast on TV bribing a politician to change sides. Montesinos subsequently emerged as the center of a vast web of illegal activities, including embezzlement, graft, drug trafficking, as well as human rights violations committed during the war against Sendero Luminoso.\nBusiness republic (2000\u20132016).\nIn November 2000, Fujimori resigned from office and went to Japan in self-imposed exile, avoiding prosecution for human rights violations and corruption charges by the new Peruvian authorities. His main intelligence chief, Vladimiro Montesinos, fled Peru shortly afterwards. Authorities in Venezuela arrested him in Caracas in June 2001 and turned him over to Peruvian authorities; he is now imprisoned and charged with acts of corruption and human rights violations committed during Fujimori's administration.\nA caretaker government presided over by Valent\u00edn Paniagua took on the responsibility of conducting new presidential and congressional elections. The elections were held in April 2001; observers considered them to be free and fair. Alejandro Toledo (who led the opposition against Fujimori) defeated former President Alan Garc\u00eda.\nThe newly elected government took office on 28 July 2001. The Toledo Administration managed to restore some degree of democracy to Peru following the authoritarianism and corruption that plagued both the Fujimori and Garc\u00eda governments. Innocents wrongfully tried by military courts during the war against terrorism (1980\u20132000) were allowed to receive new trials in civilian courts.\nOn 28 August 2003, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (CVR), which had been charged with studying the roots of the violence of the 1980\u20132000 period, presented its formal report to the President.\nPresident Toledo was forced to make a number of cabinet changes, mostly in response to personal scandals. Toledo's governing coalition had a minority of seats in Congress and had to negotiate on an \"ad hoc\" basis with other parties to form majorities on legislative proposals. Toledo's popularity in the polls suffered throughout the last years of his regime, due in part to family scandals and in part to dissatisfaction among workers with their share of benefits from Peru's macroeconomic success. After strikes by teachers and agricultural producers led to nationwide road blockages in May 2003, Toledo declared a state of emergency that suspended some civil liberties and gave the military power to enforce order in 12 regions. The state of emergency was later reduced to only the few areas where the Shining Path was operating.\nOn 28 July 2006, former president Alan Garc\u00eda was reelected as the President of Peru. He won the 2006 elections after winning in a runoff against Ollanta Humala. In May 2008, President Garc\u00eda was a signatory to the UNASUR Constitutive Treaty of the Union of South American Nations (USAN). Peru has ratified the treaty.\nOn 5 June 2011, Ollanta Humala was elected president in a run-off against Keiko Fujimori, the daughter of Alberto Fujimori and former First Lady of Peru, in the 2011 elections, making him the first leftist president of Peru since Juan Velasco Alvarado. In December 2011, a state of emergency was declared following popular opposition to some major mining project and environmental concerns.\nPolitical crisis (2016\u2013present).\nPedro Pablo Kuczynski was elected president in the general election in July 2016. His parents were Polish Jews fleeing from Nazism. Kuczynski was committed to integrating and acknowledging Peru's indigenous populations, with state-run TV beginning daily news broadcasts in Quechua and Aymara. Kuczynski was widely criticized on pardoning former President Alberto Fujimori, going against his campaign promises against his rival, Keiko Fujimori.\nIn March 2018, after a failure to impeach the president, Kuczynski faced yet again the threat of impeachment on the basis of corruption in vote buying and bribery with the Odebrecht corporation. On 23 March 2018, Kucyznski was forced to resign from the presidency, and has not been heard from since. His successor was his first vice president, engineer Mart\u00edn Vizcarra. Vizcarra has announced publicly that he has no plans in seeking for re-election amidst the political crisis and instability. However, the Congress impeached President Martin Vizcarra in November 2020. His successor, interim president Manuel Merino, resigned after being in office for only five days. Merino was succeeded by interim president Francisco Sagasti, the third head of state in under a week.\nOn 28 July 2021, coinciding with the Bicentennial of the Independence of Peru, left-wing Pedro Castillo was sworn in as the new President of Peru after a narrow win against Keiko Fujimori in the 2022 election.\nAs a result of economic stagnation during the COVID-19 pandemic in Peru, between ten and twenty percent of Peruvians fell below the poverty line in 2020, reversing a decade of poverty reduction in the country and resulting in a poverty rate of 30.1% that year. Following the global economic reverberations resulting from Western-led sanctions against Russia due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine beginning in February 2022, inflation in Peru rose sharply. As a result, on 28 March 2022 mass protests began. The government responded to the rioting by deploying the Armed Forces. President Castillo declared a state of emergency and enforced a total curfew in Lima for the entire day of 5 April. In November 2022, thousands of opponents of the government marched through the capital's center to call for the removal of President Pedro Castillo.\nAfter multiple attempts to remove Castillo were unsuccessful, Castillo attempted a self-coup on 7 December 2022 and was subsequently impeached and removed from office. Castillo's vice president Dina Boluarte was sworn in as the new president later that day, becoming the country's first female president. Following Castillo's removal, his supporters started nationwide protests demanding his release and Boluarte's resignation. On 14 December 2022, Peru's new government declared a 30-day national state of emergency to stop violent demonstrations.\nOn 10 October 2025, Peru\u2019s congress removed President Dina Boluarte from office and Jose Jeri was sworn in as Peru\u2019s interim president.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nSpanish era.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRepublican era.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomic and labor history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistoriography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "23432", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23432", "title": "Geography of Peru", "text": " \nPeru is a country on the central western coast of South America facing the Pacific Ocean. It lies wholly in the Southern Hemisphere, its northernmost extreme reaching to 1.8 minutes of latitude or about south of the equator. Peru shares land borders with Ecuador, Colombia, Brazil, Bolivia, and Chile, with its longest land border shared with Brazil.\nNatural Regions.\nDespite the great diversity of Peruvian territory, the Spanish divided it into three main regions for political rather than geographical reasons: the Coast, adjacent to the Pacific Ocean; the Highlands, located in the Andean mountains; and the Amazon Jungle. This division, despite its evident limitations, lasted until 1941, when the third General Assembly of the Pan American Institute of Geography and History approved the creation of eight natural regions, proposed by the geographer Javier Pulgar Vidal, to establish a physiographic map more adjusted to the biogeographical reality of the territory. Thus conceived, the Peruvian map comprises the following regions:\nStatistics.\nPeru has a total land area of 1,285,220\u00a0km2 and a total water area of 5,000\u00a0km2. In terms of maritime area, the country claims a continental shelf of , a territorial sea of and an \"Exclusive economic zone\" of . \nOnly 3% of Peru's land is arable, with 0.5% being suitable for permanent crops. Permanent pastureland accounts for 21% of Peru's land use, and forests and woodland accounting for 66% of the landscape. Approximately 9.5% (1993 est.) of Peruvian land is attributed to population centers, coastal regions, and other space.\nNatural hazards that Peru experiences include earthquakes, tsunamis, flooding, landslides, and mild volcanic activity. The geographic positioning of Peru adjacent to the adjoining Nazca and South American tectonic plates - converging in the Atacama trench off the Pacific coast - serves as the catalyst to many of Peru's natural hazards.\nPeru's environmental issues include deforestation (some the result of illegal logging); overgrazing of the slopes of the coast and sierra leading to soil erosion; desertification; air pollution in Lima; pollution of rivers and coastal waters from municipal and mining wastes.\nPeru is a party to the following international environmental agreements:&lt;br&gt;Antarctic Treaty, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling. Furthermore, the country has signed, but not ratified, the Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol.\nPeru shares control of Lake Titicaca, world's highest navigable lake, with Bolivia.\nUrbanization.\nThe most populated city in the country is Lima, the capital of Peru. Lima's metropolitan area has a population of over 10 million. The country's second and third largest cities, Callao and Arequipa, have around 1.3 and 1.2 million people, respectively. Peru's developed urban cities are found in coastal regions and to the north. There are 32.1 million people who live in Peru. The percentage of urbanization in Peru is 79.2%, and holds a yearly increase of 1.57%. Lima forms part of the largest cities in the Americas, and holds 31.7% of the country's population. The dense concentration of the population size of Peru is 25 people/km2 or 57/mi2. Lima is a pull factor that draws millions of Peruvians from the suburbs to the capital. This urban inland migration is the result of sprawling around Lima. These sprawling places are known as \u201cPueblos J\u00f3venes\u201d. The young towns and Lima make up the metropolitan area that extend .\nThe urban growth brings issues to the metropolitan area and the environment. Lima is the most polluted city in Latin America. The overcrowding and growth of urbanization has caused Peruvians to use its green spaces for garbage disposal. This leads to the pollution of the river Rimac that supplies water to the metropolitan area.\nThe rise of urbanization forgets the historic sites, ruins or \u201chuacas\u201d, which are being replaced for buildings, roads, etc. Lima is home of 400 sites of 46,000 in the country, the country itself only preserves 1%.\nApproximately 1.3 million Venezuelans have emigrated to Peru in search of residency. This international migration is caused by various social, environmental and economic crises in their home country. This push factor migration has brought to Peru sustenance problems like instability and food shortage.\nClimate.\nThe combination of tropical latitude, mountain ranges, topography variations and two ocean currents (Humboldt and El Ni\u00f1o) gives Peru a large diversity of climates. Peru has a tropical climate with a wet and dry season.\nAmazon Basin or Low Amazon.\nThe eastern portions of Peru include the Amazon Basin or \"selva baja\", a region that is larger in the north than in the south. Representing roughly 60% of Peru's national territory, this area includes the Amazon, Mara\u00f1\u00f3n, Huallaga and Ucayali Rivers.\nAlmost 60% of the country's area is located within this region, () giving Peru the fourth largest area of tropical forest in the world after Brazil, Congo and Indonesia.\nAndean mountain ranges.\nThe Andes shelter the very largest variety of climates in the country. The climate is semi-arid in the valleys and moist in higher elevations and towards the eastern flanks. Rainfall varies from per year. The monsoonal period starts in October and ends in April. The rainiest months are January through March where travel can be sometimes affected.\nThe western slopes are arid to semi-arid and receive rainfall only between January and March. Below the mark, the temperatures vary between in the night versus in the day.\nBetween , the temperatures vary from in the night and from during the day. At higher elevations from , the Puna ecoregion, the temperature varies from during the night versus during the day.\nThe northernmost regions of the Andes around Cajamarca and Piura regions have P\u00e1ramo climates.\nCoast.\nThe Peruvian coast is a microclimatic region. The region is affected by the cold Humboldt Current, the El Ni\u00f1o Southern Oscillation, tropical latitude, and the Andes mountain range.\nThe central and southern coast consists mainly of a subtropical desert climate composed of sandy or rocky shores and inland cutting valleys. Days alternate between overcast skies with occasional fog in the winter and sunny skies with occasional haze in the summer, with the only precipitation being an occasional light-to-moderate drizzle that is known locally as \"gar\u00faa\". These regions are usually characterized by mildly cold lows () and also mild highs (). Temperatures rarely fall below and do not go over . An exception is the southern coast, where it does get a bit warmer and drier for most of the year during daytime, and where it can also get much colder during winter nights ().\nThe northern coast, on the contrary, has a curious tropical-dry climate, generally referred to as tropical savanna. This region is a lot warmer and can be unbearable during summer months, where rainfall is also present. The region differs from the southern coast by the presence of shrubs, equatorial dry forests (Tumbes\u2013Piura dry forests ecoregion), mangrove forests, tropical valleys near rivers such as the Chira and the Tumbes. The average temperature is .\nCentral and southern coast.\nThe central and southern coast have a subtropical desert climate, despite this region being located in the tropics. The Humboldt Current, serving as one cause of climatic differentiation, is colder than normal tropical seas at , thus preventing high tropical temperatures from appearing. Additionally, due to the height of the Andes cordillera, there is no passage of hot clouds from the Amazon to the coast, the climate is cooler than that of similar tropical latitudes. This can create a great deal of humidity and fog during winter months.\nMoreover, the Andes mountains are very close to the coast, a geographic factor that prevents cumulus or cumulonimbus clouds from appearing. Therefore, a shade effect is created, causing very low annual rainfall in this region.\nRainfall averages per year near the Chilean border to per year on the northern coast and nearer the Andes.\nThe central coast is composed of regions including La Libertad, Ancash and Lima, which have a spring-like climate for most of the year. Foggy and sunny days intermingle around the humid sand dunes during most of the year.\nMost summers (February\u2013April) have pleasant temperatures ranging from during the night to about during the daytime. Winters (August\u2013October) are very humid, and range from during the nights to around the during the day. The spring (November\u2013January) and autumn (May\u2013July) months have a pleasant climate that ranges from during the day to around during the night. Moving inland into the \"Yunga\" valleys, the climate tends to be ~ drier and warmer during any given month.\nThe \"southern coast\", composed of the Ica, Arequipa, Moquegua and Tacna regions, has a drier and warmer climate during the day for all seasons, although colder in winter. There are regions famous for their sand dunes and impressive deserts that are, in part, caused by the drier and hotter climate. Temperatures in this region can reach up to in the Nazca region while inland regions can fall to during the winter months. During the day, temperatures rarely go below the for all months of the year. This purports the idea that the southern coast has a more desert-like climate, although daily temperature variations exist as they do in other regions within tropical latitudes. Clear skies are often present in desert areas and, although less common, near the coastal cliffs as well, which are home to a variety of fish and marine mammals.\nNorthern coast.\nThe northern coast consists of the eastern region of Lambayeque, the Piura Region and the Tumbes Region.\nThey are characterized by having different climate and geography from the rest of the coast. Right between the 3-hour drive on the Sechura Desert, which is located north of the Lambayeque Region and south of the Piura Region, is the evidence of climate change from the common subtropical desert found on the south to visible tropicalization effects of the tropical dry climate or tropical savanna. Examples of this are the tropical dry forests that begin to appear. They are composed of shrubs, thorny trees, carob trees, faique trees, guayacan trees, hualtaco trees, palo santo trees, ceibo trees and on the coast\nmangrove forests. It is also a biodiverse area where typical wildlife can be observed such as crocodiles, reptiles, iguanas, boas, pava aliblanca, anteater, bear, sloth (bearh) and many more.\nThis climatic change is caused by the presence of the warm El Ni\u00f1o Current during the summer months (December to April), the eventual El Ni\u00f1o Phenomenon and the passing of Amazon Jungles clouds due to mountain openings and lower altitudes of the Andes Chain. These are the causes for a climate change in a short two- or three-hour trajectory that is visible between the Lambayeque Region and the Sechura Province, where not only geography changes but a temperature rise of or more depending on the month. It is directly off the shores of the Sechura Region where the cold Humboldt current and warm El Ni\u00f1o current meet, at about 5\u00b0 to 6\u00b0 south of the equator. From this point, warm temperatures are most common, and there are no true winters. Average temperatures range between .\nSummer (December through March) is more humid and very hot, with average temperatures that vary from during the night to around during the day, although north of Lambayeque it can reach the . Winters (June\u2013September) are cooler during the nights; around during the night, to around during the daytime.\nThere are protected areas in Tumbes and Piura such as the Coto de Caza El Angolo and the Cerros de Amotape National Park, with tropical dry forests that extend to the south of Ecuador. The eastern areas of Lambayeque also have tropical dry forests, where the Chaparr\u00ed Private Conservation Area is located in Chongoyape. These forests have the particularity of connecting with the Amazon basin through the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n pass (an area where there are also tropical dry forests). \nMangrove forests are located in four specific areas from Sechura to Tumbes. In these regions, the mangrove forests are at the ending strips of the Piura River in the Sechura Province (the southernmost mangroves in the Pacific Ocean). To the north, the ending strips of the Chira River, Tumbes River, and Zarumilla River also have mangrove forests that flow into the ocean.\nTerrain:\nwestern coastal plain (costa), high and rugged Andes in center (sierra), eastern lowland jungle of Amazon Basin (selva).\nNatural resources:\ncopper, silver, gold, petroleum, timber, fish, iron ore, coal, phosphate, potash, hydropower.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Peru, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nAgriculture.\nPeru's agricultural lands make up 18.5% of Peru's total surface area, a substantially lower percentage compared to its neighbors who average at around 22% agricultural land. Common crops include, but are not limited to root vegetables like potatoes and cassava; peppers including chilies and paprika; vegetables like asparagus, tomatoes; quinoa; kiwicha; and fruits like mangoes, passion fruit, citrus, and bananas. Levels of undernourished citizens and children who suffer from undernourishment has dramatically decreased from just under six million to just over two million between 2000 and 2017, while food availability has increased from an energy percentage of 105 to 117 between 2000 and 2017.\nEnvironmental degradation.\nAs food production in Peru increases, farmers saturate the soil with nutrients with nitrogen and phosphorus bases. Oversaturation of nutrients leads to eutrophication in nearby water bodies, resulting in dead zones. Carbon emissions due to manufacturing and food processing leads to reduced air quality which contributes to the global warming that increases severity of natural disasters and acidifies the ocean, leading to mass bleaching in coral reefs, which in turn tends to destroy oceanic ecosystems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
