{"id": "26538", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26538", "title": "Roman Curia", "text": "Administrative institutions of the Holy See\nThe Roman Curia () comprises the administrative institutions of the Holy See. It is often incorrectly referred to as the Vatican Curia.\nThe Roman Curia is the central body through which the affairs of the Catholic Church are conducted. The Roman Curia is the institution of which the Roman Pontiff ordinarily makes use in the exercise of his supreme pastoral office and universal mission in the world: thus curialism refers traditionally to an emphasis on the supreme authority of the Holy See within the Catholic Church. It is at the service of the Pope and bishops, fulfilling their function with an evangelical spirit, working for the good and at the service of communion, unity and edification of the Universal Church and attending to the demands of the world in which the Church is called to fulfill its duty and mission (\"Praedicate evangelium\", article 1).\nThe structure and organization of responsibilities within the Curia are at present regulated by the apostolic constitution issued by Pope Francis on 19 March 2022, which entered into force on 5 June 2022. It was previously regulated by , issued by Pope John Paul II on 28 June 1988. With the coming into force of , was fully abrogated and replaced.\nOther bodies that play an administrative or consulting role in ecclesial affairs are sometimes mistakenly identified with the Curia, such as the Synod of Bishops and regional conferences of bishops. Cardinal Gerhard M\u00fcller, prefect emeritus of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, wrote in 2015 that \"the Synod of Bishops is not a part of the Roman Curia in the strict sense: it is the expression of the collegiality of bishops in communion with the Pope and under his direction. The Roman Curia instead aids the Pope in the exercise of his primacy over all the churches.\"\nHistorical background.\nThe Curia was created by Pope Urban II (r. 1088\u20131099). The Roman Curia () comprises the administrative institutions of the Holy See. It is often incorrectly referred to as the Vatican Curia.\n\"Curia\" in medieval and later Latin usage means \"court\" in the sense of \"royal court\" rather than \"court of law\". The Roman Curia is sometimes anglicized as the Court of Rome, as in the 1534 Act of Parliament that forbade appeals to it from England. It is the papal court and assists the Pope in carrying out his functions. The Roman Curia can be loosely compared to cabinets in governments of countries with a Western form of governance, but the only sections that can be directly compared with specific ministries of a civil government are the Second Section of the Secretariat of State, known also as the Section for Relations with States, the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State (established in 1939 by Pius XII), and the Congregation for Catholic Education.\nIt is normal for every Latin Catholic diocese to have its own \"curia\" for its administration. For the Diocese of Rome, these functions are \"not\" handled by the Roman Curia, but by the Vicariate General of His Holiness for the City of Rome, as provided by the apostolic constitution \"Ecclesia in Urbe\". The pope has, going back to St. Peter, been the bishop of Rome. There are also the Vicar General of Rome, traditionally a cardinal, and his deputy, the vicegerent, who holds the personal title of archbishop, who supervise the governance of the diocese by reference to the Pope himself, but with no more dependence on the Roman Curia, as such, than other Catholic dioceses throughout the world. A distinct office, the Vicar General for Vatican City, administers the portion of the Diocese of Rome in Vatican City.\nUntil recently, there still existed hereditary officers of the Roman Curia, holding titles denominating functions that had ceased to be a reality when the Papal States were lost to the papacy. A reorganization, ordered by Pope Pius X, was incorporated into the 1917 Code of Canon Law. Further steps toward reorganization were begun by Pope Paul VI in the 1960s. Among the goals of this curial reform were the modernization of procedures and the internationalization of the curial staff. These reforms are reflected in the 1983 Code of Canon Law. The offices of the Vatican City State are not part of the Roman Curia, which is composed only of offices of the Holy See. As of 2020[ [update]], the Curia comprises the offices listed in the sections below. Most members of the Curia except, among some others, the Cardinal Camerlengo and the Major Penitentiary resign their office immediately after a papal death or resignation. See \"sede vacante\".\nStructure.\nThe Roman Curia is composed of the Secretariat of State, the dicasteries and the bodies, all of which are juridically equal. By the term \"curial institutions\" is meant the units of the Roman Curia. The offices of the Roman Curia are the Prefecture of the Papal Household, the Office for the Liturgical Celebrations of the Supreme Pontiff and the Camerlengo of Holy Roman Church (\"Praedicate evangelium\", Article 12).\nIn general, each curial institution is composed of a prefect or equivalent, a suitable number of Members, one or more Secretaries who assist the prefect, together with, but in a subordinate line, one or more under-secretaries, who are flanked by various Officials and Consultors (\"Praedicate evangelium\", Article 13 \u00a7\u00a01).\nThe members of the curial institutions are appointed from among the Cardinals residing both in and outside Rome, to whom are added, in as much as they are particularly expert in the matters in question, some bishops, especially diocesan/eparchial ones, as well as, according to the nature of the dicastery, some priests and deacons, some members of institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life and some lay faithful (\"Praedicate evangelium\", Article 15).\nThe prefect, or his equivalent, the members, the secretary, the undersecretary and the other major officials assigned to heads of office, equivalents and experts, as well as the consultors, are appointed by the Roman Pontiff for five-year terms. As a rule, after five years, clerical officials and members of institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life who have served in curial institutions and offices return to pastoral care in their diocese or parish or in the institutes or societies to which they belong. Should the superiors of the Roman Curia deem it opportune, the service may be extended for another period of five years (\"Praedicate evangelium\", Article 17).\nDespite this general structure, some curial institutions have a different structure either due to a special law made for the curial institution or because of the nature of the curial institution (\"Praedicate evangelium\", Article 13 \u00a7\u00a02). Some examples of curial institutions with a special structure are the Apostolic Penitentiary (\"Praedicate evangelium\", Article 190) and the Tribunal of the Roman Rota (\"Praedicate evangelium\", Article 201).\nIn the event of the Apostolic See becoming vacant, all the heads of curial institutions and members cease to hold office. Exceptions to this rule include the Major Penitentiary, who continues to carry out the ordinary business within his competence, proposing to the College of Cardinals those matters that he would report to the Roman Pontiff; and the almoner of His Holiness, who continues in the exercise of works of charity according to the same criteria used during the pontificate, remaining in the employ of the College of Cardinals until the election of the new Roman Pontiff. During the vacancy of the Apostolic See, the secretaries are responsible for the ordinary government of curial institutions, taking care only of matters of ordinary administration. Within three months of the election of the Roman Pontiff, they are to be confirmed in their office by him. The Master of Papal Liturgical Celebrations assumes the duties provided for in the norms concerning the vacancy of the Apostolic See and the election of the Roman Pontiff (\"Praedicate evangelium\", Article 18).\nSecretariat.\nSecretariat of State.\nThe Secretariat of State is the oldest dicastery in the Roman Curia. As the Papal Secretariat, it closely assists the Roman Pontiff in the exercise of his supreme mission. It comprises three sections: the Section for General Affairs, under the direction of the Substitute, with the assistance of the Assessor; the Section for Relations with States and International Organizations, under the direction of its secretary, with the assistance of the undersecretary and an undersecretary for the multilateral sector; and the Section for the Diplomatic Staff of the Holy See, under the direction of the secretary for papal representations, with the assistance of an undersecretary. The current secretary of the state is Pietro Cardinal Parolin.\nSection for General Affairs.\nThe Section for General Affairs is responsible for dealing with the following matters concerning the daily service of the Roman Pontiff: to examine those matters outside the ordinary competence of the curial institutions and other bodies of the Apostolic See; and to foster coordination among these dicasteries and other bodies and offices without prejudice to their autonomy. It is responsible for carrying out everything that concerns the Representatives of States of the Holy See. The current Substitute for General Affairs is Archbishop Edgar Pe\u00f1a Parra.\nSection for Relations with States and International Organizations.\nThe task of the Section for Relations with States and International Organizations is to attend to the affairs that must be dealt with through the respective civil authorities. It is responsible for the following: to handle the diplomatic and political relations of the Holy See with states and with other subjects of international law; to deal with common affairs for the promotion of the good of the church and of civil society, also through the stipulation of concordats and other international agreements, taking into account the opinion of the episcopal bodies concerned; to represent the Holy See at international intergovernmental organizations, as well as at multilateral intergovernmental conferences, availing itself, if necessary, of the collaboration of the competent dicasteries and bodies of the Roman Curia; and to grant the \"nulla osta\" whenever a dicastery or body of the Roman Curia intends to publish a statement or document pertaining to international relations or relations with civil authorities. The current Secretary for Relations with States is Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher.\nSection for Diplomatic Staff of the Holy See.\nThe Section for the Diplomatic Staff of the Holy See deals with matters pertaining to persons serving in the diplomatic service of the Holy See, in particular their living and working conditions and their ongoing formation. In carrying out his duties, the secretary visits the offices of the pontifical representations, and convokes and presides over meetings concerning their provisions. This section collaborates with the president of the Pontifical Ecclesiastical Academy with regard to the selection and training of candidates for the diplomatic service of the Holy See and maintains contact with retired diplomatic personnel. The current Secretary for Pontifical Representations is Archbishop Jan Romeo Paw\u0142owski.\nCentral Statistics Office of the Church.\nThe Central Statistics Office, which operates under the Vatican Secretariat of State, conducts a variety of studies for the Roman Curia throughout the year. One of the office's biggest projects is compiling the 500-page \"Statistical Yearbook of the Church\". The yearbook tracks the Catholic population, both by a head count of the baptized in each country and as a percentage of the world's population. The current person-in-charge is Monsignor Tomislav \u0189ukez.\nDicasteries.\nUnder the new constitution, all the Vatican's main departments are now known as \"dicasteries\". Alongside removing the title \"congregation\" from Vatican departments, the new constitution renames pontifical councils as \"dicasteries\". The constitution says: \"The Roman Curia is composed of the Secretariat of State, the dicasteries and other bodies, all juridically equal to each other\". The curial institutions are now made up of 16 dicasteries. Each dicastery is headed by a prefect, and supported by secretary and under-secretary.\nDicastery for Evangelization.\nThe Dicastery for Evangelization is competent for the fundamental questions of evangelization in the world and for the establishment, accompaniment and support of the new particular churches, without prejudice to the competence of the Dicastery for the Eastern Churches.\nThis new dicastery is a merger of the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples and the Pontifical Council for Promoting the New Evangelization. It is made up of two sections: one for fundamental questions of evangelization in the world, and one for first evangelization and the new particular churches in the territories within its competence. It is presided over directly by the Roman Pontiff, currently Leo\u00a0XIV. Each of the two sections is governed in his name and by his authority by a pro-prefect.\nSection for Fundamental Issues in World Evangelization.\nIt is the task of this section to study, in collaboration with the particular churches, episcopal conferences and eastern hierarchical structures, institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life, the fundamental questions of evangelization and the development of an effective announcing the Gospel by identifying appropriate forms, instruments and language. The section gathers the most significant experiences in the field of evangelization, making them available to the entire church. It encourages reflection on the history of evangelization and mission, especially in their relationship to the political, social, and cultural events that have marked and conditioned the preaching of the Gospel. The current pro-prefect is Archbishop Salvatore (Rino) Fisichella.\nSection for First Evangelization and the New Particular Churches.\nThis section supports the proclamation of the Gospel and the deepening of the life of faith in the territories of first evangelization and deals with everything that concerns the erection of ecclesiastical circumscriptions or their modifications, as well as their provisioning, and it carries out the other tasks in the same way as the Dicastery for Bishops does within the scope of its competence. The section, according to the principle of just autonomy, supports the new particular churches in the work of first evangelization and growth, collaborating with the particular churches, episcopal conferences, institutes of consecrated life, societies of apostolic life, associations, ecclesial movements, new communities, and ecclesial assistance agencies. To this section are entrusted the pontifical missionary societies \u2013 the Pontifical Society for the Propagation of the Faith, the Pontifical Society of St. Peter the Apostle, the Pontifical Society of the Missionary Childhood, and the Pontifical Missionary Union \u2013 as instruments for the promotion of the missionary responsibility of every baptized person and for the support of the new particular churches. The current pro-prefect is Luis Antonio Cardinal Gokim Tagle.\nAssociated organization.\nInternational Council for Catechesis.\nThe International Council for Catechesis (COINCAT) was established by Pope Paul VI on 7 June 1973, as a consultative body within the Congregation for the Clergy. The general purpose of COINCAT, as explained in the \"Annuario Pontificio\", is \"to study the more important catechetical themes for the service of the Apostolic See and the episcopal conferences and to present proposals and suggestions.\" Specifically, it investigates concrete themes and important catechetical problems for the universal church, suggesting solutions and proposals for pastoral action; it provides information on the necessity of catechesis and new approaches being taken in various parts of the world; and it facilitates the exchange of catechetical experiences between the Holy See and the diverse areas in the church and among the members themselves. The current president is Archbishop Salvatore (Rino) Fisichella.\nDicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith.\nThe Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith, previously known as the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and as the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition, is the oldest of the dicasteries of the Roman Curia. The task of the Dicastery is to assist in the proclamation of the Gospel globally, promoting and protecting the integrity of Catholic doctrine on faith and morals, drawing on the deposit of faith and also seeking an ever deeper understanding of it in the face of new questions. The dicastery is made up of two sections \u2013 the Doctrinal Section and the Disciplinary Section \u2013 each coordinated by a secretary who assists the prefect in the specific area of his competence. The current prefect is V\u00edctor Manuel Cardinal Fern\u00e1ndez.\nDoctrinal Section.\nThe Doctrinal Section fosters and supports study and reflection on the understanding of faith and morals and the development of theology in different cultures, in the light of sound doctrine and the challenges of the times, so as to offer answers, in the light of faith, to the questions and arguments that emerge with the progress of the sciences and the evolution of civilizations.\nDisciplinary Section.\nThe Disciplinary Section, through the Disciplinary Office, deals with crimes reserved to the dicastery and dealt with by it through the jurisdiction of the Supreme Apostolic Tribunal therein established, proceeding to declare or impose canonical penalties in accordance with the norms of law, whether common or proper, without prejudice to the competence of the Apostolic Penitentiary.\nAssociated organizations.\nPontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors.\nThe Pontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors is established within the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith. Its task is to provide the Pope with advice and to propose the most appropriate initiatives for the protection of minors and vulnerable persons and promote local responsibility in the particular churches for the protection of all minors and vulnerable adults. Since July 2025 the current president has been Archbishop Thibault Verny.\nInternational Theological Commission.\nThe International Theological Commission (ITC) is a body of the Roman Curia that advises the Magisterium in examining doctrinal questions of major importance, particularly the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" prefect of the dicastery.\nPontifical Biblical Commission.\nThe Pontifical Biblical Commission is a consultative body, placed at the service of the Magisterium and linked to the dicastery, to ensure the proper interpretation and defense of the Bible. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" prefect of the dicastery.\nCollege for the review of appeals by clergy accused of \"delicta reservata\".\nThe college for the review of appeals by clergy accused of \"delicta reservata\" is a commission under the jurisdiction of the dicastery composed of bishops tasked to review sexual abuse cases of minors committed by clerics. The current president is Archbishop Charles Scicluna\nDicastery for the Service of Charity.\nThe Dicastery for the Service of Charity, also called the Apostolic Alms Office, is a special expression of mercy and, starting from the option for the poor, the vulnerable and the excluded, it exercises in any part of the world the work of assistance and help towards them in the name of the Roman Pontiff, who in cases of particular indigence or other need, personally arranges the aid to be allocated.\nThe dicastery, under the guidance of the prefect, the almoner of His Holiness, in contact with other competent dicasteries, makes concrete, through its activity, the solicitude and closeness of the Roman Pontiff, as pastor of the Universal Church, towards those who live in situations of indigence, marginalization or poverty, as well as on the occasion of serious calamities.\nFormerly the Office of Papal Charities, the change gives the office \"a more significant role in the Curia\". The current prefect is the almoner of His Holiness, Konrad Cardinal Krajewski.\nDicastery for the Eastern Churches.\nThe Dicastery for the Eastern Churches is responsible for contact with the Eastern Catholic Churches for the sake of assisting their development, protecting their rights and maintaining the one Catholic Church, alongside the liturgical, disciplinary and spiritual patrimony of the Latin Church, the heritage of the various Oriental Christian traditions. It has exclusive authority over the following regions: Egypt and the Sinai Peninsula, Eritrea and northern Ethiopia, southern Albania and Bulgaria, Cyprus, Greece, Israel, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Palestine, Syria, Jordan, Turkey, and Ukraine. Its members include all Eastern Catholic patriarchs and major archbishops, as well as the prefect of the Dicastery for Promoting Christian Unity. The current prefect is Claudio Gugerotti.\nDicastery for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments.\nThe Dicastery for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments promotes the sacred liturgy according to the renewal undertaken by the Second Vatican Council. The spheres of its competence concern all that which by provision of law pertains to the Apostolic See concerning the regulation and promotion of the sacred liturgy and the vigilance that the laws of the church and the liturgical norms are everywhere faithfully observed. It is the task of the dicastery to provide for the editing or revision and updating of typical editions of liturgical books.\nThe dicastery confirms the translations of liturgical books into current languages and grants \"recognitio\" to their appropriate adaptations to local cultures, legitimately approved by the cocal bishops' conferences. It also grants \"recognitio\" to the particular calendars, the proprieties of Masses and of the Liturgy of the Hours of the particular churches and of institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life approved by the relevant competent authority. It is concerned with the regulation and discipline of the sacred liturgy with regard to the extraordinary form of the Roman Rite and for the protection of the sacred relics, the confirmation of the patrons and the granting of the title of minor basilica. The current prefect is Arthur Cardinal Roche.\nAssociated organization.\n\"Vox Clara\" Committee.\nThe \"Vox Clara\" Committee has been established to assist and advise the Dicastery for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments in fulfilling its responsibilities with regard to the English translations of liturgical texts. Representing the different continents, the committee reflects the international character of the English language. This makes available to the Holy See the great wealth of pastoral experience drawn from different cultures. The presidency is currently vacant.\nDicastery for the Causes of Saints.\nThe Dicastery for the Causes of Saints oversees the process that leads to the canonization of saints, passing through the steps of a declaration of \"heroic virtues\" and beatification. After preparing a case, including the approval of miracles, the case is presented to the pope, who decides whether or not to proceed with beatification or canonization. The dicastery establishes the canonical procedure to be followed to verify and declare the authenticity of sacred relics and to ensure their preservation. It is up to the dicastery to judge the granting of the title of Doctor of the Church to a saint, after having obtained the vote of the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith about his or her eminent doctrine. The current prefect is Marcello Cardinal Semeraro.\nDicastery for Bishops.\nThe Dicastery for Bishops oversees the selection of new bishops who are not in mission territories or those areas that come under the jurisdiction of the Dicastery for the Oriental Churches who deal with the Eastern Catholics, pending papal approval. It consequently holds considerable sway over the evolution of the church. It schedules the papal audiences \"ad limina apostolorum\", required for bishops every five years, and arranges the creation of new dioceses.\nThe dicastery carries out its activity in a spirit of service and in close collaboration with the episcopal conferences and their regional and continental unions. It endeavors to work with them with regard to the celebration of particular councils and the establishment of episcopal conferences and the recognition of their statutes. It receives the acts and decrees of the above-mentioned bodies, examines them and, after consulting the dicasteries concerned, grants the necessary recognition to the decrees.\nThe most recent prefect of this dicastery was Robert Francis Prevost who was appointed on 30 January 2023, created cardinal on 30 September 2023, and whose term ceased on 21 April 2025, at the death of Pope Francis. Prevost was subsequently elected to the Papacy as Pope Leo XIV on 8 May 2025, leaving the post vacant until he named his successor, Archbishop Filippo Iannone on 26 September 2025 as its new prefect.\nAssociated organization.\nPontifical Commission for Latin America.\nThe Pontifical Commission for Latin America is instituted at this dicastery. Its task is to study questions concerning the life and development of these particular churches in order to assist the dicasteries concerned by reason of their competence and to assist them with advice and financial means. It is also responsible for fostering relations between international and national ecclesiastical institutions that work for the regions of Latin America and curial institutions. The president of the commission is \"ex officio\" prefect of the dicastery.\nDicastery for the Clergy.\nThe Dicastery for the Clergy is the department responsible for overseeing matters regarding priests and deacons not belonging to institutes of consecrated life or societies of apostolic life, as well as for the seminaries (except those regulated by the dicasteries for Evangelization and for the Oriental Churches), and houses of formation of religious and secular institutes. It handles requests for dispensation from active priestly ministry, as well as the legislation governing presbyteral councils and other organizations of priests around the world.\nThe dicastery deals with matters within the competence of the Holy See concerning the general discipline concerning the diocesan council for economic affairs, the presbyteral council, the college of consultors, the chapter of canons, the diocesan pastoral council, the parishes, the churches, the associations of clerics and public clerical associations; to the latter it may grant the faculty of incardination, after consulting the competent dicasteries and receiving the approval of the Roman Pontiff. It deals with ecclesiastical archives and the extinction of pious wills in general and pious foundations. The current prefect is Lazarus Cardinal You Heung-sik.\nAssociated organizations.\nPontifical Work for Priestly Vocations.\nThe Pontifical Work for Priestly Vocations was established to encourage and coordinate efforts to promote vocations to the sacred priesthood of the Catholic Church. It is concerned primarily with setting forth a true and clear notion of the nature, the necessity, and the excellence of the priesthood; promotes the offering of Masses, Communion services, prayers and works of penance and charity to the end that God may grant many priestly vocations; and encourages the growth of the project that is established in each diocese for priestly vocations, and tries to have such projects set up where they do not already exist. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" prefect of the dicastery.\nInterdicasterial Commission for Candidates to Sacred Order.\nThe Interdicasterial Commission for Candidates to Sacred Order is established within the dicastery responsible for the selection of candidates for Holy Orders, including their human, spiritual, doctrinal and pastoral training in seminaries and in special centers for permanent deacons, to their continuing formation, including their living conditions and ways of exercising the ministry. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" prefect of the dicastery.\nDicastery for Institutes of Consecrated Life and for Societies of Apostolic life.\nThe Dicastery for Institutes of Consecrated Life and for Societies of Apostolic Life is responsible for the promotion, animation and regulation of the practice of the evangelical counsels as it is lived out in the approved forms of consecrated life, and also with regard to the life and activity of Societies of Apostolic Life throughout the Latin Church. It is the responsibility of the dicastery to approve institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life, to erect them and also to grant the license for the validity of the erection of an institute of consecrated life or society of apostolic life of diocesan right by the bishop. The competence of the dicastery also extends to Third Orders and to associations of the faithful erected with a view to becoming an institute of consecrated life or a society of apostolic life. The current prefect is Simona Brambilla.\nDicastery for the Laity, Family and Life.\nThe Dicastery for the Laity, Family and Life is competent for the enhancement of the apostolate of the lay faithful, the pastoral care of the young, of the family and its mission according to God's plan, of the elderly, and for the promotion and protection of life. In pursuing its own competences, the dicastery maintains relations with the particular churches, with the Bishops' Conferences, their regional and continental Unions, the Oriental Hierarchical Structures and other ecclesial organisms, promoting exchange among them and offering its collaboration so that the values and initiatives connected with these matters may be promoted.\nThe dicastery expresses the Church's special solicitude for young people, promoting their protagonism in the midst of the world's challenges. It studies and deepens, with the support of experts, the major causes of crises in marriages and families, with particular attention to the experiences of those involved in failed marriages, especially with regard to children, in order to promote a greater awareness of the value of the family and the role of parents in society and in the Church. The current prefect is Kevin Joseph Cardinal Farrell.\nAssociated organizations.\nPontifical Academy for Life.\nThe dicastery collaborates with the Pontifical Academy for Life in matters concerning the protection and promotion of human life and makes use of its expertise. It is dedicated to promoting the Church's consistent life ethic. It also does related research on bioethics and Catholic moral theology. The current president of the academy is Archbishop Vincenzo Paglia.\nPontifical John Paul II Theological Institute for Matrimonial and Family Science.\nThe Pontifical John Paul II Theological Institute for Matrimonial and Family Science is devoted to the study of the truth about the human person in all of its dimensions: theological, philosophical, anthropological, and indeed cosmological-scientific. The institute centers its study of the person in the community that is the original cell of human society: marriage and family. The current president of the institute is Monsignor Philippe Bordeyne.\nDicastery for Promoting Christian Unity.\nIt is the responsibility of the Dicastery for the Promotion of Christian Unity to apply appropriate initiatives and activities to the ecumenical commitment, both within the Catholic Church and inrelations with other Churches and Ecclesial Communities, to restore unity among Christians. It is the task of the dicastery to implement the teachings of the Second Vatican Council and the post-conciliar Magisterium concerning ecumenism. It is responsible for the correct interpretation and faithful application of ecumenical principles and directives established to guide, coordinate and develop ecumenical activity. It also coordinates the ecumenical initiatives of other curial institutions, offices and bodies connected with the Holy See with other churches and ecclesial communities. The current prefect is Cardinal Kurt Koch.\nAssociated organization.\nCommission for Religious Relations with the Jews.\nIn order to advance the relationship between Catholics and Jews, a Commission for Religious Relations with the Jews is established at the dicastery. It is tasked with maintaining positive theological ties with Jews and Judaism. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" prefect of the dicastery.\nDicastery for Interreligious Dialogue.\nThe Dicastery for Interreligious Dialogue promotes and regulates relations with members and groups of religions that are not included under the name of Christianity, with the exception of Judaism, whose competence falls to the Dicastery for the Promotion of Christian Unity. The dicastery works to ensure that dialogue with the followers of other religions takes place in an appropriate manner, with an attitude of listening, esteem and respect. It fosters various forms of relations with them so that, through the contribution of all, peace, freedom, social justice, the protection and safeguarding of creation, and spiritual and moral values may be promoted. The current prefect is George Jacob Cardinal Koovakad.\nAssociated organization.\nCommission for Religious Relations with Muslims.\nFor the purpose of promoting relations with members of different religious beliefs, the Commission for Religious Relations with Muslims is established within the dicastery. It tasked with maintaining positive theological ties with Muslims. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" prefect of the dicastery.\nDicastery for Culture and Education.\nThe Dicastery for Culture and Education works for the development of human values in people within the horizon of Christian anthropology, contributing to the full realization of the following of Jesus Christ. The dicastery is made up of the Section for Culture, which is dedicated to the promotion of culture, pastoral animation, and the valorization of the cultural patrimony, and the Section for Education, which develops the fundamental principles of education with reference to schools, higher institutes of Catholic and ecclesiastical studies and research, and is competent for hierarchical appeals in these matters. The dicastery is formed through the merger of the Pontifical Council for Culture with the Congregation for Catholic Education. The current prefect is Jos\u00e9 Cardinal Tolentino de Mendon\u00e7a. \nSection for Culture.\nThe Section for Culture promotes and sustains relations between the Holy See and the world of culture, confronting the many requests emerging from it and especially encouraging dialogue as an indispensable means of true encounter, reciprocal interaction and mutual enrichment, so that the various cultures may become increasingly open to the Gospel as well as the Christian faith in them, and so that lovers of the arts, literature and science, of technology and sport may know and feel recognized by the Church as persons at the service of the sincere search for truth, goodness and beauty.\nSection for Education.\nThe Section for Education collaborates with the diocesan/episcopal bishops, the Bishops' Conferences and the Oriental Hierarchical Structures so that the fundamental principles of education, especially Catholic education, may be received and deepened so that they may be implemented contextually and culturally. It is competent to carry out the formalities necessary for the recognition by states of academic degrees granted in the name of the Holy See and to approve and erect Institutes of Higher Studies and other ecclesiastical academic institutions.\nAssociated organizations.\nPontifical Work for Ecclesiastical Vocations.\nThe Pontifical Work for Ecclesiastical Vocations is tasked to promotes vocations to the priesthood of the Catholic Church. It is responsible to intensify the desire for promoting, safeguarding, and assisting ecclesiastical vocations; to disseminate an accurate notion of the dignity and necessity of the Catholic priesthood; and to call the faithful of the whole world into a close union of prayers and pious exercises. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" prefect of the dicastery.\nPontifical Academies.\nThe Dicastery for Culture and Education also coordinates the activity of some Pontifical Academies, some of which are of ancient foundation, in which the major international personalities of the theological and humanistic sciences are co-opted, chosen from among believers and non- believers. These are currently the:\nDicastery for Promoting Integral Human Development.\nThe Dicastery for the Service of Integral Human Development has the task of promoting the human person and his or her God-given dignity, human rights, health, justice and peace. It is primarily concerned with issues related to the economy and work, care for creation and the earth as \"common home\", migration and humanitarian emergencies. It deepens and disseminates the Church's social teaching on integral human development and recognizes and interprets in the light of the Gospel the needs and concerns of humankind in its own time and in the future. The dicastery collaborates with the works of the Holy See for humanitarian aid in crisis areas, cooperating with ecclesial humanitarian intervention and development agencies. The current prefect is Michael Cardinal Czerny, S.J.\nAssociated organization.\nVatican COVID-19 Commission.\nThe Vatican COVID-19 Commission was created to express the Church's solicitude and care for the whole human family facing the COVID-19 pandemic. Drawing on a wealth of expertise from local communities, global platforms, and academic experts, the Commission seeks bold, broad changes: dignity in work, new structures for the common good, solidarity at the heart of governance, and nature in harmony with social systems. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" prefect of the dicastery.\nDicastery for Legislative Texts.\nThe Dicastery for Legislative Texts promotes and spreads within the Church the knowledge and acceptance of the canon law of the Latin Church and that of the Eastern Churches and offers assistance in its correct application. It carries out its duties in the service of the Roman Pontiff, of the curial institutions and offices, of the diocesan/eparchal bishops, of the Episcopal Conferences, of the Eastern hierarchical structures, and also of the supreme moderators of the institutes of consecrated life and of the societies of apostolic life of pontifical right.\nIn carrying out its tasks, it avails itself of the collaboration of canonists belonging to different cultures and working on different continents. It promotes the study of the Canon Law of the Latin Church and of the Eastern Churches and of other legislative texts by organizing interdicasterial meetings, conferences and by promoting associations of international and national canonists. The current prefect is Archbishop Filippo Iannone, O. Carm.\nDicastery for Communications.\nThe Dicastery for Communication deals with the entire communication system of the Apostolic See and, in structural unity and with respect for the relative operational characteristics, unifies all the realities of the Holy See in the field of communication, so that the entire system responds coherently to the needs of the Church's evangelizing mission in a context characterized by the presence and development of digital media, by the factors of convergence and interactivity. The dicastery provides for the needs of the Church's evangelizing mission using the production models, technological innovations and forms of communication currently available and those that may develop in the time to come. In addition to the expressly operative functions assigned to it, also deepens anddevelops the theological and pastoral aspects of the Church's communicative activity. The current prefect is Dr. Paolo Ruffini.\nAssociated organizations.\nVatican Press.\nThe Vatican press operates in the technological and productive sector, taking forward carrying out all the activities related to the printing and the packaging of the Pontifical documents, and the official documents of the various dicasteries and offices of the Holy See and the Vatican City State. In addition, it also prints the Vatican Newspaper \"L'Osservatore Romano\", and it takes care of other editorial products publications of the entities connected to the Holy See.\n\"L'Osservatore Romano\".\nThe \"Osservatore Romano\" is the daily newspaper of Vatican City State which reports on the activities of the Holy See and events taking place in the Church and the world. The current Director Manager is Professor Andrea Monda.\nPress Office of the Holy See.\nThe Holy See Press Office publishes the official news of the activities of the Holy Father and of the various departments of the Holy See. This includes speeches, messages, and other documents, as well as statements issued by the director of the press office. The current director is Matteo Bruni.\nInstitutions of Justice.\n \"The service of the Institutions of Justice is one of the essential functions in the government of the Church. The objective of this service, pursued by each institution in the forum of its own competence, is that of the Church's mission: to proclaim and inaugurate the Kingdom of God and to work, through the order of justice applied with canonical equity, for the salvation of souls, which is always the supreme law in the Church\" (\"Praedicate evangelium\" Article 189 \u00a7\u00a01).\nApostolic Penitentiary.\nThe Apostolic Penitentiary is one of the three tribunals of the Roman Curia. The Apostolic Penitentiary is responsible for issues relating to the forgiveness of sins in the Catholic Church. The Apostolic Penitentiary has jurisdiction only over matters in the internal forum. Its work falls mainly into these categories:\nThe current Major Penitentiary is Angelo de Donatis.\nSupreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura.\nThe Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura is the highest judicial authority in the Catholic Church besides the Pope himself, who is the supreme ecclesiastical judge. In addition, it is an administrative office for matters pertaining to the judicial activity of the whole church.\nAppeals in standard judicial processes, if appealed to the Apostolic See, normally are not handled by the Signatura. Those go to the Roman Rota, which is the ordinary appellate tribunal of the Apostolic See. The Supreme Tribunal handles some of the more specialized kinds of cases, including the following:\nAlthough a Rotal decision can be appealed, if not \"res judicata\", to a different panel (\"turnus\") of the Rota, there is no right of appeal from a decision of the Signatura, although a complaint of nullity on formal grounds is possible. As an administrative office, it exercises jurisdiction (vigilance) over all the tribunals of the Catholic Church. It can also extend the jurisdiction of tribunals, grant dispensations for procedural laws, establish interdiocesan tribunals, and correct advocates.\nThe current prefect is Dominique Fran\u00e7ois Joseph Cardinal Mamberti.\nTribunal of the Rota Romana.\nThe Tribunal of the Roman Rota is the highest appellate tribunal. While usually trying cases in appeal in third instance (as is normally the case in the Eastern Catholic Churches), or even in second instance if appeal is made to it directly from the sentence of a tribunal of first instance, it is also a court of first instance for cases specified in the law and for others committed to the Rota by the Roman Pontiff. It fosters the unity of jurisprudence and, through its own sentences, is a help to lower tribunals.\nThe greater part of its decisions concern the nullity of marriage. In such cases its competence includes marriages between two Catholics, between a Catholic and non-Catholic, and between two non-Catholic parties whether one or both of the baptized parties belongs to the Latin or an Eastern Rite.\nThe court is named \"Rota\" (Latin for: wheel) because the judges, called \"auditors\", originally met in a round room to hear cases.\nThe current Dean is Most Reverend Alejandro Arellano Cedillo, C.O.R.C.\nEconomic organizations.\nCouncil for the Economy.\nThe Council for the Economy has the task of supervising the structures and the administrative and financial activities of the curial institutions and of the offices and institutions connected with the Holy See or which refer to it, indicated in the list attached to its Statute. The Council for Economic Affairs shall exercise its functions in the light of the Church's social doctrine and in accordance with internationally recognized best practices in public administration, with a view to ethical and efficient administrative and financial management. The council consists of eight cardinals or bishops, representing the universality of the Church, and seven lay persons, chosen from among experts of various nationalities. The fifteen members are appointed for five years by the Roman Pontiff.\nThe Council submits for the approval of the Roman Pontiff guidelines and norms aimed at ensuring that:\nThe Council examines the proposals put forward by the Secretariat for the Economy, as well as any suggestions presented by the various Administrations of the Holy See, the Authority for Supervisionand Financial Information and other entities indicated in its own Statutes.\nThe current Coordinator is Reinhard Cardinal Marx.\nSecretariat for the Economy.\nThe Secretariat for the Economy performs the function of Papal Secretariat for economic and financial matters. It exercises control and vigilance in administrative, economic and financial matters over curial institutions, offices and institutions connected with the Holy See or which refer to it, as indicated in the list attached to the Statute of the Council for the Economy. It also exercises special control over Peter's Pence and over the other Papal Funds.\nThe Body is divided into two functional areas: one for regulation, control and supervision in economic and financial matters, and the other for regulation, control and supervision in administrative matters. The Secretariat for the Economy:\nThe current prefect is Mister Maximino Caballero Ledo.\nDirectorate for Human Resources of the Holy See.\nThe Directorate for Human Resources of the Holy See is established in the Secretariat for the Economy. This office, in dialogue and cooperation with the Institutions concerned, deals with all matters concerning the position and working management of personnel and collaborators of the Institutions subject to the legislation of the Holy See. Among other responsibilities, through this Directorate, the Secretariat for Economic Affairs authorizes hiring, verifying all requirements, and approves the establishment plans of the Entities. The president of the Directorate is the \"ex officio\" prefect of the secretariat.\nAdministration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See.\nThe Administration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See deals with the \"properties owned by the Holy See in order to provide the funds necessary for the Roman Curia to function\". It was established by Pope Paul VI on 15 August 1967.\nIt is responsible for the administration and management of the real and movable patrimony of the Holy See, intended to provide the resources necessary for the fulfillment of the function proper to the Roman Curia for the good and at the service of the particular churches. The Holy See is responsible for administering the real and movable patrimony of those entities that have entrusted their assets to the Holy See, in accordance with the specific purpose for which the patrimony has been constituted and with the general policies and guidelines approved by the competent bodies. It also provides whatever is necessary for the ordinary activity of the Roman Curia, taking care of the treasury, accounting, purchases and other services. The internal organization of the Body is divided into three functional areas, which deal with property management, financial affairs and services. The current president is Bishop Nunzio Galantino.\nOffice of the Auditor General.\nThe Office of the Auditor General is entrusted with the task of auditing the consolidated financial statements of the Holy See. The Office shall have the task, according to the annual audit program approved by the Council for the Economy, of auditing the annual financial statements of the individual curial institutions and of the Offices and Institutions connected with the Holy See or which refer to it, which shall be included in the above-mentioned consolidated financial statements.\nAt the request of the Council for the Economy, or of the Secretariat for the Economy, or of the Heads of the Entities and Administrations, it shall conduct audits on particular situations related to:\nThe same audits may be initiated autonomously by the Auditor General, who shall inform the Cardinal Coordinator of the Council for the Economy in advance, stating the reasons for the audit. The current Auditor-General is Dr. Alessandro Cassinis Righini.\nCommission for Confidential Matters.\nThe Commission for Confidential Matters is responsible to:\nThe commission, according to its own statute, is composed of several Members appointed for five years by the Roman Pontiff. The current president is Kevin Joseph Cardinal Farrell.\nCommittee for Investments.\nThe Investment Committee, a consultative body, is responsible for ensuring the ethical nature of the Holy See's investments in movable assets according to the Church's social doctrine and, at the same time, their profitability, adequacy and risk. The committee is composed, according to its own statute, of members and of high-profile professionals appointed for five years by the Roman Pontiff. The current president is Kevin Joseph Cardinal Farrell.\nOffices.\n\"Praedicate evangelium\" reorganized the Offices of the Roman Curia, comprising three main bodies.\nPrefecture of the Papal Household.\nThe Prefecture is responsible for internal order in the Pontifical Household and directs, with regard to discipline and service, all those who constitute the Chapel and the Pontifical Family. It is headed by a prefect, assisted by the Regent, appointed for five years by the Roman Pontiff.\nThe Prefecture of the Papal Household is responsible for the organization and conduct of pontifical ceremonies, excluding the strictly liturgical part, and establishes the order of precedence. It is his duty to order the service of the antechamber and to arrange for public, special and private audiences of the Roman Pontiff and visits to persons, in consultation, as often as circumstances require, with the Secretariat of State. He arranges everything that must be done when heads of state, heads of government, ministers of states, public authorities and other eminent persons, as well as Ambassadors, are received in solemn audience by the Pope himself.\nIt deals with all that is related to the Spiritual Exercises of the Roman Pontiff, the College of Cardinals and the Roman Curia. It is the responsibility of the Prefecture to make preparations whenever the Roman Pontiff visits Vatican territory, Rome or travels in Italy. The prefect assists him only on the occasion of meetings and visits in Vatican territory. The office of prefect is currently vacant, after Archbishop Georg G\u00e4nswein concluded his service of 28 February 2023.\nOffice for the Liturgical Celebrations of the Supreme Pontiff.\nIt is the responsibility of the Office for the Liturgical Celebrations of the Supreme Pontiff to prepare all that is necessary for liturgical celebrations and other sacred celebrations in the Vatican at which the Roman Pontiff, or \u2013 in his name or by his mandate \u2013 a Cardinal or Prelate, presides, participates or assists, and to direct them in accordance with the liturgical prescriptions in force, preparing all that is necessary or useful for their worthy conduct and for the active participation of the faithful. The Office shall also take care of the preparation and conduct of all the papal liturgical celebrations taking place during the pastoral visits of the Roman Pontiff on his apostolic journeys.\nThe Office is headed by the Master of Papal Liturgical Celebrations, appointed for five years by the Roman Pontiff. He is assisted in sacred celebrations by the Pontifical Masters of Ceremonies, appointed for five years by the Roman Pontiff. The Master of Papal Liturgical Celebrations is also responsible for the Papal Sacristy and the Chapels of the Apostolic Palace. The current Master of Papal Liturgical Celebrations is Monsignor Diego Giovanni Ravelli.\nPontifical Musical Chorus of the Sistine Chapel.\nThe Pontifical Musical Chorus of the Sistine Chapel is responsible for the task of guiding all the liturgical, pastoral, spiritual, artistic and educational activities and areas of the same chapel, which is included in the office as a specific place of service to the papal liturgical functions and at the same time for the custody and promotion of the prestigious artistic-musical heritage produced over the centuries by the chapel itself for the solemn liturgies of the popes. The head of Pontifical Musical Chorus of the Sistine Chapel is the \"ex officio\" master of papal liturgical celebrations.\nApostolic Camera.\nThe Cardinal Camerlengo of Holy Roman Church carries out the functions assigned to him by the special law concerning the vacant Apostolic See and the election of the Roman Pontiff. The Cardinal Camerlengo of Holy Roman Church and the Vice Camerlengo are appointed by the Roman Pontiff.\nThe task of caring for and administering the goods and temporal rights of the Apostolic See during the time it is vacant is entrusted to the Cardinal Camerlengo of Holy Roman Church. Should he be impeded, the function will be assumed by the Vice Camerlengo. When the Apostolic See is vacant, it is the right and duty of the Cardinal Camerlengo of Holy Roman Church:\nThe role of Camerlengo of Holy Roman Church is currently vacant as of 8 May 2025, after the election of Pope Leo XIV.\nInstitutions connected with the Holy See.\nThere are some institutes, both of ancient origin and of new constitution, which, although not properly part of the Roman Curia and having their own juridical personality, nevertheless provide various services necessary or useful to the Roman Pontiff himself, to the Roman Curia and to the universal Church, and are in some way connected with the Curia itself.\nLabour Office of the Apostolic See.\nThe Labour Office of the Apostolic See is responsible for labor relations of the Holy See with its employees. The office also settles labor issues which arise. It was instituted by Pope John Paul II on 1 January 1989 by an apostolic letter in the form of a motu proprio. The activity of the Office relates to the labour, in all its forms and expressions, provided by personnel in the employ of the Roman Curia, of the Governorate of the Vatican City State, and of the Bodies or Institutions administratively managed directly by the Apostolic See. The current president is Bishop Giuseppe Sciacca.\nVatican Apostolic Archives.\nThe Vatican Apostolic Archives contains the acts and documents that concern the government of the universal Church, making them available to the Holy See and the Roman Curia in the performance of their activities. The archives are also available, by pontifical concession, to scholars, without distinction of country or religion, to study the life of the Church over the centuries. The current Archivist is Jos\u00e9 Tolentino Cardinal de Mendon\u00e7a.\nVatican Apostolic Library.\nAn institution of ancient origin, the Vatican Library is a distinguished instrument of the Church for the development and dissemination of culture, in support of the activities of the Apostolic See. It has the task, through its various sections, of collecting and preserving an extremely rich patrimony of science and art and of making it available to scholars. The current librarian is Jos\u00e9 Tolentino Cardinal de Mendon\u00e7a.\nFabric of Saint Peter.\nThe Fabric of Saint Peter is responsible for all matters pertaining to the Papal Basilica of Saint Peter's, which houses the memory of the martyrdom and the tomb of the Apostle, both for the preservation and decorum of the building and for the internal discipline of the custodians and of pilgrims and visitors, according to its own norms. In necessary cases, the president and the secretary of the Fabric act in agreement with the Chapter of the Basilica itself. The current president is Mauro Cardinal Gambetti, O.F.M. Conv.\nPontifical Commission for Sacred Archaeology.\nThe Pontifical Commission for Sacred Archaeology has the task of studying, preserving, protecting and enhancing the Christian catacombs of Italy, in which the testimonies of faith and art of the first Christian communities continue to transmit their profound message to pilgrims and visitors. The current president is Gianfranco Cardinal Ravasi.\nPontifical Academies.\nFor the search for and dissemination of truth in the various fields of divine and human science, several Academies have arisen within the Catholic Church, among which the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences and the Pontifical Academy for Life stand out.\nAgency for the Evaluation and Promotion of Quality in Ecclesiastical Faculties.\nIn order to promote and develop a culture of quality within the academic institutions directly dependent on the Holy See and to assure them internationally valid criteria of quality, the Agency for the Evaluation and Promotion of Quality in Ecclesiastical Faculties is established. The current president is Father Andrzej Stefan Wodka, C.Ss.R.\nSupervisory and Financial Information Authority.\nThe Supervisory and Financial Information Authority is the institution which, in the manner provided for by law and by its own Statute, performs the functions of: supervision for the purposes of preventing and combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism with respect to entities and subjects subjected to its supervision; prudential supervision of entities that professionally carry out activities of a financial nature; prudential regulation of entities that professionally carry out activities of a financial nature and, in the cases provided for by law, in matters concerning the prevention of and fight against money laundering and terrorist financing. In this capacity it also carries out the financial information function. The current president is Dr. Carmelo Barbagallo.\nDomus Vaticanae.\nDomus Vaticanae is a merger of the four foundations dedicated to hospitality in the Vatican. It has merged the \"Domus Sanctae Marthae\", \"Domus Romana Sacerdotalis\", \"Domus Internationalis Paulus VI\", and \"Casa San Benedetto\" foundations into the new institution, which Pope Francis established as a public canonical juridic person in 2024.\nIt pursues the hospitality goals of the merged foundations with each having its own purpose:\nInterdicasterial commissions.\nAn interdicasterial commission is established to deal with matters involving the works of several institutions and dicasteries of the Roman Curia.\nInterdicasterial Commission on Particular Churches.\nThe Permanent Interdicasterial Commission on Particular Churches is responsible for managing and taking care of the relationship and communication between the Latin Church and the Eastern Catholic Churches. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" secretary of the state.\nInterdicasterial Commission for the Church in Eastern Europe.\nThe Permanent Interdicasterial Commission for the Church in Eastern Europe is responsible to better deal with the rapidly changing situations in the early 1990s on Eastern Europe. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" secretary of the state.\nInterdicasterial Commission for Consecrated Religious.\nThe Permanent Interdicasterial Commission for Consecrated Religious is responsible to better handle consecrated religious in missionary areas, mostly in Africa and Asia. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" Pro-prefect for the Section of First Evangelization of the Dicastery for Evangelization.\nInterdicasterial Commission for Candidates to Sacred Order.\nThe Permanent Interdicasterial Commission for Candidates to Sacred Order is responsible for the selection of candidates for Holy Orders, including their human, spiritual, doctrinal and pastoral training in seminaries. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" prefect of the Dicastery for the Clergy.\nInterdicasterial Commission for the Revision of the General Regulations of the Roman Curia.\nThe Interdicasterial Commission for the Revision of the General Regulations of the Roman Curia is a temporary commission with the goal of preparing the implementation of the norms related to the new Apostolic Constitution \"Praedicate evangelium\", which was made public on 19 March 2022 and took effect on 5 June 2022. The president of the commission is Archbishop Filippo Iannone, O. Carm.\nOther commissions and committees.\nPontifical Committee for International Eucharistic Congresses.\nThe Pontifical Committee for International Eucharistic Congresses is responsible \"to make ever better known, loved and served, Our Lord Jesus Christ in his Eucharistic Mystery, as center of the life of the Church and of its mission for the salvation of the world\" through the celebration of International Eucharistic Congresses. It also ensures the adequate pastoral preparation of these International Eucharistic Congresses and requests the Episcopal Conferences and Patriarchal Synods to appoint National Delegates, who will be committed to work for the preparation of the Congresses and, where necessary, set up National Eucharistic Committees with the approval and collaboration of the local ecclesiastical authority. The current president is Father Corrado Maggioni, S.M.M.\nPontifical Committee for Historical Sciences.\nThe Pontifical Committee for Historical Sciences is charged with promoting the use of ecclesiastical archives for historical research and fostering cooperation with ecclesiastical and extra-ecclesial institutions and associations, particularly at the international level. It sponsors seminars and conferences, both independently and in concert with peer organizations; reviews the historical data presented in the Pontifical Yearbook; collaborates with multinational scientific initiatives (UNESCO); and sponsors internships for the study of Latin and Greek. The current president is Father Bernard Ardura, O. Praem.\nCommission for Advocates.\nThe body called \"Advocates of the Holy See\" is composed mainly of advocates listed in the roster of advocates, and its members are able to undertake the representation of cases in civil or ecclesiastical tribunals in the name of the Holy See or the dicasteries of the Roman Curia. The president of the commission is the \"ex officio\" prefect of the Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura.\nPontifical Swiss Guards.\nThe Pontifical Swiss Guards is a minor armed force and honour guard unit maintained by the Holy See that protects the pope and the Apostolic Palace within the territory of the Vatican City. Established in 1506 under Pope Julius II, the Pontifical Swiss Guard is among the oldest military units in continuous operation.They serve as personal escorts to the pontiff and as watchmen for Vatican City and the pontifical villa of Castel Gandolfo. The guards, who are independent of the Swiss armed forces, are employed by the Catholic Church under the leadership of the pope, to whom they swear fealty in a ceremony at Belvedere Court.\nThe current Commander is Colonel Christoph Graf.\nDisciplinary Commission of the Roman Curia.\nEstablished by John Paul II in 1981, the Disciplinary Commission of the Roman Curia rules whether an administrative sanction \u2013 i.e., suspension or firing \u2013 can be imposed on a Roman Curia official is pertinent or not. The current president is Prof. Vincenzo Buonomo.\nFinancial Security Committee.\nThe Financial Security Committee is established for the purpose of coordinating the competent authorities of the Holy See and of Vatican City State for the prevention and countering of money laundering, the financing of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.\nCommission of Cardinals overseeing the Institute for Works of Religion.\nThe Commission of Cardinals overseeing the Institute for Works of Religion is a body composed of a president and four member cardinals that oversees the Institute for Works of Religion, commonly known as the Vatican Bank, a financial institution situated inside Vatican City and run by a Board of Superintendence which reports to a Commission of Cardinals and the Pope. It is not a private bank, as there are no owners or shareholders, but it has been established in the form of a juridical canonical foundation, pursuant to its Statutes. The current president of the commission is Santos Cardinal Abril y Castell\u00f3.\nPontifical Commission for the Activities of Public Juridical Persons of the Church in the Healthcare Sector.\nThe Pontifical Commission for the Activities of Public Juridical Persons of the Church in the Healthcare Sector was designed as an organ of the Roman Curia, attached to the Secretariat of State and its regulations with the responsibility to control and supervise how the health facilities managed by religious congregations manage money and assets and to stay true to their founding mission and spirit. The current president of the commission is Pietro Cardinal Parolin.\nPontifical Commission for the Verification and Application of \"Mitis Iudex\" in the Churches of Italy.\nThe Pontifical Commission for the Verification and Application of \"Mitis Iudex\" in the Churches of Italy directly support the Churches that are in Italy in receiving the reform of the canonical process for the cases of declaration of nullity of marriage, giving new impetus to the application of the motu proprio \"Mitis Iudex\". A declaration of nullity \u2013 often referred to as an \"annulment\" \u2013 is a ruling by a tribunal that a marriage did not meet the conditions required to make it valid according to Church law.\n\"Mitis Iudex Dominus Iesus\", issued in 2015, made changes to canon law intended to streamline the process by which Church tribunals assess requests for declarations of the nullity of marriages. The text also emphasized the local bishop's role in the process. The current president is Monsignor Alejandro Arellano Cedillo, C.O.R.C.\nHoly See Agency for the Evaluation and Promotion of the Quality of Ecclesiastical Universities and Faculties (AVEPRO).\nThe Agency of the Holy See for the Evaluation and Promotion of Quality in Ecclesiastical Universities and Faculties (AVEPRO; Agenzia della Santa Sede per la Valutazione e la Promozione della Qualit\u00e0 delle Universit\u00e0 e Facolt\u00e0 Ecclesiastiche) was established by Pope Benedict XVI on September 19, 2007. It aims to enhance quality within academic institutions tied to the Holy See, aligning with international standards. This initiative was partly inspired by the Holy See's involvement in the Bologna Process in 2003, aiming to respect the diversity of university systems, promote a common higher education area, and emphasize quality in university research and innovation. AVEPRO's work is guided by the Apostolic Constitution Sapientia Christiana and adheres to European and international quality evaluation standards. The agency supports academic institutions in internal and external quality evaluations, collaborating with various stakeholders in ecclesiastical education.\nOrder of the Holy Sepulchre.\nThe Pontifical Order of the Holy Sepulchre of Jerusalem is a Catholic chivalric order that is under the direct protection of the Holy See and is represented in 40 countries. The Order of Knights was founded in the pilgrimage movement of the Middle Ages and was established in 1868 as a Catholic lay order to support the Latin Patriarchate of Jerusalem. Today, around 30,000 priests and laymen, men and women belong to it.\nThe mission of the order, which was recognised by the Vatican for its commitment to the Christian presence in Jerusalem, has evolved over the centuries. Today, the Order focuses on providing financial, spiritual and moral support to the Latin Patriarchate of Jerusalem and assists in the preservation and support of Christian sites, institutions and communities in the Holy Land. Membership of the Order is considered a very high honour and is bestowed on lay people, clergy and knights who have rendered exemplary service to the Catholic Church, particularly through initiatives that contribute to the preservation of the Christian faith in Jerusalem and the surrounding area.\nFondazione Centesimus Annus pro pontifice.\nThe Fondazione Centesimus Annus Pro Pontifice (FCAPP) is a Catholic Vatican foundation that was established in 1993 by Pope John Paul II together with 40 entrepreneurs. It is named after his encyclical \"Centesimus Annus\", which was published in 1991 on the centenary of Pope Leo XIII's encyclical \"Rerum Novarum\" and dealt with issues of labour, the economy and social justice. The aim of the foundation is to promote discussion of the social doctrine of the Catholic Church as formulated in \"Centesimus Annus\" and later teachings. The FCAPP focuses on promoting discussion and research on the relationship between ethics and economics and organises conferences, seminars and workshops for business leaders, academics and other stakeholders to explore these issues. Through its activities, the foundation is committed to contributing as a think tank to the development of a more just and equitable society in line with Catholic social teaching. The foundation is based in San Damaso in the Vatican Secretariat of State.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26540", "revid": "1316593195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26540", "title": "Romano Mussolini", "text": "Italian jazz pianist, painter, and film producer (1927\u20132006)\nRomano Bruno Mussolini (26 September 1927 \u2013\u00a03 February 2006) was an Italian jazz pianist, painter, and film producer. He was the fourth child and youngest son of Benito Mussolini.\nEarly life and education.\nRomano Mussolini grew up in Villa Carpena, his family's residence in Forl\u00ec in Romagna. He studied music as a child, playing classical pieces on the piano and accompanying his father, Benito Mussolini, who played the violin. Following World War II, he started playing jazz under the assumed name \"Romano Full\".\nMusical career.\nHis playing style has been described as \"like a slightly melancholic Oscar Peterson. Occasionally inspired, he was always efficient; he made the refrains run on time.\"\nPersonal life.\nIn 1962, Mussolini married Maria Scicolone, the younger sister of actress Sophia Loren. They had two daughters, Alessandra and her younger sister Elisabetta. Alessandra led a small Italian far-right party often described as neofascist, \"Alternativa Sociale\". Romano Mussolini composed the party's official anthem, \"The Pride of Being Italian\".\nWith his second wife, the actress Carla Maria Puccini, he had a daughter, Rachele Mussolini, named after his mother Rachele Mussolini. The younger Rachele has served as a member of the city council of Rome.\nMussolini was very reserved about his family history until the entry of the post-fascist National Alliance party into government following the 2001 general election. In 2004 he published a broadly sympathetic account of his personal recollections of his father, \"Il Duce, mio padre\" (translated as \"My father, il Duce: a memoir by Mussolini's son\", alluding to the Fascist dictator's official title), including anecdotes of private confidences and discussions.\nDeath.\nRomano Mussolini died from heart problems in a hospital in Rome in 2006, aged 78.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26541", "revid": "49129373", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26541", "title": "Repo Man (film)", "text": "1984 film by Alex Cox\nRepo Man is a 1984 American science fiction black comedy film written and directed by Alex Cox in his directorial debut. It stars Harry Dean Stanton and Emilio Estevez, with Tracey Walter, Olivia Barash, Sy Richardson, Vonetta McGee, Fox Harris, and Dick Rude among the supporting cast. Set in Los Angeles, the plot concerns a young punk rocker (Estevez) who is recruited by a car repossession agency and gets caught up in the pursuit of a mysterious Chevrolet Malibu that might be connected to extraterrestrials.\nA satire of America under the Reagan administration, consumerism and the Atomic Age, \"Repo Man\" was developed by Cox in partnership with his fellow film school graduates from UCLA, independent producers Jonathan Wacks and Peter McCarthy. His inspiration for the film came from his own experiences working with repossession agent Mark Lewis. Originally conceiving of it as a road movie, Cox reconfigured the story to take place mostly in Los Angeles to maintain its budget. Michael Nesmith of the Monkees came on board the project as an executive producer, and secured a negative pickup deal with Universal Pictures. Principal photography ran through summer 1983, during which Cox encouraged improvisation from the cast; the film's ending notably differed from what had originally been written. The soundtrack, headlined by a main theme composed and performed by Iggy Pop, is noted as a snapshot of 1980s hardcore punk; Cox wanted the music to underscore the life of repo men.\nDespite a troubled initial release due to Universal's skepticism towards the film's commercial viability, \"Repo Man\" received widespread acclaim, and was deemed by critics to be one of the best films of 1984. It has since gained a cult following, particularly surrounding Cox's re-edited version of the film for television due to its deliberate inclusion of surreal overdubs to replace profanity. A stand-alone sequel based on an unproduced screenplay by Cox, \"Waldo's Hawaiian Holiday\", was published as a graphic novel in 2008, while a spiritual successor, \"Repo Chick\", was released in 2009.\nPlot.\nIn the Mojave Desert, a policeman pulls over a 1964 Chevrolet Malibu driven by J. Frank Parnell. The policeman opens the trunk, sees a blinding flash of white light, and instantly vaporizes, leaving only his boots behind.\nOtto Maddox, a young punk rocker in L.A., is fired from his job as a supermarket stock clerk. His girlfriend leaves him for his best friend. Depressed and broke, Otto is wandering the streets when a man named Bud drives up and offers him $25 to drive a car out of the neighborhood, supposedly for his wife. Otto follows Bud in the car to the Helping Hand Acceptance Corporation, where he learns the car he drove was being repossessed. He refuses to join Bud as a \"repo man\" and goes to see his parents. After learning that his burned-out ex-hippie parents have donated the money they promised to reward him for graduating from college to a televangelist, he takes the repo job.\nAfter repossessing a flashy red Cadillac, Otto sees a woman named Leila running down the street. He gives her a ride to her workplace, the United Fruitcake Outlet. On the way, she shows him pictures of aliens that she says are in the trunk of a Chevy Malibu. She says they are dangerous due to the radiation they emit. Meanwhile, Helping Hand is offered a $20,000 bounty notice for the Malibu. Most assume that the repossession is drug-related because the bounty is far above the value of the car.\nParnell arrives in L.A. driving the Malibu but cannot meet his waiting UFO compatriots because of a team of government agents led by a woman with a metal hand. When Parnell pulls into a gas station, Helping Hand's competitors, the Rodriguez brothers, take the Malibu. They stop for sodas because the car's trunk is hot. While they are out of the car, a trio of Otto's punk friends, who are on a crime spree, steal it.\nAfter visiting a nightclub, Parnell appears and tricks the punks into opening the trunk, killing one of them and scaring the other two away. Later, he picks up Otto and drives aimlessly before collapsing and dying from radiation. After surviving a convenience store shootout with the punks that leaves Bud wounded and punk Duke dead, Otto takes the Malibu back to Helping Hand and leaves it in the lot. The car is stolen again, and a chase ensues. By this time, the car is glowing bright green.\nEventually, the Malibu reappears at the Helping Hand lot with Bud behind the wheel, but he ends up being shot. The various groups trying to acquire the car soon show up: government agents, the UFO scientists, and the televangelist. Anyone who approaches it bursts into flames, even those in flame-retardant suits. Only Miller, an eccentric mechanic at Helping Hand who had explained earlier to Otto that aliens exist and can travel through time in their spaceships, can enter the car. He slides behind the wheel and beckons Otto into the Malibu. After Otto settles into the passenger seat, it lifts straight into the air. It flies away through the city's skyline (Miller telling Otto what Bud had said earlier, \"The life of a repo man is ALWAYS intense.\") and later into space.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Harry Dean Stanton as Bud\nProduction.\nFilming.\nNumerous scenes were filmed around the Downtown Los Angeles, such as south of downtown in the Garment/Fashion District and southeast of downtown in the Arts District. Early in the film when Otto was walking along the tracks, the 4th Street bridge over the Los Angeles River was in the background. When Parnell and Leila are in nearby phone booths talking to each other, the scene is located at the corner of Wilson and Violet in Los Angeles.\nReception.\n\"Repo Man\" garnered widespread praise upon its release, and is widely considered to be one of the best films of 1984. In 2008, the film was voted by a group of \"Los Angeles Times\" writers and editors as the eighth-best film set in Los Angeles in the last 25 years. \"Entertainment Weekly\" ranked the film seventh on their list of \"The Top 50 Cult Films\".\nRoger Ebert gave the film 3 stars out of a possible 4, and wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I saw \"Repo Man\" near the end of a busy stretch on the movie beat: Three days during which I saw more relentlessly bad movies than during any comparable period in memory. Most of those bad movies were so cynically constructed out of formula ideas and \"commercial\" ingredients that watching them was an ordeal. \"Repo Man\" comes out of left field, has no big stars, didn't cost much, takes chances, dares to be unconventional, is funny, and works. There is a lesson here.\u2014\u200a\nNeil Gaiman reviewed \"Repo Man\" for \"Imagine\" magazine, and stated that \"one of last year's cult movie successes was \"Repo Man\" [...] and it's not hard to see why. A lobotomised nuclear scientist is driving around Los Angeles in a car with something in the boot. Dead extraterrestrials, a neutron bomb or something even more bizarre?\"\nThe review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a 98% approval rating based on 49 reviews, with an average rating of 8/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"\"Repo Man\" is many things: an alien-invasion film, a punk-rock musical, a send-up of consumerism. One thing it isn't is boring.\" On Metacritic, the film received a score of 82 based on 21 reviews, indicating \"universal acclaim\", and was given the \"Must-See\" badge.\nAccolades.\nAcademy of Science Fiction, Fantasy &amp; Horror Films\nAmerican Film Institute Lists\nSoundtrack.\nThe soundtrack features songs by various punk rock musicians such as The Plugz, Black Flag, the Circle Jerks, Suicidal Tendencies, Iggy Pop (with Steve Jones, Nigel Harrison, and Clem Burke as his backing band) and others. The film score was created by Tito Larriva, Steven Hufsteter, Charlie Quintana and Tony Marsico of The Plugz. Iggy Pop volunteered to write the title song after his manager viewed a screening of the film.\nSequels.\n\"Waldo's Hawaiian Holiday\".\nChris Bones saw the script on Cox's website and asked, and received, permission to adapt the script into a graphic novel. The book, \"Waldo's Hawaiian Holiday\", was released in March 2008 by Gestalt Publishing.\n\"Repo Chick\".\nOn December 3, 2008, a sequel was reported to be going into development with the working title \"Repo Chick\". The story would be set in 2008 and the resulting boom in repossession that extends far beyond cars and homes. On February 13, 2009, Cox announced on his blog that shooting had finished and the film was in post-production. The bulk of the film was shot in front of a green screen, with backgrounds filmed and composited-in during post-production.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26542", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26542", "title": "Ruth Benedict", "text": "American anthropologist and folklorologist (1887\u20131948)\nRuth Fulton Benedict (June 5, 1887 \u2013 September 17, 1948) was an American anthropologist and folklorist.\nShe was born in New York City, attended Vassar College, and graduated in 1909. After studying anthropology at the New School of Social Research under Elsie Clews Parsons, she entered graduate studies at Columbia University in 1921, where she studied under Franz Boas. She received her Ph.D. and joined the faculty in 1923. Margaret Mead, with whom she shared a romantic relationship, Marvin Opler and Vera D. Rubin were among her students and colleagues.\nBenedict was president of the American Anthropological Association and also a prominent member of the American Folklore Society. She became the first woman to be recognized as a prominent leader of a learned profession. She can be viewed as a transitional figure in her field for redirecting both anthropology and folklore away from the limited confines of culture-trait diffusion studies and towards theories of performance as integral to the interpretation of culture. She studied the relationships between personality, art, language, and culture and insisted that no trait existed in isolation or self-sufficiency, a theory that she championed in her 1934 book \"Patterns of Culture\".\nEarly biography.\nChildhood.\nBenedict was born Ruth Fulton in New York City on June 5, 1887, to Beatrice (Shattuck) and Frederick Fulton. Her mother worked in the city as a school teacher, and her father was a homeopathic doctor and surgeon. Fulton loved his work and research, but they eventually led to his premature death, as he acquired an unknown disease during one of his surgeries in 1888. His illness caused the family to move back to Norwich, New York, to the farm of Ruth's maternal grandparents, the Shattucks. A year later, he died ten days after he had returned from a trip to Trinidad to search for a cure.\nBeatrice Fulton was deeply affected by her husband's passing. Any mention of him overwhelmed her with grief; every March, she cried at church and in bed. Ruth hated her mother's sorrow and viewed it as a weakness. For Ruth, the greatest taboos were crying in front of people and showing expressions of pain. She reminisced, \"I did not love my mother; I resented her cult of grief.\" The psychological effects on her childhood were thus profound, since \"in one stroke she [Ruth] experienced the loss of the two most nourishing and protective people around her\u2014the loss of her father at death and her mother to grief\".\nAs a toddler, she contracted measles, which left her partially deaf; that was not discovered until she began school. Ruth had a fascination with death as a young child. When she was four years old, her grandmother took her to see an infant that had recently died. Upon seeing the dead child's face, Ruth claimed that it was the most beautiful thing she had ever seen.\nAt seven, Ruth began to write short verses and to read any book that she could get her hands on. Her favorite author was Jean Ingelow, and her favorite readings were \"A Legend of Bregenz\" and \"The Judas Tree\". Through writing, she gained approval from her family. Writing was her outlet, and she wrote with an insightful perception about human reality. For example, in her senior year of high school, she wrote a piece, \"Lulu's Wedding (A True Story)\", in which she recalled the wedding of a family serving-girl. Instead of romanticizing the event, she revealed the true unromantic arranged marriage that Lulu went through because the man would take her even though he was much older.\nAlthough her fascination with death started at an early age, she continued to study how death affected people throughout her career. In her book \"Patterns of Culture\", Benedict shows how the Pueblo culture dealt with grieving and death. She describes in the book that individuals may deal with reactions to death, such as frustration and grief, differently from one another. Societies all have social norms that they follow; some allow more expression in dealing with death, such as mourning, but other societies do not permit its acknowledgement.\nCollege and marriage.\nAfter high school, Ruth and her sister entered St Margaret's School for Girls, a college preparatory school, with the help from a full-time scholarship. The girls were successful in school and entered Vassar College in September 1905, where Ruth thrived in an all-female atmosphere. Stories were then circulating that going to college led girls to become childless and remain unmarried. Nevertheless, Ruth explored her interests in college and found writing as her way of expressing herself as an \"intellectual radical\" - as her classmates sometimes labelled her. The author Walter Pater (1839-1894) influenced her greatly during this time as she strove to be like him and to live a well-lived life. She graduated with her sister in 1909 with a major in English Literature. Unsure of what to do after college, she received an invitation from a wealthy trustee of the college to go on an all-expense-paid tour around Europe. Accompanied by two girls from California whom she had never met, Katherine Norton and Elizabeth Atsatt, she traveled through France, Switzerland, Italy, Germany, and England for one year with the opportunity of various home-stays throughout the trip.\nOver the next few years, Ruth took up many different jobs. She first tried paid social-work for the Charity Organization Society; later she accepted a job as a teacher at the Westlake School for Girls in Los Angeles, California. While working there, she gained an interest in Asia that would later affect her choice of fieldwork as a working anthropologist. However, she was unhappy with that job as well and, after one year, left to teach English in Pasadena at the Orton School for Girls. Those years were difficult, and she experienced depression and severe loneliness. However, through reading authors like Walt Whitman and Richard Jefferies, who stressed a worth, importance, and enthusiasm for life, she held onto hope for a better future.\nThe summer after her first year teaching at the Orton School, she returned home to the Shattucks' farm to spend some time in thought and peace. There, Stanley Rossiter Benedict, an engineer at Cornell Medical College, began to visit her at the farm. She had met him by chance in Buffalo, New York around 1910. That summer, Ruth fell deeply in love with Stanley as he began to visit her more, and she accepted his proposal for marriage. Invigorated by love, she undertook several writing projects to keep busy besides the everyday housework chores in her new life with Stanley. She began to publish poems under different pseudonyms: Ruth Stanhope, Edgar Stanhope, and Anne Singleton. She also began work on writing a biography of Mary Wollstonecraft and other lesser-known women who (she felt) deserved more acknowledgement for their work and contributions.\nBy 1918, the couple had begun to drift apart. Stanley suffered an injury that made him want to spend more time away from the city, and Ruth was not happy when the couple moved to Bedford Hills, far away from the city.\nCareer in anthropology.\nEducation and early career.\nIn her search for a career, she decided to attend some lectures at the New School for Social Research while looking into the possibility of becoming an educational philosopher. While at the school, she took a class called \"Sex in Ethnology\" taught by Elsie Clews Parsons. She enjoyed the class and took another anthropology course with Alexander Goldenweiser, a student of noted anthropologist Franz Boas. With Goldenweiser as her teacher, Ruth's love for anthropology steadily grew. As close friend, and lover Margaret Mead explained, \"Anthropology made the first 'sense' that any ordered approach to life had ever made to Ruth Benedict.\" After working with Goldenweiser for a year, he sent her to work as a graduate student with Franz Boas at Columbia University in 1921. She developed a close friendship with Boas, who took on a role as a kind of father figure in her life. Benedict lovingly referred to him as \"Papa Franz.\"\nBoas gave her graduate credit for the courses that she had completed at the New School for Social Research. Benedict wrote her dissertation, \"The Concept of the Guardian Spirit in North America,\" and received the PhD in anthropology in 1923. Benedict also started a friendship with Edward Sapir, who encouraged her to continue the study of the relations between individual creativity and cultural patterns. Sapir and Benedict shared an interest in poetry and read and critiqued each other's work; both submitted to the same publishers and both were rejected. Both also were interested in psychology and the relation between individual personalities and cultural patterns, and in their correspondences, they frequently psychoanalyzed each other. However, Sapir showed little understanding for Benedict's private thoughts and feelings. In particular, his conservative gender ideology jarred with Benedict's struggle for emancipation. While they were very close friends for a while, the differences in worldview and personality ultimately led their friendship to strain.\nBenedict taught her first anthropology course at Barnard College in 1922 and among the students was Margaret Mead. Benedict was a significant influence on Mead.\nBoas regarded Benedict as an asset to the anthropology department, and in 1931, he appointed her as assistant professor in anthropology, something that was impossible until her divorce from Stanley Benedict that same year.\nOne student who felt especially fond of Ruth Benedict was Ruth Landes. Letters that Landes sent to Benedict state that she was enthralled by the way in which Benedict taught her classes and with the way that she forced the students to think in an unconventional way.\nWhen Boas retired in 1937, most of his students considered Ruth Benedict to be the obvious choice for the head of the anthropology department. However, the administration of Columbia was not as progressive in its attitude towards female professionals as Boas had been, and the university president, Nicholas Murray Butler, was eager to curb the influence of the Boasians whom he considered to be political radicals. Instead, Ralph Linton, one of Boas's former students, a World War I veteran and a fierce critic of Benedict's \"Culture and Personality\" approach, was named head of the department. Benedict was understandably insulted by Linton's appointment, and the Columbia department was divided between the two rival figures of Linton and Benedict, both accomplished anthropologists with influential publications, neither of whom ever mentioned the work of the other.\nRelationship with Margaret Mead.\nMargaret Mead and Ruth Benedict were two of the most influential and famous anthropologists of their time. Both got along well with their shared passion for each other's work and the sense of pride that they felt in being successful working women while that was still uncommon. They were frequently known to critique each other's work; they entered into a companionship that began through their work, but during its early period, it also had an erotic character. Both Benedict and Mead wanted to dislodge stereotypes about women that were widely believed during their time and to show people that working women could also be successful even though working society was seen as a man's world. In her memoir about her parents, \"With a Daughter's Eye\", Mead's daughter strongly implies that the relationship between Benedict and Mead was partly sexual.\nIn 1946, Benedict received the Achievement Award from the American Association of University Women. After Benedict died of a heart attack in 1948, Mead kept the legacy of Benedict's work going by supervising projects that Benedict would have looked after and by editing and publishing notes from studies that Benedict had collected throughout her life.\nPostwar.\nBefore World War II began, Benedict had been giving lectures at the Bryn Mawr College for the Anna Howard Shaw Memorial Lectureship. The lectures were focused around the idea of synergy. However, World War II made her focus on other areas of concentration of anthropology, and the lectures were never presented in their entirety. After the war, she focused on finishing her book \"The Chrysanthemum and the Sword\". Her original notes for the synergy lecture were never found after her death. She was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1947. She continued her teaching after the war and advanced to the rank of full professor only two months before her death in New York on September 17, 1948.\nWork.\n\"Patterns of Culture\".\nBenedict's \"Patterns of Culture\" (1934) was translated into fourteen languages and was for years published in many editions and used as standard reading material for anthropology courses in American universities.\nThe essential idea in \"Patterns of Culture\" is, according to the foreword by Margaret Mead, \"her view that human cultures are 'personality writ large.'\" As Benedict wrote in that book, \"A culture, like an individual, is a more or less consistent pattern of thought and action.\" Each culture, she held, chooses from \"the great arc of human potentialities\" only a few characteristics, which become the leading personality traits of the persons living in that culture. Those traits comprise an interdependent constellation of aesthetics and values in each culture which together add up to a unique gestalt.\nFor example, she described the emphasis on restraint in Pueblo cultures of the American Southwest and the emphasis on abandon in the Native American cultures of the Great Plains. She used the Nietzschean opposites of \"Apollonian\" and \"Dionysian\" as the stimulus for her thought about these Native American cultures.\nShe describes how in ancient Greece the worshipers of Apollo emphasized order and calm in their celebrations. In contrast, the worshipers of Dionysus, the god of wine, emphasized wildness, abandon, and letting go, like Native American groups living on the Great Plains. She described in detail the contrasts between rituals, beliefs, and personal preferences among people of diverse cultures to show how each culture had a \"personality\", which was encouraged in each individual.\nOther anthropologists of the culture and personality school also developed those ideas, notably Margaret Mead in her \"Coming of Age in Samoa\" (published before \"Patterns of Culture\") and \"Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies\" (published just after Benedict's book came out). Benedict was a senior student of Franz Boas when Mead began to study with them, and they had extensive and reciprocal influence on each other's work. Abram Kardiner was also affected by these ideas, and in time, the concept of \"modal personality\" was born: the cluster of traits most commonly thought to be observed in people of any given culture.\nBenedict in \"Patterns of Culture\", expresses her belief in cultural relativism. She desired to show that each culture has its own moral imperatives that can be understood only if one studies that culture as a whole. It was wrong, she felt, to disparage the customs or values of a culture different from one's own. Those customs had a meaning to the people who lived them that should not be dismissed or trivialized. Others should not try to evaluate people by their standards alone. Morality, she argued, was \"relative\" to the values of the culture in which one operated.\nAs she described the Kwakiutl of the Pacific Northwest (based on the fieldwork of her mentor Boas), the Pueblo of New Mexico (among whom she had direct experience), the nations of the Great Plains, and the Dobu culture of New Guinea (regarding whom she relied upon Mead and Reo Fortune's fieldwork), she gave evidence that their values, even where they may seem strange, are intelligible in terms of their own coherent cultural systems and should be understood and respected. That also formed a central argument in her later work on the Japanese following World War II.\nCritics have objected to the degree of abstraction and generalization inherent in the \"culture and personality\" approach. Some have argued that particular patterns that she found may be only a part or a subset of the whole cultures. For example, David Friend Aberle writes that the Pueblo people may be calm, gentle, and much given to ritual in one mood or set of circumstances, but they may be suspicious, retaliatory, and warlike in other circumstances.\nIn 1936, she was appointed an associate professor at Columbia University. However, Benedict had already assisted in the training and guidance of several Columbia students of anthropology including Margaret Mead and Ruth Landes.\nBenedict was among the leading cultural anthropologists who were recruited by the US government for war-related research and consultation after the US entered World War II.\n\"The Races of Mankind\".\nOne of Benedict's lesser-known works was a pamphlet \"The Races of Mankind,\" which she wrote with her colleague at the Columbia University Department of Anthropology, Gene Weltfish. The pamphlet was intended for American troops and set forth in simple language with cartoon illustrations the scientific case against racist beliefs.\n\"The world is shrinking,\" begin Benedict and Weltfish. \"Thirty-four nations are now united in a common cause\u2014victory over Axis aggression, the military destruction of fascism.\"\nThe nations united against fascism, they continue, include \"the most different physical types of men.\"\nThe writers explicate, in section after section, their best evidence for human equality. They want to encourage all types of people to join and not fight among themselves. \"[A]ll the peoples of the earth,\" they point out, \"are a single family and have a common origin.\" We all have just so many teeth, so many molars, just so many little bones and muscles, and so we can have come from only one set of ancestors, no matter what our color, the shape of our head, the texture of our hair. \"The races of mankind are what the Bible says they are\u2014brothers. In their bodies is the record of their brotherhood.\"\n\"The Chrysanthemum and the Sword\".\nBenedict is known not only for her earlier \"Patterns of Culture\" but also for her later book \"The Chrysanthemum and the Sword\", the study of the society and culture of Japan that she published in 1946, incorporating results of her wartime research.\nThis book is an instance of \"anthropology at a distance\". The study of a culture through its literature, newspaper clippings, films and recordings, etc. was necessary when anthropologists aided the United States and its allies during World War II. Unable to visit Nazi Germany or Japan under Hirohito, anthropologists used the cultural materials to produce studies at a distance. They attempted to understand the cultural patterns that might be driving their aggression and hoped to find possible weaknesses or means of persuasion that had been missed.\nBenedict's war work included a major study, largely completed in 1944, aimed at understanding Japanese culture, which had matters that Americans found themselves unable to comprehend. For instance, Americans considered it quite natural for American prisoners-of-war to want their families to know they were alive and to keep quiet when asked for information about troop movements, etc. However, Japanese prisoners-of-war apparently gave information freely and did not try to contact their families. Why was that? Why, too, did Asian peoples neither treat the Japanese as their liberators from Western colonialism nor accept their own supposedly-just place in a hierarchy that had Japanese at the top?\nBenedict played a major role in grasping the place of the Emperor of Japan in Japanese popular culture, and formulating the recommendation to US President Franklin Roosevelt that permitting continuation of the Emperor's reign had to be part of the eventual surrender offer.\nJapanese who read this work, according to Margaret Mead, found it on the whole accurate but somewhat \"moralistic.\" Sections of the book were mentioned in Takeo Doi's book, \"The Anatomy of Dependence\", but Doi is highly critical of Benedict's concept that Japan has a \"shame\" culture, whose emphasis is on how one's moral conduct appears to outsiders in contradistinction to the Christian American \"guilt\" culture in which the emphasis is on the individual's internal conscience. Doi considered that claim to imply clearly that the former value system is inferior to the latter one.\nLegacy.\nThe American Anthropology Association awards an annual prize named after Benedict. The Ruth Benedict Prize has two categories, one for monographs by one writer and one for edited volumes. The prize recognizes \"excellence in a scholarly book written from an anthropological perspective about a lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender topic.\"\nA 46\u00a2 Great Americans series postage stamp in her honor was issued on October 20, 1995.\nBenedict College in Stony Brook University is named after her.\nIn 2005, Benedict was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26543", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26543", "title": "Rosmalen", "text": "Rosmalen () is a town in the province of North Brabant, in the south of the Netherlands. The town is located 6 kilometers east of the city of 's-Hertogenbosch (Den Bosch) and has been part of that municipality since 1996. Its population is around 37,240 on 1 January 2021. In 2005 the town began construction of a new neighbourhood, De Groote Wielen (named after the large kolks in the area created by flood water), to include 5,000 homes and other buildings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRosmalen has a significant and locally well known football club, OJC Rosmalen. Many players from OJC have played for professional football clubs, like FC Den Bosch, RKC Waalwijk, Willem II. Rosmalen is also the home of the second-largest basketball club in the Netherlands: The Black Eagles. Well-known players like Kees Akerboom, Jr., Thijs Vermeulen, Robin Goossens and Rob van Mil demonstrate the success of the club in developing talented players.\nRosmalen is the location of the Autotron, formerly a car museum/attraction park and now a convention center. The park hosts an annual international tennis tournament in the summer, the Rosmalen Grass Court Championships. The park is located about 7 km east of 's-Hertogenbosch and can be reached via the A59.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26544", "revid": "50552535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26544", "title": "Reichstag", "text": " is a German word generally meaning \"parliament\", more directly translated as \"Diet of the Realm\" or \"National Diet\", or more loosely as \"Imperial Diet\". It may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBuildings and places.\n is the specific German word for the German parliament buildings, often shortened to \"Reichstag\", and may refer to:\nInstitutions.\nHistoric legislative bodies in German-speaking countries have been referred to as Reichstag, including:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26546", "revid": "44092845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26546", "title": "Ruslan Khasbulatov", "text": "Russian economist and politician (1942\u20132023)\nRuslan Imranovich Khasbulatov (, ; 22 November 1942 \u2013 3 January 2023) was a Russian economist and politician and the former chairman of Parliament of Russia of Chechen descent who played a central role in the events leading to the 1993 constitutional crisis in the Russian Federation.\nEarly life.\nKhasbulatov was born in Tolstoy-Yurt, a village near Grozny, the capital of Chechnya, on 22 November 1942. In February 1944, he was deported to Central Asia during the Chechen deportations.\nAfter studying in Almaty, Khasbulatov moved to Moscow in 1962, where he studied law at the prestigious Moscow State University. After graduating in 1966, he joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. He continued his studies, focusing on the political, social and economic development of capitalist countries, and received several higher degrees between 1970 and 1980. During the 1970s and 1980s, he published a number of books on international economics and trade.\nPolitical career.\nEntry into political life.\nIn the late 1980s, Khasbulatov began to work closely with rising maverick in the Communist Party Boris Yeltsin. He was elected to the Congress of People's Deputies of the Russian SFSR in 1990. He followed Yeltsin in the successful resistance to the coup attempt in 1991. He quit the Communist Party in August 1991, and on 29 October 1991, he was elected speaker of the Supreme Soviet of RSFSR.\n1993 Constitutional Crisis.\nKhasbulatov had been an ally of Yeltsin in this period, and played a key role in leading the resistance to the 1991 coup attempt. However, he and Yeltsin drifted apart following the collapse of the Soviet Union at the end of 1991.\nAfter the collapse of the USSR, Khasbulatov consolidated his control over the Russian parliament and became the second most powerful man in Russia after Yeltsin himself. Among other factors, the escalating clash of egos between Khasbulatov and Yeltsin led to the Russian constitutional crisis of 1993, in which Khasbulatov (along with Vice-President Alexander Rutskoy) led the Supreme Soviet of Russia in its power struggle with the president, which ended with Yeltsin's violent assault on and subsequent dissolution of the parliament in October 1993.\nKhasbulatov was arrested along with the other leaders of the parliament. In 1994, the newly elected Duma pardoned him along with other key leaders of the anti-Yeltsin resistance.\n\"Professor Khasbulatov's peacekeeping mission\".\nIn 1994, he organized the so-called \"Peacekeeping Mission of Professor Khasbulatov\". He traveled to Chechnya, trying to organize negotiations between the separatist leader, Ichkerian president Dzhokhar Dudayev and the anti-Dudayev opposition, as well as the Russian authorities. However, the mission was unsuccessful, the parties were not ready to make any compromises, in addition to the popularity of Dudayev at the time in Chechnya being extremely high, and Khasbulatov himself essentially joined the anti-Dudayev opposition.\nA few months before Russian troops entered Chechnya, on August 20, 1994, Khasbulatov at a rally in the town of Shali in Chechnya called for the creation of a reconciliation commission and the signing of an agreement on the non-use of weapons by armed groups against each other.\nOn August 21 of the same year, a radio station of Khasbulatov's supporters began operating in the village of Tolstoy-Yurt. Thanks to its appearance, people started talking about \"Professor Khasbulatov's peacekeeping mission\". Seven armed groups joined the mission.\nOn August 25, Dudayev spoke at a rally of his supporters and, among other things, stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Khasbulatov's goal is to provoke a war in Chechnya in order to return to the Russian political arena on the blood of Chechens.\nOn August 26, news agencies reported that 20 armed groups had already joined Khasbulatov's peacekeeping mission. Umar Avturkhanov, leader of the anti-Dudayev opposition and chairman of the Provisional Council, and Khasbulatov meet in the village of Znamenskoye in the Nadterechny district and agree on joint actions against the Dudayev regime.\nOn August 29, at a meeting of leaders of opposition groups (Umar Avturkhanov, Khasbulatov, Ruslan Labazanov, Bislan Gantamirov) in the Nadterechny district, it was decided to unite the actions of opponents of the regime under the aegis of the Temporary Council of the Chechen Republic.\nOn September 7, representatives of the mission arrived at the headquarters of the anti-Dudayev opposition, the Temporary Council of the Chechen Republic, to work out a strategy for further joint actions.\nWith the outbreak of hostilities at the end of the year, Khasbulatov returned to Moscow, where he continued to work at his department at the institute.\nIn 1995, when the active stage of the military conflict was unfolding in Chechnya, Khasbulatov, who, according to the newspaper Vremya Novostei, had influence in the Chechen diaspora, again offered to act as a mediator. However, the Russian authorities refused his services. In 2005, Khasbulatov claimed that Dudayev had plotted with Yeltsin when he wanted to deprive him (Khasbulatov) of his deputy position.\nChechen politics.\nKhasbulatov considered running as a candidate in the 2003 election for President of the Chechen Republic, following the Second Chechen War, but ultimately chose not to run. In the 2021 Chechen head election, he endorsed incumbent Ramzan Kadyrov.\nLater life.\nFollowing the end of his political career, Khasbulatov returned to his earlier profession as a teacher of economics as founder and head of the Department of International Economy at the Plekhanov Russian Academy of Economics (REA). He continued to comment on political developments in Russia. His death was reported on 3 January 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26547", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26547", "title": "Six Nations Championship", "text": "Annual international rugby union competition\nFootball tournament\nThe Six Nations Championship (known as the Six Nations, branded as Guinness M6N) is an annual international rugby union competition by the men's teams of England, France, Ireland, Italy, Scotland and Wales. It is the oldest sports tournament contested by the Home Nations. The championship holders are France, who won the 2025 tournament.\nThe tournament is organised by the unions of the six participating nations under the banner of Six Nations Rugby, which is responsible for the promotion and operation of the men's, women's and under-20s tournaments, and the Autumn International Series, as well as the negotiation and management of their centralised commercial rights.\nThe Six Nations is the successor to the Home Nations Championship (1883\u20131909 and 1932\u201339), played by teams from England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, which was the first international rugby union tournament. With the addition of France, this became the Five Nations Championship (1910\u201331 and 1947\u201399), and the Six Nations Championship with Italy joining in 2000.\nEngland and Wales have won the championship the most times, both with 39 titles, but England have won the most outright titles with 29 (28 for Wales). Since the Six Nations era started in 2000, only Italy and Scotland have failed to win the Six Nations title.\nThe women's tournament started as the Women's Home Nations in the 1996 season. The men's Six Nations Under 20s Championship is the successor to the Under 21s tournament which began in 2004.\nHistory and expansion.\nThe tournament was first played in 1883 as the Home Nations Championship among the then four Home Nations of the United Kingdom \u2013 England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. However, England was excluded from the 1888 and 1889 tournaments due to their refusal to join the International Rugby Football Board. The tournament then became the Five Nations Championship in 1910 with the addition of France. The tournament was expanded in 2000 to become the Six Nations Championship with the addition of Italy.\nFollowing the relative success of the Tier 2 nations in the 2015 Rugby World Cup, there were calls by Octavian Morariu, the president of Rugby Europe, to let Georgia and Romania join the Six Nations due to their consistent success in the European Nations Cup and ability to compete in the Rugby World Cup.\nFormat.\nThe tournament begins on the first weekend in February and culminates on the second or third Saturday in March. Each team plays every other team once (a total of 15 matches), with home ground advantage alternating from one year to the next. Before the 2017 tournament, two points were awarded for a win, one for a draw and none for a loss. Unlike many other rugby union competitions, a bonus point system had not previously been used.\nA bonus point system was first used in the 2017 Championship. The system is similar to the one used in most rugby championships (0 points for a loss, 2 for a draw, 4 for a win, 1 for scoring four or more tries in a match, and 1 for losing by 7 points or fewer). The only difference is that a team that wins all their games (a Grand Slam) are automatically awarded 3 extra points - to ensure they cannot be overtaken by a defeated team on bonus points.\nBefore 1994, teams equal on match points shared the championship. Since then, ties have been broken by considering the points difference (total points scored minus total points conceded) of the teams. The rules of the championship further provide that if teams tie on both match points and points difference, the team that scored the most tries wins the championship. Were this decider to be a tie, the tying teams would share the championship. To date, however, match points and points difference have been sufficient to decide the championship.\nThe Wooden Spoon is a metaphorical award given to the team that finishes in last place; a team which loses all their matches is said to have been \"whitewashed\". Since the inaugural Six Nations tournament in 2000, only England and Ireland have avoided finishing last. Italy have finished last 18 times in the Six Nations era, and have lost all their matches in 12 tournaments.\nTrophies.\nChampionship Trophy.\nThe winners of the Six Nations are presented with the Championship Trophy. This was originally conceived by the Earl of Westmorland, and was first presented to the winners of the 1993 Five Nations Championship; France. It was a sterling silver trophy, designed by James Brent-Ward and made by a team of eight silversmiths from the London firm William Comyns. The current championship trophy for the Six Nations Championship was designed and made in 2015 by Thomas Lyte, London silversmiths.\nThe old trophy had 15 side panels representing the 15 members of the team and with three handles to represent the three officials (referee and two touch judges). The cup has a capacity of \u2013 sufficient for five bottles of champagne. Within the mahogany base is a concealed drawer which contains six alternative finials, each a silver replica of one of the team emblems, which can be screwed on the detachable lid.\nA new trophy was introduced for the 2015 Championship. The trophy is sterling silver, contains over fifty individual pieces, stands at a height of and has a distinctive six-sided design representing the six nations that compete.\nGrand Slam and Triple Crown.\nA team that wins all its games wins the 'Grand Slam'.\nThe Triple Crown may only be won by one of the Home Nations of England, Ireland, Scotland or Wales, when one nation wins all three of their matches against the others. The Triple Crown dates back to the original Home Nations Championship, but the physical Triple Crown Trophy has been awarded only since 2006, when the Royal Bank of Scotland (the primary sponsor of the competition) commissioned Hamilton &amp; Inches to design and create a dedicated Triple Crown Trophy. As of 2025[ [update]], the trophy has been won five times by Ireland, four times by Wales, three times by England, and yet to be won by Scotland.\nRivalry trophies.\nSeveral individual competitions take place under the umbrella of the tournament. Some of these trophies are also awarded for other matches between the two teams outside the Six Nations. Only Scotland play for a 'rivalry' or challenge trophy in every Six Nations match, as well as for the oldest such trophy, the Calcutta Cup. Wales became the last nation to contest such a trophy, the Doddie Weir Cup in 2018, while the newest such trophy is the Cuttitta Cup introduced between Scotland and Italy in 2022.\nGames which form part of the Triple Crown are marked TC.\nCurrently the following matches have no additional trophy contested:\nVenues.\nAs of the 2025 tournament, Six Nations matches are held in the following stadiums:\nThe opening of Aviva Stadium in May 2010 ended the arrangement with the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) that allowed the all-Ireland governing body for rugby union, the Irish Rugby Football Union, to use the GAA's flagship stadium, Croke Park, for its international matches. This arrangement was made necessary by the 2007 closure and subsequent demolition of Ireland's traditional home at Lansdowne Road; Aviva Stadium was built on the former Lansdowne Road site. During this construction, Croke Park was the largest of the Six Nations grounds, with a capacity of 82,300.\nIn 2012 Italy moved their home games from the 32,000 seat Stadio Flaminio, to Stadio Olimpico, also in Rome, with a capacity of 72,000.\nThe French Rugby Federation (FFR) had planned to build a new stadium of its own, seating 82,000 in the southern suburbs of Paris, because of frustrations with their tenancy of Stade de France. However the project was cancelled in December 2016. France played their 2018 match against Italy at Stade V\u00e9lodrome in Marseille.\nIn 2020, Wales played their final game at Parc y Scarlets in Llanelli due to the Principality Stadium being used as Dragon's Heart Hospital in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn 2024, France was unable to use the Stade de France for their Six Nations home games due to ongoing preparations for its use in the 2024 Summer Olympics. Instead they played their three home matches at the Stade V\u00e9lodrome in Marseille, Stade Pierre-Mauroy in Lille, and Parc Olympique Lyonnais in Lyon.\nResults.\nHome Nations (1883\u20131939).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFive Nations (1940\u20131999).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSix Nations (2000\u2013present).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTitles and awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWooden Spoon.\nOverall\nSix Nations era (2000\u20132025).\nBold indicates that the team did not win any matches\nMatch records (Six Nations era 2000\u20132025)\nHead-to-head records (Five Nations Championship)\nRecords.\nIreland's Johnny Sexton holds the record for most points in the competition, with 566. England's Jonny Wilkinson holds the records for individual points in one match (35 points against Italy in 2001) and one season with 89 (scored in 2001).\nThe record for tries in a match is held by George Campbell Lindsay, who scored five tries for Scotland against Wales in 1887. England's Cyril Lowe, Scotland's Ian Smith and France's Louis Bielle-Biarrey jointly hold the record for tries in one season with 8 (Lowe in 1914, Smith in 1925, Bielle-Biarrey in 2025). Ireland's Brian O'Driscoll has the Championship record for tries with 26.\nThe record for appearances is held by Sergio Parisse of Italy, with 69 appearances, between 2004 and 2019.\nThe most points scored by a team in one match was 80 points, scored by England against Italy in 2001. England also scored the most points in a season in 2001 with 229. France scored the most tries in a season, with 30 in 2025. Wales hold the record for fewest tries conceded during a season in the Six Nations era, conceding only 2 in 5 games in 2008, but the 1977 Grand Slam-winning France team did not concede a try in their four matches. Wales hold the record for the longest time without conceding a try, at 358 minutes in the 2013 tournament.\nAdministration.\nThe Championship is run from headquarters in Dublin, Ireland by Six Nations Rugby Ltd. \nFormer England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) CEO, Tom Harrison, was appointed the CEO of Six Nations Rugby in January 2023 following the resignation of Benjamin Morel in November 2022. Morel had held the position of CEO since November 2018, replacing John Feehan, who stepped down after sixteen years as CEO in April 2018. Harrison's tenure as CEO commenced from April 2023. \nRonan Dunne was appointed as the Chairman for Six Nations Rugby in November 2021 with his tenure commencing from January 2022. Dunne has responsibility for the commercial and marketing operations for both the men's and women's Six Nations tournaments.\nMarketing.\nBroadcasting rights.\nOne of the most important rugby union tournaments in the world, the Six Nations Championship is broadcast in various countries in addition to the six participating nations. \nIn the United Kingdom, the BBC has long covered the tournament, broadcasting all matches (apart from England home matches between 1997 and 2002, which were shown live by Sky Sports with highlights on the BBC) until 2015. In addition, Welsh language coverage of broadcasts matches featuring the Welsh team shown by the BBC are shown on S4C in Wales in the United Kingdom. Between 2003 and 2015, the BBC covered every match live on BBC Sport either on BBC One or BBC Two with highlights also on the BBC Sport website and either on the BBC Red Button or late at night on BBC Two.\nOn 9 July 2015, in reaction to bids by Sky for the rights beginning in 2018, the BBC ended its contract two seasons early, and renegotiated a joint contract with ITV Sport for rights to the Six Nations from 2016 through 2021. ITV acquired rights to England, Ireland and Italy home matches, while the BBC retained rights to France, Scotland and Wales home matches. By ending its contract early, the BBC saved around \u00a330\u00a0million, while the new contract generated \u00a320\u00a0million in additional revenue for the Six Nations.\nWith the end of the contract nearing, speculation once again emerged in 2020 that Sky was pursuing rights to the Six Nations from 2022 onward; under the Ofcom \"listed events\" rules, rights to the tournament can be held by a pay television channel if delayed broadcasts or highlights are made available on free-to-air television. It was reported that the bid for CVC Equity Partners to purchase a stake in the Six Nations was being hindered by a desire for a more lucrative broadcast contract; a call for the Six Nations to be moved to Category A (which requires live coverage to air free-to-air) was rejected. In May 2021, the BBC and ITV renewed their contracts through 2025. The BBC will continue to broadcast home matches from Scotland and Wales and all women's and under-20s matches, with ITV airing England, France, Ireland and Italy home matches. In 2025, the deal was further extended until the 2029 tournament in a deal which would see BBC retain 5 matches and ITV also gain rights to England matches played in Scotland or Wales.\nFrance, Ireland, and Italy listed the Six Nations as a major event with cultural significance and enacted national and EU laws to ensure coverage would be available on free-to-air channels.\nIn Ireland, each of Ireland's games in the Six Nations may be held by a pay television channel, if the match is delayed broadcast and in full on free-to-air television. RT\u00c9 have broadcast the championship since RT\u00c9's inception and continued to do so until 2017, while TG4 televised highlights. However, in late 2015 RT\u00c9's free-to-air rival TV3 was awarded the rights for every game from the Six Nations on Irish television from 2018 to 2021. In 2022 it was announced that RT\u00c9 and Virgin Media would share broadcasting rights.\nIn France, the entire Six Nations rugby tournament must appear on free-to-air television. France T\u00e9l\u00e9visions has covered the competition in France.\nIn Italy, Six Nations rugby matches involving the Italian national team must be broadcast on free-to-air television. Sky Italia broadcasts all matches while free-to-air TV8 only covers Italy fixtures.\nIn the United States, NBC Sports broadcasts matches in English. The tournament is also broadcast on DAZN in Canada, Premier Sports Asia in East and Southeast Asia, Sky Sport in New Zealand, Stan Sport in Australia and SuperSport in South Africa.\nIn 2024 the Six Nations teams featured in a Netflix documentary Six Nations: Full Contact. In February 2024, the show was green lit for a second season. In January 2025, the tournament organisers confirmed that Netflix would not be taking up the option to produce a third series.\nSponsorship.\nUntil 1998, the competition had no title sponsor. Sponsorship rights were sold to Lloyds TSB Group for the 1999 tournament and the competition was titled the Lloyds TSB 5 Nations and Lloyds TSB 6 Nations until 2002.\nThe Royal Bank of Scotland Group took over sponsorship from 2003 until 2017, with the competition being branded the RBS 6 Nations. A new title sponsor was sought for the 2018 tournament and beyond. However, after struggling to find a new sponsor, organisers agreed a one-year extension at a reduced rate. As the RBS brand was being phased out, the tournament was named after the NatWest banking subsidiary, becoming the NatWest 6 Nations.\nOn 7 December 2018, Guinness was announced as the Championship's new title sponsor, with the competition to be named the Guinness Six Nations from 2019 to 2024. Due to the \"Loi \u00c9vin\" laws which prohibit alcohol sponsorship in sport, \"Guinness\" cannot be used as part of the branding of the tournament in France. The French-language logo for the tournament replaces the Guinness logo with the word \"Greatness\" in the same colour and typeface as the Guinness wordmark.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26548", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26548", "title": "Rugby Union Five Nations Championship/Results", "text": ""}
{"id": "26550", "revid": "40808726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26550", "title": "Reconquista", "text": "Series of medieval Christian military campaigns\nThe Reconquista (Spanish and Portuguese for 'reconquest') or the fall of al-Andalus was a series of military and cultural campaigns by Northern Christian polities against Muslim-ruled al-Andalus, which had previously been part of the Visigothic Kingdom before the Muslim Conquest of 711. The \"Reconquista\" concluded in 1492 with the capture of Granada by the Catholic Monarchs of Spain, thereby ending the presence of any Muslim rule on the Iberian Peninsula.\nThe beginning of the \"Reconquista\" is traditionally dated to the Battle of Covadonga (c.\u2009718 or 722), approximately a decade after the Muslim conquest of the Iberian Peninsula began, in which the army of the Kingdom of Asturias achieved the first Christian victory over the forces of the Umayyad Caliphate since the beginning of the military invasion. By the early 11th century, the Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba endured state collapse into a series of petty successor states known as \"taifas\". The northern kingdoms advanced further against these fiefdoms and often made them subject to a protection racket system. \nIn the 12th century, Portugal, Le\u00f3n and Castile, and the Crown of Aragon made territorial advances sometimes offset by Almohad campaigns. Military orders took a prominent role both in warfare and settlement policies. Castile conquered the Guadalquivir basin with the largest Muslim population centres in the 13th century\u2014leaving the Muslim enclave of Granada as a tributary state in the south. After the surrender of Granada in 1492, the entire Iberian peninsula was controlled by Christian rulers. While a share of the Muslim population in conquered territories exiled from the peninsula to the Maghreb, State edicts enacting the forced assimilation and social discrimination of the remaining people (\"Moriscos\") ensued throughout the following century.\nBeginning in the 19th century, traditional historiography has used the term \"Reconquista\" as the restoration of the Visigothic Kingdom over conquered territories. The concept of \"Reconquista\", consolidated in Spanish historiography in the second half of the 19th century, was associated with Spanish nationalism during the period of Romantic nationalism. Recent scholarship describes the \"Reconquista\" as a process that unfolded in multiple episodes, with regional variation. It is the inspiration for the \"Moros y cristianos\" festival, popular in the southern Valencian Community, and which is also celebrated in parts of Spanish America. Pursuant to an Islamophobic worldview, the concept is of significance for the 21st century European far-right.\nConcept and duration.\nThe term 'Reconquista' was not used by medieval writers to describe the struggle between Christians and Muslims in the Iberian Peninsula. Since its development as a term in historiography occurred centuries after the events it references, it has acquired various meanings. Its meaning as an actual \"reconquest\" has been subject to the particular concerns or prejudices of scholars, who have sometimes wielded it as a weapon in ideological disputes.\nA discernible irredentist ideology that became part of the concept of Christian conquest appeared in writings by the end of the 9th century. For example, the anonymous Christian chronicle \"Chronica Prophetica\" (883\u2013884) claimed a historical connection between Tariq ibn Ziyad's conquest of the Visigothic Kingdom in 711 and the Kingdom of Asturias in which the document was produced, and stressed a Christian and Muslim cultural and religious divide in Hispania, and a necessity to drive out the Muslims and restore conquered territories. Literature from both sides described a divide based on ethnicity and culture between the inhabitants of the small Christian kingdoms of the north and the dominant elite in the Muslim-ruled south.\nThe linear approach to the origins of the Reconquista adopted in early twentieth-century historiography is complicated by several issues. For example, periods of peaceful coexistence, or at least of limited and localised skirmishes on the frontiers, were more prevalent over the 781 years of Muslim rule than periods of significant military conflict. Additionally, both Christian and Muslim rulers fought other Christians and Muslims, and cooperation and alliances between Muslims and Christians were not uncommon, such as between \u00cd\u00f1igo Arista, the founder of the Kingdom of Pamplona (later 'Navarre'), and the Banu Qasi as early as the 9th century. Blurring distinctions even further were the mercenaries from both sides who fought for whoever paid the most. The period is seen today to have had long episodes of relative religious coexistence and tolerance such as the Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain. \nDocuments dating from the 10th and 11th centuries are mute on any idea of reconquest. The Crusades, which started late in the 11th century, birthed the religious ideology of a reconquest. In al-Andalus, Christian states of that era were confronted by the century-long rule of the Sanhaja-ruled Almoravid dynasty and subsequently the religious extremism of the Almohad Caliphate of the Masmuda, which supported a similarly staunch ideology of jihad.\nPropaganda accounts of Muslim-Christian hostility came into being to support that idea, most notably the \"Chanson de Roland\", an 11th-century French \"chanson de geste\" that offers a fictionalised retelling of the Battle of Roncevaux Pass dealing with the Saracens or Moors, and centuries later introduced in the French school system to instill moral and national values in the population following the 1870 defeat of the French in the Franco-Prussian War, regardless of the actual events.\nThe consolidation of the modern idea of a Reconquista is inextricably linked to the foundational myths of 19th-century Spanish nationalism, associated with the development of a Centralist, Castilian, and staunchly Catholic nationalism, evoking nationalistic, romantic and sometimes colonialist themes. The concept gained further track in the 20th century during the Francoist dictatorship. It thus became one of the key tenets of the historiographical discourse of National Catholicism, the mythological and ideological identity of the regime. The discourse was underpinned in its most traditional version by an avowed 'historical illegitimacy' of al-Andalus and the subsequent glorification of the Christian conquest.\nThe idea of a \"liberation war\" against Muslims, who were viewed as foreigners, suited the anti-Republican rebels of the Spanish Civil War. This Nationalist faction agitated for the banner of the \"patria\", the fatherland which, according to them, was being threatened by regionalism and communism. Their rebellious pursuit was thus a crusade for the restoration of the unity of the Church and State, where Franco stood for both Pelagius of Asturias and El Cid.\nThe Reconquista has become a rallying call for right-wing populist and far-right parties of Spain such as Vox to expel from office incumbent progressive or peripheral nationalist options as well as their values in different political contexts.\nSimilar propaganda was circulated during the Spanish Civil War by the Republicans, who wanted to portray their enemies as foreign invaders, especially given the prominence of the Army of Africa among Franco's troops. This army consisted of Berber soldiers of the Tiradores de Ifni and Regulares from the Spanish protectorate in Morocco.\nTraditionalist scholarship viewed the Reconquista as proof that the process of Christian state-building in Iberia was often defined by the reclamation of lands that had been lost to foreigners in past generations. State-building was characterised\u2014at least in ideological, if not practical, terms\u2014as a process by which Iberian states were being \"rebuilt\". Current historians dispute the entire concept of the Reconquista as created a posteriori in the service of later political goals. A few historians point out that Spain and Portugal did not previously exist as nations and the heirs of the Christian Visigothic Kingdom were not \"re\"conquering them, as the name suggests. One of the first Spanish intellectuals to question the idea of a \"reconquest\" that lasted for eight centuries was Jos\u00e9 Ortega y Gasset, writing in the first half of the 20th century. However, the term \"Reconquista\" is still widely in use.\nBackground.\nLanding in Visigothic Hispania and initial expansion.\nIn 711, a predominantly Berber army commanded by Tariq ibn Ziyad crossed the Strait of Gibraltar, engaging a Visigothic force led by King Roderic at the Battle of Guadalete (19\u201326 July) in a moment of severe infighting and division across the Visigothic Kingdom of Hispania. Many of Roderic's troops deserted, leading to his defeat. He drowned while crossing the Guadalquivir.\nAfter Roderic's defeat, the Umayyad governor of Ifriqiya, Musa ibn Nusayr, joined Tariq, directing a campaign against different towns and strongholds in Hispania. Some, like M\u00e9rida, C\u00f3rdoba, or Zaragoza in 712, and probably Toledo as well, were captured. Others agreed to a treaty in exchange for maintaining autonomy, such as Theodemir's dominion in the southeastern peninsula, or the area of Pamplona. The invading Islamic armies did not exceed 60,000 men.\nIslamic rule.\nAfter the establishment of a local emirate, Al-Walid I, ruler of the Umayyad Caliphate, removed many of the successful Muslim commanders. Tariq ibn Ziyad was recalled to Damascus and replaced with Musa ibn-Nusayr, who had been his former superior. Musa's son, Abd al-Aziz ibn Musa, apparently married Egilona, Roderic's widow, and established his regional government in Seville. He was suspected of being under the influence of his wife and was accused of wanting to convert to Christianity and of planning a secessionist rebellion. A concerned Al-Walid I ordered Abd al-Aziz's assassination. Al-Walid I died in 715 and was succeeded by his brother, Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik. Sulayman appears to have punished the surviving Musa ibn Nusayr, who died during the Hajj in 716. In the end, Abd al-Aziz ibn Musa's cousin, Ayyub ibn Habib al-Lakhmi, became the wali (governor) of al-Andalus.\nA significant weakness among the Muslim conquerors was the ethnic tension between Berbers and Arabs. The Berbers were indigenous inhabitants of North Africa who had only recently converted to Islam; they provided most of the soldiery of the invading armies, but experienced systematised discrimination. This latent internal conflict jeopardised Umayyad unity. The Umayyad forces arrived and crossed the Pyrenees by 719 and conquered Narbona. The last Visigothic king, Ardo, resisted them in Septimania, where he fended off the Berber\u2013Arab armies until 720. \nAfter the Umayyad conquests of 711\u2013718 and the establishment of the state, an expedition suffered a major defeat at the Battle of Toulouse against the armies of the Duchy of Aquitaine. Odo the Great had married his daughter to Munuza, a rebel and lord of Cerdanya (trans-Pyrenean Catalunya), in an attempt to secure his southern borders to fend off Charles Martel's attacks on the north. However, a major punitive expedition led by Amir Abd al-Rahman ibn Abd Allah al-Ghafiqi defeated and killed Uthman, and the governor then mustered an expedition north across the western Pyrenees, looted areas up to Bordeaux, and then defeated Odo in the Battle of the River Garonne in 732.\nA desperate Odo turned to his archrival Charles Martel for help, who led the remaining Aquitanian armies alongside his Frankish forces against the Umayyad armies, defeating them in the Battle of Tours on 10 October 732, killing al Ghafiqi. While Muslim rule began to recede in what is now France, it would remain in the Iberian Peninsula for another 760 years.\nEarly Reconquista.\nBeginning of the \"Reconquista\".\nA drastic increase of taxes on Christians by the emir Anbasa ibn Suhaym Al-Kalbi provoked several rebellions in al-Andalus, which a series of succeeding weak emirs were unable to suppress. Around 722, a Muslim military expedition was sent into the north in late summer to suppress a rebellion led by Pelagius of Asturias (Pelayo in Spanish, Pelayu in Asturian). Traditional historiography has hailed Pelagius's victory at Covadonga as the beginning of the \"Reconquista\".\nTwo northern realms, Navarre and Asturias, despite their small size, demonstrated an ability to maintain their independence. Because the Umayyad rulers based in C\u00f3rdoba were unable to extend their power over the Pyrenees, they decided to consolidate their power within the Iberian peninsula. Arab-Berber forces made periodic incursions deep into Asturias, but this area was a \"cul-de-sac\" on the fringes of the Islamic world fraught with inconveniences during campaigns and of little interest.\nIt comes then as no surprise that, besides focusing on raiding the Arab-Berber strongholds of the Meseta, Alfonso I of Asturias centred on expanding his domains at the expense of the neighbouring Galicians and Basques at either side of his realm just as much. During the first decades, Asturian control over part of the kingdom was weak, and for this reason it had to be continually strengthened through matrimonial alliances and war with other peoples from the north of the Iberian Peninsula. After Pelayo's death in 737, his son Favila of Asturias was elected king. Favila, according to the chronicles, was killed by a bear during a trial of courage. Pelayo's dynasty in Asturias survived and gradually expanded the kingdom's boundaries until all of northwest Hispania was included by roughly 775. However, credit is due to him and to his successors, the \"Banu Alfons\" from the Arab chronicles. Further expansion of the northwestern kingdom towards the south occurred during the reign of Alfonso II of Asturias (from 791 to 842). A king's expedition arrived in and pillaged Lisbon in 798, probably concerted with the Carolingians.\nThe Asturian kingdom became firmly established with the recognition of Alfonso II as king of Asturias by Charlemagne and the Pope. During his reign, the bones of St. James the Great were declared to have been found in Galicia, at Santiago de Compostela. Pilgrims from all over Europe opened a channel of communication between the isolated Asturias and the Carolingian lands and beyond, centuries later.\nFrankish invasions.\nAfter the Umayyad conquest of the Iberian heartland of the Visigothic kingdom, the Muslims crossed the Pyrenees and gradually took control of Septimania, starting in 719 with the conquest of Narbonne through 725 when Carcassonne and N\u00eemes were secured. From the stronghold of Narbonne, they tried to conquer Aquitaine but suffered a major defeat at the Battle of Toulouse (721).\nTen years after halting their advance north, Odo of Aquitaine married his daughter to Uthman ibn Naissa, a rebel Berber and lord of Cerdanya (perhaps all of contemporary Catalonia as well), in an attempt to secure his southern borders to fend off Charles Martel's attacks on the north. However, a major punitive expedition led by Abdul Rahman Al Ghafiqi, the latest emir of al-Andalus, defeated and killed Uthman.\nAfter expelling the Muslims from Narbonne in 759 and driving their forces back over the Pyrenees, the Carolingian king Pepin the Short conquered Aquitaine in an eight-year war. Charlemagne followed his father by subduing Aquitaine by creating counties, taking the Church as his ally and appointing counts of Frankish or Burgundian stock, like his loyal William of Gellone, making Toulouse his base for expeditions against al-Andalus. Charlemagne decided to organize a regional subkingdom, the Spanish March, which included part of contemporary Catalonia, in order to keep the Aquitanians in check and to secure the southern border of the Carolingian Empire against Muslim incursions. In 781, his three-year-old son Louis was crowned king of Aquitaine, under the supervision of Charlemagne's trustee William of Gellone, and was nominally in charge of the incipient Spanish March.\nMeanwhile, the takeover of the southern fringes of al-Andalus by Abd ar-Rahman I in 756 was opposed by Yusuf ibn Abd al-Rahman, autonomous governor (\"w\u0101li\") or king (\"malik\") of al-Andalus. Abd ar-Rahman I expelled Yusuf from Cordova, but it took still decades for him to expand to the north-western Andalusian districts. He was also opposed externally by the Abbasids of Baghdad who failed in their attempts to overthrow him. In 778, Abd al-Rahman closed in on the Ebro valley. Regional lords saw the Umayyad emir at the gates and decided to enlist the nearby Christian Franks. According to Ali ibn al-Athir, a Kurdish historian of the 12th century, Charlemagne received the envoys of Sulayman al-Arabi, Husayn, and Abu Taur at the Diet of Paderborn in 777. These rulers of Zaragoza, Girona, Barcelona, and Huesca were enemies of Abd ar-Rahman I, and in return for Frankish military aid against him offered their homage and allegiance.\nCharlemagne, seeing an opportunity, agreed upon an expedition and crossed the Pyrenees in 778. Near the city of Zaragoza Charlemagne received the homage of Sulayman al-Arabi. However the city, under the leadership of Husayn, closed its gates and refused to submit. Unable to conquer the city by force, Charlemagne decided to retreat. On the way home the rearguard of the army was ambushed and destroyed by Basque forces at the Battle of Roncevaux Pass. \"The Song of Roland\", a highly romanticised account of this battle, would later become one of the most famous of the Middle Ages. Around 788 Abd ar-Rahman I died and was succeeded by Hisham I. In 792 Hisham proclaimed a jihad, advancing in 793 against the Kingdom of Asturias and Carolingian Septimania (Gothia). They defeated William of Gellone, Count of Toulouse, in battle, but William led an expedition the following year across the eastern Pyrenees. Barcelona, a major city, became a potential target for the Franks in 797, as its governor Zeid rebelled against the Umayyad emir of C\u00f3rdoba. An army of the emir managed to recapture it in 799, but Louis, at the head of an army, crossed the Pyrenees and besieged the city for seven months until it finally capitulated in 801.\nThe main passes in the Pyrenees were Roncesvalles, Somport and La Jonquera. Charlemagne established across them the vassal regions of Pamplona, Aragon, and Catalonia respectively. Catalonia was itself formed from a number of small counties, including Pallars, Girona, and Urgell; it was called the \"Marca Hispanica\" by the late 8th century. They protected the eastern Pyrenees passes and shores and were under the direct control of the Frankish kings. Pamplona's first king was I\u00f1igo Arista, who allied with his Muslim kinsmen the Banu Qasi and rebelled against Frankish overlordship and overcame a Carolingian expedition in 824 that led to the setup of the Kingdom of Pamplona. Aragon, founded in 809 by Aznar Gal\u00edndez, grew around Jaca and the high valleys of the Aragon River, protecting the old Roman road. By the end of the 10th century, Aragon, which then was just a county, was annexed by Navarre. Sobrarbe and Ribagorza were small counties and had little significance to the progress of the \"Reconquista\".\nIn the late 9th century under Count Wilfred, Barcelona became the \"de facto\" capital of the region. It controlled the other counties' policies in a union, which led in 948 to the independence of Barcelona under Count Borrel II, who declared that the new dynasty in France (the Capets) were not the legitimate rulers of France nor, as a result, of his county. These states were small and, with the exception of Navarre, did not have the capacity for attacking the Muslims in the way that Asturias did, but their mountainous geography rendered them relatively safe from being conquered, and their borders remained stable for two centuries.\nReconquista as Crusade.\nThe 1064 conquest of Barbastro, sanctioned by Pope Alexander II, was considered as a crusade rehearsal. However, the mentality of the Iberian Christian rulers of the era was generally removed from ideals of defence of Christendom. The motivations for warfare against Muslims were generally more mundane: obtaining \"parias\", or loot, and rivalry with other Christians. In the Castile of Alfonso VI, who was called \"the lord of the three religions\", parias were preferred over conquest. Pope Urban II tried to prevent Iberians from going East and to engage locally in warfare against Muslims instead, conceding the same indulgences to those who were dying while fighting Saracens in the Iberian Peninsula as to those who were dying in the Holy Land. Whatever the case, after early 12th century cross-pollination in the Holy Land, Iberian military orders were created in the image of the Templars and the Hospitallers.\nAt the First Council of the Lateran, Pope Callixtus II declared fighting against Muslims in the Iberian Peninsula as \npart of Crusades and its participants as Crusaders having an equal spiritual standing with those in the east.\nIn the Second Crusade (1147\u20131149), after appeals by Afonso Henriques and the apparent acquiescence of Bernard of Clairvaux, non-Iberian (German, Flemish, English) crusaders en route to the Holy Land played a role in the 1147 conquest of Lisbon, although it did not end up legitimised as a crusading enterprise. Afonso Henriques' rival cousin Alfonso Raim\u00fandez benefited instead from the \"Divina dispensatione\" papal bull, managing to draw a Genoese and Pisan naval contingent to the 1147 siege and conquest of Almer\u00eda. The 1148 conquest of Tortosa led by the County of Barcelona and the Common of Genoa, in which English and Flemish crusaders as well as Templars and Hospitallers took part, also enjoyed from the papal endorsement.\nCrusade bulls were weaponised beyond direct engagement against Saracens, as Pope Celestine III sided with Sancho I of Portugal and granted him a bull in 1197 to fight against Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n for collaborating with Almohads, although the crusading operation did not come to fruition in the battlefield.\nArchbishop Rodrigo Jim\u00e9nez de Rada tried to internationalize the preparations for the campaign against the Almohad Caliphate that resulted into the 1212 Battle of Las Navas, but despite the papal indulgences by Innocent III, the event remained largely an Iberian affair on the Christian side, as almost all 'ultramontane' (trans-Pyreneean) international forces gathered for the campaign deserted before the battle. The Catholic Church considered nonetheless the campaign a true crusade.\nAfter his conquest of C\u00f3rdoba, Ferdinand III of Castile requested financial aid from Pope Gregory IX. The pope bestowed upon him the title of Athleta Christi besides providing him with a funding of 40,000 gold pieces per year to further his campaign. He later requested additional money, which was granted to him by Pope Innocent IV. Ferdinand went on to conquer Seville as well as several other major cities from the Islamic states, making the biggest advance yet in the Reconquista.\nUpon learning of the victory of the Crusade of Valencia under James I of Aragon, Pope Gregory IX declared to \"all the world\": \nOur most dear son in Christ ... with many Catholic men, stirred by zeal for faith and signed by the sign of the cross, has ripped the Kingdom of Valencia from the hands of the pagans\nEmphasizing the need to protect the new conquest, the Pope also offered crusader status to those who would defend it. French King Louis IX gave King James a thorn from the Crown of Thorns relic he had in Sainte Chapelle Church.\nNorthern Christian realms.\nThe northern principalities and kingdoms survived in their mountainous strongholds (see above). However, they started a definite territorial expansion south at the turn of the 10th century (Leon, Najera). The fall of the Caliphate of Cordova (1031) heralded a period of military expansion for the northern kingdoms, now divided into several mighty regional powers after the division of the Kingdom of Navarre (1035). Myriad autonomous Christian kingdoms emerged thereafter.\nKingdom of Asturias (718\u2013924).\nThe Kingdom of Asturias was located in the Cantabrian Mountains, a wet and mountainous region in the north of the Iberian Peninsula. It was the first Christian power to emerge. The kingdom was established by a Visigothic nobleman, named Pelagius (\"Pelayo\"), who had possibly returned after the Battle of Guadalete in 711 and was elected leader of the Asturians, and the remnants of the \"gens Gothorum\" (the Hispano-Gothic aristocracy and the Hispano-Visigothic population who took refuge in the North). Historian Joseph F. O'Callaghan says an unknown number of them fled and took refuge in Asturias or Septimania. In Asturias they supported Pelagius's uprising, and joining with the indigenous leaders, formed a new aristocracy. \nThe population of the mountain region consisted of native Astures, Galicians, Cantabri, Basques and other groups unassimilated into Hispano-Gothic society, laying the foundations for the Kingdom of Asturias and starting the Astur-Leonese dynasty that spanned from 718 to 1037 and led the initial efforts in the Iberian peninsula to take back the territories then ruled by the Moors. Although the new dynasty first ruled in the mountains of Asturias, with the capital of the kingdom established initially in Cangas de On\u00eds, and was in its dawn mostly concerned with securing the territory and settling the monarchy, the latest kings (particularly Alfonso III of Asturias) emphasised the nature of the new kingdom as heir of that in Toledo and the restoration of the Visigothic nation in order to vindicate the expansion to the south. However, such claims have been overall dismissed by modern historiography, emphasizing the distinct, autochthonous nature of the Cantabro-Asturian and Vasconic domains with no continuation to the Gothic Kingdom of Toledo.\nPelagius's kingdom initially was little more than a gathering point for the existing guerrilla forces. During the first decades, the Asturian dominion over the different areas of the kingdom was still lax, and for this reason it had to be continually strengthened through matrimonial alliances with other powerful families from the north of the Iberian Peninsula. Thus, Ermesinda, Pelagius's daughter, was married to Alfonso, son of Dux Peter of Cantabria. Alfonso's son Fruela married Munia, a Basque from \u00c1lava, after crushing a Basque uprising (probably resistance). Their son is reported to be Alfonso II, while Alfonso I's daughter Adosinda married Silo, a local chief from the area of Flavionavia, Pravia.\nAlfonso's military strategy was typical of Iberian warfare at the time. Lacking the means needed for wholesale conquest of large territories, his tactics consisted of raids in the border regions of Vardulia. With the plunder he gained further military forces could be paid, enabling him to raid the Muslim cities of Lisbon, Zamora, and Coimbra. Alfonso I also expanded his realm westwards conquering Galicia.\nDuring the reign of King Alfonso II (791\u2013842), the kingdom was firmly established, and a series of Muslim raids caused the transfer of the Asturian capital to Oviedo. The king is believed to have initiated diplomatic contacts with the kings of Pamplona and the Carolingians, thereby gaining official recognition for his kingdom and his crown from the Pope and Charlemagne.\nThe bones of St. James the Great were proclaimed to have been found in Iria Flavia (present day Padr\u00f3n) in 813 or probably two or three decades later. The cult of the saint was transferred later to Compostela (from Latin \"campus stellae\", literally \"the star field\"), possibly in the early 10th century when the focus of Asturian power moved from the mountains over to Leon, to become the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n or Galicia-Leon. Santiago's were among many saint relics proclaimed to have been found across north-western Hispania. Pilgrims started to flow in from other Iberian Christian realms, sowing the seeds of the later Way of Saint James (11\u201312th century) that sparked the enthusiasm and religious zeal of continental Christian Europe for centuries.\nDespite numerous battles, neither the Umayyads nor the Asturians had sufficient forces to secure control over these northern territories. Under the reign of Ramiro, famed for the Battle of Clavijo, the border began to slowly move southward and Asturian holdings in Castile, Galicia, and Leon were fortified, and an intensive program of re-population of the countryside began in those territories. In 924 the Kingdom of Asturias became the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n, when Leon became the seat of the royal court.\nKingdom of Le\u00f3n (910\u20131230).\nAlfonso III of Asturias repopulated the strategically important city Leon and established it as his capital. King Alfonso began a series of campaigns to establish control over all the lands north of the Douro river. He reorganised his territories into the major duchies (Galicia and Portugal) and major counties (Salda\u00f1a and Castile), and fortified the borders with many castles. At his death in 910 the shift in regional power was completed as the kingdom became the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n. From this power base, his heir Ordo\u00f1o II was able to organize attacks against Toledo and even Seville.\nThe Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba was gaining power, and began to attack Leon. King Ordo\u00f1o allied with Navarre against Abd-al-Rahman, but they were defeated in Valdejunquera in 920. For the next 80 years, the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n suffered civil wars, Moorish attack, internal intrigues and assassinations, and the partial independence of Galicia and Castile, thus delaying the reconquest and weakening the Christian forces. It was not until the following century that the Christians started to see their conquests as part of a long-term effort to restore the unity of the Visigothic kingdom.\nThe only point during this period when the situation became hopeful for Leon was the reign of Ramiro II. King Ramiro, in alliance with Fern\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez of Castile and his retinue of \"caballeros villanos\", defeated the Caliph in Simancas in 939. After this battle, when the Caliph barely escaped with his guard and the rest of the army was destroyed, King Ramiro obtained 12 years of peace, but he had to give Gonz\u00e1lez the independence of Castile as payment for his help in the battle. After this defeat, Moorish attacks abated until Almanzor began his campaigns. Alfonso V finally regained control over his domains in 1002. Navarre, though attacked by Almanzor, remained intact.\nThe conquest of Leon did not include Galicia which was left to temporary independence after the withdrawal of the Leonese king. Galicia was conquered soon after (by Ferdinand, son of Sancho the Great, around 1038). Subsequent kings titled themselves kings of Galicia and Leon, instead of merely king of Leon as the two were in a personal union.\nAt the end of the 11th century, King Afonso VI of Le\u00f3n reached the Tagus (1085), repeating the same policy of alliances and developing collaboration with Frankish knights. The original \"repoblaci\u00f3n\" was then complete. His aim was to create a Hispanic empire like the Visigothic Kingdom (418\u2013720) to reclaim his hegemony over the entire Iberian Peninsula. Within this context, the territory between the Douro and the Tagus was repopulated and a western nucleus was formed in Portugal that wanted independence. This marks the beginning of the Portuguese \"Repovoa\u00e7\u00e3o\" ou \"Repovoamento\" occurred during the reigns of the House of Burgundy up to the middle of the thirteenth century when the Portuguese Reconquista was also brought to an end with the ultimate conquering of Gharb al-Andalus when in March 1249 the city of Faro was conquered by Afonso III of Portugal.\nKingdom of Castile (1037\u20131230).\nFerdinand I of Leon was the leading king of the mid-11th century. He conquered Coimbra and attacked the taifa kingdoms, often demanding the tributes known as parias. Ferdinand's strategy was to continue to demand parias until the taifa was greatly weakened both militarily and financially. He also repopulated the Borders with numerous \"fueros\". Following the Navarrese tradition, on his death in 1064 he divided his kingdom between his sons. His son Sancho II of Castile wanted to reunite the kingdom of his father and attacked his brothers, with a young noble at his side: Rodrigo D\u00edaz, later known as El Cid Campeador. Sancho was killed in the siege of Zamora by the traitor Bellido Dolfos (also known as Vellido Adolfo) in 1072. His brother Alfonso VI took over Leon, Castile and Galicia.\nAlfonso VI the Brave gave more power to the \"fueros\" and repopulated Segovia, \u00c1vila and Salamanca. Once he had secured the Borders, King Alfonso conquered the powerful Taifa kingdom of Toledo in 1085. Toledo, which was the former capital of the Visigoths, was a very important landmark, and the conquest made Alfonso renowned throughout the Christian world. However, this \"conquest\" was conducted rather gradually, and mostly peacefully, during the course of several decades. However, Toledo was not fully secured and integrated into Alfonso's kingdom until after a period of gradual resettlement and consolidation, during which Christian settlers were encouraged to move into the area.\nAlfonso VI was first and foremost a tactful monarch who chose to understand the kings of taifa and employed unprecedented diplomatic measures to attain political feats before considering the use of force. He adopted the title \"Imperator totius Hispaniae\" (\"Emperor of all Hispania\", referring to all the Christian kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula, and not just the modern country of Spain). Alfonso's more aggressive policy towards the taifas worried the rulers of those kingdoms, who called on the African Almoravids for help.\nKingdom of Pamplona / Kingdom of Navarre (824\u20131620).\nThe Kingdom of Pamplona primarily extended along either side of the Pyrenees on the Atlantic Ocean. The kingdom was formed when local leader \u00cd\u00f1igo Arista led a revolt against the regional Frankish authority and was elected or declared King in Pamplona (traditionally in 824), establishing a kingdom inextricably linked at this stage to their kinsmen, the muwallad Banu Qasi of Tudela.\nAlthough relatively weak until the early 11th century, Pamplona took a more active role after the accession of Sancho the Great (1004\u20131035). The kingdom expanded greatly under his reign, as it absorbed Castile, Leon, and what was to be Aragon, in addition to other small counties that would unite and become the Principality of Catalonia. This expansion also led to the independence of Galicia, as well as gaining overlordship over Gascony.\nIn the 12th century, however, the kingdom contracted to its core, and in 1162 King Sancho VI declared himself king of Navarre. Throughout its early history, the Navarrese kingdom engaged in frequent skirmishes with the Carolingian Empire, from which it maintained its independence, a key feature of its history until 1513.\nKingdom and Crown of Aragon (1035\u20131706).\nThe Kingdom of Aragon started off as an offshoot of the Kingdom of Navarre. It was formed when Sancho III of Navarre decided to divide his large realm among all his sons. Aragon was the portion of the realm which passed to Ramiro I of Aragon, an illegitimate son of Sancho III. The kingdoms of Aragon and Navarre were several times united in personal union until the death of Alfonso the Battler in 1135.\nIn 1137, the heiress of the kingdom married the count of Barcelona, and their son Alfonso II ruled from 1162 the combined possessions of his parents, resulting in the composite monarchy that modern historians call the Crown of Aragon. Alfonso successfully reincorporated the Principality of Tarragona into their realm, expelling the Norman d'Aguil\u00f3 family.\nIn the following centuries, the Crown of Aragon conquered a number of territories in the Iberian peninsula and the Mediterranean, including the kingdom of Valencia and the kingdom of Mallorca. James I of Aragon, also known as James the Conqueror, expanded his territories to the north, south and east. James also signed the Treaty of Corbeil (1258), in which the French king renounced to any feudal claim over Catalonia.\nEarly in his reign, James attempted to reunite the Aragonese and Navarrese crowns through a treaty with the childless Sancho VII of Navarre. But the Navarrese nobles rejected him, and chose Theobald IV of Champagne in his stead.\nLater on, Ferdinand II of Aragon, married Isabella of Castile, leading to a dynastic union which eventually gave birth to modern Spain, after the conquest of Upper Navarre (Navarre south of the Pyrenees) and the Emirate of Granada.\nKingdom of Portugal (1139\u20131249).\nIn 1139, after an overwhelming victory in the Battle of Ourique against the Almoravids, Afonso Henriques was proclaimed the first King of Portugal by his troops. According to the legend, Christ announced from heaven Afonso's great deeds, whereby he would establish the first Portuguese Cortes at Lamego and be crowned by the Primate Archbishop of Braga. In 1142 a group of Anglo-Norman crusaders on their way to the Holy Land helped King Afonso Henriques in a failed Siege of Lisbon (1142). In the Treaty of Zamora in 1143, Alfonso VII of Leon and Castile recognized Portuguese independence from the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n.\nIn 1147, Portugal captured Santar\u00e9m, and seven months later the city of Lisbon was also brought under Portuguese control after the Siege of Lisbon. By the papal bull Manifestis Probatum, Pope Alexander III recognized Afonso Henriques as King of Portugal in 1179.\nWith Portugal finally recognized as an independent kingdom by its neighbors, Afonso Henriques and his successors, aided by Crusaders and the military monastic orders the Knights Templar, the Order of Aviz or the Order of Saint James, pushed the Moors to the Algarve on the southern coast of Portugal. After several campaigns, the Portuguese part in the \"Reconquista\" came to an end with the definitive capture of the Algarve in 1249. With all of Portugal now under the control of Afonso III of Portugal, religious, cultural and ethnic groups became gradually homogenized.\nAfter the completion of the \"Reconquista\", the Portuguese territory was a Roman Catholic realm. Nonetheless, Denis of Portugal carried out a short war with Castile for possession of the towns of Serpa and Moura. After this, Denis avoided war. In 1297, he signed the Treaty of Alcanizes with Ferdinand IV of Castile, establishing a permanent border between the two kingdoms.\nDuring the suppression of the Knights Templar all over Europe, under the influence of Philip IV of France and Pope Clement V requesting its annihilation by 1312, King Denis reinstituted the Templars of Tomar as the Order of Christ in 1319. Denis believed that the Order's assets should by their nature stay in any given Order instead of being taken by the King, largely for the Templars' contribution to the \"Reconquista\" and the reconstruction of Portugal after the wars.\nThe experience gained during the battles of the \"Reconquista\" was fundamental to Conquest of Ceuta, the first step to the establishment of the Portuguese Empire. Likewise, the contact with Muslim's navigation techniques and sciences enabled the creation of Portuguese nautical innovations such as the caravel \u2013 the principal Portuguese ship during their voyages of exploration in the Age of Discovery.\nMinor Christian realms.\nMinor Christian realms were the Kingdom of Viguera (970\u20131005), the Lordship of Albarrac\u00edn (1167\u20131300), the Principality of Tarragona (1129\u20131173), and the (1094\u20131102).\nSouthern Islamic realms.\nUmayyads.\nDuring the 9th century the Berbers returned to North Africa in the aftermath of revolts. Many governors of large cities distant from the capital, C\u00f3rdoba, had planned to establish their independence. Then, in 929, the Emir of C\u00f3rdoba (Abd-ar-Rahman III), the leader of the Umayyad dynasty, declared himself Caliph, independent from the Abbasids in Baghdad. He took all the military, religious, and political power and reorganised the army and the bureaucracy.\nAfter regaining control over the dissident governors, Abd-ar-Rahman III tried to conquer the remaining Christian kingdoms of the Iberian peninsula, attacking them several times and forcing them back beyond the Cantabrian Mountains. Abd-ar-Rahman's grandson later became a puppet in the hands of the great Vizier Almanzor (\"al-Mansur\", \"the victorious\"). Almanzor waged several campaigns attacking and sacking Burgos, Leon, Pamplona, Barcelona, and Santiago de Compostela before his death in 1002.\n\"Taifas\".\nBetween Almanzor's death and 1031, al-Andalus suffered many civil wars, which ended in the division into the \"taifa\" kingdoms. The taifas were small kingdoms, established by the city governors. The result was many (up to 34) small kingdoms, each centered upon its capital. Their governors had no larger-scale vision of the Moorish presence in the Iberian peninsula and had no qualms about attacking their neighbouring kingdoms whenever they could gain advantage by doing so.\nThe split into the taifa states weakened the Islamic presence, and the Christian kingdoms further advanced as Alfonso VI of Leon and Castile conquered Toledo in 1085. Surrounded by enemies, taifa rulers sent a desperate appeal to the Berber chieftain Yusuf ibn Tashfin, leader of the Almoravids. \"Taifas\" reemerged when the Almoravid dynasty collapsed in the 1140s, and again when the Almohad Caliphate declined in the 1220s.\nAlmoravids.\nThe Almoravids were a Muslim militia composed of Berbers, and unlike previous Muslim rulers, they were not so tolerant towards Christians and Jews. Their armies entered the Iberian peninsula on several occasions (1086, 1088, 1093) and defeated King Alfonso at the Battle of Sagrajas in 1086, but initially their purpose was to unite all the taifas into a single Almoravid Caliphate. Their actions halted the southward expansion of the Christian kingdoms. Their only defeat came at Valencia in 1094, due to the actions of El Cid.\nMeanwhile, Navarre lost all importance under King Sancho IV, for he lost Rioja to Sancho II of Castile, and nearly became the vassal of Aragon. At his death, the Navarrese chose as their king Sancho Ram\u00edrez, King of Aragon, who thus became Sancho V of Navarre and I of Aragon. Sancho Ram\u00edrez gained international recognition for Aragon, uniting it with Navarre and expanding the borders south, conquering \"Wasqat\" Huesca deep in the valleys in 1096 and building a fort, El Castellar, 25\u00a0km from \"Saraqustat\" Zaragoza.\nCatalonia came under intense pressure from the taifas of Zaragoza and L\u00e9rida, as well as from internal disputes, as Barcelona suffered a dynastic crisis that led to open war among the smaller counties. But by the 1080s, the situation had calmed down, and the dominion of Barcelona over the smaller counties was restored.\nAlmohads.\nAfter a brief period of disintegration (the second Taifa period), the Almohads, the rising power in North Africa, took over most of \"al-Andalus\". However they were decisively defeated at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa (1212) by a Christian coalition, losing almost all the remaining lands of \"al-Andalus\" in the following decades. By 1252 only the Emirate of Granada remained intact but as a vassal state of Castile.\nGranada War and the end of Muslim rule.\nFerdinand and Isabella completed the \"Reconquista\" with a war against the Emirate of Granada that started in 1482 and ended with Granada's surrender on 2 January 1492. The Moors in Castile previously numbered \"half a million within the realm\". By 1492 some 100,000 had died or been enslaved, 200,000 had emigrated, and 200,000 remained in Castile. Many of the Muslim elite, including Granada's former Emir Muhammad XII, who had been given the area of the Alpujarras mountains as a principality, found life under Christian rule intolerable and emigrated to Fez in North Africa.\nIn 1497, Spanish forces took Melilla, west of Oran, and the island of Djerba, south of Tunis, and went on to more important gains, with the bloody seizure of Oran in 1509, and the capture of Bougie and Tripoli in 1510. The Spanish capture of Tripoli cost them some 300 men, while the inhabitants suffered between 3,000 and 5,000 killed and another 5,000\u20136,000 carried off as slaves. Soon thereafter, however, they faced competition from the rapidly expanding Ottoman Empire in the east and were pushed back.\nInfighting.\nChristian infighting.\nClashes and raids on bordering Andalusian lands did not keep the Christian kingdoms from battling among themselves or allying with Muslim kings. Some Muslim kings had Christian-born wives or mothers. Some Christian mercenaries, like El Cid, were contracted by taifa kings to fight against their neighbours. Indeed, El Cid's first battle experience was gained fighting for a Muslim state against a Christian state. At the Battle of Graus in 1063, he and other Castilians fought on the side of al-Muqtadir, Muslim sultan of Zaragoza, against the forces of Ramiro I of Aragon. There is even an instance of a crusade being declared against another Christian king in Hispania. Although Christian rulers Fern\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez of Castile and Ramiro II of Le\u00f3n had cooperated to defeat the Muslims at the Battle of Simancas (939), Fern\u00e1n attacked Ramiro soon after and the Leonese\u2013Castilian war that followed lasted until Ramiro's victory in 944. Ramiro II's death caused the war of the Leonese succession (951\u2013956) between his sons, and the winner Ordo\u00f1o III of Le\u00f3n concluded peace with caliph Abd al-Rahman III of C\u00f3rdoba.\nAfter the defeat of Alfonso VIII, King of Castile, at Alarcos, Kings Alfonso IX of Leon and Sancho VII of Navarre entered an alliance with the Almohads and invaded Castile in 1196. By the end of the year Sancho VII had dropped out of the war under Papal pressure. Early in 1197, at the request of Sancho I, King of Portugal, Pope Celestine III declared a crusade against Alfonso IX and released his subjects from their responsibilities to the king, declaring that \"the men of his realm shall be absolved from their fidelity and his dominion by authority of the apostolic see.\" Together the Kings of Portugal, Castile, and Aragon invaded Leon. In the face of this onslaught combined with pressure from the Pope, Alfonso IX was finally forced to sue for peace in October 1197.\nIn the late years of \"al-Andalus\", Castile had the might to conquer the remnants of the kingdom of Granada, but the kings preferred to wait and claim the tribute of the Muslim \"parias\". The trade of Granadan goods and the parias were a major means by which African gold entered medieval Europe.\nMuslim infighting.\nSimilarly, there was frequent Muslim infighting throughout the existence of al-Andalus. The Abbasid Revolution (747\u2013750) divided Muslim rulers in Iberia into the pro-Abbasid Caliphate faction (based in Baghdad) and the pro-Umayyad faction (reconstituted as the Emirate of C\u00f3rdoba). Charlemagne's failed 778 campaign into Iberia was prompted by the invitation of the pro-Abbasid governor of Barcelona, Sulayman al-Arabi, which led to a brief Abbasid-Carolingian Alliance against the Umayyads. During the Fitna of al-Andalus (1009\u20131031), the Umayyad-run Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba fell apart into rival taifas headed by Islamic emirs warring each other. After the Christian king of Castile and Le\u00f3n conquered Toledo in 1085, the emirs requested Yusuf ibn Tashfin, leader of the strict Islamic Almoravid sect, to come to their defence, which he did at the Battle of Sagrajas (1086). However, Yusuf soon turned on the Muslim emirs of Spain, defeating them all and conquering their lands by 1091. A similar scenario occurred in 1147\u20131157, when the Almoravid dynasty fell, a Second Taifas period happened, and the Muslim-controlled cities of al-Andalus were conquered by the new Almohad Caliphate. The War of the Granada succession (1482\u20131492) took place after the deposition of emir Abu'l-Hasan Ali of Granada by his son Muhammad XII of Granada; the deposed emir's brother Muhammad XIII of Granada also joined the fight. This succession conflict took place simultaneously with the Granada War, and was ended only by the Castilian conquest in 1492.\nChristian repopulation.\nThe \"Reconquista\" was a process not only of war and conquest, but also of repopulation. Christian kings moved their own people to locations abandoned by Muslims in order to have a population capable of defending the borders. The main repopulation areas were the Douro Basin (the northern plateau), the high Ebro valley (La Rioja) and central Catalonia. The repopulation of the Douro Basin took place in two distinct phases. North of the river, between the 9th and 10th centuries, the \"pressure\" (or \"presura\") system was employed. South of the Douro, in the 10th and 11th centuries, the \"presura\" led to the \"charters\" (\"forais\" or \"fueros\"). \"Fueros\" were used even south of the Central Range.\nThe \"presura\" referred to a group of peasants who crossed the mountains and settled in the abandoned lands of the Douro Basin. Asturian laws promoted this system, for instance granting a peasant all the land he was able to work and defend as his own property. Of course, Asturian and Galician minor nobles and clergymen sent their own expeditions with the peasants they maintained. This led to very feudalised areas, such as Leon and Portugal, whereas Castile, an arid land with vast plains and harsh climate, only attracted peasants with no hope in Biscay. As a consequence, Castile was governed by a single count, but had a largely non-feudal territory with many free peasants. \"Presuras\" also appear in Catalonia, when the count of Barcelona ordered the Bishop of Urgell and the count of Gerona to repopulate the plains of Vic.\nDuring the 10th century and onwards, cities and towns gained more importance and power, as commerce reappeared and the population kept growing. \"Fueros\" were charters documenting the privileges and usages given to all the people repopulating a town. The \"fueros\" provided a means of escape from the feudal system, as \"fueros\" were only granted by the monarch. As a result, the town council was dependent on the monarch alone and, in turn, was required to provide \"auxilium\"\u2014aid or troops\u2014for their monarch. The military force of the towns became the \"caballeros villanos\". The first \"fuero\" was given by count Fern\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez to the inhabitants of Castrojeriz in the 940's. The most important towns of medieval Hispania had \"fueros\", or \"forais\". In Navarre, \"fueros\" were the main repopulating system. Later on, in the 12th century, Aragon also employed the system; for example, the \"fuero\" of Teruel, which was one of the last fueros, in the early 13th century.\nFrom the mid-13th century on, no more charters were granted, as the demographic pressure had disappeared and other means of re-population were created. \"Fueros\" remained as city charters until the 18th century in Aragon, Valencia and Catalonia and until the 19th century in Castile and Navarre. \"Fueros\" had an immense importance for those living under them, who were prepared to go to war to defend their rights under the charter. In the 19th century, the abolition of the \"fueros\" in Navarre would be one of the causes of the Carlist Wars. In Castile, disputes over the system contributed to the war against Charles I (Castilian War of the Communities).\nChristian military culture.\nNon-religious motives.\nJim Bradbury (2004) noted that the Christian belligerents in the \"Reconquista\" were not all equally motivated by religion, and that a distinction should be made between 'secular rulers' on the one hand, and on the other hand Christian military orders which came from elsewhere (including the three main orders of Knights Templar, Knights Hospitaller and Teutonic Knights), or were established inside Iberia (such as those of Santiago, Alc\u00e1ntara and Calatrava). '[The Knights] were more committed to religious war than some of their secular counterparts, were opposed to treating with Muslims and carried out raids and even atrocities, such as decapitating Muslim prisoners.'\nOn the other hand, Christian armies sometimes forged temporary alliances with Islamic emirs, and Christian mercenaries were quite willing to fight for Arab and Berber rulers if the price was right. El Cid is a well-known example of a Christian mercenary leader who was in paid military service of the Islamic kings of Zaragoza for years. Mercenaries were an important factor, as many kings did not have enough soldiers available. Norsemen, Flemish spearmen, Frankish knights, Moorish mounted archers (archers who travelled on horseback), and Berber light cavalry were the main types of mercenaries available and used in the conflict.\nChristian cavalry and infantry.\nMedieval Christian armies mainly comprised two types of forces: the cavalry (mostly nobles, but including commoner knights from the 10th century on) and the infantry, or \"peones\" (peasants). Infantry only went to war if needed, which was not frequent. In an atmosphere of constant conflict, warfare and daily life were strongly intertwined during this period. These armies reflected the need for society to be on constant alert during the first chapters of the Reconquista. These forces were capable of moving long distances in short times.\nCavalry tactics in Hispania involved knights approaching the enemy, throwing javelins, then withdrawing to a safe distance before commencing another assault. Once the enemy formation was sufficiently weakened, the knights charged with thrusting spears (lances did not arrive in Hispania until the 11th century). There were three types of knights (\"caballeros\"): royal knights, noble knights (\"caballeros hidalgos\"), and commoner knights (\"caballeros villanos\", or \"mounted soldier from a villa\"). Royal knights were mainly nobles with a close relationship with the king, and thus claimed a direct Gothic inheritance.\nRoyal knights in the early stages of the Reconquista were equipped with mail hauberk, kite shield, a long sword (designed to fight from the horse), javelins, spears and an axe. Noble knights came from the ranks of the \"infanzones\" or lower nobles, whereas the commoner knights were not noble but were wealthy enough to afford a horse. Uniquely in Europe, these horsemen comprised a militia cavalry force with no feudal links, being under the sole control of the king or the count of Castile because of \"fueros\" (charters) with the crown. Both noble and common knights wore padded armour and carried javelins, spears and round-tasselled shield (influenced by Moorish shields), as well as a sword.\nThe \"peones\" were peasants who went to battle in service of their feudal lord. Poorly equipped, with bows and arrows, spears and short swords, they were mainly used as auxiliary troops. Their function in battle was to contain the enemy troops until the cavalry arrived and to block the enemy infantry from charging the knights. The longbow, the composite bow, and the crossbow were the basic types of bows and were especially popular in the infantry.\nEquipment.\nIn the early Middle Ages in Hispania, armour was typically made of leather, with iron scales. Head protections consisted of a round helmet with nose protector (influenced by the designs used by Vikings, who attacked during the 8th and 9th centuries) and a chain mail headpiece. Shields were often round or kidney-shaped, except for the kite-shaped designs used by the royal knights. Usually adorned with geometric designs, crosses or tassels, shields were made out of wood and had a leather cover.\nSteel swords were the most common weapon. The cavalry used long double-edged swords and the infantry short, single-edged ones. Guards were either semicircular or straight, but always highly ornamented with geometrical patterns. Spears and javelins were up to 1.5 metres long and had an iron tip. The double-axe\u2014made of iron, 30\u00a0cm long, and possessing an extremely sharp edge\u2014was designed to be equally useful as a thrown weapon or in close combat. Maces and hammers were not common, but some specimens have remained and are thought to have been used by members of the cavalry.\nTechnological changes.\nThis style of warfare remained dominant in the Iberian Peninsula until the late 11th century, when lance tactics entered from France, although the traditional horse javelin-shot techniques continued to be used. In the 12th and 13th centuries, soldiers typically carried a sword, a lance, a javelin, and either bow and arrows or crossbow and darts/bolts. Armor consisted of a coat of mail over a quilted jacket, extending at least to the knees, a helmet or iron cap, and bracers protecting the arms and thighs, either metal or leather.\nShields were round or triangular, made of wood, covered with leather, and protected by an iron band; the shields of knights and nobles would bear the family's coat of arms. Knights rode in both the Muslim style, \"a la jineta\" (i.e. the equivalent of a modern jockey's seat), a short stirrup strap and bended knees allowed for better control and speed, or in the French style, \"a la brida\", a long stirrup strap allowed for more security in the saddle (i.e. the equivalent of the modern cavalry seat, which is more secure) when acting as heavy cavalry. Horses were occasionally fitted with a coat of mail as well.\nAround the 14th and 15th centuries heavy cavalry gained a predominant role, including knights wearing full plate armor.\nConversions and expulsions.\nThe new Christian hierarchy demanded heavy taxes from non-Christians and gave them rights, such as in the Treaty of Granada (1491) only for Moors in recently Islamic Granada. On 30 July 1492, all the Jewish community\u2014some 200,000 people\u2014were forcibly expelled. The next year, the Alhambra decree ordered the expulsion of practicing Jews, leading many of them to convert to Catholicism. In 1502, Queen Isabella I declared that conversion to Catholicism was compulsory within the Kingdom of Castile. Holy Roman Emperor Charles V imposed the same religious requirement on Moors in the Kingdom of Aragon in 1526, forcing its Muslim population to convert during the Revolt of the Germanies.\nSpanish Inquisition.\nMaking things more complex were the many former Muslims and Jews known as \"Moriscos\", \"Marranos\", and \"Conversos\", who shared ancestors in common with many Christians, especially among the aristocracy, causing much concern over loyalty and attempts by the aristocracy to hide their non-Christian ancestry. Some\u2014the numbers are debated\u2014continued to secretly practice their religions and use their languages well into the sixteenth century. Those that the Spanish Inquisition found to be secretly practicing Islam or Judaism were executed, imprisoned, or exiled.\nNevertheless, all those deemed to be \"New Christians\" were repeatedly suspected of various crimes against the Spanish state, including continued practice of Islam or Judaism. New Christians were subject to many discriminatory practices starting in the sixteenth century.\nClassifications and later consequences.\nThe many advances and retreats created several social types:\nLegacy.\nSince the 19th century, traditional Western and especially Iberian historiography has stressed the existence of the \"Reconquista\", a continual phenomenon by which the Christian Iberian kingdoms opposed and conquered the Muslim kingdoms, understood as a common enemy who had militarily seized territory from native Iberian Christians. However, modern scholarship has challenged this concept of a \"reconquista\" as a national myth tied to Spanish nationalism. The concept has served the idea \"that Spain is a nation shaped against Islam\", contributing to \"a largely biased and distorted vision of the Iberian medieval past, aimed at delegitimizing the Islamic presence (al-Andalus) and therefore at legitimizing the Christian conquest of the Muslim territory.\" Among other arguments, one of those advanced by scholars is that \"no military campaign lasts eight centuries.\" The term \"reconquista\" in this sense first appeared in the 19th century, and only entered the dictionary of the Royal Spanish Academy in 1936, with the rise of Francisco Franco. The concept of the reconquista continues to have significance and has even experienced a resurgence in modern politics\u2014especially for the extreme right Spanish party Vox, but also more broadly among xenophobic and especially Islamophobic conservatives in the West, with the influence of the doctrine of a \"Clash of Civilizations\".\nThe popular hero El Cid, whose name is highly associated with the Reconquista, at one part in his career fought for the Muslim rulers of Zaragoza, whom he defended from its traditional enemy, the Christian Aragon. The most important achievement of El Cid's career, the conquest of the kingdom-city of Valencia, was actually achieved in close alliance with the Banu Hud and other Muslim dynasties opposed to the Almoravids.\nFrench emulation.\nIn 1558, the armies of King Henry II of France managed to conquer the city of Calais, which had been under English rule for centuries. Queen Mary I of England considered the loss of Calais as the greatest disaster of her reign. The region around Calais, then-known as the \"Calaisis\", was renamed the \"Pays Reconquis\" (\"Reconquered Country\") in commemoration of its recovery by the French. The French were certainly aware of the Spanish Reconquista, and since at the time Philip II of Spain was Queen Mary's consort, use of this term might have been intended as a deliberate snub to him.\nFestivals in modern Spain and Portugal.\nCurrently, festivals called \"moros y cristianos\" (Spanish), \"moros i cristians\" (Catalan), \"mouros e crist\u00e3os\" (Portuguese) and \"mouros e cristi\u00e1ns\" (Galician), which all mean \"Moors and Christians\", recreate the fights as colorful parades with elaborate garments and many fireworks, especially on the central and southern towns of the Land of Valencia, like Alcoi, Ontinyent or Villena.\nPersistent effects.\nA 2016 study found that the \"rate of Reconquest\"\u2014how rapidly the Christian frontier was expanded\u2014has persistent effects on the Spanish economy to this day. After an initial phase of military conquest, Christians states incorporated the conquered land. When large frontier regions were incorporated at once, the land was mostly given to the nobility and the military orders, with negative effects on long-term development. The incorporation of small regions, on the other hand, generally allowed for the participation of individual settlers and was more likely to fall under the auspices of the crown. This led to a more equitable distribution of land and greater social equality, with positive effects on long-term development.\nReverberations.\nAs the Christian kingdoms completed their conquest of territory on the Iberian Peninsula, they shifted their impetus elsewhere, even to the Maghreb, which is located across the Strait of Gibraltar. A Castilian Crown-sanctioned punitive expedition against Tetouan, a corsair stronghold, was launched as early as 1399\u20131400. The conquest of Ceuta in 1415 marked the beginning of Portuguese expansion in Africa. Thereby, it allowed Portugal to exert control over Castilian and Aragonese trade through the Strait, and it also allowed Portugal to establish a powerbase for the launching of raid expeditions in Muslim-ruled lands. Some 15th-century political writers promoted the idea of a \"Gothic Monarchy\", an heir to Rome, that included territory across the Strait. \nThe African enterprise which was undertaken during the rule of the Catholic Monarchs was nominally endorsed by papal bulls and it was also financed with donations which were used to pay the crusade tax, even if it was viewed with some suspicion by the Papacy. Conquest efforts in Africa on the part of the Catholic Monarchy by and large stalled following the death of Ferdinand II of Aragon. The model of conquest and repopulation by Christian powers in the Peninsula was however never reproduced in Northern Africa, and with the conquered territory\u2014a fortified mark with very few fortresses scattered along an extensive coastline\u2014merely adopting a defensive role, it allowed for Ottoman expansion in the region.\nThe Portuguese warred with the Ottoman Caliphate in the Mediterranean, Indian Ocean and Southeast Asia as the Portuguese conquered the Ottomans' allies: the Sultanate of Adal in East Africa, the Sultanate of Delhi in South Asia and the Sultanate of Malacca in Southeast Asia.\nChristopher Columbus's initial 1492 voyage to the Americas was predicated on the completion of the Granada War, with the Spanish monarchy only able to assent to his overseas journeys once it had completed the process of defeating the Moors. Columbus's views of the New World and the Christian convictions that shaped his actions there were influenced by historical European anti-Muslim ideas that had underpinned the Reconquista itself; he believed that by his voyaging, he would be able to reach the Grand Khan of Asia and create a coalition that could attack the Middle East from both sides and thus bring Jerusalem back under Christian rule.\nFar-right motif.\nAlong with the rhetoric of the crusades, the rhetoric of the 'Reconquista' serves as a rallying point in the political discourse of the contemporary far-right in Spain, Portugal and, more broadly, it also serves as a rallying point in the political discourse of the far-right in Europe. Frequently, references to the Reconquista and the crusades are allegorically played as internet meme by 21st-century online far-right groups which seek to convey anti-Muslim sentiments. The theme has also been used as a major rallying point by identitarian groups in France and Italy.\n\"D\u00eda de la Toma de Granada\", the annual commemoration of the surrender of Sultan Boabdil in Granada on 2 January acquired a markedly nationalistic undertone during the early years of the Francoist regime and, since the death of the dictator Francisco Franco in 1975, it has served as glue for extreme right groups by facilitating their open-air physical gatherings and providing them with an occasion which they can use to explicitly state their political demands. A Spanish Legion unit usually parades and sings \"El novio de la muerte\" (\"Boyfriend of death\"). The far right has also waged a culture war by claiming dates in the history of the Reconquista, such as the aforementioned 2 January or 2 February, regional festivities for the related autonomous communities (Andalusia and Murcia).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26551", "revid": "49980404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26551", "title": "Raku ware", "text": "Type of Japanese pottery traditionally used in tea ceremonies\n is a type of Japanese pottery traditionally used in Japanese tea ceremonies, most often in the form of \"chawan\" tea bowls. It is traditionally characterised by being hand-shaped rather than thrown, fairly porous vessels, which result from low firing temperatures, lead glazes and the removal of pieces from the kiln while still glowing hot. In the traditional Japanese process, the fired raku piece is removed from the hot kiln and is allowed to cool in the open air. \nThe Western version of raku was developed in the 20th century by studio potters. Typically wares are fired at a high temperature, and after removing pieces from the kiln, the wares are placed in an open-air container filled with combustible material, which is not a traditional Raku practice in Japan. The Western process can give a great variety of colors and surface effects, making it very popular with studio and amateur potters.\nHistory.\nIn the 16th century, Sen no Riky\u016b, the Japanese tea master, was involved with the construction of the Jurakudai and had a tile-maker, named Ch\u014djir\u014d, produce hand-moulded tea bowls for use in the wabi-styled tea ceremony that was Riky\u016b's ideal. The resulting tea bowls made by Ch\u014djir\u014d were initially referred to as \"ima-yaki\" (\"contemporary ware\") and were also distinguished as Juraku-yaki, from the red clay (Juraku) that they employed. Toyotomi Hideyoshi presented Jokei, Ch\u014djir\u014d's son, with a seal that bore the Chinese character for \"raku\" (\"Enjoyment\"). Raku then became the name of the family that produced the wares. Both the name and the ceramic style have been passed down through the family (sometimes by adoption) to the present 16th generation (Raku Kichizaemon XVI). The name and the style of ware has become influential in both Japanese culture and literature.\nIn Japan, there are \"branch kilns\" (\"wakigama\"), in the raku-ware tradition, that have been founded by Raku-family members or potters who apprenticed at the head family's studio. One of the most well-known of these is \u014chi-yaki (\u014chi ware).\nAfter the publication of a manual in the 18th century, raku ware was also made in numerous workshops by amateur potters and tea practitioners in Kyoto, and by professional and amateur potters around Japan.\nRaku ware marked an important point in the historical development of Japanese ceramics, as it was the first ware to use a seal mark and the first to focus on close collaboration between potter and patron. Other famous Japanese clay artists of this period include D\u014dny\u016b (grandson of Ch\u014djir\u014d, also known as Nonk\u014d; 1574\u20131656), Hon'ami K\u014detsu (1556\u20131637) and Ogata Kenzan (1663\u20131743).\nIt influenced H\u014draku ware from Nagoya, Owari province in the later Edo period.\nWestern raku.\nBernard Leach is credited with bringing Raku to the west. In 1911 he attended a party where he witnessed raku firing. This was his first experience of ceramics. Although he continued to experiment with raku firing for a few years following his return to England in 1920, the technique was largely forgotten after the 1930s. \nRaku became popular with American potters in the late 1950s with the help of Paul Soldner. Americans kept the general firing process, that is, heating the pottery quickly to high temperatures and cooling it quickly, but continued to form their own unique style of raku.\nRaku's unpredictable results and intense color attracts modern potters. These patterns and color result from the harsh cooling process and the amount of oxygen that is allowed to reach the pottery. Depending on what effect the artist wants, the pottery is either instantly cooled in water, cooled slowly in the open air, or placed in a barrel filled with combustible material, such as newspaper, covered, and allowed to smoke. Water immediately cools the pottery, stopping the chemical reactions of the glaze and fixing the colors. The combustible material produces smoke, which stains the unglazed portions of the pottery black. The amount of oxygen that is allowed during the firing and cooling process affects the color of the resultant glaze and the amount of crackle.\nUnlike traditional Japanese raku, which is mainly hand-built bowls of modest design, western raku tends to be vibrant in color, and comes in many shapes and sizes. Western raku can be anything from an elegant vase to an eccentric abstract sculpture. Although some do hand build, most western potters use throwing wheels while creating their raku piece. Western culture has even created a new sub-branch of raku called horse hair raku, pieces that are often white with squiggly black lines and smoke-like smudges. These effects are created by placing horse hair, feathers, or even sugar on the pottery as it is removed from the kiln and still extremely hot.\nWestern raku artists include the French ceramist Claude Champy, who received the Suntory Museum Grand Prix; Jane Malvisi, a British artist making raku figurines, Alicja Bu\u0142awka-Fankidejska at the Academy of Fine Arts in Gda\u0144sk; artist Eva D\u00edaz Torres introduced the practice to Uruguay.\nKilns and firing.\nThe type and the size of kilns that are used in raku are crucial in the outcome. One aspect that can affect the results is the use of electric versus gas kilns. Electric kilns allow easy temperature control. Gas kilns, which comprise brick or ceramic fibers, can be used in either oxidation or reduction firing and use propane or natural gas. Gas kilns also heat more quickly than electric kilns, but it is more difficult to maintain temperature control. There is a noteworthy difference when using an updraft kiln rather than a downdraft kiln. An updraft kiln has shelves that trap heat. This effect creates uneven temperatures throughout the kiln. Conversely, a downdraft kiln pulls air down a separate stack on the side and allows a more even temperature throughout and allows the work to be layered on shelves.\nIt is important for a kiln to have a door that is easily opened and closed, because, when the artwork in the kiln has reached the right temperature (over 1000 degrees Celsius), it must be quickly removed and put in a metal or tin container with combustible material, which reduces the pot and leaves certain colors and patterns.\nThe use of a reduction chamber at the end of the raku firing was introduced by the American potter Paul Soldner in the 1960s to compensate for the difference in atmosphere between wood-fired Japanese raku kilns and gas-fired American kilns. Typically, pieces removed from the hot kiln are placed in masses of combustible material (e.g., straw, sawdust, or newspaper) to provide a reducing atmosphere for the glaze and to stain the exposed body surface with carbon. The first Japanese-style kiln in the west was built by Tsuronosuke Matsubayashi at Leach Pottery, St Ives in 1922.\nWestern raku potters rarely use lead as a glaze ingredient, due to its serious level of toxicity, but may use other metals as glaze ingredients. Japanese potters substitute a non-lead frit. Although almost any low-fire glaze can be used, potters often use specially formulated glaze recipes that \"crackle\" or craze (present a cracked appearance), because the crazing lines take on a dark color from the carbon.\nWestern raku is typically made from a stoneware clay body, bisque fired at and glost or glaze fired (the final firing) between , which falls into the cone 06 firing temperature range. The process is known for its unpredictability, particularly when reduction is forced, and pieces may crack or even explode due to thermal shock. Pots may be returned to the kiln to re-oxidize if firing results do not meet the potter's expectations, although each successive firing has a high chance of weakening the overall structural integrity of the pot. Pots that are exposed to thermal shock multiple times can break apart in the kiln, as they are removed from the kiln, or when they are in the reduction chamber.\nThe glaze firing times for raku ware are short: an hour or two as opposed to up to 16 hours for high-temperature cone 10 stoneware firings. This is due to several factors: raku glazes mature at a much lower temperature (under , as opposed to almost for high-fire stoneware); kiln temperatures can be raised rapidly; and the kiln is loaded and unloaded while hot and can be kept hot between firings.\nBecause temperature changes are rapid during the raku process, clay bodies used for raku ware must be able to cope with significant thermal stress. The usual way to add strength to the clay body and to reduce thermal expansion is to incorporate a high percentage of quartz, grog, or kyanite into the body before the pot is formed. At high additions, quartz can increase the risk of dunting or shivering. Therefore, kyanite is often the preferred material, as it contributes both mechanical strength and, in amounts up to 20%, significantly reduces thermal expansion. Although any clay body can be used, white stoneware clay bodies are unsuitable for the western raku process unless some material is added to deal with thermal shock. Porcelain, however, is often used but it must be thinly thrown.\nAesthetic considerations include clay color and fired surface texture, as well as the clay's chemical interaction with raku glazes.\nIn a craft conference in Kyoto in 1979, a heated debate sprang up between Western raku artists Paul Soldner and the youngest in the dynastic raku succession, Kichiemon (of the fourteenth generation of the \"Raku\" family of potters), concerning the right to use the title \"raku\". The Japanese artists maintain that any work by other craftspeople should take their own name, (i.e., Soldner-ware, Hirsh-ware), as that was how \"raku\" was intended.\nRaku in the west has been abstracted and is now a more philosophical approach with the emphasis on the spontaneity of surface pattern creation rather than purely a firing technique. Consequently, this has expanded its application from pots to sculptural ceramics.\nReduction process.\nReduction firing is when the kiln atmosphere, which is full of combustible material, is heated up. \"Reduction is incomplete combustion of fuel, caused by a shortage of oxygen, which produces carbon monoxide\" (Arbuckle, 4). Eventually, all of the available oxygen is used. This then draws oxygen from the glaze and the clay to allow the reaction to continue. Oxygen serves as the limiting reactant in this scenario because the reaction that creates fire needs a constant supply of it to continue; when the glaze and the clay come out hardened, this means that the oxygen was subtracted from the glaze and the clay to accommodate the lack of oxygen in the atmosphere. Consequently, the Raku piece appears black or white, depending on the amount of oxygen that was lost from each area of the piece. The empty spaces that occur from the reduction of oxygen are filled in by carbon molecules in the atmosphere of the container, which makes the piece blacker in spots where more oxygen was retracted.\nRaku reduction.\nIn the western style of raku firing, the aluminium container acts as a reduction chamber, which is a container that allows the carbon dioxide to pass through a small hole. A reduction atmosphere is created by closing the container. A reduction atmosphere induces a reaction between oxygen and the clay minerals, which affects the color. It also affects the metal elements of the glaze. Reduction is a decrease in oxidation number. Closing the can reduces the oxygen content after the combustible materials such as sawdust catch fire and forces the reaction to pull oxygen from the glazes and the clay minerals. For example, luster gets its color from deprivation of oxygen. The reduction agent is a substance from which electrons are being taken by another substance. The reaction uses oxygen from the atmosphere within the reduction tube and, to continue, it receives the rest of the oxygen from the glazes. This leaves ions and iridescent luster behind, creating a metallic effect. Pieces with no glaze have nowhere to get the oxygen from, so they take it from clay minerals. This atmosphere will turn clay black, producing a matte color.\nDesign considerations.\nRaku is a unique form of pottery making; what makes it unique is the range of designs that can be created by simply altering certain variables. These variables\u2014which include wax resist, glazes, slips, temperature, and timing\u2014ultimately determine the outcome when firing a piece of clay.\nWax resist, which is painted over the bare clay, is a suspension of wax in water; the glaze does not cover the area where the wax resist was applied, thus creating a design. When in the kiln, the wax melts off and the carbon that results from oxygen reduction replaces it. Raku glazes contain alumina, which has a very high melting point, so that they remain in place and are not replaced by carbon as the wax is. Any unglazed areas turn black due to the carbon given off from the reduction of oxygen. Next, the clay is moved from the kiln to a container, typically a trashcan, which contains combustible organic materials such as leaves, sawdust, or paper.\nObvara is a raku form that uses a yeast solution that creates an earthy tone on secondary firing. The obvara mixture, made from yeast, flour, sugar, and water, is usually opaque cream in color. The temperature at which the pottery piece is lowered into the obvara solution is usually 800 degrees Celsius. After dipping the piece into the obvara solution, it is removed and dipped into water to \"seal\" the design via rapid cooling. \nCrackle glazes contain metallic compounds including metals such as copper, iron, and cobalt. After the glaze has reached a certain temperature, the metal in the glaze reacts taking on a specific color. For example, cobalt produces dark blue, and copper usually produces green, but can also produce a red when the oxygen in the glaze is completely gone. The change in temperature and in the reduction oxidation (redox) process sometimes cause cracking or crazing. Crazing is a pattern of surface cracking in the glaze of a piece. The timing of removal and placement in water directly affects the shades of each color.\nCopper glazes are unlike crackle glazes. While the latter are deliberately subjected to cooling and the oxidation process between the kiln and the reduction chamber so the glaze will crackle, the copper glazed pieces are transferred from the kiln to the reduction chamber as quickly as possible. This causes the glaze to have as much reduction as possible and can pull out vibrant flashes of color from the glaze and end with either a matte or glossy finish depending on the type of glaze used.\nNaked Raku is done by coating a section of the exterior of the piece with slip, taping off portions of the piece to leave parts of the body exposed to the firing; these areas will turn black after reduction. The piece is then fired in the kiln at lower temperatures until the slip has dried, and then further fired to . At this point, the piece is removed from the kiln and placed into the reduction chamber. In reduction the carbon will soak into the clay where the slip has cracked and turn black, but where the slip is stuck on the clay will keep its natural color. The slip can be easily removed by hand from the cooled piece to reveal the design.\nHorse hair: Horse hair decoration is a process where the piece remains unglazed; when it reaches temperature in the kiln it is placed in the open air rather than the reduction chamber, and horse hair is strategically arranged on the piece. The horse hair immediately burns and leaves thin linear markings on the pottery.\nIn literature.\nHiroshi Teshigahara made the film \"Rikyu\", which is a nearly documentary story showing how Sen no Rikyu met Chojiro, who made the first genuine Raku tea bowl (chawan) and how Rikyu trained the shogun Toyotomi Hideyoshi in the tea ceremony with Raku chawans.(Ashton D 1997).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26552", "revid": "1319733933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26552", "title": "Roy Orbison", "text": "American singer-songwriter (1936\u20131988)\nRoy Kelton Orbison (April 23, 1936 \u2013 December 6, 1988) was an American singer, songwriter, and guitarist known for his distinctive and powerful voice, complex song structures, and dark, emotional ballads. Orbison's most successful periods were in the early 1960s and the late 1980s. Many of Orbison's songs conveyed vulnerability at a time when most male performers projected strength. He performed with minimal motion and in black clothes, matching his dyed black hair and dark sunglasses.\nBorn in Texas, Orbison began singing in a country-and-western band as a teenager. He was signed by Sam Phillips of Sun Records in 1956 after being urged by \nJohnny Cash. Elvis was leaving Sun and Phillips was looking to replace him. His first Sun recording, \"Ooby Dooby\", was a direct musical sound-a-like of Elvis's early Sun recordings. He had some success at Sun, but enjoyed his greatest success with Monument Records. From 1960 to 1966, 22 of Orbison's singles reached the \"Billboard\" top 40. He wrote or co-wrote almost all of his own top-10 hits, including \"Only the Lonely\" (1960), \"Running Scared\" (1961), \"Crying\" (1961), \"In Dreams\" (1963), \"Oh, Pretty Woman\" (1964), \"I Drove All Night\" (1987), \"She's a Mystery to Me\" (1988), \"You Got It\" (1988), and \"California Blue\" (1988).\nAfter the mid-1960s, Orbison suffered a number of personal tragedies, and his career faltered. He experienced a resurgence in popularity in the 1980s, following the success of several cover versions of his songs. In 1988, he co-founded the Traveling Wilburys supergroup with George Harrison, Bob Dylan, Tom Petty, and Jeff Lynne. Orbison died of a heart attack that December at age 52. One month later, his song \"You Got It\" (1989) was released as a solo single, becoming his first hit to reach the top 10 in both the US and UK in nearly 25 years.\nOrbison's honors include inductions into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1987, the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1989, and the Musicians Hall of Fame and Museum in 2014. He received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award and five other Grammy Awards. \"Rolling Stone\" placed him at number 37 on its list of the \"Greatest Artists of All Time\" and number 13 on its list of the \"100 Greatest Singers of All Time\". In 2002, \"Billboard\" magazine listed him at number 74 on its list of the Top 600 recording artists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nOrbison was born on April 23, 1936, in Vernon, Texas. He was the second of three sons born to Orbie Lee Orbison (1913\u20131984) and Nadine Vesta Shults (1914\u20131992). His father was an oil-field driller, who struggled to find work after the Great Depression, and his mother enjoyed painting and writing poetry. His direct paternal ancestry was traced to Thomas Orbison (born 1715) from Lurgan, Ireland who settled in the Province of Pennsylvania in the middle of the 18th century. According to \"The Authorized Roy Orbison\", a biography written by Orbison's son Alex, the family moved to Fort Worth in 1942 to find work in the aircraft factories. Due to eyesight problems, Roy Orbison wore thick glasses from the age of four.\nOrbison's father gave him a guitar on his sixth birthday, and he was taught how to play it by his father and older brother. He recalled, \"I was finished, you know, for anything else\" by the time he was seven, and music became the focus of his life. His major musical influence as a youth was country and western swing music. He was particularly moved by Lefty Frizzell's singing, with its slurred syllables, leading Orbison to adopt the stage name \"Lefty Wilbury\" during his time with the Traveling Wilburys. He also enjoyed Hank Williams, Bob Wills, Moon Mullican, and Jimmie Rodgers. One of the first musicians that he heard in person was Ernest Tubb, playing on the back of a truck in Fort Worth. Orbison also said that a formative experience was the regular singing sessions at Fort Worth, where he was surrounded by soldiers who were intensely emotional because they were about to be sent to the front line in World War II. In West Texas, he was exposed to rhythm and blues, western swing, Tex-Mex (Tejano music), the orchestral arrangements of Mantovani, and Cajun music. The Cajun favorite \"Jole Blon\" was one of the first songs that he sang in public. He began singing on a local radio show at age eight, and he became the show's host by the late 1940s. At the age of nine, Orbison won a contest on radio station KVWC, which led to his own radio show, on which he sang the same songs every week. He attended Denver Avenue Elementary School in Fort Worth until a polio scare in 1944 prompted his parents to send Orbison (then eight) and his brother Grady Lee to Vernon to live with their grandmother. As World War II wound down, Roy's parents returned to Vernon.\nThe Orbison family moved again in 1946, to Wink, Texas, in search of employment. Orbison described life in Wink as \"football, oil fields, oil, grease, and sand\" and expressed relief that he was able to leave the desolate town. He was self-conscious about his appearance and began dyeing his nearly white hair black when he was still young. He was quiet, self-effacing, polite, and obliging. During recess at school, he played guitar by himself while the other kids were playing physical games. As a teenager, Orbison's lack of sporting ability left him with shyness and low self-esteem. He was always keen to sing, however, and considered his voice memorable, but not great.\nCareer.\n1949\u20131955: Wink Westerners.\nIn 1949, Orbison (then 13 years old) formed the band \"Wink Westerners\" with school friends Billy Pat Ellis on drums, Slob Evans on bass fiddle, Richard West on piano, and James Morrow on electric mandolin. They played country and western swing standards and Glenn Miller jazz swing songs at local honky-tonk bars, and had a weekly morning radio show on KERB in Kermit, Texas. Their first performance was at a school assembly in 1953. They were offered $400 to play at a dance, and Orbison realized that he could make a living in music. Orbison was also part of a marching band and a singing octet. At the age of 15, he decided that instead of becoming a guitar player, he would use the guitar as an accompaniment to his singing.\nIn 1953, the Wink Westerners entered a talent contest on KMID-TV in Midland, Texas. The group won the contest, resulting in a 30-minute spot on a local television show. After the show, Orbison asked the owner of the company sponsoring the show if he could sponsor the group for ongoing shows, which led to the Wink Westerners playing weekly shows on KMID-TV on Friday nights and on Odessa television station KOSA-TV on Saturday nights. Around this time, Orbison began dyeing his hair (naturally a \"dishwater grey color\") to jet black.\nAfter graduating from high school in 1954, Orbison enrolled at North Texas State College in Denton. His plan was to study geology so he could secure work in the oil fields if music did not pay; however, he became bored with the course in its first year, and switched to history and English. Orbison preferred to play music with fellow students Billy Pat Ellis, Dick Penner, and Wade Moore. Penner and Moore had written a simple, catchy rockabilly song, \"Ooby Dooby\", which impressed Orbison, and he started looking into how he could make a recording of it. Orbison continued performing with the Wink Westerners after his first year. He then heard that his schoolmate Pat Boone had signed a record deal, and it further strengthened his resolve to become a professional musician. At a New Year's Eve dance in 1954, the Wink Westerners had mostly played country and western swing music throughout the night, but ended the night by playing Bill Haley &amp; the Comets\u2019 hit song \"Shake, Rattle and Roll\" repeatedly, which became the catalyst for the band switching to rock and roll music. Also, Orbison had seen Elvis Presley perform back during his days at North Texas State College in 1954, and was impressed by the shocking gyrations that Elvis exhibited on stage.\n1955\u20131956: The Teen Kings.\nAt the end of the spring semester of 1955, Orbison dropped out of North Texas State College, switching to Odessa Junior College. The Wink Westerners were disbanded in the fall of 1955, and Orbison formed a new band called the Teen Kings. The band was made of Orbison, Billy Pat Ellis, and James Morrow from the Wink Westerners, plus Jack Kennelly on bass and Johnny Wilson. At a dance event where the Teen Kings performed, Orbison met his future wife, Claudette Frady. Frady was 14 at the time, five years younger than Orbison.\nThe Teen Kings's first recording was the song \"Ooby Dooby\", which was recorded at Norman Petty's studio in Clovis, New Mexico, in March 1956. It was published by Odessa-based start-up label Je\u2013Wel as the B-side of the \"JE-WEL 101\" single. The A-side of the single was \"Tryin' to Get to You\", a song previously recorded by Elvis Presley.\nAfter \"Ooby Dooby\" was published by Je-Wel Records, Orbison became convinced that a larger record company would be able to sell more copies of the record, and he spoke to a lawyer about breaking the contract with Je-Wel. Initially, Orbison obtained an injunction to prevent Je-Wel from distributing the record, before they reached an agreement that the band would pay back the label the costs of producing the records. He was now free to find a new label to market Ooby Dooby, but a further setback was that he cut a demonstration tape of the song for Columbia Records, which they turned down, but had one of their contract artists (Sid King) release a recording of \"Ooby Dooby\" before Orbison could offer the tape to another record company.\nEventually, Sam Phillips's Sun Records signed up to record \"Ooby Dooby\", but the events which led to this are disputed. Some claim that Johnny Cash toured the Odessa area in 1955 and 1956, appearing on the same local TV show as the Wink Westerners, Cash said, \"[I]n late '55 or early '56, I was touring with Elvis when I met Roy in Texas... I told him to get in touch with Sun Records if he wanted to be a recording artist\". Orbison has said that when he did this, Phillips told him, \"Johnny Cash doesn't run my record company!\". However, both Sam Philips and Billy Pat Ellis (the band's drummer) have disputed that Johnny Cash was involved. Three of the Teen Kings's band members have said that their relationship with Sun Records began when Odessa record-store owner Poppa Holifield played it over the telephone for Sam Phillips in April 1956, and Phillips offered the Teen Kings a contract.\nThe Teen Kings went to Sun Studio in Memphis, to re-record \"Ooby Dooby\" for publication by Sun Records. After an audition of the song, Sam Phillips signed the band up for \"a year or two\". However, the band's career soon slumped, since Orbison wanted to record emotional ballads rather than the rockabilly songs demanded by Sam Phillips, and Phillips's goal for a successor to Elvis Presley had moved on from Orbison to Carl Perkins. The Teen Kings were granted a reprieve when Carl Perkins was badly injured in a car crash, resulting in \"Ooby Dooby\" being released (along with \"Go Go Go\") as Sun Single 242 in May 1956. The Teen Kings began an experimental tour of drive-in theaters in the Southern U.S. states (playing on top of projection house roofs between drive-in film showings) with Sonny James, Johnny Horton, Carl Perkins, and Johnny Cash. Much influenced by Elvis Presley, Orbison performed frenetically, doing \"everything we could to get applause, because we had only one hit record\". Orbison also began writing songs in a rockabilly style, including \"Go! Go! Go!\" and \"Rockhouse\". In June 1956, \"Ooby Dooby\" peaked at number 59 in the \"Billboard\" charts and sold 200,000 copies, but the follow-up singles did not reach the charts.\nThe Teen Kings played alongside Carl Perkins, Johnny Cash, Warren Smith, and Eddie Bond at the Overton Park Shell on June 1, 1956, but Orbison's relationship with the rest of the band was deteriorating at this stage. Elvis Presley was in the audience for this show, and Orbison claimed that Elvis praised Orbison, but another band member says that it was actually Jack Kennelly (the band's bass player) whom Presley praised. Kennelly said, \"Roy's dream was to be a star, and once Sam (Phillips) inflated his ego, he couldn't be a part of a unit. Roy became egomaniacal\". In the summer of 1956, Orbison purchased a brand-new purple Cadillac and a diamond ring with his first royalty check from \"Ooby Dooby\"; however, the band soon found out that their paychecks from the concerts were not covering their costs and that life as a touring band was a demoralizing experience. The band's contract did not include any royalty payments (\"BMI\") when their songs were played on the radio, and Orbison had run out of money by late 1956. Orbison was encouraged by Norman Petty to record a single without the Teen Kings and the rest of the band walked on Roy during a recording session when told of a plan to rename the band \"Roy Orbison and the Teen Kings\". The band broke up in December 1956, and Sam Phillips said they were arguing about money, but the basic problem was that Orbison was too much of a loner and driven egoist. The lack of a band was a serious problem for Orbison's contract at Sun Records, since the label had no use for a singer who did not have a band.\n1956\u20131959: Solo work and Acuff-Rose Music.\nAfter the Teen Kings split, Orbison stayed in Memphis with his girlfriend Claudette. However, Orbison was broke, and realized that he could not survive as a recording artist, so after several weeks, he returned to the road. He toured with Johnny Cash, Sonny Burgess, Eddie Cochran, and Gene Vincent, playing mostly songs from other artists before finishing the set with a song of his own. At the time, Orbison was addicted to sleeping pills and speed. Orbison was introduced to Elvis Presley's social circle, and at some stage picked up a date for Presley in his purple Cadillac.\nIn August 1957, Orbison returned to the Sun Recording Studio and recorded several new songs with just his acoustic guitar instead of a backing band. None was successful, though, and Roy gave up on becoming a recording artist. Sam Phillips remembered being much more impressed with Orbison's mastery of the guitar than with his voice. Orbison returned to Odessa, Texas, in the fall of 1957 to be together with his 16-year-old girlfriend, Claudette. The two began to talk about getting married. On a professional level, Orbison met singer Joe Melson while in Memphis, who would collaborate with Orbison on his biggest hit songs in the early 1960s.\nA ballad Orbison wrote, \"The Clown\", met with a lukewarm response; after hearing it, Sun Records producer Jack Clement told Orbison that he would never make it as a ballad singer. Nonetheless, he continued to pitch his ballad \"Claudette\" (on which he began working in early 1956) to singers he met on tour, and in April 1958, the Everly Brothers recorded it as the B-side of their hit \"All I Have to Do Is Dream\". \"Claudette\" reached number 30 in the charts in March 1959. Orbison then left Sun Records, due to a dispute about royalties from \"Claudette\" (which was recorded by Nashville Records). Orbison and Claudette had married in 1957, and their first child was born on September 16, 1958. Using the royalty payments from the Everly Brothers hit \"Claudette\", Orbison bought the most expensive new pink Cadillac available. However, Roy and Claudette spent the money lavishly and were soon broke and living with Roy's parents in Wink.\nIncreasingly frustrated at Sun, he gradually stopped recording. He toured music circuits around Texas, and then quit performing for seven months in 1958.\nDuring the period of 1958\u20131959, Orbison made his living at Acuff-Rose Music, a songwriting firm concentrating mainly on country music. After spending an entire day writing a song, he would make several demonstration tapes at a time and send them to Wesley Rose, who would try to find musical acts to record them. Orbison then worked with, and was in awe of, Chet Atkins (who had played guitar with Presley) and attempted to sell his recordings of songs by other writers to the RCA Victor record label. One of these songs was \"Seems to Me\", by Boudleaux Bryant. Bryant's impression of Orbison was of \"a timid, shy kid who seemed to be rather befuddled by the whole music scene. I remember the way he sang then\u2014softly, prettily, but almost bashfully, as if someone might be disturbed by his efforts and reprimand him.\"\nPlaying shows at night and living with his wife and young child in a tiny apartment, Orbison often took his guitar to his car to write songs. Songwriter Joe Melson, an acquaintance of Orbison's, tapped on his car window one day in Texas in 1958, and the two decided to write some songs together. In three recording sessions in 1958 and 1959, Orbison recorded seven songs for RCA Victor at their Nashville studios; only two singles (\"Paper Boy\" and \"With the Bug\") were judged worthy of release by the label. Wesley Rose brought Orbison to the attention of the producer Fred Foster at Monument Records, the record label to which Orbison would soon switch.\n1960\u20131964: Monument Records and stardom.\nEarly singles.\nIn his first session for Monument in Nashville, Orbison recorded a song that RCA Victor had refused, \"Paper Boy\". It was accompanied by the B-side sing \"With the Bug\", but neither song charted.\nOrbison's own style, the sound created at RCA Victor Studio B in Nashville with pioneer engineer Bill Porter, the production by Foster, and the accompanying musicians gave Orbison's music a \"polished, professional sound... finally allowing Orbison's stylistic inclinations free rein\". Orbison requested to use string instruments instead of fiddles, which was unusual for the time. He recorded three new songs, the most notable of which was \"Uptown\", written with Joe Melson and released in late 1959. Impressed with the results, Melson later recalled, \"We stood in the studio, listening to the playbacks, and thought it was the most beautiful sound in the world.\" \"The Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock and Roll\" states that the music Orbison made in Nashville \"brought a new splendour to rock\", and compared the melodramatic effects of the orchestral accompaniment to the musical productions of Phil Spector.\n\"Uptown\" was a modest hit and the first song by Orbison and Melson to reach the \"Billboard\" Top 100. His initial success came just as the 1950s rock-and-roll era was winding down. Starting in 1960, the charts in the United States came to be dominated by teen idols, novelty acts, and Motown girl groups.\n\"Only the Lonely\".\nExperimenting with a new sound, Orbison and Joe Melson wrote a song in early 1960, which in using elements from \"Uptown\" and another song they had written called \"Come Back to Me (My Love)\", employed strings and the Anita Kerr doo-wop backing singers. It also featured a note hit by Orbison in falsetto that showcased a powerful voice, which according to biographer Clayson, \"came not from his throat, but deeper within\". The song was \"Only the Lonely (Know the Way I Feel)\". Orbison was passing through Memphis when he tried to pitch the song to Elvis Presley (along with several other songs) to make some money quickly, but it was early in the morning and Presley did not want to see Orbison at that time. Orbison and Melson instead recorded the song at RCA Victor's Nashville studio, with sound engineer Bill Porter trying a completely new strategy, building the mix from the top down rather than from the bottom up, beginning with close-microphoned backing vocals in the foreground, and ending with the rhythm section soft in the background. This combination became Orbison's trademark sound.\n\"Only the Lonely\" shot to number two on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and hit number one in the UK and Australia. According to Orbison, the subsequent songs he wrote with Melson during this period were constructed with his voice in mind, specifically to showcase its range and power. He told \"Rolling Stone\" in 1988, \"I liked the sound of [my voice]. I liked making it sing, making the voice ring, and I just kept doing it. And I think that somewhere between the time of \"Ooby Dooby\" and \"Only the Lonely\", it kind of turned into a good voice.\" At the time of its recording, though, Orbison was struggling to earn a living, because he was only working as a singer at local dances. Also, the days of his working with Melson were numbered, due to disagreements such as who came up with the title for \"Only the Lonely\". The success of \"Only the Lonely\" transformed Orbison into an overnight star, and he appeared on Dick Clark's \"Saturday Night Beechnut Show\" in New York City. When Presley heard \"Only the Lonely\" for the first time, he bought a box of copies to pass to his friends.\nMove to Nashville.\nSoon after recording an early version of his next hit \"Blue Angel\", Orbison and his wife and son (Roy DeWayne, born in 1958) moved from Wink to the suburb of Hendersonville near Nashville. Orbison's second son, Anthony King, would follow in 1962. Melson also moved to Hendersonville soon after, and began working on \"Blue Angel\" together, which was recorded in August 1960. This hit was a more complex song, yet it still peaked at number nine in the USA. The follow-up single, \"I'm Hurtin'\" (with \"I Can't Stop Loving You\" as the B-side) rose to number 27 in the US, but failed to chart in the UK. After the success of \"Blue Angel\", Orbison undertook a hectic touring schedule, often performing with his neighbor Patsy Cline. During this time, Claudette was lonely and unhappy, and some people said that Orbison was unfaithful to her while he was on tour.\nBack in the studio, seeking a change from the pop sound of \"Only the Lonely\", \"Blue Angel\", and \"I'm Hurtin'\", Orbison worked on a new song, \"Running Scared\", about a man worried that his girlfriend is about to leave him for another man. Orbison encountered difficulty when he found himself unable to hit the song's highest note without his voice breaking. He was backed by an orchestra in the studio, and Porter told him he would have to sing louder than his accompaniment because the orchestra was unable to be softer than his voice. Fred Foster then put Orbison in the corner of the studio and surrounded him with coat racks, forming an improvised isolation booth to emphasize his voice. Orbison was unhappy with the first two takes. In the third, however, he abandoned the idea of using falsetto and sang the final high 'A' naturally, so astonishing everyone present that the accompanying musicians stopped playing. On that third take, \"Running Scared\" was completed. Fred Foster later recalled, \"He did it, and everybody looked around in amazement. Nobody had heard anything like it before.\" Just weeks later, \"Running Scared\" became Orbison's first number-one hit on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart and it reached number 9 in the UK. The composition of Orbison's following hits reflected \"Running Scared\", a story about an emotionally vulnerable man facing loss or grief, with a crescendo culminating in a surprise climax that employed Orbison's dynamic voice.\nThe B-side \"Crying\" followed soon after, and reached the top-five singles in August 1961. \"Crying\" was coupled with an up-tempo R&amp;B song, \"Candy Man\", written by Fred Neil and Beverley Ross, which reached the \"Billboard\" Top 30, staying on the charts for two months. By the end of 1961, Orbison had recorded six hit singles in a row over the past two years. While Orbison was touring Australia in 1962, an Australian DJ referred to him affectionately as \"The Big O\", partly based on the big finishes to his dramatic ballads, and the moniker stuck with him thereafter. Orbison's second son was born the same year, and Orbison hit number four in the United States and number two in the UK with \"Dream Baby (How Long Must I Dream)\", an upbeat song by country songwriter Cindy Walker. Orbison enlisted The Webbs, from Dothan, Alabama, as his backing band. The band changed their names to the Candy Men (in reference to Roy's hit) and played with Orbison from 1962 to 1967. They later went on to have their own career, releasing a few singles and two albums on their own. Also in 1962, he charted with \"The Crowd\", \"Leah\", and \"Workin' for the Man\", which he wrote about working one summer in the oil fields near Wink. Orbison's relationship with Joe Melson, however, was deteriorating, over Melson's growing concerns that his own solo career would never get off the ground.\nOrbison first met Bob Dylan at Dylan's 21st birthday party in May 1962.\nFrom 1959 to 1963, Orbison was the top-selling American artist and one of the world\u2019s biggest names in music.\n\"In Dreams\" and international tours.\nOrbison's string of top-40 hits continued with \"In Dreams\" (US number seven in January 1963, UK number six), \"Falling\" (US number 22, UK number 9) and \"Mean Woman Blues\" (US number five, UK number three) coupled with \"Blue Bayou\" (US number 29, UK number three). According to the discography in \"The Authorized Roy Orbison\", a rare alternative version of \"Blue Bayou\" was released in Italy. Orbison finished 1963 with a Christmas song written by Willie Nelson, \"Pretty Paper\" (US number 15 in 1963, UK number six in 1964).\nAs \"In Dreams\" was released in April 1963, Orbison was asked to replace Duane Eddy on a tour of the UK in top billing with the Beatles. The tour sold out in one afternoon. When Orbison arrived in Britain, however, he realized he was no longer the main draw. He had never heard of the Beatles, and annoyed, asked rhetorically, \"What's a Beatle, anyway?\" to which John Lennon replied, after tapping his shoulder, \"I am\". On the opening night, Orbison opted to go onstage first, although he was the more established act. The Beatles stood dumbfounded backstage as Orbison simply played through 14 encores. Finally, when the audience began chanting \"We want Roy!\" again, Lennon and Paul McCartney physically held Orbison back. Ringo Starr later said, \"In Glasgow, we were all backstage listening to the tremendous applause he was getting. He was just standing there, not moving or anything.\" Through the tour, however, the two acts quickly learned to get along, a process made easier by the fact that the Beatles admired his work. Orbison felt a kinship with Lennon, but it was George Harrison with whom he would later form a strong friendship.\nIn 1963, touring took a toll on Orbison's personal life. After discovering a letter from one of Orbison's secret girlfriends, his wife Claudette had an affair with the builder of their home in Tennessee. Billy Pat Ellis said, \"Claudette had the affair because Roy was gone a lot and she got lonely and wanted to prove she was attractive again\". When Orbison toured Britain again in the autumn of 1963, she joined him. \nLater in 1963, Orbison toured England, Ireland, and Canada. In 1964, he toured Australia and New Zealand with the Beach Boys and returned again to Britain and Ireland, where he was so besieged by teenaged girls that the Irish police had to halt his performances to pull the girls off him. He traveled to Australia again in 1965, this time with the Rolling Stones. Mick Jagger later remarked, referring to a snapshot he took of Orbison in New Zealand, \"a fine figure of a man in the hot springs, he was.\"\n\"Oh, Pretty Woman\".\nOrbison also began collaborating with Bill Dees, whom he had known in Texas. With Dees, he wrote \"It's Over\", a number-one hit in the UK. When Claudette walked in the room where Dees and Orbison were writing to say she was heading for Nashville, Orbison asked if she had any money. Dees said, \"A pretty woman never needs any money\". Just 40 minutes later, \"Oh, Pretty Woman\" was completed. A riff-laden masterpiece that employed a playful growl he got from a Bob Hope movie, the epithet \"mercy\" Orbison uttered when he was unable to hit a note, it rose to number one in the autumn of 1964 in the United States and stayed on the charts for 14 weeks. It rose to number one in the UK, as well, spending a total of 18 weeks on the charts. The single sold over seven million copies. Orbison's success was greater in Britain; as \"Billboard\" magazine noted, \"In a 68-week period that began on August 8, 1963, Roy Orbison was the \"only\" American artist to have a number-one single in Britain. He did it twice, with 'It's Over' on June 25, 1964, and 'Oh, Pretty Woman' on October 8, 1964. The latter song also went to number one in America, making Orbison impervious to the current chart dominance of British artists on both sides of the Atlantic.\"\n1965\u20131969: Career decline and tragedies.\nBy late 1964, Orbison had \"occasionally treated himself to a groupie\" and his wife Claudette had had an affair with the builder Braxton Dixon, who had built Orbison's house. After Roy became aware of the affair, he fired Dixon and finished building the house himself (with the help of a hired carpenter). In early 1965, Roy confirmed that Claudette and he were divorced. Later in 1965, Claudette gave birth to Roy's third child, and Roy and Claudette reunited several months later.\nOrbison's singles in early 1965 had been unsuccessful, and his contract with Monument was expiring soon. Wesley Rose, at this time acting as Orbison's agent, moved him from Monument Records to MGM Records (though in Europe he remained with Decca's London Records) for $1\u00a0million and with the understanding that he would expand into television and films, as Elvis Presley had done. Orbison was a film enthusiast, and when not touring, writing, or recording, he dedicated time to seeing up to three films a day. The move was described as Orbison \"joining the ranks of fading rock stars fleeing to MGM\".\nRose also became Orbison's producer. Fred Foster later suggested that Rose's takeover was responsible for the commercial failure of Orbison's work at MGM. Engineer Bill Porter agreed that Orbison's best work could only be achieved with RCA Victor's A-Team in Nashville. Orbison's first collection at MGM, an album titled \"There Is Only One Roy Orbison\", sold fewer than 200,000 copies. With the onset of the British Invasion in 1964\u201365, the direction of popular music shifted dramatically, and most performers of Orbison's generation (Orbison was 28 in 1964) were driven from the charts. The contractual requirement to release a certain number of singles and albums per year for MGM also took its toll on the quality of Orbison's songs.\nOrbison was fascinated with machines. He was known to follow a car that he liked and make the driver an offer on the spot. While on tour again in the UK in 1966, Orbison broke his foot falling off a motorcycle in front of thousands of screaming fans at a race track; he performed his show that evening in a cast. Claudette traveled to Britain to accompany Roy for the remainder of the tour. It was now made public that the couple had happily remarried and were back together (they had remarried in December 1965).\nRoy and Claudette shared a love for motorcycles after Roy had been introduced to them by Elvis Presley. Orbison was a daredevil driver, blasting around on his Harley-Davidson motorcycle and owning a Ferrari car, which he used to challenge other drivers to race him on the highway. On June 6, 1966, when Orbison and Claudette were both riding their motorcycles home from Bristol, Tennessee, she was struck by a pickup truck in Gallatin, Tennessee and thrown into the air. She was taken by ambulance to hospital, but her liver was seriously injured and she died, aged 25.\nA grieving Orbison threw himself into his work, collaborating with Bill Dees to write music for \"The Fastest Guitar Alive\", a film in which MGM had scheduled for him to star, as well. It was initially planned as a dramatic Western, but was rewritten as a comedy. Orbison's character was a spy who stole and had to protect and deliver a cache of gold to the Confederate Army during the American Civil War, and was supplied with a guitar that turned into a rifle. The prop allowed him to deliver the line, \"I could kill you with this and play your funeral march at the same time\", with, according to biographer Colin Escott, \"zero conviction\". Orbison was pleased with the film, although it proved to be a critical and box-office failure. While MGM had included five films in his contract, no more were made.\nHe recorded an album dedicated to the songs of Don Gibson and another of Hank Williams covers, but both sold poorly. During the counterculture era, with the charts dominated by artists including Jimi Hendrix, Jefferson Airplane, the Rolling Stones, and the Doors, Orbison lost mainstream appeal, yet seemed confident that this would return, later saying: \"[I] didn't hear a lot I could relate to, so I kind of stood there like a tree where the winds blow and the seasons change, and you're still there and you bloom again.\" Orbison's single \"Cry Softly Lonely One\" from March 1967 was his last song to enter the top 100 until the 1980s.\nDuring a tour of Britain and playing Birmingham on Saturday, September 14, 1968, he received the news that his home in Hendersonville, Tennessee, had burned down, and his two eldest sons had died. This occurred two years after the death of his wife Claudette and Orbison's grief meant he could not write songs. Fire officials stated that the cause of the fire may have been an aerosol can, which possibly contained lacquer. The property was sold to Johnny Cash, whose house at the same location also burned down later.\nDuring the 1968 tour of England, Orbison and his childhood friend Bobby Blackburn slept with many girls over the course of two months, and used a calendar on the wall to track when each girl was arriving and leaving their rented apartment in Upper Brook Street in London. During this time, Orbison met the 16-year-old German girl Barbara Wellh\u00f6ner Jakobs, with whom he became fascinated, although Orbison continued to see other girls in the meantime. On May 25, 1969, Orbison and Barbara married. Roy was 33 years old at the time, and sources vary regarding whether Barbara was 17, 18, or 19. Wesley (born 1965), his youngest son with Claudette, was raised by Orbison's parents. Orbison and Barbara had a son (Roy Kelton Jr.) in 1970 and another (Alexander) in 1975.\n1970s: Struggles.\nOrbison continued recording albums in the 1970s, but his career stagnated during this decade. At the beginning of the decade, Orbison started to wear his hair straight, instead of combing it back. He would wear it like this for the rest of his life.. In 1974, he switched record labels from MGM to Mercury Records for a one-album deal. Although the peak of his success was over, his single \"Penny Arcade\" was number one in Australia for many weeks and \"Too Soon to Know\" reached number three in England. His fortunes sank so low in America that his concerts were mostly empty, such as the concert at Cincinnati Gardens that he played on his 40th birthday in April 1976. Peter Lehman observed that Orbison's absence was a part of the mystery of his persona: \"Since it was never clear where he had come from, no one seemed to pay much mind to where he had gone; he was just gone.\" However, several artists released popular covers of his songs. Orbison's version of \"Love Hurts\" was remade by Gram Parsons and Emmylou Harris, again by hard rock band Nazareth, and by Jim Capaldi. Sonny James' version of \"Only the Lonely\" reached number one on the country music charts. Bruce Springsteen ended his concerts with Orbison songs, and Glen Campbell had a minor hit with a remake of \"Dream Baby\".\nA compilation of Orbison's greatest hits reached number one in the UK in January 1976, and Orbison began to open concerts that year for the Eagles, who had started as Linda Ronstadt's backup band. Ronstadt covered \"Blue Bayou\" in 1977, her version reaching number three on the \"Billboard\" charts and remaining in the charts for 24 weeks. Orbison credited this cover in particular for reviving his memory in the popular mind, if not his career. He signed again with Monument in 1976 and recorded \"Regeneration\" with Fred Foster, but it proved no more successful than before.\nIn late 1977, Orbison was not feeling well and decided to spend the winter in Hawaii. He checked in to a hospital there, where testing discovered that he had severely obstructed coronary arteries and was barely alive. Orbison underwent open-heart surgery on January 18, 1978. He had suffered from duodenal ulcers since 1960 and had been a heavy smoker since adolescence. Orbison said he felt rejuvenated after the procedure, but his weight would continue to fluctuate for the rest of his life. He also continued to smoke cigarettes, despite the advice of his doctor..\n1980\u20131988: Revival and Traveling Wilburys.\nIn 1980, Don McLean recorded a cover of Orbison's 1961 hit single \"Crying\" and it went to the top of the charts, first in the Netherlands then reaching number five in the US and staying on the charts for 15 weeks; it was number one in the UK for three weeks and also topped the Irish charts. In 1981, he performed \"Pretty Woman\" on an episode of \"The Dukes of Hazzard\". Orbison was all but forgotten in the US, yet he reached popularity in less likely places such as Bulgaria in 1982. He was astonished to find that he was as popular there as he had been in 1964, and he was forced to stay in his hotel room because he was mobbed on the streets of Sofia. In 1981, Emmylou Harris and he won a Grammy Award for their duet \"That Lovin' You Feelin' Again\" from the comedy film \"Roadie\" (in which Orbison also played a cameo role), and things were picking up. It was Orbison's first Grammy, and he felt hopeful of making a full return to popular music, In the meantime, Van Halen released a hard-rock cover of \"Oh, Pretty Woman\" on their 1982 album \"Diver Down\", further exposing a younger generation to Orbison's music.\nOrbison, his wife, and two oldest children moved from Nashville to Malibu in 1986. Following the move, Orbison's involvement with the Los Angeles creative community proved to be very important for him..\nOrbison was alleged to have originally declined David Lynch's request to allow the use of \"In Dreams\" for the film \"Blue Velvet\" (1986), although Lynch has stated to the contrary that his producers and he obtained permission to use the song without speaking to Orbison in the first place. Lynch's first choice for a song had actually been \"Crying\"; the song served as one of several obsessions of psychopath Frank Booth (Dennis Hopper). It was lip-synched by Ben (Dean Stockwell), Booth's drug-dealer boss, using an industrial work light as a pretend microphone, lighting his face. In later scenes, Booth demands the song be played repeatedly, and also wanting the song while beating the protagonist. During filming, Lynch would also sit his cast down every few hours and ask them to listen to the song. Orbison was initially shocked at its use; he saw the film in a theater in Malibu and later said, \"I was mortified because they were talking about the 'candy-colored clown' in relation to a dope deal\u00a0... I thought, 'What in the world\u00a0...?' But later, when I was touring, we got the video out and I really got to appreciate what David gave to the song, and what the song gave to the movie\u2014how it achieved this otherworldly quality that added a whole new dimension to 'In Dreams'.\" The use of \"In Dreams\" in the film greatly helped Orbison's comeback.\nIn 1987, Orbison released an album of re-recorded hits titled \"\". \"Life Fades Away\", a song he co-wrote with his friend Glenn Danzig and recorded, was featured in the film \"Less than Zero\" (1987). k.d. lang and he performed a duet of \"Crying\" for inclusion on the soundtrack to the film \"Hiding Out\" (1987); the pair received a Grammy Award for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals after Orbison's death.\nAlso in 1987, Orbison was inducted into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame and was initiated into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Bruce Springsteen, who concluded his speech with a reference to his own album \"Born to Run\": \"I wanted a record with words like Bob Dylan that sounded like Phil Spector\u2014but, most of all, I wanted to sing like Roy Orbison. Now, everyone knows that no one sings like Roy Orbison.\" In response, Orbison asked Springsteen for a copy of the speech, and said of his induction that he felt \"validated\" by the honor. After the awards, Orbison signed with Virgin Records, which immediately released a \"greatest hits\" album and began preparing for an album of new songs.\nA few months later, Orbison and Springsteen paired again to film a concert at the Cocoanut Grove nightclub in Los Angeles. They were joined by Jackson Browne, T Bone Burnett, Elvis Costello, Tom Waits, Bonnie Raitt, Jennifer Warnes, James Burton, JD Souther, and k.d. lang. Lang later recounted how humbled Orbison had been by the display of support from so many talented and busy musicians: \"Roy looked at all of us and said, 'If there is anything I can ever do for you, please call on me'. He was very serious. It was his way of thanking us. It was very emotional.\" The concert was filmed in one take and aired on Cinemax under the title \"\"; it was released on video by Virgin Records, selling 50,000 copies. The concert is considered a landmark in Orbison's career.\nThe creation of the world's most recognized supergroup, Traveling Wilburys began in 1987, when Orbison began collaborating seriously with Electric Light Orchestra bandleader Jeff Lynne on a new album. Lynne had just completed production work on George Harrison's \"Cloud Nine\" album, and all three ate lunch together one day when Orbison accepted an invitation to sing on Harrison's new single. They subsequently contacted Bob Dylan, who, in turn, allowed them to use a recording studio in his home. Along the way, Harrison made a quick visit to Tom Petty's residence to obtain his guitar; Petty and his band had backed Dylan on his last tour. By that evening, the group had written \"Handle with Care\", which led to the concept of recording an entire album. They called themselves the Traveling Wilburys, representing themselves as half-brothers with the same father. They gave themselves stage names; Orbison chose his from his musical hero, calling himself \"Lefty Wilbury\" after Lefty Frizzell. Expanding on the concept of a traveling band of raucous musicians, Orbison offered a quote about the group's foundation in honor: \"Some people say Daddy was a cad and a bounder. I remember him as a Baptist minister.\"\nLynne later spoke of the recording sessions: \"Everybody just sat there going, 'Wow, it's Roy Orbison!'\u00a0... Even though he's become your pal and you're hanging out and having a laugh and going to dinner, as soon as he gets behind that [mic] and he's doing his business, suddenly it's shudder time.\" The band's debut album, \"Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1\" (1988), was released on October 25, 1988. Orbison was given one solo track, \"Not Alone Any More\", on the album. His contributions were highly praised by the press.\nOrbison determinedly pursued his second chance at stardom, but he expressed amazement at his success: \"It's very nice to be wanted again, but I still can't quite believe it.\" He lost some weight to fit his new image and the constant demand of touring, as well as the newer demands of making videos. In the final three months of his life, he gave \"Rolling Stone\" extensive access to his daily activities; he intended to write an autobiography and wanted Martin Sheen to play him in a biopic.\nOrbison completed a solo comeback album, \"Mystery Girl\", in November 1988. \"Mystery Girl\" was co-produced by Jeff Lynne. Orbison considered Lynne to be the best producer with whom he had ever collaborated. Elvis Costello, Bono, Orbison's son Wesley, and others offered their songs to him.\nAround November 1988, Orbison confided in Johnny Cash that he was having chest pains. Orbison traveled to Europe and received an award at the Diamond Awards festival in Antwerp, where footage for the video for \"You Got It\" was filmed. He gave several interviews a day in a hectic schedule and became ill with a blinding headache during the final interview. A few days later, a manager at a club in Boston was concerned that he looked ill, but Orbison played the show to a standing ovation.\nDeath.\nOrbison performed at the Front Row Theater in Highland Heights, Ohio, on December 4, 1988. Exhausted, he returned to his home in Hendersonville to rest for several days before flying again to London to film two more videos for the Traveling Wilburys. He was also booked in to tour the U.S. and Europe in the following year.\nOn December 6, 1988, he spent the day buying parts for model airplanes with his bus driver and friend Benny Birchfield and ate supper at Birchfield's home in Hendersonville (Birchfield was married to country star Jean Shepard). After the meal, Orbison went to his mother's house and chatted with his son Wesley. He went to the bathroom, but did not return for 30 minutes. He was found collapsed on the bathroom floor and was rushed to the hospital by ambulance, where he died of a heart attack at the age of 52.\nA public memorial attended by friends, family, and fans was organized by friend Jean Shepard and held at the College Heights Baptist Church in Gallatin, Tennessee, on December 11. In Los Angeles, Barbara Orbison organized a \"Celebration of Life\" attended by friends and celebrities at the Wiltern Theatre on December 13. Orbison's body was buried at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in an unmarked grave.\nPosthumous career.\nOrbison's posthumous album \"Mystery Girl\" was released by Virgin Records on January 31, 1989 and became the highest-selling album of his career. The biggest hit from \"Mystery Girl\" was \"You Got It\", written with Lynne and Tom Petty. \"You Got It\" rose to number 9 in the US and number three in the UK. The song earned Orbison a posthumous Grammy Award nomination. According to \"Rolling Stone\", \"\"Mystery Girl\" cloaks the epic sweep and grandeur of his classic sound in meticulous, modern production\u2014the album encapsulates everything that made Orbison great, and for that reason it makes a fitting valedictory.\"\n\"Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1\" spent 53 weeks on the US charts, peaking at number three. It reached number one in Australia and number 16 in the UK. The album won a Grammy for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group. \"Rolling Stone\" included it in the top 100 albums of the decade.\nOn April 8, 1989, Orbison became the first deceased musician since Elvis Presley to have two albums in the US top five at the same time, with \"Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1\" at number four and his own \"Mystery Girl\" at number five. In the United Kingdom, he achieved even greater posthumous success, with two solo albums in the top three on February 11, 1989 (\"Mystery Girl\" was number two and the compilation \"The Legendary Roy Orbison\" was number three).\nAlthough the video for the Traveling Wilburys' \"Handle with Care\" was filmed with Orbison, the video for \"End of the Line\" was filmed and released posthumously. During Orbison's vocal solo parts in \"End of the Line\", the video shows Orbison's guitar in a rocking chair next to Orbison's framed photo.\nOn October 20, 1992, \"King of Hearts\"\u2014another album of Orbison songs\u2014was released. Earlier in the early 1990s, Rodney Crowell and Orbison\u2019s friend and occasional songwriting partner Will Jennings wrote the lyrics to a recording of a melody that Orbison had made before his death; they titled the resulting song, which was recorded by Crowell and released in 1992, \u201cWhat Kind of Love\u201d. In 1996, the album \"The Very Best of Roy Orbison\" documented his entire career. Roy's wife Barbara managed his estate and released albums through the Roy Orbison Enterprises company. Following Barbara's death in December 2011, the company management was taken over by Roy's sons Alex and Roy Kelton Jr.\nIn 2014, a demonstration recording of Orbison's \"The Way Is Love\" was released as part of the 25th-anniversary deluxe edition of \"Mystery Girl\". The song was originally recorded on a stereo cassette player around 1986. Orbison's sons contributed instrumentation on the track along with Orbison's vocals; it was produced by John Carter Cash.\nOn December 4, 2015, the studio album \"One of the Lonely Ones\", recorded by Orbison in 1969, was posthumously released. The album, which Orbison recorded surreptitiously in the aftermath of his first wife Claudette's death in a motorcycle accident and the death of their two sons in a house fire 2 years later, was long believed lost.\nPublic image.\nOrbison eventually developed an image that did not reflect his personality. He had no publicist in the early 1960s, so had little presence in fan magazines, and his single sleeves did not feature his picture. \"LIFE\" called him an \"anonymous celebrity\". After leaving his thick eyeglasses on an airplane in 1963, Orbison was forced to wear his prescription Faosa sunglasses on stage and found that he preferred them. The sunglasses led some people to assume he was blind. His black clothes and song lyrics emphasized the image of mystery and introversion. Orbison later recalled that he \"wasn't trying to be weird ... I didn't have a manager who told me to dress or how to present myself or anything, but the image developed of a man of mystery and a quiet man in black somewhat of a recluse, although I never was, really.\"\nStyle and legacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"[Roy Orbison] was the true master of the romantic apocalypse you dreaded and knew was coming after the first night you whispered 'I Love You' to your first girlfriend. You were going down. Roy was the coolest uncool loser you'd ever seen. With his Coke-bottle black glasses, his three-octave range, he seemed to take joy sticking his knife deep into the hot belly of your teenage insecurities.\"\n \u2014Bruce Springsteen, 2012 SXSW Keynote Address\nRock and roll in the 1950s was defined by a driving backbeat, heavy guitars, and lyrical themes that glorified youthful rebellion. Few of Orbison's recordings have these characteristics. The structure and themes of his songs defied convention, and his much-praised voice and performance style were unlike any other in rock and roll. Many of his contemporaries compared his music with that of classically trained musicians, although he never mentioned any classical music influences. Peter Lehman summarized it, writing, \"He achieved what he did not by copying classical music, but by creating a unique form of popular music that drew upon a wide variety of music popular during his youth.\" Orbison was known as \"the Caruso of Rock\" and \"the Big O\".\nRoy's Boys LLC, a Nashville-based company founded by Orbison's sons to administer their father's catalog and safeguard his legacy, announced a November 16, 2018, release of \"Unchained Melodies: Roy Orbison with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra\" album, as well as an autumn 2018 Roy Orbison hologram tour called \"In Dreams: Roy Orbison in Concert\".\nSong structures.\nMusic critic Dave Marsh wrote that Orbison's compositions \"define a world unto themselves more completely than any other body of work in pop music\". Orbison's music, like the man himself, has been described as timeless, diverting from contemporary rock and roll and bordering on the eccentric, within a hair's breadth of being weird. Peter Watrous, writing for the \"New York Times\", declared in a concert review, \"He has perfected an odd vision of popular music, one in which eccentricity and imagination beat back all the pressures toward conformity\".\nIn the 1960s, Orbison refused to splice edits of songs together and insisted on recording them in single takes with all the instruments and singers together. The only convention Orbison followed in his most popular songs is the time limit for radio fare in pop songs. Otherwise, each seems to follow a separate structure. Using the standard 32-bar form for verses and choruses, normal pop songs followed the verse-chorus-verse-chorus-bridge-verse-chorus structure. Where A represents the verse, B represents the chorus, and C the bridge, most pop songs can be represented by A-B-A-B-C-A-B, like \"Ooby Dooby\" and \"Claudette\". Orbison's \"In Dreams\" was a song in seven movements that can be represented as Intro-A-B-C-D-E-F; no sections are repeated. In \"Running Scared\", however, the entire song repeats to build suspense to a final climax, to be represented as A-A-A-A-B. \"Crying\" is more complex, changing parts toward the end to be represented as A-B-C-D-E-F-A-B'-C'-D'-E'-F'. Although Orbison recorded and wrote standard structure songs before \"Only the Lonely\", he claimed never to have learned how to write them:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I'm sure we had to study composition or something like that at school, and they'd say, 'This is the way you do it,' and that's the way I would have done it, so being blessed again with not knowing what was wrong or what was right, I went on my own way.\u00a0... So, the structure sometimes has the chorus at the end of the song, and sometimes there is no chorus, it just goes\u00a0... But that's always after the fact\u2014as I'm writing, it all sounds natural and in sequence to me.\u2014\u200a\nElton John's songwriting partner and main lyricist Bernie Taupin wrote that Orbison's songs always made \"radical left turns\", and k.d. lang declared that good songwriting comes from being constantly surprised, such as how the entirety of \"Running Scared\" eventually depends on the final note, one word. Some of the musicians who worked with Orbison were confounded by what he asked them to do. Nashville session guitarist Jerry Kennedy stated, \"Roy went against the grain. The first time you'd hear something, it wouldn't sound right. But after a few playbacks, it would start to grow on you.\"\nLyrical themes.\nCritic Dave Marsh categorizes Orbison's ballads into themes reflecting pain and loss, and dreaming. A third category is his up-tempo rockabilly songs such as \"Go! Go! Go!\" and \"Mean Woman Blues\" that are more thematically simple, addressing his feelings and intentions in a masculine braggadocio. In concert, Orbison placed the up-tempo songs between the ballads to keep from being too consistently dark or grim.\nIn 1990, Colin Escott wrote an introduction to Orbison's biography published in a CD box set: \"Orbison was the master of compression. Working the singles era, he could relate a short story, or establish a mood in under three minutes. If you think that's easy\u2014try it. His greatest recordings were quite simply perfect; not a word or note surplus to intention.\" After attending a show in 1988, Peter Watrous of \"The New York Times\" wrote that Orbison's songs are \"dreamlike claustrophobically intimate set pieces\". Music critic Ken Emerson writes that the \"apocalyptic romanticism\" in Orbison's music was well-crafted for the films in which his songs appeared in the 1980s because the music was \"so over-the-top that dreams become delusions, and self-pity paranoia\", striking \"a post-modern nerve\". Led Zeppelin singer Robert Plant favored American R&amp;B music as a youth, but beyond the black musicians, he named Elvis and Orbison especially as foreshadowing the emotions he would experience: \"The poignancy of the combination of lyric and voice was stunning. [Orbison] used drama to great effect and he wrote dramatically.\"\nThe loneliness in Orbison's songs for which he became most famous, he both explained and downplayed: \"I don't think I've been any more lonely than anyone else\u00a0... Although if you grow up in West Texas, there are a lot of ways to be lonely.\" His music offered an alternative to the postured masculinity that was pervasive in music and culture. Robin Gibb of the Bee Gees stated, \"He made emotion fashionable, that it was all right to talk about and sing about very emotional things. For men to sing about very emotional things\u00a0... Before that no one would do it.\" Orbison acknowledged this in looking back on the era in which he became popular: \"When [\"Crying\"] came out I don't think anyone had accepted the fact that a man should cry when he wants to cry.\"\nVoice quality.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhat separates Orbison from so many other multi-octave-spanning power singers is that he can hit the biggest notes imaginable and still sound \"unspeakably sad\" at the same time. All his vocal gymnastics were just a means to a powerful end, not a mission unto themselves. Roy Orbison didn't just sing beautifully\u2014he sang brokenheartedly.\n \u2014Stephen Thompson, NPR\nOrbison admitted that he did not think his voice was put to appropriate use until \"Only the Lonely\" in 1960, when it was able, in his words, to allow its \"flowering\". Carl Perkins, however, toured with Orbison while they were both signed with Sun Records and recalled a specific concert when Orbison covered the Nelson Eddy and Jeanette MacDonald standard \"Indian Love Call\", and had the audience completely silenced, in awe. When compared to the Everly Brothers, who often used the same session musicians, Orbison is credited with \"a passionate intensity\" that, according to \"The Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock and Roll\", made \"his love, his life, and, indeed, the whole world [seem] to be coming to an end\u2014not with a whimper, but an agonized, beautiful bang\".\nBruce Springsteen and Billy Joel both commented on the otherworldly quality of Orbison's voice. Dwight Yoakam stated that Orbison's voice sounded like \"the cry of an angel falling backward through an open window\". Barry Gibb of the Bee Gees went further to say that when he heard \"Crying\" for the first time, \"That was it. To me that was the voice of God.\" Elvis Presley stated Orbison's voice was the greatest and most distinctive he had ever heard. Orbison's music and voice have been compared to opera by Bob Dylan, Tom Waits, and songwriter Will Jennings, among others. Dylan marked Orbison as a specific influence, remarking that nothing like him was on radio in the early 1960s:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;With Roy, you didn't know if you were listening to mariachi or opera. He kept you on your toes. With him, it was all about fat and blood. He sounded like he was singing from an Olympian mountaintop. [After \"Ooby Dooby\"] he was now singing his compositions in three or four octaves that made you want to drive your car over a cliff. He sang like a professional criminal\u00a0... His voice could jar a corpse, always leave you muttering to yourself something like, \"Man, I don't believe it\".\u2014\u200a\nLikewise, Tim Goodwin, who conducted the orchestra that backed Orbison in Bulgaria, had been told that Orbison's voice would be a singular experience to hear. When Orbison started with \"Crying\" and hit the high notes, Goodwin stated: \"The strings were playing and the band had built up and, sure enough, the hair on the back of my neck just all started standing up. It was an incredible physical sensation.\" Bassist Jerry Scheff, who backed Orbison in his concert, wrote about him, \"Roy Orbison was like an opera singer. His voice melted out of his mouth into the stratosphere and back. He never seemed like he was trying to sing, he just did it.\"\nHis voice ranged from baritone to tenor, and music scholars have suggested that he had a three- or four-octave range.\nOrbison's severe stage fright was particularly noticeable in the 1970s and early 1980s. During the first few songs in a concert, the vibrato in his voice was almost uncontrollable, but afterward, it became stronger and more dependable. This also happened with age. Orbison noticed that he was unable to control the tremor in the late afternoon and evenings, and chose to record in the mornings when control was possible.\nLive performances.\nOrbison often excused his motionless performances by saying that his songs did not allow instrumental sections so he could move or dance on stage, although songs like \"Mean Woman Blues\" did offer that. He was aware of his unique performance style, even in the early 1960s, when he commented, \"I'm not a super personality\u2014on stage or off. I mean, you could put workers like Chubby Checker or Bobby Rydell in second-rate shows and they'd still shine through, but not me. I'd have to be prepared. People come to hear my music, my songs. That's what I have to give them.\"\nk.d. lang compared Orbison to a tree, with passive but solid beauty. This image of Orbison as immovable was so associated with him it was parodied by John Belushi on \"Saturday Night Live\", as Belushi, dressed as Orbison, falls over while singing \"Oh, Pretty Woman\", and continues to play as his bandmates set him upright again. However, lang quantified this style by saying, \"It's so hard to explain what Roy's energy was like because he would fill a room with his energy and presence, but not say a word. Being that he was so grounded and so strong and so gentle and quiet. He was just there.\"\nOrbison attributed his own passion during his performances to the period when he grew up in Fort Worth while the US was mobilizing for World War II. His parents worked in a defense plant; his father brought out a guitar in the evenings playing the driving rhythm of western swing, and their friends and relatives who had just joined the military gathered to drink and sing heartily with him. Orbison later reflected, \"I guess that level of intensity made a big impression on me, because it's still there. That sense of 'do it for all it's worth and do it now and do it good.' Not to analyze it too much, but I think the verve and gusto that everybody felt and portrayed around me has stayed with me all this time.\"\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nPosthumous albums\nRemix albums\nConcert videos\nHonors.\n\"Rolling Stone\" placed him at number 37 on their list of the \"Greatest Artists of All Time\" and number 13 on their list of the \"100 Greatest Singers of All Time'. In 2002, \"Billboard\" magazine listed Orbison at number 74 in the Top 600 recording artists.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26553", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26553", "title": "Ragtime", "text": "Music genre\nRagtime, also spelled rag-time or rag time, is a musical style that was popular and heavily influenced musical genres such as the Blues, and was seen in the United States from the 1890s to 1910s. Its signature trait is its syncopated or \"ragged\" rhythm. Ragtime was popularized during the early 20th century by composers such as Scott Joplin, James Scott, and Joseph Lamb. Ragtime pieces (often called \"rags\") are typically composed for and performed on the piano, though the genre has been adapted for a variety of instruments and styles.\nRagtime music originated within African American communities in the late 19th century and became a distinctly American form of popular music. It is closely related to marches. Ragtime pieces usually contain several distinct themes, often arranged in patterns of repeats and reprises. Scott Joplin, known as the \"King of Ragtime\", gained fame through compositions like \"Maple Leaf Rag\" and \"The Entertainer\". Ragtime influenced early jazz, Harlem stride piano, Piedmont blues, and early 20th century European classical composers such as Erik Satie, Claude Debussy, and Igor Stravinsky. Despite being overshadowed by jazz in the 1920s, ragtime has experienced several revivals, notably in the 1950s and 1970s (the latter renaissance due in large part to the use of \"The Entertainer\" in the film \"The Sting\"). The music was distributed primarily through sheet music and piano rolls, with some compositions adapted for other instruments and ensembles.\nEtymology.\nWhile the word \"ragtime\" was first recorded in 1896, the term probably originates in the dance events known as \"rags\", hosted by enslaved black folk bound to the plantation system. The first recorded use of the term \"ragtime\" was by vaudeville musician Ben Harney who in 1896 used it to describe the piano music he played (which he had extracted from banjo and fiddle players).\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nRagtime music was developed long before it was printed as sheet music. While its precise origins are uncertain, scholars like Terry Waldo believe it to stem from music played by plantation slaves for dance events called \"rags\" (these were mentioned in newspaper articles as early as the 1820s). The musician ensemble would generally only consist of a banjo player and a fiddle player. They would play dance music like jigs, reels and schottisches, with the way the banjo is played providing the syncopation that ragtime came to be known for.\nWhile no examples of music from this era survive, there are nevertheless some examples from before ragtime's heyday in the 1890s. Believed to be one of the oldest preserved pieces of ragtime music is \"The Dream Rag\" (originally titled \"The Bull Dyke's Dream\") by Jessie Pickett. While its year of composition is unknown, Eubie Blake (who Pickett taught it to around 1900), believed it to have been written some time before the American Civil War. Unlike the march-style left hand pattern of many later rags, \"The Dream Rag\" uses a rhythm more closely related to the habanera, providing a good example of how Spanish music influenced the ragtime genre. Jesse Pickett performed \"The Dream Rag\" at the 1893 Chicago World's Fair, where the greater American public were first introduced to what would become known as ragtime. Others present at the exposition were such names as Scott Joplin, Ben Harney, and Shep Edmonds (referred to by some as the \"father of ragtime\").\nAnother surviving example of early ragtime is the music of Louis Moreau Gottschalk. Born in 1829 in New Orleans, his childhood home was within earshot of Congo Square, a traditional Sunday meeting place for New Orleans' African-American community, where dancing and music-making took place on a regular basis, featuring the rhythms that would later characterize ragtime. While not a ragtime composer per se, there are elements in Gottschalk's compositions, traceable to the music he heard from Congo Square, that distinctly foreshadow the ragtime music of the 1890s.\nThe composed ragtime of the 1890s had its origins in African American communities of the Mississippi Valley in general and St. Louis in particular. Most of the early ragtime musicians could not read or notate music, but instead played by ear and improvised. The instrument of choice by ragtime musicians during this time was usually a banjo or a piano. It was performed in brothels, bars, saloons, and informal gatherings at house parties or juke joints. These places were an excellent breeding ground for new music as European classical music was mixed with African-American folk songs.\nThe first ragtime composition to be published was \"La Pas Ma La\" in 1895. It was written by minstrel comedian Ernest Hogan. Kentucky native Ben Harney composed the song \"You've Been a Good Old Wagon But You Done Broke Down\" the following year in 1896. The composition was a hit and helped popularize the genre to the mainstream. Another early ragtime pioneer was comedian and songwriter Irving Jones.\nRagtime was also a modification of the march style popularized by John Philip Sousa. Jazz critic Rudi Blesh thought its polyrhythm may be coming from African music, although no historian or musicologist has made any connection with any music from Africa. Ragtime composer Scott Joplin (\"ca.\" 1868\u20131917) from Texas, became famous through the publication of the \"Maple Leaf Rag\" (1899) and a string of ragtime hits such as \"The Entertainer\" (1902), although he was later forgotten by all but a small, dedicated community of ragtime aficionados until the major ragtime revival in the early 1970s. For at least 12 years after its publication, \"Maple Leaf Rag\" heavily influenced subsequent ragtime composers with its melody lines, chord progressions or metric patterns.\nIn a 1913 interview published in the black newspaper \"New York Age\", Scott Joplin asserted that there had been \"ragtime music in America ever since the Negro race has been here, but the white people took no notice of it until about twenty years ago [in the 1890s].\"\nThe heyday of ragtime.\nRagtime quickly established itself as a distinctly American form of popular music. Ragtime became the first African American music to have an impact on mainstream popular culture. Piano \"professors\" such as Jelly Roll Morton played ragtime in the \"sporting houses\" (bordellos) of New Orleans. Polite society embraced ragtime as disseminated by brass bands and \"society\" dance bands. Bands led by W. C. Handy and James R. Europe were among the first to crash the color bar in American music. The new rhythms of ragtime changed the world of dance bands and led to new dance steps, popularized by the show-dancers Vernon and Irene Castle during the 1910s. The growth of dance orchestras in popular entertainment was an outgrowth of ragtime and continued into the 1920s.\nRagtime also made its way to Europe. Shipboard orchestras on transatlantic lines included ragtime music in their repertoire. In 1912, the first public concerts of ragtime were performed in the United Kingdom by the American Ragtime Octette (ARO) at the Hippodrome, London; a group organized by ragtime composer and pianist Lewis F. Muir who toured Europe. Immensely popular with British audiences, the ARO popularized several of Muir's rags (such as \"Waiting for the Robert E. Lee\" and \"Hitchy-Koo\") which were credited by historian Ian Whitcomb as the first American popular songs to influence British culture and music. The ARO recorded some of Muir's rags with the British record label The Winner Records in 1912; the first ragtime recordings made in Europe. James R. Europe's 369th Regiment band generated great enthusiasm during its 1918 tour of France.\nRagtime was an influence on early jazz; the influence of Jelly Roll Morton continued in the Harlem stride piano style of players such as James P. Johnson and Fats Waller. Ragtime was also a major influence on Piedmont blues. Dance orchestras started evolving away from ragtime towards the big band sounds that predominated in the 1920s and 1930s when they adopted smoother rhythmic styles.\nRevivals.\nThere have been numerous revivals since newer styles supplanted ragtime in the 1920s. First in the early 1940s, many jazz bands began to include ragtime in their repertoire and put out ragtime recordings on 78 rpm records. A more significant revival occurred in the 1950s as a wider variety of ragtime genres of the past were made available on records, and new rags were composed, published, and recorded.\nIn the 1960s, two major factors brought about a greater public recognition of ragtime. The first was the publication of the book, \"They All Played Ragtime\", in 1960, by Harriet Janis and Rudi Blesh. Some historians refer to this book as \"The Ragtime Bible\". Regardless, it was the first comprehensive and serious attempt to document the first ragtime era, and its three most important composers, Joplin, Scott, and Lamb. The second major factor was the rise to prominence of Max Morath. Morath created two television series for National Educational Television (now PBS) in 1960 and 1962: \"The Ragtime Era\", and \"The Turn of the Century\". Morath turned the latter into a one-man-show in 1969, and toured the US with it for five years. Morath subsequently created different one-man-shows which also toured the US, that also educated and entertained audiences about ragtime. New ragtime composers soon followed, including Morath, Donald Ashwander, Trebor Jay Tichenor, John Arpin, William Bolcom, and William Albright.\nIn 1971, Joshua Rifkin released a compilation of Joplin's work which was nominated for a Grammy Award.\nIn 1973, The New England Ragtime Ensemble (then a student group called The New England Conservatory Ragtime Ensemble) recorded \"The Red Back Book\", a compilation of some of Joplin's rags in period orchestrations edited by conservatory president Gunther Schuller. It won a Grammy for Best Chamber Music Performance of the year and was named Top Classical Album of 1974 by \"Billboard\" magazine. The film \"The Sting\" (1973) brought ragtime to a wide audience with its soundtrack of Joplin tunes. The film's rendering of \"The Entertainer\", adapted and orchestrated by Marvin Hamlisch, was a Top 5 hit in 1975.\nRagtime \u2013 with Joplin's work at the forefront \u2013 has been cited as an American equivalent of the minuets of Mozart, the mazurkas of Chopin, or the waltzes of Brahms. Ragtime also influenced classical composers including Erik Satie, Claude Debussy, and Igor Stravinsky.\nHistorical context.\nRagtime originated in African American music in the late 19th century and descended from the jigs and march music played by African American bands, referred to as \"jig piano\" or \"piano thumping\".\nBy the start of the 20th century, it became widely popular throughout North America and was listened and danced to, performed, and written by people of many different subcultures. A distinctly American musical style, ragtime may be considered a synthesis of African syncopation and European classical music, especially the marches made popular by John Philip Sousa.\nSome early piano rags were classified as \"jig\", \"rag\", and \"coon songs\". These labels were sometimes used interchangeably in the mid-1890s, 1900s, and 1910s. Ragtime was also preceded by its close relative the cakewalk. In 1895, black entertainer Ernest Hogan released the earliest ragtime composition, called \"La Pas Ma La\". The following year he released another composition called \"All Coons Look Alike to Me\", which eventually sold a million copies.\nTom Fletcher, a vaudeville entertainer and the author of \"100 Years of the Negro in Show Business\", has stated that \"Hogan was the first to put on paper the kind of rhythm that was being played by non-reading musicians.\" While the success of \"All Coons Look Alike to Me\" helped popularize the country to ragtime rhythms, its use of racial slurs created a number of derogatory imitation tunes, known as \"coon songs\" because of their use of racist and stereotypical images of black people. In Hogan's later years, he admitted shame and a sense of \"race betrayal\" from the song, while also expressing pride in helping bring ragtime to a larger audience.\nThe emergence of mature ragtime is usually dated to 1897, the year in which several important early rags were published. \"Harlem Rag\" by Tom Turpin and \"Mississippi Rag\" by William Krell were both release that year. In 1899, Scott Joplin's \"Maple Leaf Rag\" was published and became a great hit and demonstrated more depth and sophistication than earlier ragtime.\nRagtime was one of the main influences on the early development of jazz (along with the blues). Some artists, such as Jelly Roll Morton, were present and performed both ragtime and jazz styles during the period the two styles overlapped. He also incorporated the Spanish tinge in his performances, which gave a habanera or tango rhythm to his music. Jazz largely surpassed ragtime in mainstream popularity in the early 1920s, although ragtime compositions continue to be written up to the present, and periodic revivals of popular interest in ragtime occurred in the 1950s and the 1970s.\nThe heyday of ragtime occurred before sound recording was widely available. Like European classical music, classical ragtime has primarily been a written tradition distributed though sheet music. But sheet music sales ultimately depended on the skill of amateur pianists, which limited classical ragtime's complexity and proliferation. A folk ragtime tradition also existed before and during the period of classical ragtime (a designation largely created by Scott Joplin's publisher John Stillwell Stark), manifesting itself mostly through string bands, banjo and mandolin clubs (which experienced a burst of popularity during the early 20th century) and the like. Ragtime was also distributed via piano rolls for mechanical player pianos. While the traditional rag was fading in popularity, a genre called novelty piano (or novelty ragtime) emerged that took advantage of new advances in piano roll technology and the phonograph record to permit a more complex, pyrotechnic, performance-oriented style of rag to be heard. Chief among the novelty rag composers is Zez Confrey, whose \"Kitten on the Keys\" popularized the style in 1921.\nRagtime also served as the roots for stride piano, a more improvisational piano style popular in the 1920s and 1930s. Elements of ragtime found their way into much of the American popular music of the early 20th century. It also played a central role in the development of the musical style later referred to as Piedmont blues; indeed, much of the music played by such artists of the style as Reverend Gary Davis, Blind Boy Fuller, Elizabeth Cotten, and Etta Baker could be referred to as \"ragtime guitar.\"\nAlthough most ragtime was composed for piano, transcriptions for other instruments and ensembles are common, notably including Gunther Schuller's arrangements of Joplin's rags. Ragtime guitar continued to be popular into the 1930s, usually in the form of songs accompanied by skilled guitar work. Numerous records emanated from several labels, performed by Blind Blake, Blind Boy Fuller, Blind Lemon Jefferson, and others. Occasionally, ragtime was scored for ensembles (particularly dance bands and brass bands) similar to those of James Reese Europe or as songs like those written by Irving Berlin. Joplin had long-standing ambitions of synthesizing the worlds of ragtime and opera, to which end the opera \"Treemonisha\" was written. However, its first performance, poorly staged with Joplin accompanying on the piano, was \"disastrous\" and was never performed again in Joplin's lifetime. The score was lost for decades, then rediscovered in 1970, and a fully orchestrated and staged performance took place in 1972. An earlier opera by Joplin, \"A Guest of Honor\", has been lost.\nMusical form.\nThe rag was a modification of the march made popular by John Philip Sousa, with additional polyrhythms coming from African music. It was usually written in or time with a predominant left-hand pattern of bass notes on strong beats (beats 1 and 3) and chords on weak beats (beat 2 and 4) accompanying a syncopated melody in the right hand. According to some sources the name \"ragtime\" may come from the \"ragged or syncopated rhythm\" of the right hand. A rag written in time is a \"ragtime waltz\".\nRagtime is not a meter in the same way that marches are in duple meter and waltzes are in triple meter; it is rather a musical style that uses an effect that can be applied to any meter. The defining characteristic of ragtime music is a specific type of syncopation in which melodic accents occur between metrical beats. This results in a melody that seems to be avoiding some metrical beats of the accompaniment by emphasizing notes that either anticipate or follow the beat (\"a rhythmic base of metric affirmation, and a melody of metric denial\"). The ultimate (and intended) effect on the listener is actually to accentuate the beat, thereby inducing the listener to move to the music. American composer and pianist Scott Joplin, known as the \"King of Ragtime\", called the effect \"weird and intoxicating.\" He also used the term \"swing\" in describing how to play ragtime music: \"Play slowly until you catch the swing...\".\nThe name swing later came to be applied to an early style of jazz that developed from ragtime. Converting a non-ragtime piece of music into ragtime by changing the time values of melody notes is known as \"ragging\" the piece. Original ragtime pieces usually contain several distinct themes, four being the most common number. These themes were typically 16 bars, each theme divided into periods of four four-bar phrases and arranged in patterns of repeats and reprises. Typical patterns were AABBACCC\u2032, AABBCCDD and AABBCCA, with the first two strains in the tonic key and the following strains in the subdominant. Sometimes rags would include introductions of four bars or bridges, between themes, of anywhere between four and 24 bars.\nIn a note on the sheet music for the song \"Leola\" Joplin wrote, \"Notice! Don't play this piece fast. It is never right to play 'ragtime' fast.\" E. L. Doctorow used the quotation as the epigraph to his novel \"Ragtime\".\nRelated forms and styles.\nRagtime pieces came in a number of different styles during the years of its popularity and appeared under a number of different descriptive names. It is related to several earlier styles of music, has close ties with later styles of music, and was associated with a few musical fads of the period such as the foxtrot. Many of the terms associated with ragtime have inexact definitions and are defined differently by different experts; the definitions are muddled further by the fact that publishers often labelled pieces for the fad of the moment rather than the true style of the composition. There is even disagreement about the term \"ragtime\" itself; experts such as David Jasen and Trebor Tichenor choose to exclude ragtime songs from the definition but include novelty piano and stride piano (a modern perspective), while Edward A. Berlin includes ragtime songs and excludes the later styles (which is closer to how ragtime was viewed originally). The terms below should not be considered exact, but merely an attempt to pin down the general meaning of the concept.\nInfluence on European composers.\nDuring the early 20th century, some European classical composers were influence from the form. The first contact with ragtime was probably at the Paris Exposition in 1900, one of the stages of the European tour of John Philip Sousa. The first notable classical composer to take a serious interest in ragtime was Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k. French composer Claude Debussy emulated ragtime in three pieces for piano. The best-known remains the \"Golliwog's Cake Walk\" (from the 1908 Piano Suite \"Children's Corner\"). He later returned to the style with two preludes for piano: \"Minstrels\", (1910) and \"General Lavine-excentric\" (from his 1913 Pr\u00e9ludes), which was inspired by a M\u00e9drano circus clown.\nErik Satie, Arthur Honegger, Darius Milhaud, and the other members of Les Six in Paris never made any secret of their sympathy for ragtime, which is sometimes evident in their works. Consider, in particular, the ballet of Satie, \"Parade (Ragtime du Paquebot),\" (1917) and \"La Mort de Monsieur Mouche\", an overture for piano for a drama in three acts, composed in the early 1900s in memory of his friend J. P. Contamine de Latour. In 1902 the American cakewalk was very popular in Paris and Satie two years later wrote two rags, \"La Diva de l'empire\" and \"Piccadilly\". Despite the two Anglo-Saxon settings, the tracks appear American-inspired. \"La Diva de l'empire\", a march for piano soloist, was written for Paulette Darty and initially bore the title \"Stand-Walk Marche\"; it was later subtitled \"Intermezzo Americain\" when Rouarts-Lerolle reprinted it in 1919. \"Piccadilly\", another march, was initially titled \"The Transatlantique\"; it presented a stereotypical wealthy American heir sailing on an ocean liner on the New York\u2013Europe route, going to trade his fortune for an aristocratic title in Europe. There is a similar influence in Milhaud's ballets \"Le boeuf sur le toite\" and \"Creation du Monde\", which he wrote after a visit to Harlem during his trip in 1922. Even the Swiss composer Honegger wrote works in which the influence of African American music is pretty obvious. Examples include \"Pacific 231\", \"Pr\u00e9lude et Blues\" and especially the \"Concertino\" for piano and orchestra.\nIgor Stravinsky wrote a solo piano work called \"Piano-Rag-Music\" in 1919 and also included a rag in his theater piece \"L'Histoire du soldat\" (1918).\nRevivals.\nIn the early 1940s, many jazz bands began to include ragtime in their repertoire, and as early as 1936 78 rpm records of Joplin's compositions were produced. Old numbers written for piano were rescored for jazz instruments by jazz musicians, which gave the old style a new sound. The most famous recording of this period is Pee Wee Hunt's version of Euday L. Bowman's \"Twelfth Street Rag.\"\nA more significant revival occurred in the 1950s. A wider variety of ragtime styles of the past were made available on records, and new rags were composed, published, and recorded. Much of the ragtime recorded in this period is presented in a light-hearted novelty style, looked to with nostalgia as the product of a supposedly more innocent time. A number of popular recordings featured \"prepared pianos\", playing rags on pianos with tacks on the hammers and the instrument deliberately somewhat out of tune, supposedly to simulate the sound of a piano in an old honky tonk.\nFour events brought forward a different kind of ragtime revival in the 1970s. First, pianist Joshua Rifkin released a compilation of Scott Joplin's work, \"\", on Nonesuch Records, which was nominated in 1971 for a Grammy Award for Best Classical Performance \u2013 Instrumental Soloist or Soloists (without orchestra) category. This recording reintroduced Joplin's music to the public in the manner the composer had intended, not as a nostalgic stereotype but as serious, respectable music. Second, the New York Public Library released a two-volume set of \"The Collected Works of Scott Joplin\" which renewed interest in Joplin among musicians and prompted new stagings of Joplin's opera \"Treemonisha\". Next came the release and Grammy Award for The New England Ragtime Ensemble's recording of \"The Red Back Book,\" Joplin tunes edited by Gunther Schuller. Finally, with the release of the film \"The Sting\" in 1973, which had a Marvin Hamlisch soundtrack of Joplin rags, ragtime was brought to a wide audience. Hamlisch's rendering of Joplin's 1902 rag \"The Entertainer\" won an Academy Award, and was an American Top 40 hit in 1974, reaching No. 3 on May 18. Ragtime news and reviews publications during this period included \"The Ragtime Review\" (1962\u20131966), \"The Rag Times\" (bimonthly/sporadic, fl. 1962\u20132003), and \"The Mississippi Rag\" (monthly, 1973\u20132009).\nIn 1980, an adaption of E. L. Doctorow's historical novel \"Ragtime\" was released on screen. Randy Newman composed its music score, which was all original. In 1998, a stage version of \"Ragtime\" was produced on Broadway. With music by Stephen Flaherty and lyrics by Lynn Ahrens, the show featured several rags as well as songs in other musical styles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26555", "revid": "42964511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26555", "title": "Rashi", "text": "French rabbi and commentator (1040\u20131105)\nShlomo Yitzchaki (c.\u200922 February 1040\u00a0\u2013 13 July 1105), commonly known by the Rabbinic acronym Rashi, was a French rabbi and commentator who authored comprehensive commentaries on the Talmud and Hebrew Bible.\nBorn in Troyes, Rashi studied Torah studies in Worms under German rabbi Yaakov ben Yakar and French rabbi Isaac ben Eliezer Halevi, both of whom were pupils of the famed scholar Gershom ben Judah. After returning to Troyes, Rashi joined the , began answering halakhic questions and later served as the 's head after the death of Zerach ben Abraham.\nRashi is generally considered a leading biblical exegete in the Middle Ages. Acclaimed for his ability to present the basic meaning of the text in a concise and lucid fashion, Rashi's commentaries appeal to both learned scholars and beginning students, and his works remain a centerpiece of contemporary Torah study. A large fraction of rabbinic literature published since the Middle Ages discusses Rashi, either using his view as supporting evidence or debating against it. His commentary on the Talmud, which covers nearly all of the Babylonian Talmud, has been included in every edition of the Talmud since its first printing by Daniel Bomberg in the 1520s. His commentaries on the Tanakh\u2014especially his commentary on the Chumash (the \"Five Books of Moses\")\u2014serves as the basis of more than 300 \"supercommentaries\" which analyze Rashi's choice of language and citations, penned by some of the greatest names in rabbinic literature.\nName.\nRashi's surname, Yitzhaki, derives from his father's name, Yitzhak. The acronym \"Rashi\" stands for Rabbi Shlomo Yitzhaki, but is sometimes fancifully expanded as Rabban Shel YIsrael which means the \"Rabbi of Israel\", or as Rabbenu SheYichyeh (Our Rabbi, may he live). He may be cited in Hebrew and Aramaic texts as (1) \"Shlomo son of Rabbi Yitzhak\", (2) \"Shlomo son of Yitzhak\", (3) \"Shlomo Yitzhaki\", and myriad similar highly respectful derivatives.\nIn older literature, Rashi is sometimes referred to as \"Jarchi\" or \"Yarhi\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d9\u05e8\u05d7\u05d9\u200e), his abbreviated name being interpreted as Rabbi Shlomo Yarhi. This was understood to refer to the Hebrew name of Lunel in Provence, popularly derived from the occitan \"luna\" \"moon\", in Hebrew &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d9\u05e8\u05d7\u200e, in which Rashi was assumed to have lived at some time or to have been born, or where his ancestors were supposed to have originated. Later Christian writers Richard Simon and Johann Christoph Wolf claimed that only Christian scholars referred to Rashi as Jarchi, and that this epithet was unknown to the Jews. Bernardo de Rossi, however, demonstrated that Hebrew scholars also referred to Rashi as Yarhi. In 1839, Leopold Zunz showed that the Hebrew usage of Jarchi was an erroneous propagation of the error by Christian writers, instead he interpreted the abbreviation as: Rabbi Shlomo Yitzhaki. The evolution of this term has been thoroughly traced.\nBiography.\nBirth and early life.\nRashi was an only child born at Troyes, Champagne, in northern France. His mother's brother was Simeon bar Isaac, rabbi of Mainz. Simon was a disciple of Gershom ben Judah, who died that same year. On his father's side, Rashi has been claimed to be a 33rd-generation descendant of Johanan HaSandlar, who was a fourth-generation descendant of Gamaliel, who was reputedly descended from the Davidic line. In his voluminous writings, Rashi himself made no such claim at all. The main early rabbinical source about his ancestry, Responsum No. 29 by Solomon Luria, makes no such claim either.\nLegends.\nHis fame later made him the subject of many legends. One tradition contends that his parents were childless for many years. Rashi's father, Yitzhak, a poor winemaker, once found a precious jewel and was approached by non-Jews who wished to buy it to adorn their idol. Yitzhak agreed to travel with them to their land, but en route, he cast the gem into the sea. Afterwards he was visited by either the Voice of God or the prophet Elijah, who told him that he would be rewarded with the birth of a noble son \"who would illuminate the world with his Torah knowledge.\"\nAnother legend also states that Rashi's parents moved to Worms, Germany while Rashi's mother was pregnant. As she walked down one of the narrow streets in the Jewish quarter, she was imperiled by two oncoming carriages. She turned and pressed herself against a wall, which opened to receive her. This miraculous niche is still visible in the wall of the Worms Synagogue.\nAdditional legends, particularly in Hasidic literature, postulate that Rashi's tremendous works and accomplishments were inspired by the Holy Spirit, the \"Shekhinah,\" as no mere human could produce such immense works. One text goes so far as to claim that Rashi was beyond human; the author proposes that he never died a natural death, but rather ascended to Heaven alive like the immortal prophet Elijah.\nYeshiva studies.\nAccording to tradition, Rashi was first brought to learn Torah by his father on Shavuot day at the age of five. His father was his main Torah teacher until his death when Rashi was still a youth. At the age of 17 he married and soon after went to learn in the yeshiva of Yaakov ben Yakar in Worms, returning to his wife three times yearly, for the Days of Awe, Passover and Shavuot. When Yaakov died in 1064, Rashi continued learning in Worms for another year in the yeshiva of his relative, Isaac ben Eliezer Halevi, who was also chief rabbi of Worms. Then he moved to Mainz, where he studied under another of his relatives, Isaac ben Judah, the rabbinic head of Mainz and one of the leading sages of the Lorraine region straddling France and Germany.\nRashi's teachers were students of Rabbeinu Gershom and Eliezer Hagadol, leading Talmudists of the previous generation. From his teachers, Rashi imbibed the oral traditions pertaining to the Talmud as they had been passed down for centuries, as well as an understanding of the Talmud's logic and forms of argument. Rashi took concise, copious notes from what he learned in yeshiva, incorporating this material in his commentaries. He was also greatly influenced by the exegetical principles of Menahem Kara.\nCareer.\nHe returned to Troyes at the age of 25, after which time his mother died, and he was asked to join the Troyes \"Beth din\" (rabbinical court). He also began answering halakhic questions. Upon the death of the head of the \"Bet din\", Zerach ben Abraham, Rashi assumed the court's leadership and answered hundreds of halakhic queries.\nAt some time around 1070 he founded a yeshiva, which attracted many disciples. Jewish oral tradition contends that he was a vintner. There is no evidence for this, although Rashi shows an extensive knowledge of winemaking utensils and process. One responsum from his school refers to a barrel of wine marked with Rashi's import seal. The soil around Troyes is not suited to growing grapes, but some vineyards are known to have existed anyway, due to the great local demand for wine.\nAlthough there are many legends about his travels, Rashi likely never went farther than from the Seine to the Rhine; his furthest destinations were the yeshivas of Lorraine.\nIn 1096, the People's Crusade swept through the Lorraine, murdering 12 Jews and uprooting whole communities. Among those murdered in Worms were the three sons of Isaac ben Eliezer Halevi, Rashi's teacher. Rashi wrote several \"Selichot\" (penitential poems) mourning the slaughter and the destruction of the region's great yeshivot. Seven of Rashi's \"Selichot\" still exist, including \"Adonai Elohei Hatz'vaot\", which is recited on the eve of Rosh Hashanah, and \"Az Terem Nimtehu\", which is recited on the Fast of Gedalia.\nDeath and burial site.\nRashi died on July 13, 1105 (Tammuz 29, 4865) at the age of 65. He was buried in Troyes. The approximate location of the cemetery in which he was buried was recorded in \"Seder ha-Dorot\", but over time the location of the cemetery was forgotten. A number of years ago, a Sorbonne professor discovered an ancient map depicting the site of the cemetery, which lay under an open square in the city of Troyes. After this discovery, French Jews erected a large monument in the center of the square\u2014a large, black and white globe featuring the three Hebrew letters of \u05e8\u05e9\u05d9 artfully arranged counterclockwise in negative space, evoking the style of Hebrew microcalligraphy. The granite base of the monument is engraved: \"Rabbi Shlomo Yitzchaki \u2014 Commentator and Guide\".\nIn 2005, Yisroel Meir Gabbai erected an additional plaque at this site marking the square as a burial ground. The plaque reads: \"The place you are standing on is the cemetery of the town of Troyes. Many Rishonim are buried here, among them Rabbi Shlomo, known as Rashi the holy, may his merit protect us\".\nDescendants.\nRashi had no sons. All of his three children were girls, named Yocheved, Miriam and Rachel. He invested himself in their education; his writings and the legends which surround him suggest that his daughters were well-versed in the Torah and the Talmud (at a time when women were not expected to study) and would help him when he was too weak to write. His daughters married his disciples; most present-day Ashkenazi rabbinical dynasties can trace their lineage back to his daughters Miriam or Yocheved.\nA late-20th century legend claims that Rashi's daughters wore tefillin. While a few women in medieval Ashkenaz did wear tefillin, there is no evidence that Rashi's daughters did.\nIt is reputed that the famous Polish Talmudist Moses Isserles (1530\u20131572) was a descendant of Rashi.\nWorks.\nCommentary on the Tanakh.\nRashi's commentary on the Tanakh\u2014and especially his commentary on the Chumash\u2014is the essential companion for any study of the Bible among Orthodox Jews. Drawing on the breadth of Midrashic, Talmudic and Aggadic literature (including literature that is no longer extant), as well as his knowledge of Hebrew grammar and halakhah, Rashi clarifies the \"simple\" meaning of the text so that a bright child of five could understand it. At the same time, his commentary forms the foundation for some of the most profound legal analysis and mystical discourses that came after it. Scholars debate why Rashi chose a particular Midrash to illustrate a point, or why he used certain words and phrases and not others. Shneur Zalman of Liadi wrote that \"Rashi's commentary on Torah is the 'wine of Torah'. It opens the heart and uncovers one's essential love and fear of G-d.\" There are hints to mystical sources within Rashi's commentary, particularly within his comments on the Creation account.\nScholars believe that Rashi's commentary on the Torah grew out of the lectures he gave to his students in his yeshiva, and evolved with the questions and answers they raised on it. Rashi completed this commentary only in the last years of his life. It was immediately accepted as authoritative by all Jewish communities, Ashkenazi and Sephardi alike.\nThe first dated Hebrew printed book was Rashi's commentary on the Chumash, printed by Abraham ben Garton in Reggio di Calabria, Italy, 18 February 1475. (This version did not include the text of the Chumash itself.)\nRashi wrote commentaries on all the books of Tanakh except Chronicles I &amp; II, and Ezra\u2013Nehemiah. His commentary to Job is incomplete, ending at 40:25.\nA main characteristic of Rashi's writing was his focus on grammar and syntax. His primary focus was on word choice, and \"essentially [he acts] as a dictionary where he defines unusual Hebrew words.\" He searches for things that may not be clear to the reader and offers clarification on the inconsistency that may be present. Rashi does so by \"filling in missing information that [helps] lead to a more complete understanding\" of the Torah. A portion of his writing is dedicated to making distinctions between the \"peshat\", or plain and literal meaning of the text, and the \"aggadah\" or rabbinic interpretation. Rashbam, one of Rashi's grandchildren, heavily critiqued his response on his \"commentary on the Torah [being] based primarily on the classic midrashim (rabbinic homilies).\"\nRashi himself explained his method as utilizing both \"peshat\" and \"derash\": \"I, however, am only concerned with the plain sense of Scripture (\"peshuto shel mikra\") and with such Agadoth that explain the words of Scripture in a manner that fits in with them.\" In one place, he quotes a midrash and then states \"But this midrash cannot be reconciled with Scripture for several reasons... Therefore I say: let scripture be reconciled according to its simple meaning, clearly, and the midrash may also be expounded, as is said: 'Is not My word... like a hammer which shatters the rock?' - it is divided into many fragments.\"\nCommentary on the Talmud.\nRashi wrote the first comprehensive commentary on the Talmud, covering nearly all of the Babylonian Talmud (a total of 30 out of 39 tractates, due to his death). The commentary, drawing on his knowledge of the entire contents of the Talmud, attempts to provide a full explanation of the words and of the logical structure of each Talmudic passage. Unlike other commentators, Rashi does not paraphrase or exclude any part of the text, but elucidates phrase by phrase. Often he provides punctuation in the unpunctuated text, explaining, for example, \"This is a question\"; \"He says this in surprise\", \"He repeats this in agreement\", etc.\nAs in his commentary on the Tanakh, Rashi frequently illustrates the meaning of the text using analogies to the professions, crafts, and sports of his day. He also translates difficult Hebrew or Aramaic words into the spoken French language of his day, giving latter-day scholars a window into the vocabulary and pronunciation of Old French.\nRashi's Talmud commentary spread quickly, reaching Jews as far as Yemen by mid-12th century. It has been included in every version of the Talmud since its first printing in the fifteenth century. It is always situated towards the middle of the opened book display; i.e., on the side of the page closest to the binding.\nSome of the other printed commentaries which are attributed to Rashi were composed by others, primarily his students. Akiva Eger stated that the commentary on Nazir was not in fact by Rashi, while Zvi Hirsch Chajes stated that the commentary on Taanit was not by Rashi. In some editions of the Talmud, the text indicates that Rashi died before completing the tractate, and that it was completed by a student. This is true of Makkot (the end of which was composed by his son-in-law, Judah ben Nathan), and of Bava Batra (finished, in a more detailed style, by his grandson the Rashbam). The commentary attributed to Rashi on Horayot was thought by some to have been written by Judah ben Nathan, but evidence was uncovered indicating that the commentary on Horayot was from the school of Gershom ben Judah. There is a legend that the commentary on Nedarim, which is clearly not his, was actually composed by his daughters. Another legend states that Rashi died while writing a commentary on Talmud, and that the very last word he wrote was 'tahor,' which means pure in Hebrew - indicating that his soul was pure as it left his body.\nResponsa.\nAbout 300 of Rashi's responsa and halakhic decisions are extant. Although some may find contradictory to Rashi's intended purpose for his writings, these responsa were copied, preserved, and published by his students, grandchildren, and other future scholars. \"Siddur Rashi\", compiled by an unknown student, also contains Rashi's responsa on prayer. Many other rulings and responsa are recorded in Mahzor Vitry. Other compilations include \"Sefer Hapardes\", probably edited by Shemaiah of Troyes, Rashi's student, and \"Sefer Haorah\", prepared by Nathan Hamachiri.\nRashi's writing is placed under the category of post-Talmudic, for its explanation and elaboration on the Talmud; however, he not only wrote about the meaning of Biblical and Talmudic passages, but also on liturgical texts, syntax rules, and cases regarding new religions emerging. Some say that his responsa allows people to obtain \"clear pictures of his personality,\" and shows Rashi as a kind, gentle, humble, and liberal man. They also illustrate his intelligence and common sense.\nRashi's responsa not only addressed some of the different cases and questions regarding Jewish life and law, but it shed light into the historical and social conditions which the Jews were under during the First Crusade. He covered the following topics and themes in his responsa: linguistic focus on texts, law related to prayer, food, and the Sabbath, wine produced by non-Jews, oaths and excommunications, sales, partnerships, loans and interest, bails, communal affairs, and civil law. Rashi's responsa can be broken down into three genres: questions by contemporary sages and students regarding the Torah, the law, and other compilations.\nFor example, in his writing regarding relations with the Christians, he provides a guide for how one should behave when dealing with martyrs and converts, as well as the \"insults and terms of [disgrace] aimed at the Jews.\" Stemming from the aftermath of the Crusades, Rashi wrote concerning those who were forced to convert, and the rights women had when their husbands were killed.\nRashi focused the majority of his responsa, if not all, on a \"meticulous analysis of the language of the text\".\nPoetry.\nRashi wrote several selichot (penitential prayers), some of which are still recited today as part of the Jewish liturgy. These include:\nOther poems are sometimes falsely attributed to Rashi. The above list is probably not exhaustive, but no evidence exists to connect Rashi to other poems.\nAssessment and legacy.\nRashi was one of the first authors to write in Old French (the language he spoke in everyday life, which he used alongside Hebrew), as most contemporary French authors instead wrote in Latin. As a consequence, besides its religious value, his work is valued for the insight it gives into the language and culture of Northern France in the 11th century. His commentaries on the Tanakh\u2014especially his commentary on the Chumash (the \"Five Books of Moses\")\u2014serves as the basis of more than 300 \"supercommentaries\" which analyze Rashi's choice of language and citations, penned by some of the greatest names in rabbinic literature. Rashi was also the primary subject of Romanian-born American writer and political activist Elie Wiesel's 2009 biography entitled \"Rashi: A Portrait\". \nCommentary on the Tanakh.\nTens of thousands of men, women and children study \"Chumash with Rashi\" as they review the Torah portion to be read in synagogue on the upcoming Shabbat. According to halakha, a man may even fulfill of the requirement of Shnayim mikra ve-echad targum by reading Rashi's commentary rather than the standard Targum Onkelos. Since its publication, Rashi's commentary on the Torah is standard in almost all Chumashim produced within the Orthodox Jewish community. Many people who study Rashi along with Tanakh use the term \"Chumash with Rashi\".\nMordechai Leifer of Nadvorna said that anyone who learns the weekly Parsha together with the commentary by Rashi every week is guaranteed to sit in the Yeshiva (school) of Rashi in the Afterlife.\nVoluminous supercommentaries have been published on Rashi's Bible commentaries, including \"Gur Aryeh\" by Judah Loew (the Maharal), \"Sefer ha-Mizrachi\" by Elijah Mizrachi (the Re'em), and \"Yeri'ot Shlomo\" by Solomon Luria (the Maharshal). Menachem Mendel Schneerson, in his \"Rashi Sichos\", often addresses several of these commentaries at once. The growth of intensive scholary interest in Rashi's commentary, the rise of supercommentaries, and what has been called the 'canonisation' of Rashi, has meant his literary reception and legacy in Jewish circles has been immense and long-standing.\nRashi's influence grew the most in the 15th century; from the 17th century onwards, his commentaries were translated into many other languages. Rashi's commentary on the Pentateuch was known as the first printed Hebrew work. English translations include those of Rosenbaum and Silbermann and ArtScroll.\nCommentary on the Talmud.\nRashi's commentary on the Talmud continues to be a key basis for contemporary rabbinic scholarship and interpretation. Without Rashi's commentary, the Talmud would have remained a closed book.\nRashi's commentary had a profound influence on subsequent Talmud study and scholarship:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe presence of Rashi's commentary also changed the nature of subsequent Talmud commentaries:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn general, Rashi's commentary provides the \"peshat\" or literal meaning of the Talmud, while subsequent commentaries such as the Tosafot often go beyond the passage itself in terms of arguments, parallels, and distinctions that could be drawn out. This addition to Jewish texts was seen as causing a \"major cultural product\" which became an important part of Torah study.\nIn the standard printed Talmud, the Tosafot's commentaries can be found in the Talmud opposite Rashi's commentary. The Tosafot also added comments and criticism in places where Rashi had not added comments.\nRashi also exerted a decisive influence on establishing the correct text of the Talmud. Up to and including his age, texts of each Talmudic tractate were copied by hand and circulated in yeshivas. Errors often crept in: sometimes a copyist would switch words around, and other times incorporate a student's marginal notes into the main text. Because of the large number of merchant-scholars who came from throughout the Jewish world to attend the great fairs in Troyes, Rashi was able to compare different manuscripts and readings in Tosefta, Jerusalem Talmud, Midrash, Targum, and the writings of the Geonim, and determine which readings should be preferred. However, in his humility, he deferred to scholars who disagreed with him. For example, in Chulin 4a, he comments about a phrase, \"We do not read this. But as for those who do, this is the explanation...\"\nInfluence in non-Jewish circles.\nRashi's commentaries on the Bible, especially those on the Pentateuch, circulated in many different communities. In the 12th\u201317th centuries, Rashi's influence spread from French and German provinces to Spain and the east. He had a tremendous influence on Christian scholars. The French monk Nicholas de Lyra, who was known as the \"ape of Rashi\", relied on Rashi's commentary when writing his \"Postillae Perpetuate\", one of the primary sources used in Luther's translation of the Bible. He believed that Rashi's commentaries were the \"official repository of Rabbinical tradition\" and significant to understanding the Bible. Rashi's commentaries became significant to humanists at this time who studied grammar and exegesis. Christian Hebraists studied Rashi's commentaries as important interpretations \"authorized by the Synagogue\".\nAlthough Rashi had an influence on communities outside of Judaism, his lack of connection to science prevented him from entering the general domain, and he remained more popular among the Jewish community.\nIn his book \"Demystifying Islam\", Muslim apologist Harris Zafar cites Rashi for the view that the Song of Songs is not an erotic poem narrated by a man about a woman, but is instead a poem narrated by God about the people of Israel, a point of importance to Muslims because of their belief, which Zafar summarizes, that the Song of Songs, at Chapter 5, Verse 16, mentions Muhammad by name, a supposition that might be problematic if the mention were in an erotic context.\n\"Rashi script\".\nThe semi-cursive typeface in which Rashi's commentaries are printed both in the Talmud and Tanakh is often referred to as \"Rashi script.\" Despite the name, Rashi himself did not use such a script: the typeface is based on a 15th-century Sephardic semi-cursive hand, postdating Rashi's death by several hundred years. Early Hebrew typographers such as the Soncino family and Daniel Bomberg employed in their editions of commented texts (such as the Mikraot Gedolot and the Talmud, in which Rashi's commentaries prominently figure) what would become called \"Rashi script\" to distinguish the rabbinic commentary from the primary text proper, for which they used a square typeface.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26556", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26556", "title": "Riemann integration", "text": ""}
{"id": "26557", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26557", "title": "Rutherford Backscattering", "text": ""}
{"id": "26558", "revid": "3022076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26558", "title": "Redmond, Washington", "text": "City in Washington, United States\nRedmond is a city in King County, Washington, United States, located east of Seattle. The population was 73,256 at the 2020 census.\nRedmond is best known as the home of Microsoft and Nintendo of America. The city has a large technology industry in addition to being a bedroom community for Seattle, which lies across Lake Washington on State Route 520.\nWith an annual bike race on city streets and the state's only velodrome, Redmond is also known as the \"Bicycle Capital of the Northwest\".\nHistory.\nNative Americans have lived in the Redmond area for about 10,000 years, based on artifacts discovered at the Redmond Town Center archaeological site and Marymoor Prehistoric Indian Site. The first European settlers arrived in the 1870s. Luke McRedmond filed a Homestead Act claim for land next to the Sammamish Slough on September 9, 1870, and the following year Warren Perrigo took up land adjacent to him. The rivers and streams had so many salmon that the settlement was initially named Salmonberg. More settlers came, and with the establishment of the first post office in 1881, the name of the community was changed to Melrose. The new name was derived from the Perrigos' successful inn, Melrose House, which upset McRedmond. After becoming postmaster, he successfully petitioned to have the name changed to Redmond in 1883.\nThe abundant forests and fish of Redmond provided jobs for loggers and fishermen, and with those jobs came demand for goods and services, bringing in merchants. The logging industry expanded significantly in 1889 when the Seattle, Lake Shore and Eastern Railway built a station in the center of town. The first plat for Redmond was filed on May 11, 1891, encompassing much of the area now known as downtown. After reaching the necessary population of 300, Redmond was incorporated on December 31, 1912.\nRedmond experienced an economic downturn in the 1920s. Prohibition forced saloons to close, cutting off a large portion of the city's tax base. The forests were declining after heavy logging, causing lumber mills to shut down. The deforested land was suitable for farming. Agriculture became Redmond's primary business, keeping residents fed during the Great Depression. When the U.S. entered World War II, shipyard jobs and other wartime work came to Redmond.\nAfter the war, Redmond's expansion began in earnest. The city expanded over thirty times larger in area through annexations between 1951 and 1967. From 1956 to 1965, Redmond was bordered by the town of East Redmond, which was formed by rural homeowners and later dissolved by the Washington Supreme Court. The completion of the Evergreen Point Floating Bridge across Lake Washington in 1963 allowed Redmond to flourish as a suburb of Seattle. In 1978, the U.S. Census Bureau proclaimed Redmond the fastest growing city in the state. Many technology companies made the city their home, and the increasing population demanded more retail shops. By the late 1980s, Downtown Redmond had become \"a series of strip centers surrounded by parking lots\", sparking plans for a mixed-use revitalized downtown.\nRedmond underwent a commercial boom during the 1990s, primarily due to Nintendo of America and Microsoft establishing their respective headquarters within the city in 1984 and 1986 respectively, culminating in 1997 with the opening of Redmond Town Center, a major regional shopping center on the site of a long-defunct golf course. Since 1990, the city has seen rising traffic congestion as a result of its rapid expansion, particularly in areas of urban sprawl. To address these issues, SR 520 underwent expansion in the 2000s and 2010s. A light rail line connecting Redmond to Seattle was proposed by Sound Transit as part of a ballot measure that was passed by voters in 2008. The first section of the 2 Line, as the light rail project was later renamed, opened in April 2024 between Bellevue and Redmond Technology station in Overlake. It was followed by an extension to Downtown Redmond on May 10, 2025.\nGeography.\nRedmond is bordered by Kirkland to the west, Bellevue to the southwest, and Sammamish to the southeast. Unincorporated King County lies to the north (with Woodinville a short distance beyond) and east. The city's urban downtown lies just north of Lake Sammamish; residential areas lie north and west of the lake. Overlake, the city's second urban center, is to the west of Lake Sammamish. The Sammamish River runs north from the lake along the west edge of the city's downtown. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which are land and are water.\nThe city is divided into several neighborhoods that form a ring around downtown Redmond. The Overlake neighborhood, which also encompasses part of Bellevue, lies southwest of downtown and includes the Microsoft headquarters campus and other office complexes as well as residential areas. The predominantly residential neighborhood of Education Hill lies north of downtown and was named for the five schools in the area, including Redmond High School; it was previously known as Poverty Hill until the 1950s, when it was annexed into Redmond.\nClimate.\nRedmond, like most of the Pacific Northwest, has a mild climate for its latitude, but still gets all four seasons. Summers tend to be warm and dry, with low rainfall and sunny or partly sunny from June to September. Winters tend to be cool and wet, with November being the rainiest month. Snowfall is uncommon, with the most common cold air being in a form of a high pressure system, driving out the rains from the area. However, snowfall is not as rare as in other cities closer to the moderating effects of Puget Sound, like Seattle. On average, the warmest month is August. The highest recorded temperature was on June 28, 2021. On average, the coolest month is January. The lowest recorded temperature was in January 1950. The maximum average precipitation usually occurs in December.\nRedmond has a Mediterranean climate type (\"Csb\"), with a fairly dry summer peak.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 73,256 people, 29,693 households, and 18,617 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 31,738 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 44.90% White, 2.21% African American, 0.38% Native American, 41.04% Asian, 0.13% Pacific Islander, 3.13% from some other races and 8.21% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 7.25% of the population. 22.4% of residents were under the age of 18, 6.9% were under 5 years of age, and 11.0% were 65 and older. The gender makeup of the city was 47.8% female.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 54,144 people, 22,550 households, and 13,890 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 24,177 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 65.19% White, 1.71% African American, 0.37% Native American, 25.36% Asian, 0.15% Pacific Islander, 3.22% from other races, and 4.00% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 7.78% of the population.\nThere were 22,550 households, of which 32.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.4% were married couples living together, 6.9% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.3% had a male householder with no wife present, and 38.4% were non-families. 29.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 2.98.\nThe median age in the city was 34.1 years. 22.7% of residents were under the age of 18; 7.5% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 38.7% were from 25 to 44; 21.6% were from 45 to 64; and 9.5% were 65 years of age or older. The sex ratio of the city was 50.9% male and 49.1% female.\nEconomy.\nSeveral companies in the high-tech industry are based in Redmond. The largest employer in the city by far is Microsoft, which moved its headquarters to Redmond in 1986. As of 2012, Microsoft has over 47,000 full-time employees, 45,000 contractors, and more than of office space in the Seattle area Eastside region, primarily in Redmond, with additional offices in Bellevue and Issaquah (90,000 employees worldwide). In June 2006, Microsoft purchased former Safeco's Redmond campus at 4515\u20135069 154th Place NE for $220.5 million.\nOther companies with headquarters in Redmond include Nintendo of America, Genie Industries (now part of Terex), Physio-Control (now part of Stryker), Visible.net, WildTangent, Solstice (acquired by Samsung) and Data I/O. As of 2023[ [update]], approximately 89\u00a0percent of employees for Redmond companies commute from outside the city.\nIn 2015, SpaceX opened a Starlink satellite development facility in Redmond.\nUnlike Bellevue and other neighboring cities, the city of Redmond does not have a business and occupation tax on income. However, to help offset the costs of road improvements for businesses, a business license fee of $55 per employee was approved in 1996. As of 2024[ [update]], the fee is $141 per employee.\nTop employers.\nAccording to Redmond's Comprehensive Annual Financial Reports, the top employers in the city are:\nCulture.\nRedmond Derby Days is an annual community festival held the second full weekend of July and celebrated its 75th anniversary in 2015. It began as a race around Lake Sammamish called the Redmond Bicycle Derby in 1939, and since then has become a multi-day event including a bicycle criterium, a parade, entertainment stages, a beer garden, local food offerings, a carnival, a drone light show, and other activities.\nPerforming arts in Redmond include the Eastside Symphony and the Second Story Repertory theater company, as well as artists who play at the Robertson Performing Arts Center located at Redmond High School. Redmond has a collection of outdoor sculptures throughout its streets and parks, many of which are part of a rotating sculpture exhibition.\nRedmond Lights is an annual community festival held the first Saturday of December. It features a special guest each year, a tree-lighting conducted by the mayor on city hall campus, a luminary walk on the Sammamish Trail and Redmond Central Connector with musical and light stations along the way to Redmond Town Center where there are many special attractions such as a carousel, skating rink and food sampling.\nThe Old Redmond Firehouse is a center for local teens. It has become a hub in the thriving Eastside independent music scene. Local bands perform here with concert style speakers.\nSince 2010, by city ordinance, Redmond has appointed a poet laureate.\nThe Concerts at Marymoor is an annual summer series of concerts held at the amphitheater in Marymoor Park. The venue has been host to artists as diverse as Norah Jones, Peter, Paul &amp; Mary, Rob Thomas and Duran Duran. When visiting the Seattle area, Cirque du Soleil has set up in Marymoor since the 2004 tour of Varekai when a concrete base was built for them to set up on. Since then, tours of Corteo (2006), Kooza (2010), Amaluna (2013), Kurios (2015) and Luzia (2017) have played in this spot. Marymoor also hosted the Warped Tour and Cavalia in 2012 and 2014.\nRedmond Saturday Market is the oldest farmer's market in the Seattle area's east side. This market is held on Saturdays from May through October on approximately 8,000 square feet of land near the Redmond Town Center. The City of Redmond has approved an ordinance that the current market site be preserved for its community and historic significance.\nLandmarks.\nRedmond has designated the following landmarks:\nParks and recreation.\nRedmond has 47 public parks totaling over . Many of these are neighborhood parks with picnic tables and sports fields or courts. The largest park within Redmond is King County's Marymoor Park, one of the most popular recreational areas in King County. It features a climbing rock, a model airplane flying field, a 48-acre off-leash dog park, an outdoor theater, sports fields such as baseball and soccer, a playground, tennis courts, a community garden, cricket pitch, and the Jerry Baker Memorial Velodrome, which hosts the FSA Star Crossed \u2013 Redmond cyclo-cross competition in September.\nThe city offers over of public trails for hiking, bicycling, and horseback riding. The Redmond Central Connector runs through downtown. The Sammamish River Trail connects to the Puget Power trail, the Burke-Gilman Trail (in Bothell), and the East Lake Sammamish Trail.\nIdylwood Park was acquired by the City in parcels between 1994 and 1996 and is situated on West Lake Sammamish. The park receives more than 42,000 visitors every summer.\nSixty Acres Park is known for its soccer in the spring through fall and RC electric airplanes and gliders in the winter time.\nIn 2004, Redmond North Little League won the Northwest region and participated in the Little League World Series in South Williamsport, PA. With Redmond North claiming the Northwest, it is the third team from Washington to claim the Northwest since its inception in 2001. Previous Washington champions were Bainbridge Island (2001), Richland (2003).\nThe Seattle Orcas of Major League Cricket plan to play at Redmond's Marymoor Park, where a 6,000-seat cricket pitch is planned to be built.\nGovernment.\nRedmond has a non-partisan mayor\u2013council form of government, with the mayor and seven council members elected at-large for staggered four-year terms. The city council authorized a ballot measure in March 2003 that would have changed Redmond to a council-manager government. However, it was rejected by the electorate, receiving less than 30% of the vote.\nEducation.\nMost of Redmond is part of the Lake Washington School District, which also encompasses almost all of Kirkland and parts of other surrounding communities. The public schools in Redmond include ten elementary schools, eight middle schools, and two high schools. The district also offers \"choice\" schools at all levels for alternative schooling needs. The city's two high schools are Redmond High School and Nikola Tesla STEM High School, a choice school with a STEM focus.\nThe Bellevue School District serves the city's southernmost neighborhoods, mainly below NE 40th Street. The unincorporated English Hill neighborhood in northern Redmond is served by the Northshore School District, while the Redmond Ridge area to the east is part of the Lake Washington School District. Several private schools in Redmond offer K\u201312 education, including Montessori programs. The Bear Creek School, a non-denominational Christian prep school, is the largest with nearly 750 enrolled students. The secular Overlake School has over 550 students at its Novelty Hill campus, which was established in 1972, and operates a branch school in Pailin, Cambodia.\nDigiPen Institute of Technology, a for-profit university that focuses on video game development, moved from Vancouver to Redmond in 1998. A local community college, the Lake Washington Institute of Technology, built its Redmond campus near Marymoor Park in 2005. Since 2018, it has leased a portion of its building to the Redmond city government for use as a community center.\nThe city is home to Redmond Regional Library, the second-largest branch in the King County Library System. The building opened on November 20, 1999, and replaced a smaller building that opened in 1975 and was deemed too small for the growing community. Redmond had been annexed into the King County Library System in 1947 shortly after the system was created through a county referendum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26559", "revid": "8087765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26559", "title": "Rise of the Triad", "text": "1995 first-person shooter video game\nRise of the Triad: Dark War is a first-person shooter video game, developed and published by Apogee Software (now 3D Realms) in 1995. The player can choose to play as one of five different characters, each bearing unique attributes such as speed and endurance. The game's story follows these five characters who have been sent to investigate a deadly cult, and soon become aware of a deadly plot to destroy a nearby city. A remake was designed by Interceptor Entertainment and released by Apogee Games in 2013. The shareware version of the game is titled Rise of the Triad: The HUNT Begins.\nThe game began as a follow-up game to \"Wolfenstein 3D\", but was soon altered and became a stand-alone game. It includes both single-player and multi-player functions, allowing individuals to connect with other gamers and tackle missions as a team. It is powered by a modified version of the \"Wolfenstein 3D\" engine and it was supposed to be called \"Wolfenstein 3D II: the Rise of the Triad\". The idea was scrapped by id Software and Apogee Software bought the license of that game.\nGameplay.\nLike most early first-person shooter games, the single-player mode's objective is to collect keys in order to proceed through the levels. Occasionally, special tactics and simple problem-solving skills are required to reach locations. Although most levels are fairly linear, there are some maps which have multiple exits.\nThe player chooses between five characters: Taradino Cassatt, Thi Barrett, Lorelei Ni, Doug Wendt, and Ian Paul Freeley. The characters differ in three characteristics: hit points, speed, and accuracy. Taradino Cassatt is the only character available in the shareware version of the game and has average statistics: average hit points, average speed, average accuracy.\nCertain enemies can beg for their life if they take enough damage, or fake their death. Some enemies dodge the player's attacks, while others lie on the ground to ambush the player. Other enemies can shoot nets to restrain the player, or steal and use weapons from the player. There are also four bosses. All enemies are digitized actors, mostly played by Apogee employees and their friends and family.\nOn random occasions, there are an especially large amount of gibs produced when an enemy is killed, presenting the player with a \"Ludicrous Gibs!\" message. The amount of gibs can be controlled through the options menu, which allows the player to set the graphics to various levels of goriness, from completely bloodless to extreme.\nThere are 13 weapons in the game, divided into three groups: bullet weapons (using infinite ammunition), missile weapons (using limited ammunition), and magic weapons. The missile weapons constitute the bulk of the arsenal, and usually have a wide area of effect. Magic weapons, like missile weapons, hold limited ammunition. Players can carry a total of four weapons at once: all three bullet weapons (a single pistol, dual pistols, and a submachine gun) and either a missile or a magic weapon.\nOnly one power-up can be active at once, and power-up effects last for a limited time.\nJump pads catapult a player in the air. By stepping onto one, the player character is propelled straight up, while by running up to it the player character can make long jumps. Jump pads are often required for getting past certain obstacles or reaching a ledge to retrieve a key. They can also be used for collecting powerups and bonuses.\nDestructible objects such as ornaments or plants may block secret doors. If light poles and firepots are shot, the area dims. Glass can be shattered by shooting or running through it.\nBonuses are awarded for various achievements whenever a level is completed. Examples are picking up all the missile weapons in a level, using all the healing items, or ending a level with minimal hit points remaining.\nMultiplayer.\nThe multiplayer mode (called COMM-BAT in the game) allows up to eleven players simultaneously. Each can have separate uniform colors, but in team mode, teams are defined by uniform color.\nThere are nine multiplayer modes. These include a standard deathmatch mode, and the similar \"Score More\", which assigns different points depending on the weapon and way that a kill was done. Other modes consist of collecting or destroying as many triad symbols as possible. There are a few \"tag\" multiplayer modes, similar to the children's game, where a player must tag another player or moving symbols. There is also a \"Hunter\" mode, in which a \"prey\" player with no weapons has to be hunted by the rest, and a capture the flag mode. Options that can be set for a multiplayer game include player attributes, and whether or not health refills, missile weapons, or traps are spawned.\nPlot.\nA team of special operatives known as the HUNT (High-risk United Nations Task-force) is sent to San Nicolas Island to investigate deadly cult activity taking place in an ancient monastery. Their boat, the only way back, is destroyed by patrols, and the team soon learns that the cult plans to systematically destroy nearby Los Angeles. The operatives, now unable to return whence they came, are then left to fight their way into the monastery on the island and eventually put a stop to the cult's activities.\nDuring its early stages of development, \"Rise of the Triad\" was initially meant to serve as the sequel to \"Wolfenstein 3D\", titled \"Wolfenstein 3D II: Rise of the Triad\". The presence of the Walther PP pistol, the MP 40 submachine gun, the bazooka, and the outfits worn by the enemies allude to Nazi Germany and imply the original aforementioned intent for the development of \"RotT\".\nDevelopment history.\nOriginal concept.\n\"Rise of the Triad\" began its life as a follow-up to \"Wolfenstein 3D\" (though it reportedly shares some similarities with director Tom Hall's \"Doom Bible\", which laid out Hall's conception of the video game \"Doom\" and even shares the name of one of the protagonists). The working titles of the game were \"Wolfenstein II\" and \"Wolfenstein 3D: Rise of the Triad\". It was to use the same game engine code as \"Wolfenstein 3D\", and have new levels, art, and characters. The artwork took around six months to do. As the game was getting into deeper development, project leader Scott Miller was contacted by John Romero, informing Miller that the project had been cancelled. Miller suspected that this was because id Software did not want to draw the spotlight away from the upcoming \"Doom\". In order to keep as many of the numerous game assets the team had already created from going to waste, Tom Hall came up with a new storyline which still incorporated the Nazi themes seen in the Wolfenstein series, however they would ultimately depart from plotlines involving Nazis, with the final narrative concerning a cult apparently inspired by the Californian folk legend of the Dark Watchers or 'los vigilantes oscuros'.\nAccording to the Apogee website, the original storyline was the following: After the fall of Hitler, the true powers behind him have drawn into seclusion, planning their next strategy for world domination. Three large corporations guided Hitler as a puppet, and now plan the subjugation of the planet to their organization, the Triad. Their new plan: having developed nuclear weapons and new V-3 rockets to carry them, they plan to get a stranglehold on the world with the threat of Armageddon.\nEngine.\nThe engine is an enhanced variant of the Wolfenstein 3D engine. The level design uses 90-degree walls and unvarying floor and ceiling heights in individual maps, limitations that are vestiges of the Wolfenstein 3D engine. However, the \"Rise of the Triad\" engine also includes features not possible with the original Wolfenstein 3D engine, such as elevation, panoramic skies, simulated dynamic lighting, fog, bullet holes, breakable glass walls, and level-over-level environments (made possible by \"gravitational anomaly disks\", suspended objects that collectively form stairs, floors, etc.). The level layouts were created with Tile Editor version 5 (TED5), which was also released with \"Extreme Rise of the Triad\" for users to customize their own maps.\nDevelopers of Incredible Power.\nThe team behind \"Rise of the Triad\" called itself The Developers of Incredible Power (DIP). Its name was created by Tom Hall, the lead designer of \"RotT\". Other members of DIP included Mark Dochtermann, Jim Dos\u00e9, Steve Hornback, Chuck Jones, Nolan Martin, Tim Neveu, William Scarboro, Joseph Selinske, Susan Singer, and Marianna Vayntrub. \"Rise of the Triad\" was the only game released by DIP. A second game that was planned, \"Prey\", never took off, but its title and parts of the original design were eventually recycled by Human Head Studios. The team was disbanded, and some of the members worked on the bestseller \"Duke Nukem 3D\". Others started their own companies or left the computer games business. Scarboro died from an asthma attack in 2002.\nCut elements.\nSeveral planned elements were cut from the game, including female versions of certain enemies, like Low Guards, Strike Force soldiers, and the Overpatrol. Originally the game was going to load both sets of guards into memory, then determine randomly which to place at each appropriate point. This had the side effect of making memory requirements much higher than normal for the time, so in order to conserve performance, the alternate versions of the enemies were removed. Stills of the alternate enemies can be seen during the credits, as \"actors who were cut from the game\". Other cuts survived, like the ROTT Reject Level Pack (stages that were cut) and some artwork (some can be found on the CD). There is a motion capture session that was not used in the final game, but can be found online.\nRelease.\nGame releases.\nAs with most Apogee games, the game was distributed as shareware, with the first episode released for free. The shareware episode, which contains ten original levels, is titled \"Rise of the Triad: The HUNT Begins\". This version has some limitations, including the ability to play only as Taradino Cassatt, and the availability of only four of the multiplayer modes. A \"Deluxe Edition\" of the shareware version, marketed in retail by LaserSoft, contains three extra levels, and three extra multiplayer levels that are not available on any other version.\nThere are several versions of the full or paid game, which includes three new episodes. The floppy disk and CD versions both contain 32 game levels for the three new episodes, with the CD version containing more multiplayer levels. The Site License version contains several multiplayer levels, and allows the game to be played in multiplayer mode in up to 11 different computers in a single network, without each requiring a different copy of the game.\nIn 2009, \"Rise of the Triad\" was released on GOG.com through DOSBox, making it compatible with Microsoft Windows, Linux, and macOS.\nExpansion packs.\nOn July 25, 1995, Apogee released a \"Reject Level Pack\" as freeware online. This pack is a collection of multiplayer maps deemed unsuitable for the original release. Some of these were serious attempts at levels (one even attempted to recreate a popular deathmatch level ((1-5) from \"Doom\"), and some were not (like one played inside the popular character Dopefish). The final level of the pack causes the game to crash intentionally.\nAn official retail add-on level pack was released by Apogee for \"ROTT\" entitled \"Extreme Rise of the Triad\", also in 1995. The add-on was produced by two key members from the original team, Tom Hall and Joe Siegler. Generally the maps produced in this add-on are considerably harder than the original game's maps due to tricks that Hall and Siegler had learned in the editor since the release of the original. It also includes some user made level editors, a random level generator from Apogee, maps, and sound files. The levels were released as freeware on September 1, 2000. The remaining materials on the \"Extreme ROTT\" CD were released as freeware online as part of a \"ROTT Goodies Pack\" on February 15, 2005.\nThere are a few other level packs released from Apogee, including \"Lasersoft Deluxe Shareware Maps\". They are identical to the released shareware packs, except that they include six exclusive levels. After Lasersoft went out of business, Apogee released these levels in October 1999.\nAnother is a level called \"Wolf3D\", which was done by Siegler as an exercise to see if he could replicate the level geography from \"Wolfenstein 3D\" in \"Rise of the Triad\", as \"Rise of the Triad\" uses the same basic game engine. The level copies the complete level geography from Episode 1 Level 1 of \"Wolfenstein 3D\". Some of the adjoining levels were added, but not completely.\nThe final release from Hall and Siegler was the \"Ohio RTC\" pack. This is a four level multiplayer pack which was designed for a group in Ohio that was holding a game tournament called 'BloodFest 96'. After the tournament was over, the pack was released online for everyone.\nThe final level to be released by anyone from the original team was one level done by Siegler called \"You &amp; Spray\" (Spray was an internal nickname given to the NME boss character by the developers). This was done by Siegler as a gag in 1998, mostly as a personal exercise to see if he could remember how to still use the level editor. After mentioning its existence online, Siegler was cajoled into releasing it in November 2000. It was posted for download at the \"Rise of the Triad\" page on the Apogee website.\nSource code.\nThe source code to \"Rise of the Triad\" was released under the GNU GPL-2.0-or-later on 20 December 2002. Fans of the game ported it to AmigaOS, Linux, Mac OS, Xbox, Dreamcast, PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS (homebrew) and 32-bit versions of Microsoft Windows. This has led to the game being included in the Fedora software repository, which downloads the free source port engine used as well as a free installer which downloads the shareware version's data.\nRemaster.\nOn September 6, 2020, during 3D Realms' \"Realms Deep 2020\" livestream, the game was shown running on Nintendo Switch and confirmed for modern platforms (Microsoft Windows, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One) for a 2021 release. At Realms Deep 2022, this was re-announced as \"Rise of the Triad: Ludicrous Edition\", developed by Nightdive Studios and co-published by Apogee Entertainment and New Blood Interactive. It will be released on the aforementioned platforms, as well as PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S. A demo was released on June 19, 2023. It was released on July 31, 2023 (September 29, 2023 for consoles), coinciding with the tenth anniversary of the 2013 remake. It features the option to toggle between the OPL and MIDI versions of the original soundtrack and the 2013 remake's soundtrack by Andrew Hulshult.\nReception.\nScott Miller estimates that the game eventually sold around 110,000 copies.\nA reviewer for \"Next Generation\" assessed that \"Rise of the Triad\" is an entertaining but ultimately undistinguished \"Doom\" replica which fails to rank with the best of the genre. Remarking that the game \"has its own style but never strays far enough from the \"Doom\" herd to fully break free\", he gave it three out of five stars.\nThe iOS version was not very well received and has Metacritic and GameRankings scores of respectively 49/100 and 49.00%.\nRemake.\nIn 2009, Scott Miller said that \"Rise of the Triad\" would be remade. Gameplay footage of the new \"Rise of the Triad\" was revealed at QuakeCon 2012. The game was designed by Frederik Schreiber and his company Interceptor Entertainment and was released on July 31, 2013, through Steam and GOG.com.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26560", "revid": "41906662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26560", "title": "Rurik", "text": "Varangian chieftain of the Rus'\nRurik (also spelled Rorik, Riurik or Ryurik; ; ; died 879) was a Varangian chieftain of the Rus' who, according to tradition, was invited to reign in Novgorod in the year 862. The \"Primary Chronicle\" states that Rurik was succeeded by his kinsman Oleg who was regent for his infant son Igor.\nTraditionally, Rurik has been considered the founder of the Rurik dynasty, which was the ruling dynasty of Kievan Rus' and its principalities, and ultimately the Tsardom of Russia, until the death of Feodor I in 1598. As a result, he is considered to be the traditional founder of the Russian monarchy.\nLife.\nThe earliest mention of Rurik is contained in the \"Primary Chronicle\", traditionally ascribed to Nestor and compiled in c.\u20091113, which states that East Slavic and Finnic tribes in 860\u2013862 (including the Chuds, Slovenes, Krivichs, Meryans and Ves) \"drove the Varangians back beyond the sea, refused to pay them tribute, and set out to govern themselves\". Afterwards the tribes started fighting each other and decided to invite the Varangians, led by Rurik, to reestablish order. Rurik came along with his younger brothers Sineus and Truvor and a large retinue.\nAccording to the chronicle, Rurik was one of the Rus', a Varangian tribe. Most historians believe that the Rus' were of Scandinavian origin, more specifically from what is currently coastal eastern Sweden around the eighth century. According to the prevalent theory, the name \"Rus\"' is derived from an Old Norse term for \"the men who row\", from an older name for the Swedish coastal area of Roslagen.\nSineus established himself at Beloozero, and Truvor at the town of Izborsk. Truvor and Sineus died shortly after the establishment of their territories, and Rurik consolidated these lands into his own territory, extending his rule in northern Russia. Askold and Dir, followers of Rurik who were sent to Constantinople, seized Kiev before launching an attack recorded in Byzantine sources for the year 860.\nThe Laurentian Codex of 1377, which contains the oldest surviving version of the \"Primary Chronicle\", states that Rurik first settled in Novgorod (\"newtown\"), while the Hypatian Codex of the 1420s states that Rurik first settled in Ladoga, before moving his seat of power to the newly founded city of Novgorod, a fort built not far from the source of the Volkhov River, where he stayed until his death.\nRurik is said to have remained in power until his death some time in the 870s. On his deathbed, Rurik bequeathed his realm to Oleg, who belonged to his kin, and entrusted to Oleg's hands his son Igor, for he was very young. Oleg moved the capital to Kiev (by murdering the then-rulers and taking the city) and founded the state of Kievan Rus', which was ruled by Rurik's successors (his son Igor and Igor's descendants). The state persisted until the Mongol invasion in 1240.\nLegacy.\nRurik does not appear in the regnal list in the opening section of the \"Hypatian Codex\" (compiled c. 1425); the list of \"knyazi\" (\"princes\") of Kiev starts with \"Dir and Askold\", followed by \"Oleg\", and then \"Igor\".\nThe Rurikids were the ruling dynasty of Kievan Rus', and ultimately the Tsardom of Russia, until 1598, and numerous noble families claim male-line descent from Rurik. He is considered to be the traditional founder of the Russian monarchy. The last Rurikid to rule Russia as tsar was Vasily IV, who reigned until 1610 and was from the House of Shuysky. The Romanovs were also related to the descendants of Rurik through marriage. The descendants of the princely families allegedly inherited from Rurik are still living.\nThe king Micha\u0142 Korybut Wi\u015bniowiecki reigned in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth until 1673; a member of the House of Wi\u015bniowiecki, who traditionally traced their descent to the Gediminids, recent studies side with a Rurikid origin of the House of Zbaraski and its cadet branches including the House of Wi\u015bniowiecki.\nAlternative theories.\nThe name \"Rurik\" is a form of the Old Norse name \"Hr\u0153rekr\". Rorik of Dorestad was a member of one of two competing families reported by the Frankish chroniclers as having ruled the nascent Danish kingdom at Hedeby. He may have been a nephew of king Harald Klak. He is mentioned as receiving lands in Friesland from Emperor Louis I. He plundered neighbouring lands: he took Dorestad in 850, attacked Hedeby in 857, and looted Bremen in 859, while his own lands were ravaged in his absence. The Emperor was enraged and stripped him of all his possessions in 860. After that, Rorik disappears from western sources for a considerable period of time. In 862, according to Russian sources, Rurik arrived in the eastern Baltic and built the fortress of Ladoga. Later he moved to Novgorod.\nRorik of Dorestad reappeared in Frankish chronicles in 870, when his Friesland demesne was returned to him by Charles the Bald. In 882, Rorik is mentioned as dead (without a specific date of death). The \"Primary Chronicle\" places the death of Rurik of Novgorod in 879, three years earlier than the Frankish chronicles. According to western sources, the ruler of Friesland was converted to Christianity by the Franks.\nThe idea of identifying Rurik of Rus' with Rorik of Dorestad was revived by the anti-Normanists Boris Rybakov and Anatoly H. Kirpichnikov in the mid-20th century, but Alexander Nazarenko and other scholars have objected to it.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26561", "revid": "13974845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26561", "title": "Rank (linear algebra)", "text": "Dimension of the column space of a matrix\nIn linear algebra, the rank of a matrix A is the dimension of the vector space generated (or spanned) by its columns. This corresponds to the maximal number of linearly independent columns of A. This, in turn, is identical to the dimension of the vector space spanned by its rows. Rank is thus a measure of the \"nondegenerateness\" of the system of linear equations and linear transformation encoded by A. There are multiple equivalent definitions of rank. A matrix's rank is one of its most fundamental characteristics.\nThe rank is commonly denoted by rank(\"A\") or rk(\"A\"); sometimes the parentheses are not written, as in rank \"A\".\nMain definitions.\nIn this section, we give some definitions of the rank of a matrix. Many definitions are possible; see Alternative definitions for several of these.\nThe column rank of A is the dimension of the column space of A, while the row rank of A is the dimension of the row space of A.\nA fundamental result in linear algebra is that the column rank and the row rank are always equal. (Three proofs of this result are given in , below.) This number (i.e., the number of linearly independent rows or columns) is simply called the rank of A.\nA matrix is said to have full rank if its rank equals the largest possible for a matrix of the same dimensions, which is the lesser of the number of rows and columns. A matrix is said to be rank-deficient if it does not have full rank. The rank deficiency of a matrix is the difference between the lesser of the number of rows and columns, and the rank.\nThe rank of a linear map or operator formula_1 is defined as the dimension of its image:formula_2where formula_3 is the dimension of a vector space, and formula_4 is the image of a map.\nExamples.\nThe matrix\nformula_5\nhas rank 2: the first two columns are linearly independent, so the rank is at least 2, but since the third is a linear combination of the first two (the first column plus the second), the three columns are linearly dependent so the rank must be less than 3.\nThe matrix\nformula_6\nhas rank 1: there are nonzero columns, so the rank is positive, but any pair of columns is linearly dependent. Similarly, the transpose\nformula_7\nof A has rank 1. Indeed, since the column vectors of A are the row vectors of the transpose of A, the statement that the column rank of a matrix equals its row rank is equivalent to the statement that the rank of a matrix is equal to the rank of its transpose, i.e., rank(\"A\") = rank(\"A\"T).\nComputing the rank of a matrix.\nRank from row echelon forms.\nA common approach to finding the rank of a matrix is to reduce it to a simpler form, generally row echelon form, by elementary row operations. Row operations do not change the row space (hence do not change the row rank), and, being invertible, map the column space to an isomorphic space (hence do not change the column rank). Once in row echelon form, the rank is clearly the same for both row rank and column rank, and equals the number of pivots (or basic columns) and also the number of non-zero rows.\nFor example, the matrix A given by\nformula_8\ncan be put in reduced row-echelon form by using the following elementary row operations:\nformula_9\nThe final matrix (in reduced row echelon form) has two non-zero rows and thus the rank of matrix A is 2.\nComputation.\nWhen applied to floating point computations on computers, basic Gaussian elimination (LU decomposition) can be unreliable, and a rank-revealing decomposition should be used instead. An effective alternative is the singular value decomposition (SVD), but there are other less computationally expensive choices, such as QR decomposition with pivoting (so-called rank-revealing QR factorization), which are still more numerically robust than Gaussian elimination. Numerical determination of rank requires a criterion for deciding when a value, such as a singular value from the SVD, should be treated as zero, a practical choice which depends on both the matrix and the application.\nProofs that column rank = row rank.\nProof using row reduction.\nThe fact that the column and row ranks of any matrix are equal is fundamental in linear algebra. Many proofs have been given. One of the most elementary ones has been sketched in . Here is a variant of this proof:\nIt is straightforward to show that neither the row rank nor the column rank are changed by an elementary row operation. As Gaussian elimination proceeds by elementary row operations, the reduced row echelon form of a matrix has the same row rank and the same column rank as the original matrix. Further elementary column operations allow putting the matrix in the form of an identity matrix possibly bordered by rows and columns of zeros. Again, this changes neither the row rank nor the column rank. It is immediate that both the row and column ranks of this resulting matrix is the number of its nonzero entries.\nWe present two other proofs of this result. The first uses only basic properties of linear combinations of vectors, and is valid over any field. The proof is based upon Wardlaw (2005). The second uses orthogonality and is valid for matrices over the real numbers; it is based upon Mackiw (1995). Both proofs can be found in the book by Banerjee and Roy (2014).\nProof using linear combinations.\nLet A be an \"m\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrix. Let the column rank of A be r, and let c1, ..., c\"r\" be any basis for the column space of A. Place these as the columns of an \"m\" \u00d7 \"r\" matrix C. Every column of A can be expressed as a linear combination of the r columns in C. This means that there is an \"r\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrix R such that \"A\" = \"CR\". R is the matrix whose ith column is formed from the coefficients giving the ith column of A as a linear combination of the r columns of C. In other words, R is the matrix which contains the multiples for the bases of the column space of A (which is C), which are then used to form A as a whole. Now, each row of A is given by a linear combination of the r rows of R. Therefore, the rows of R form a spanning set of the row space of A and, by the Steinitz exchange lemma, the row rank of A cannot exceed r. This proves that the row rank of A is less than or equal to the column rank of A. This result can be applied to any matrix, so apply the result to the transpose of A. Since the row rank of the transpose of A is the column rank of A and the column rank of the transpose of A is the row rank of A, this establishes the reverse inequality and we obtain the equality of the row rank and the column rank of A. (Also see Rank factorization.)\nProof using orthogonality.\nLet A be an \"m\"\u2009\u00d7\u2009\"n\" matrix with entries in the real numbers whose row rank is r. Therefore, the dimension of the row space of A is r. Let x1, x2, ..., x\"r\" be a basis of the row space of A. We claim that the vectors \"Ax1, \"Ax2, ..., \"A\"x\"r\" are linearly independent. To see why, consider a linear homogeneous relation involving these vectors with scalar coefficients \"c\"1, \"c\"2, ..., \"cr\":\nformula_10\nwhere v = \"c\"1x1 + \"c\"2x2 + \u22ef + \"crx\"r\". We make two observations: (a) v is a linear combination of vectors in the row space of A, which implies that v belongs to the row space of A, and (b) since \"Av = 0, the vector v is orthogonal to every row vector of A and, hence, is orthogonal to every vector in the row space of A. The facts (a) and (b) together imply that v is orthogonal to itself, which proves that v = 0 or, by the definition of v,\nformula_11\nBut recall that the x\"i\" were chosen as a basis of the row space of A and so are linearly independent. This implies that \"c\"1 = \"c\"2 = \u22ef = \"cr\" = 0. It follows that \"Ax1, \"Ax2, ..., \"A\"x\"r\" are linearly independent.\nEvery \"Ax\"i\" is in the column space of A. So, \"Ax1, \"Ax2, ..., \"Ax\"r\" is a set of r linearly independent vectors in the column space of A and, hence, the dimension of the column space of A (i.e., the column rank of A) must be at least as big as r. This proves that row rank of A is no larger than the column rank of A. Now apply this result to the transpose of A to get the reverse inequality and conclude as in the previous proof.\nAlternative definitions.\nIn all the definitions in this section, the matrix A is taken to be an \"m\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrix over an arbitrary field F.\nDimension of image.\nGiven the matrix formula_12, there is an associated linear mapping\nformula_13\ndefined by\nformula_14\nThe rank of formula_12 is the dimension of the image of formula_16. This definition has the advantage that it can be applied to any linear map without need for a specific matrix.\nRank in terms of nullity.\nGiven the same linear mapping f as above, the rank is n minus the dimension of the kernel of f. The rank\u2013nullity theorem states that this definition is equivalent to the preceding one.\nColumn rank \u2013 dimension of column space.\nThe rank of A is the maximal number of linearly independent columns formula_17 of A; this is the dimension of the column space of A (the column space being the subspace of \"F\"\"m\" generated by the columns of A, which is in fact just the image of the linear map f associated to A).\nRow rank \u2013 dimension of row space.\nThe rank of A is the maximal number of linearly independent rows of A; this is the dimension of the row space of A.\nDecomposition rank.\nThe rank of A is the smallest positive integer k such that A can be factored as formula_18, where C is an \"m\" \u00d7 \"k\" matrix and R is a \"k\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrix. In fact, for all integers k, the following are equivalent:\nIndeed, the following equivalences are obvious: formula_26.\nFor example, to prove (3) from (2), take C to be the matrix whose columns are formula_19 from (2).\nTo prove (2) from (3), take formula_19 to be the columns of C.\nIt follows from the equivalence formula_29 that the row rank is equal to the column rank.\nAs in the case of the \"dimension of image\" characterization, this can be generalized to a definition of the rank of any linear map: the rank of a linear map \"f\" : \"V\" \u2192 \"W\" is the minimal dimension k of an intermediate space X such that f can be written as the composition of a map \"V\" \u2192 \"X\" and a map \"X\" \u2192 \"W\". Unfortunately, this definition does not suggest an efficient manner to compute the rank (for which it is better to use one of the alternative definitions). See rank factorization for details.\nRank in terms of singular values.\nThe rank of A equals the number of non-zero singular values, which is the same as the number of non-zero diagonal elements in \u03a3 in the singular value decomposition \nDeterminantal rank \u2013 size of largest non-vanishing minor.\nThe rank of A is the largest order of any non-zero minor in A. (The order of a minor is the side-length of the square sub-matrix of which it is the determinant.) Like the decomposition rank characterization, this does not give an efficient way of computing the rank, but it is useful theoretically: a single non-zero minor witnesses a lower bound (namely its order) for the rank of the matrix, which can be useful (for example) to prove that certain operations do not lower the rank of a matrix.\nA non-vanishing p-minor (\"p\" \u00d7 \"p\" submatrix with non-zero determinant) shows that the rows and columns of that submatrix are linearly independent, and thus those rows and columns of the full matrix are linearly independent (in the full matrix), so the row and column rank are at least as large as the determinantal rank; however, the converse is less straightforward. The equivalence of determinantal rank and column rank is a strengthening of the statement that if the span of n vectors has dimension p, then p of those vectors span the space (equivalently, that one can choose a spanning set that is a \"subset\" of the vectors): the equivalence implies that a subset of the rows and a subset of the columns simultaneously define an invertible submatrix (equivalently, if the span of n vectors has dimension p, then p of these vectors span the space \"and\" there is a set of p coordinates on which they are linearly independent).\nTensor rank \u2013 minimum number of simple tensors.\nThe rank of A is the smallest number k such that A can be written as a sum of k rank 1 matrices, where a matrix is defined to have rank 1 if and only if it can be written as a nonzero product formula_30 of a column vector c and a row vector r. This notion of rank is called tensor rank; it can be generalized in the separable models interpretation of the singular value decomposition.\nProperties.\nWe assume that A is an \"m\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrix, and we define the linear map f by \"f\"(x) = \"A\"x as above.\nApplications.\nOne useful application of calculating the rank of a matrix is the computation of the number of solutions of a system of linear equations. According to the Rouch\u00e9\u2013Capelli theorem, the system is inconsistent if the rank of the augmented matrix is greater than the rank of the coefficient matrix. If on the other hand, the ranks of these two matrices are equal, then the system must have at least one solution. The solution is unique if and only if the rank equals the number of variables. Otherwise the general solution has k free parameters where k is the difference between the number of variables and the rank. In this case (and assuming the system of equations is in the real or complex numbers) the system of equations has infinitely many solutions.\nIn control theory, the rank of a matrix can be used to determine whether a linear system is controllable, or observable.\nIn the field of communication complexity, the rank of the communication matrix of a function gives bounds on the amount of communication needed for two parties to compute the function.\nGeneralization.\nThere are different generalizations of the concept of rank to matrices over arbitrary rings, where column rank, row rank, dimension of column space, and dimension of row space of a matrix may be different from the others or may not exist.\nThinking of matrices as tensors, the tensor rank generalizes to arbitrary tensors; for tensors of order greater than 2 (matrices are order 2 tensors), rank is very hard to compute, unlike for matrices.\nThere is a notion of rank for smooth maps between smooth manifolds. It is equal to the linear rank of the derivative.\nMatrices as tensors.\nMatrix rank should not be confused with tensor order, which is called tensor rank. Tensor order is the number of indices required to write a tensor, and thus matrices all have tensor order 2. More precisely, matrices are tensors of type (1,1), having one row index and one column index, also called covariant order 1 and contravariant order 1; see Tensor (intrinsic definition) for details.\nThe tensor rank of a matrix can also mean the minimum number of simple tensors necessary to express the matrix as a linear combination, and that this definition does agree with matrix rank as here discussed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26563", "revid": "5379071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26563", "title": "Marine archaeology in the Gulf of Khambhat", "text": "Archaeological exploration along Western Indian coast\nMarine Archeology in the Gulf of Khambhat - earlier known as Gulf of Cambay - centers around controversial findings made in December 2000 by the National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) under the Gulf of Khambhat, a bay on the Arabian Sea on the west coast of India. The structures and artifacts discovered by NIOT are the subject of contention. The major disputes surrounding the Gulf of Khambhat Cultural Complex (GKCC) are claims about the existence of submerged \"city-like structures\", the difficulty associating dated artifacts with the site itself, and disputes about whether stone artifacts recovered at the site are actually geofacts or artifacts. One major complaint is that artifacts at the site were recovered by dredging, instead of being recovered during a controlled archeological excavation. This leads archeologists to claim that these artifacts cannot be definitively tied to the site. Because of this problem, prominent archeologists reject a piece of wood that was recovered by dredging and dated to 7500 BC as having any significance in dating the site. The surveys were followed up in the following years and two palaeo channels of old rivers were discovered in the middle of the Khambhat area under water depths, at a distance of about from the present day coast.\nInitial discovery.\nOn 19 May 2001, India's Union Minister for Human Resource Development, Science and Technology division, Murli Manohar Joshi, announced that the ruins of an ancient civilization had been discovered off the coast of Gujarat, in the Gulf of Khambhat. The site was discovered by NIOT while they performed routine pollution studies using sonar, and was described as an area of regularly spaced geometric structures. It is located from the Gujarat coast, spans , and can be found at a depth of . In his announcement, Joshi represented the site as an urban settlement that pre-dates the Indus Valley civilization. Further descriptions of the site by Joshi describe it as containing regularly spaced dwellings, a granary, a bath, a citadel, and a drainage system. However it was later on 22 May, reported that the discovery has not been dated and the discovery (for example, great baths) resembles the Harappan civilization dating 4,000 years ago. Furthermore, the Indus civilization port Lothal is located at the head, Gulf of Khambhat.\nFollow-up excavations.\nA follow-up investigation was conducted by NIOT in November 2001, which included dredging to recover artifacts and sonar scans to detect structures. Among the artifacts recovered were a piece of wood, pottery shards, weathered stones initially described as hand tools, fossilized bones, and a tooth. Artifacts were sent to the National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI) in Hyderabad, India, the Birbal Sahni Institute of Paleobotany (BSIP) in Lucknow, India, and the Physical Research Laboratory in Ahmedabad, India. The piece of wood was carbon dated to an age of 9,500 years old.\nNIOT returned for further investigation in the Gulf from October 2002 to January 2003. During these excavations, NIOT reported finding two paleochannels flanked by rectangular and square basement-like features. Artifacts were recovered by means of dredging, including pottery sherds, microliths, wattle and daub remains, and hearth materials. These artifacts were sent for dating at the laboratories of Manipur University and Oxford University. The wattle and daub remains are composed of locally available clay, reed, husk, pottery pieces, and pieces of fresh water shell. The wattle and daub also shows evidence of partial burning.\nThe most recent work in the Gulf of Khambhat took place from October 2003 to January 2004 and was primarily a geologic study. Techniques used during this investigation include bathymetry survey, sub-bottom survey, side-scan survey, and magnetic survey. One of the major findings from this investigation concerns the orientation of sand ripples at the site. NIOT researchers claim that there are two sets of ripples visible at the site; one set is a natural feature formed by tidal currents, whilst they say the other set has formed in relation to underlying structural features.\nCarbon dates.\nOne of the main controversies surrounding the GKCC is the dated piece of wood. D. P. Agrawal, chairman of the Paleoclimate Group and founder of Carbon-14 testing facilities in India stated in an article in Frontline Magazine that the piece was dated twice, at separate laboratories. The NGRI in Hyderabad returned a date of 7190 BC and the BSIP in Hannover returned a date of 7545-7490 BC. Some archeologists, Agrawal in particular, contest that the discovery of an ancient piece of wood does not imply the discovery of an ancient civilization. Agrawal argues that the wood piece is a common find, given that 20,000 years ago the Arabian Sea was lower than its current level, and that the gradual sea level rise submerged entire forests.\nArtifacts.\nAnother controversial issue are the artifacts retrieved from the site during the various excavations. It is disputed that many of the items that have been identified as artifacts by the NIOT investigators are actually man-made. Instead their artificial nature is contested and they are argued to be stones of natural origin.\nResearchers report finding shards of pottery as indicative of hand-made and wheel-turned pottery traditions. The reported shards have simple rims with small incised lines. All of the pottery fragments found so far are small or miniature shards. Part of the controversy is that some of the \"shards\" are natural geofacts and others lack any proof of any connections, as with the dated pieces of wood, with the purported \"ruins\" found by NIOT researchers. In addition, their small size also raises the possibility that the real shards have been transported from elsewhere by local, strong tidal currents. But if the pottery is genuine, researchers say it should show some similarities to Harappan pottery, which is typically red and black and stamped with seals. Based on the current pottery collection, a stylistic continuity of Harappan civilization isn't evident. The small size of the artifact collection makes it difficult to analyse the pottery conclusively.\nGeography.\nThe Gulf of Khambhat was formed by a major rift that resulted in a down sliding of the Khambhat region. The area is very tectonically active today, and several faults can be found in the gulf. Periodic earthquakes also occur here. This knowledge has led several archeologists to state that the site is not in a secure enough context to be reliably dated. Because of the tectonic activity and strong currents, these archeologists claim that there is not sufficient stratification to be sure the recovered artifacts can be associated with the site.\nCollection methods.\nComplaints have arisen because NIOT recovered artefacts by dredging the sea floor of the site. This method might allow errant artefacts to be collected along with those that actually correlate with the site. Analysing stratification is virtually impossible with this method as well.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26565", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26565", "title": "Robert Siodmak", "text": "German film director (1900\u20131973)\nRobert Siodmak (; 8 August 1900 \u2013 10 March 1973) was a German film director, screenwriter, and producer. His career spanned some 40 years, working extensively in the United States and France, as well as in his native country. \nThough he worked in many genres, he was best known as a skilled craftsman of thrillers and film noir, and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Director for \"The Killers\" (1946). Later in his career, he won the Golden Bear for \"Die Ratten\" (1955) and the German Film Award for Best Director for \"The Devil Strikes at Night\" (1957).\nHis brother was writer and filmmaker Curt Siodmak.\nEarly life.\nSiodmak was born in Dresden, Germany, one of three children of Rosa Philippine (n\u00e9e Blum) and Ignatz Siodmak. His parents were both from Jewish families in Leipzig (the myth of his American birth in Memphis, Tennessee was necessary for him to obtain a visa in Paris during World War II). He worked as a stage director and a banker before becoming editor and scenarist for Curtis Bernhardt in 1925 (Bernhardt directed a film of Siodmak's story \"Conflict\" in 1945). \nCareer.\nPre-war Germany.\nAt twenty-six he was hired by his cousin, producer Seymour Nebenzal, to assemble original silent movies from stock footage of old films. Siodmak worked at this for two years before he persuaded Nebenzal to finance his first feature, the silent masterpiece, \"Menschen am Sonntag\" (\"People on Sunday\") in 1929. The script was co-written by Billy Wilder and Siodmak's brother Curt, later the screenwriter of \"The Wolf Man\" (1941). It was the last German silent and also included such future Hollywood artists as Fred Zinnemann, Edgar G. Ulmer, and Eugen Schufftan. His next film\u2014the first at UFA to use sound\u2014was the 1930 comedy \"Abschied\" for writers Emeric Pressburger and Irma von Cube, followed by \"Der Mann, der seinen M\u00f6rder sucht\", another comedy, yet quite different and unusual, a likely product of Billy Wilder's imagination. But in his next film, the crime thriller \"St\u00fcrme der Leidenschaft\", with Emil Jannings and Anna Sten, Siodmak found a style that would become his own.\nFrance.\nWith the rise of Nazism and following an attack in the press by Hitler's minister of propaganda Joseph Goebbels in 1933 after viewing \"Brennendes Geheimnis\" (\"The Burning Secret\"), Siodmak left Germany for Paris. His creativity flourished, as he worked for the next six years in a variety of film genres, from comedy (\"Le sexe faible\" and \"La Vie Parisienne\" ) to musical (\"La crise est finie\", with Danielle Darrieux) to drama (\"Mister Flow\", \"Cargaison blanche\", \"Mollenard\"\u2014compare Gabrielle Dorziat's shrewish wife with that of Rosalind Ivan in \"The Suspect\"\u2014and \"Pi\u00e8ges\", with Maurice Chevalier and Erich von Stroheim). While in France, he was well on his way to becoming successor to Rene Clair, until Hitler again forced him out. Siodmak arrived in California in 1939, where he made 23 movies, many of them widely popular thrillers and crime melodramas, which critics today regard as classics of film noir.\nHollywood.\nBeginning in 1941, he first turned out several B-films and programmers for various studios before he gained a seven-year contract with Universal Studios in 1943. The best of those early films are the thriller \"Fly by Night\" in 1942, with Richard Carlson and Nancy Kelly, and in 1943 \"Someone to Remember\", with Mable Paige in a signature role. As house director, his services were often used to salvage troublesome productions at the studio. On Mark Hellinger's production \"Swell Guy\" (1946), for instance, Siodmak was brought in to replace Frank Tuttle only six days after completing work on \"The Killers\". Siodmak worked steadily while under contract, overshadowed by high-profile directors, like Alfred Hitchcock, with whom he had been often compared by the press.\nAt Universal, Siodmak made yet another B-film, \"Son of Dracula\" (1943), the third in the studio's series of Dracula movies (based on his brother Curt's original story). His second feature was the Maria Montez/Jon Hall vehicle, \"Cobra Woman\" (1944), made in Technicolor.\nHis first all-out noir was \"Phantom Lady\" (1944), for staff producer Joan Harrison, Universal's first female executive and Alfred Hitchcock's former secretary and script assistant. It showcased Siodmak's skill with camera and editing to dazzling effect, but no more so than in the iconic jam-session sequence with Elisha Cook Jr. in throes on the drums. Following the critical success of \"Phantom Lady\", Siodmak directed \"Christmas Holiday\" (1944) with Deanna Durbin and Gene Kelly (Hans J. Salter received an Oscar nomination for best music). Beginning with this film, his work in Hollywood attained the stylistic and thematic characteristics that are evident in his later noirs. \"Christmas Holiday\", adapted from a W. Somerset Maugham novel of the same title by Herman J. Mankiewicz, was Durbin's most successful feature. Siodmak's use of black-and-white cinematography and urban landscapes, together with his light-and-shadow designs, followed the basic structure of classic noir films. In fact, he had a number of collaborations with cinematographers, such as Nicholas Musuraca, Elwood Bredell, and Franz Planer, in which he achieved the Expressionist look he had cultivated in his early years at UFA. During Siodmak's tenure, Universal made the most of the noir style in \"The Suspect\", \"The Strange Affair of Uncle Harry\" and \"The Dark Mirror\", but the capstone was \"The Killers\". Released in 1946, it was Burt Lancaster's film debut and Ava Gardner's first dramatic, featured role. A critical and financial success, it earned Siodmak his only Oscar nomination for direction in Hollywood. His German production \"Nachts, wenn der Teufel kam\", based on the false story of Bruno L\u00fcdke, who was falsely accused of being a serial killer by the Nazis, was nominated for Best Foreign Language Film in 1957.\nWhile still under contract at Universal, Siodmak worked on loan out to RKO for producer Dore Schary in the thriller \"The Spiral Staircase\", a masterly blending of suspense and horror, which Siodmak said he edited as he pleased, due to a strike in Hollywood in 1945. The film earned Ethel Barrymore an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actress. For 20th Century Fox and producer Darryl F. Zanuck, he directed, partly on location in New York City, the crime noir \"Cry of the City\" in 1948, and in 1949 for MGM he tackled its lux production \"The Great Sinner\", but the prolix script proved unmanageable for Siodmak who relinquished direction to the dependable Mervyn LeRoy. On loan out to Paramount in 1949, he made for producer Hal B. Wallis his penultimate American noir \"The File on Thelma Jordon\", with Barbara Stanwyck at her most fatal\u2014and sympathetic. Siodmak saw in this film a thematic link with \"The Suspect\" and \"The Strange Affair of Uncle Harry\", with the failed lovers of these films and significantly their tragic conclusions (ten years later he addressed the same theme in \"The Rough and the Smooth\"). Perhaps his finest American noir\u2014although not his last\u2014is \"Criss Cross\" that was to reunite him not only with Lancaster, but also \"The Killers\" producer Mark Hellinger, who died suddenly before production began in 1949. Working without the hands-on control of Hellinger again, Siodmak was able to make this film his own as he could not the earlier film. Yvonne De Carlo's working-class femme fatal (a high mark in her career) completes the deadly triangle, along with Lancaster and Dan Duryea: the archetype of doomed attraction central to all Siodmak's noirs, but the one he could fully express to its nihilistic conclusion.\nSiodmak immersed himself in the creative process and genuinely loved working with actors, acquiring a reputation as an actor's director for his work with many future stars, including Burt Lancaster, Ernest Borgnine, Tony Curtis, Debra Paget, Maria Schell, Mario Adorf, Ava Gardner, Olivia de Havilland, Dorothy McGuire, Yvonne de Carlo, Barbara Stanwyck, Geraldine Fitzgerald, and Ella Raines.\nHe directed Charles Laughton (a close friend) and George Sanders, and got from both perhaps the unlikeliest, most natural and under-acted performances of their careers. From Lon Chaney Jr. he drew an uncharacteristically controlled and coldly menacing performance for \"Son of Dracula\". He managed with Lancaster to capture a youthful vulnerability in \"The Killers\", despite the actor's age (he was 33). He was able to get a believable, dramatic performance from Gene Kelly. He also helped raise Ava Gardner's public profile.\nReturn to Europe.\nBefore leaving for Europe in 1952, following the problematic production \"The Crimson Pirate\" for Norma Productions (distributed through Warner Bros.) and producer Harold Hecht, his third and last film with Burt Lancaster (Siodmak dubbed the chaotic experience \"The Hecht Follies\"), Siodmak had directed some of the era's best films noirs (twelve in all), more than any other director who worked in that style. However, his identification with film noir, generally unpopular with American audiences, may have been more of a curse than a blessing.\nHe often expressed his desire to make pictures \"of a different type and background\" than the ones he had been making for ten years. Nevertheless, he ended his Universal contract with one last noir, the disappointing \"Deported\" (1951) which he filmed partly abroad (Siodmak was among the first refugee directors to return to Europe after making American films). The story is loosely based on the deportation of gangster Charles \"Lucky\" Luciano. Siodmak had hoped Loretta Young would star, but settled for the Swedish actress M\u00e4rta Tor\u00e9n.\nThose \"different type\" of films he had made\u2014\"The Great Sinner\" (1949) for MGM, \"Time Out of Mind\" (1947) for Universal (which Siodmak also produced), \"The Whistle at Eaton Falls\" (1951) for Columbia Pictures (Ernest Borgnine's debut and Dorothy Gish's return to the screen)\u2014all proved ill-suited to his noir sensibilities (although in 1952 \"The Crimson Pirate\", despite the difficult production, was a surprising and pleasing departure\u2014in fact, Lancaster believed it was inspiration for the tongue-in-cheek style of the James Bond films).\nThe five months he collaborated with Budd Schulberg on a screenplay tentatively titled \"A Stone in the River Hudson\", an early version of \"On the Waterfront\", was also a major disappointment for Siodmak. In 1954 he sued producer Sam Spiegel for copyright infringement. Siodmak was awarded $100,000, but no screen credit. His contribution to the original screenplay has never been acknowledged.\nSiodmak's return to Europe in 1954 with a Grand Prize nomination at the Cannes Film Festival for his remake of Jacques Feyder's \"Le grand jeu\" was a misstep, despite its stars, Gina Lollobrigida and Arletty in the role originated by Fran\u00e7oise Rosay, Feyder's wife. In 1955, Siodmak returned to the Federal Republic of Germany to make \"Die Ratten\", with Maria Schell and Curd Jurgens, winning the Golden Berlin Bear at the 1955 Berlin Film Festival. It was the first in a series of films critical of his homeland, during and after Hitler, which included \"Nachts, wenn der Teufel kam\", both thriller and social artifact of Germany under Nazi rule, shot in documentary style reminiscent of \"Menschen am Sonntag\" and \"Whistle at Eaton Falls\", and in 1960, \"Mein Schulfreund\", an absurdist comedy, dark and strange, with Heinz R\u00fchmann as a postal worker attempting to reunite with childhood friend Hermann G\u00f6ring. In April 1958, Siodmak was made an executive in Kirk Douglas' film production company Bryna Productions, as European Representative.\nBetween these films, and \"Mein Vater, der Schauspieler\" in 1956, with O. W. Fischer (the West German Rock Hudson), he took a detour into Douglas Sirk territory with the sordid melodrama, \"Dorothea Angermann\" in 1959, featuring Germany's star Ruth Leuwerik. Later the same year he left Germany for Great Britain to film \"The Rough and the Smooth\", with Nadja Tiller and Tony Britton, yet another noir, but much meaner and gloomier than anything he had made in America (compare its downbeat ending with that of \"The File on Thelma Jordan\"). He followed with \"Katia\" also in 1959, a tale of Czarist Russia, with twenty-one-year-old Romy Schneider, mistakenly titled in America \"Magnificent Sinner\", recalling\u2014unfavorably\u2014Siodmak's other costume melodrama. In 1961, \"L'affaire Nina B\", with Pierre Brasseur and Nadja Tiller (again), returned Siodmak to familiar ground in a slick, black-and-white thriller about a pay-for-hire Nazi hunter, which could be argued was the start of the many spy themed films so popular in the 1960s. In 1962, the entertaining \"Escape from East Berlin\", with Don Murray and Christine Kaufman, had all the characteristic style of a Siodmak thriller, but was one that he later dismissed as something he had made for \"little kids in America.\" His work in Germany returned to programmers like those that had begun his career in Hollywood 23 years earlier. From 1964 to 1965, he made a series of films with former Tarzan Lex Barker: \"The Shoot\", \"The Treasure of the Aztecs\", and \"The Pyramid of the Sun God\", all taken from the western, adventure novels of Karl May.\nLater career.\nSiodmak's return to Hollywood filmmaking in 1967 with the wide-screen western \"Custer of the West\" was another disappointment, receiving mostly negative reviews from critics and failing to generate box-office appeal. Siodmak ended his career with a six-hour, two-part toga and chariot epic, \"Kampf um Rom\" (1968), a more campy work (perhaps intentionally) than \"Cobra Woman\" had been. There was a brief and profitable foray into television in Great Britain with the series \"O.S.S.\" (1957\u201358). \nPersonal life.\nSiodmak long resided in Ascona, Ticino, Switzerland. He was married to Bertha Odenheimer from 1933 until her death in 1973. \nDeath.\nHe died of a heart attack on 10 March 1973, seven weeks after his wife's death.\nThe British Film Institute held a retrospective of his career in April and May 2015.\nFilmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26567", "revid": "26937909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26567", "title": "Rap Music", "text": ""}
{"id": "26568", "revid": "6056090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26568", "title": "Regression", "text": "Regression or regressions may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26569", "revid": "46274489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26569", "title": "Return to Castle Wolfenstein", "text": "2001 video game\nReturn to Castle Wolfenstein is a 2001 first-person shooter game developed by Gray Matter Studios and published by Activision. It was initially released for Microsoft Windows and subsequently for the PlayStation 2 (as \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein: Operation Resurrection\"), Xbox (as \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein: Tides of War\"), Linux, and Macintosh in the following years. The game serves as a reboot of the \"Wolfenstein\" series. id Software, the developers of \"Wolfenstein 3D\", oversaw the development and were credited as executive producers.\nUpon release, \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" received a generally favorable reception, with critics praising the visual presentation and design of the game's open-ended levels in its single-player campaign and quality of its multiplayer gameplay. However, critics considered the game was not as innovative or impactful as the design of its predecessor, and expressed that its narrative and themes were unoriginal. Splash Damage created some of the maps for the Game of the Year edition. A sequel, titled \"Wolfenstein\", was released in 2009.\nGameplay.\n\"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" is a first-person shooter in which the player navigates levels and fights enemies including Nazi soldiers, undead, and experimental mutants. The player acquires weapons and ammo throughout levels, including for pistols, submachine guns, rifles, grenades, rockets, flamethrowers, and experimental weapons including the Venom, a minigun, and the Tesla Gun, which shoots electricity at enemies. Some weapons have alternate fire modes, such as rifles that have a scope, or shoot projectiles. The player can also engage in melee combat by either kicking or using a knife. Damage is location-specific, with headshots damaging enemies more than other areas. Special items can be collected that increase the player's health, ammo, armor, or stamina.\nIn the game's single-player mode, players use combat and stealth to complete objectives across 27 levels in 7 missions. Missions begin with a mission briefing, providing information about objectives, and may include activities such as reaching the end of an area, defeating all the enemies, collecting certain items, eliminating specific enemies, or stealth missions. Mission levels contain secrets and treasure in hidden areas, with completion of the level informing the player if all have been discovered. Several missions and the endgame also feature more difficult boss battles. The player can review objectives and mission information in their notebook, as well as collect notes or read clipboards and letters throughout the levels that provide background information.\nStealth missions require players to sneak and take cover through levels to avoid enemy detection. Guards in these levels will independently patrol the area and have their own routines. When enemies detect a player, they will be alerted and sound an alarm at an alarm box, causing other enemies to appear. Players can take down enemies from behind whilst sneaking if undetected. Some stealth missions lead to failure if enemies sound an alarm.\nMultiplayer.\nMultiplayer is an objective-based game mode, in which players are split into two teams\u2014Axis and Allies. Each team has a set of objectives to complete, the Allies usually being to destroy some sort of Axis objective, and the Axis objectives being to defend their objectives. These objectives are split into two categories, primary and secondary. Primary objectives are ones which must be completed for victory, generally stealing secret documents or destroying a radar array; however, secondary objectives are ones which are optional\u2014they do not have to be completed, but if they are they may aid the appropriate team, such as blowing out a door to allow access into a tunnel which shortens travel time or allows less-noticeable infiltration of the enemy base.\nEach team has access to a slightly different set of weapons, matching those used by each side in World War II. Players can choose from four different classes: Soldier, Medic, Engineer and Lieutenant. Soldiers can carry heavy weapons, such as the Panzerfaust, Venom Cannon or Flamethrower, which are not available to other classes. Medics can revive and heal other teammates. Engineers can breach obstacles and arm and defuse dynamite. Lieutenants can supply ammo to teammates and are able to call in air strikes.\nEach class specializes in a certain aspect of the game, and an effective team will balance players out using all four classes, such as soldiers for blasting through enemy defenses, medics for supporting the team and keeping them alive, Lieutenants to resupply teammates with ammo, and engineers to complete the objective.\nThere are three different modes of play, each allowing for a different experience\u2014objective, stopwatch, and checkpoint. Stopwatch calls for the Allied side to complete a set of objectives within a predefined time limit. The opposing team then become the Allies and have to complete the objectives in a shorter time than the now Axis. Checkpoint gamemode is a mode in which teams capture flags. It may be more commonly known as Capture the Flag (CTF). Whichever team is first to control all the flags at once, wins. The team-based networked multiplayer features different character classes that must work together in order to win. There are four classes\u00a0\u2014 lieutenant, medic, engineer, and soldier\u00a0\u2014 the soldier can be one of several subclasses depending upon the special/heavy weapon that he selects. The multiplayer demo includes a beachhead assault map similar to Omaha Beach.\nPlot.\nIn 1943, assigned to the Office of Secret Actions (OSA) from the military, US Army Ranger William \"B.J.\" Blazkowicz and British operative Agent One are sent to Egypt to investigate the activity of the German SS Paranormal Division. The duo find themselves witness to the SS releasing an ancient curse around the dig site, resurrecting scores of zombies from their slumber. Pushing through the mummies and Nazis, B.J. and Agent One are led to an airfield and a location to follow. As they tail the SS, the two are shot down near Austria and captured by the Nazis. Agent One and Blazkowicz are imprisoned in Castle Wolfenstein, a remote, medieval castle that serves as a stronghold, prison, and research station. During their incarceration, Agent One is tortured for information and dies from electrocution. B.J., however, manages to escape Castle Wolfenstein's dungeon and fights his way out of the castle, using a cable car to leave the area and meet up with Kessler, a member of the German resistance in a nearby village.\nMeanwhile, the SS Paranormal Division, under Oberf\u00fchrer Helga von B\u00fclow, has long since moved from Egypt and has been excavating the catacombs and crypts of an ancient church within the village itself in search of the resting place of a \"Dark Knight\". The Division's sloppy precautions have led to the release of an ancient curse and the awakening of hordes of undead creatures, this time including Saxon knights. The majority of the SS finally realize the dangers and seal off the entrance into the catacombs, leaving many soldiers trapped inside. B.J. descends regardless and fights both Nazis and undead until he arrives at the ancient house of worship, the Defiled Church, where Nazi scientist Professor Zemph is conducting a 'life essence extraction' on the corpse of a Dark Knight, which, thanks to some Nazi technology, succeeds. Shortly before B.J.'s arrival, Zemph tries to talk the impatient Helga von Bulow out of retrieving an ancient Thulian artifact, the \"Dagger of Warding\" from a nearby altar in an isolated area of the church, but she shoots him and proceeds. This final blunder awakens another monster, Olaric, which kills and dismembers her. Blazkowicz, after a heated battle against spirits and demon attacks, defeats Olaric, and then is airlifted out with Zemph's notes and the dagger.\nWith the lead on Helga seeming to have come to a close, the OSA begins to shift its focus to one of Germany's leading scientific researchers and Head of the SS Special Projects Division, Oberf\u00fchrer Wilhelm \"Deathshead\" Strasse. Their investigation leads the OSA to realizing that Deathshead is preparing to launch an attack on London. He intends to use a V-2 rocket fitted with an experimental biological warhead, launching it from his base near Katamarunde in the Baltics. Due to the stealthy nature in which the OSA needs to act, Blazkowicz is parachuted some distance from the missile base and separated from his equipment. After collecting his gear, he smuggles himself into a supply truck bound for the base. Once inside, Blazkowicz destroys the V-2 on its launchpad and fights his way out of the facility towards an airbase filled with experimental jet aircraft. There, he commandeers a \"Kobra\" rocket-plane and flies to safety in Malta.\nEager to know more about Deathshead and his secret projects, the OSA sends Blazkowicz to the bombed-out city of Kugelstadt, where he is assisted by members of the German Kreisau Circle resistance group in breaking into a ruined factory and exfiltrating a defecting scientist. It is there he discovers the blueprints and prototype of the Reich's latest weapon, an electrically operated hand-held minigun dubbed the Venom Gun. Blazkowicz eventually breaks into Deathshead's underground research complex, the Secret Weapons Facility. There he encounters the horrific fruits of Deathshead's labors: creatures, malformed, and twisted through surgery and mechanical implants. The creatures escape from their containments and go on a rampage. Blazkowicz fights his way through the facility, only to see Deathshead escape the chaos by U-boat, and learns of his destination by interrogating a captured German officer.\nBlazkowicz is then parachuted into Norway, close to Deathshead's mysterious \"X-Labs.\" After breaking into the facility, which has been overrun by the twisted creatures he encountered in Kugelstadt (dubbed 'Lopers'), Blazkowicz retrieves Deathshead's journal, which links Deathshead's research to the rest of the SS Paranormal's occult activity. Finally catching up with Deathshead, Blazkowicz comes face to face with a completed and fully armored \"\u00dcbersoldat\", and kills the researchers who have developed it. After the \"\u00dcbersoldat\" is destroyed, Deathshead escapes in a Kobra rocket-plane and disappears for the rest of the game.\nAfter studying the documents captured by Blazkowicz, the OSA has become aware of a scheme codenamed 'Operation: Resurrection', a plan to resurrect Heinrich I, a legendary and powerful Saxon warlock-king from 943 AD. Despite the skepticism of senior Allied commanders, the OSA parachutes Blazkowicz back near Castle Wolfenstein, at the Bramburg Dam, where he fights his way until he arrives at the village town of Paderborn. After assassinating all the senior officers of the SS Paranormal Division present there for the resurrection, Blazkowicz fights his way through Chateau Schufstaffel and into the grounds beyond. After fighting two more \"\u00dcbersoldaten\", Blazkowicz enters an excavation site near Castle Wolfenstein.\nInside the excavation site, Blazkowicz fights Nazi guards and prototype \"\u00dcbersoldaten\", and makes his way to a boarded-up entrance to Castle Wolfenstein's underground crypts. There, he finds that the ruined and decaying sections of the castle has become infested with undead creatures, which are attacking the castle's garrison. After fighting his way through the underworkings of the castle, Blazkowicz arrives too late at the site of a dark ceremony to prevent the resurrection of Heinrich I. At the ceremony, SS psychic and \"Oberf\u00fchrerin\" Marianna Blavatsky conjure up dark spirits, which transform three of Deathshead's \"\u00dcbersoldaten\" into Dark Knights, Heinrich's lieutenants. She ultimately raises Heinrich I, who turns her into his undead slave. Blazkowicz destroys the three Dark Knights, the undead Marianna Blavatsky, and eventually Heinrich I. In the distance, \"Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS\" Heinrich Himmler remarks how matters have been ruined as he leaves for Berlin to face an expectant Hitler.\nBack in the OSA, Operation Resurrection is closed and Blazkowicz is off on some \"R&amp;R\" \u2014 shooting Nazis.\nDevelopment and release.\nDevelopment.\nDevelopment on a sequel to \"Wolfenstein 3D\" was pitched to id Software by Gray Matter Studios. The studio was composed of former staff of Xatrix Entertainment, who had developed \"Redneck Rampage\", ' and the 1998 mission pack ' for id Software's \"Quake II\". To support the pitch, a demo was created set outside a castle that demonstrated the enemy AI and a feature involving enemies setting off an alarm when detecting the player. id Software CEO Todd Hollenshead stated that studio had been searching for a development team to revive the series and the pitch was \"jaw-dropping\" and \"captured the imagination of what the potential could be for a modern \"Wolfenstein\"\". The game's publisher, Activision, invested in a 40 per cent equity stake of Grey Matter.\n\"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" was announced in January 2000. id Software provided \"significant involvement\" to Grey Matter with guidance on animation, art and research, with the studio stating they were in contact with John Carmack and the id Software team \"on a regular basis\". However, id Software had limited creative interference in the studio's vision for the game, beyond \"direction in keeping the game true to the universe. Activision extended the development window beyond the planned release date of Christmas 2000 to ensure the game's quality.\nThe game was designed in the id Tech 3 engine developed for \"Quake III\", the fourth game to use the engine. The development team used terrain tools in the \"Quake III\" expansion \"Team Arena\" to create complex interiors for the castle and large outdoor environments, which led to further delays. This approach supported the creation of \"enormous maps\" and allowed the team to design levels that offered multiple paths to the player to complete a mission. Levels were designed to showcase the game's \"dynamic\" scripting system for enemy behavior, who would patrol areas, react to dead enemies or noise, sound alarms or call for reinforcements. Additional features, including dragging dead bodies, silent attacks, and exchanging uniforms, were tested and removed to \"significantly simplify\" the game to make it \"easier to play\".\nDesign of the game took reference from \"Wolfenstein 3D\", with the developers' aim to create an interpretation of the original game as a \"semi-retelling\" rather than a direct sequel. The studio dispensed with several elements from the original game they viewed as unenjoyable, including key cards and save points, and prioritised improving the action elements of the game, including enemy AI and scripted behaviors. The developers also undertook research into the World War 2 era to create the visual design for the game. Photographs of castles, cobblestones, and other visual elements were used by the team from two visits to Europe to create textures of the game's German setting. However, the studio aimed to balance plausible historical depiction with \"mysterious and bizarre\" elements for entertainment value, with creative director Drew Markham describing the game as \"World War 2 meets \"The X-Files\"\". Supernatural elements were inspired by Wewelsburg, a castle used by Heinrich Himmler and associated with occult rituals and practices. The castle and cable car also bear close similarities to the 1968 war film Where Eagles Dare.\nRelease.\n\"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" was released on November 21, 2001, for Windows. The game was released for Linux and Macintosh platforms in 2002, with the Linux port done in-house by Timothee Besset and the Mac port done by Aspyr Media. In 2003, the game was ported to the PlayStation 2 and Xbox video game consoles and subtitled as \"Operation Resurrection\" and \"Tides of War\", respectively.\nBoth console versions include an additional single-player prequel mission, set in the fictional town of Ras El-Hadid in Egypt. The latter half of the level features an extensive underground burial site with many undead enemies, as does the original first mission. This prequel level is likely closer to the developers' true intentions for the story, as indicated by the distinctly Egyptian design of the burial site, including the presence of sand, traps, mummies and hieroglyphs on the walls in some areas (in the original storyline, this site is found in the middle of a German village during the second mission). By contrast, the single-player storyline in the Windows version starts at Castle Wolfenstein. The PS2 version has a bonus feature which allows players to purchase items at the end of each level by finding secrets. In the Xbox version, a Secret Bonus is awarded after every level when all the secret areas for that level have been found. It also has several new equipable items and weapons as well as new enemies. The two-player co-op mode is exclusive to Xbox and allows the second player to play as Agent One, altering the game in which he was never killed and played out the missions to the end. This allows for the story to support that Agent One either survived. The Xbox version also has downloadable content, system-link play and had online multiplayer via Xbox Live before Xbox Live was terminated for original Xbox games. \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" is now playable online on Insignia, a revival server restoring online functionality to Xbox games. A Platinum Hits edition of the game was also released for the Xbox. The PlayStation 2 version does not support online multiplayer.\nThe source code for \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" and \"Enemy Territory\" was released under the GNU General Public License v3.0 or later on August 12, 2010. The \"ioquake3\" developers at icculus.org announced the start of respective engine projects soon after.\nCommunity mods.\nOn October 15, 2020, a community overhaul mod \"RealRTCW\" was released on Steam as a free modification for original game. It features new renderer, expanded arsenal, rebalanced gunplay, new high-quality models, textures and sounds.\nOn November 19, 2021, day of the game's twentieth anniversary, free modification \"Wolfenstein: Enemy Territory Single-Player &amp; Cooperative\" was released on Steam by French modder William Faure, head of a small team of developers at \"Dark Matter Productions\" since 2013 who was also involved in the development of \"RealRTCW\", restoring the single-player campaign of the cancelled \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein: Enemy Territory\" expansion with approval and external support from original game developers.\nFilm.\nA \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" film was announced in 2002 with Rob Cohen attached to direct. Little information has been available since, however, with the exception of a July 20, 2005, IGN interview. The interview discussed the \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" film with id employees. In the interview, Todd Hollenshead indicated that the movie was in the works, though still in the early stages.\nOn August 3, 2007, \"Variety\" confirmed \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\", to be written and directed by Roger Avary and produced by Samuel Hadida. On November 2, 2012, Roger Avary signed on to write and direct the film. The film is being described as a mix of \"Inglourious Basterds\" and \"\".\nReception.\nAccording to review aggregator website Metacritic, \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" received \"generally favorable\" reviews. Several critics remarked that the game was a capable successor to \"Wolfenstein 3D\". and on par with its contemporaries. However, despite high pre-release expectations that the game would be as impactful as its predecessor, others felt the game was not innovative and derivative of other titles, such as \"Half-Life\" or \"No One Lives Forever\". \"Edge\" stated that despite a \"lack of anything revelatory\", the game embodied the shooter genre at its purest. Similarly, \"GameSpot\" described the game as a \"pure shooter\" whose appeal was in its action gameplay, but noted whilst it was \"thoroughly competent and technically excellent\", it was \"also rather sterile and passionless\", comparing the game as falling short of shooters including \"Serious Sam\", \"Max Payne\", or \"Alien vs. Predator 2\".\nMany critics praised the game's graphics and implementation of the \"Quake III\" engine, particularly the representaton of the game's setting and environment. Eliot Fish of \"Hyper\" praised the authenticity of the game's \"creepy atmosphere, nice environmental detail and excellent architecture\". Li C. Kuo of \"PC Gamer\" similarly praised the game's \"high-res textures, smooth animations and detailed character models\", drawing attention to character animations, lighting effects and fire animations.\nCritics generally praised the gameplay and single-player-missions, with particular praise directed towards the variety of environments, open-ended levels and multiple objectives. Some enjoyed the variety and handling of weapons in the game, finding the game's distribution of ammo and health was balanced and challenging. Reception of the enemy AI was mixed, with Some finding enemy behaviour complex and challenging, and others finding it unrealistic and easy to defeat. Reviewers highlighted the game's stealth mechanics, with Richard Shoemaker of \"PC Zone\" finding they provided a \"pause in the relentless action\" and were integrated well with the game. Other reviewers enjoyed the additions of secret areas and hidden treasure in adding replayability to levels, although others found them contrived and added little to the gameplay. Jim McCauley of \"PC Format\" considered the game's initial progression to be \"depressingly straightforward\", but praised later missions as \"varied and rewarding\". However, other critics felt some levels were too linear or uninteractive.\nThe game's multiplayer mode was considered by many to be a highlight, with some claiming the game featured one of the best multiplayer modes of a first-person shooter. Praise was directed towards the game's objective-based modes and classes. Eliot Fish of \"Hyper\" praised the mode's \"fantastic map design\" and \"truly gripping teamplay\". Air Hendrix of \"Australian PC World\" described the game's action as \"more cerebral\" and emphasising \"teamwork and accomplishing specific objectives over twitchy combat\".\nThe game's narrative received a less positive reception. Although some reviewers enjoyed the game's premise, many reviewers considered the game's themes and settings to be clich\u00e9. The game's cutscenes and dialogue also received a mixed reception. Christopher Allen of \"Allgame\" considered they added \"intrigue\" and \"urgency\" to the game, but James Cottee of \"PC PowerPlay\" described them as \"surprisingly dry, dull and uninspiring\". Richard Shoemaker of \"PC Zone\" expressed that the game had a \"clever storyline\" but lacked \"classic moments\", was \"paced quite poorly\" and did not have many surprises or twists.\nThe \"PlayStation 2\" version, \"Operation Resurrection\", received less favorable reviews, with critics considering the game to be an inferior version to its counterparts. Critics lamented the omission of multiplayer features, with \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" stating the lack of any features was an \"inexcusably raw deal\" given the pedigree of the game's online gameplay on other platforms. Many reviews also noted the reduced graphical fidelity compared to other versions, and encountered poor performance, including a low framerate. Reviewers also commented on the difficulty of aiming with analog controls. Adam Pavlacka of \"Official Playstation 2 Magazine\" described the version as \"\"Wolfenstein\" lite\" and \"half a game\".\nSales.\n\"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" debuted at #3 on NPD Intelect's computer game sales chart for the November 18\u201324 period, at an average retail price of $57. It fell to position 7 in its second week. By the end of 2001, the game's domestic sales totaled 253,852 units, for revenues of $13.1 million (~$ in 2024).\nIn the United States, \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" sold 350,000 copies and earned $17 million (~$ in 2024) by August 2006. It was the country's 48th-best-selling computer game between January 2000 and August 2006. Combined sales of all \"Wolfenstein\" computer games released between January 2000 and August 2006 had reached 660,000 units in the United States by the latter date. \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" received a \"Silver\" sales award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association (ELSPA), indicating sales of at least 100,000 copies in the United Kingdom. By January 2002, Activision reported that shipments of \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" to retailers had surpassed one million units. The game sold 2 million copies by January 2004.\nAwards.\n\"PC Gamer US\" awarded \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" its 2001 \"Best Multiplayer Game\" prize. The editors wrote: \"No other FPS rewards this level of teamplay, sports this kind of graphics, or is this blissfully free of cheaters.\"\nSequels.\nA multiplayer-only spinoff of the series, \"\", was originally planned as a full-fledged expansion pack for \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" developed by Splash Damage. The single-player component of the game was never completed and thus was removed entirely. The developers at that point decided the multiplayer part would be released as a free, downloadable standalone game. \"Enemy Territory\" is a team-based networked multiplayer game which involves completing objectives through teamwork using various character classes.\nThis gameplay was later reutilized in a full-fledged commercial game ' set in id Software's \"Quake\" universe. A semi-sequel called \"Wolfenstein\" was developed by Raven Software and id Software and published by Activision, and released on August 18, 2009. A successor to \"Wolfenstein\" titled ' and a standalone prequel expansion titled \"\" have also been released in 2014 and 2015. The Old Blood references RTCW with characters with similar names and the X-labs being mentioned.\n\"The New Order\" storyline was followed up in \"\" which was released in late 2017.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26570", "revid": "13023844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26570", "title": "Red Faction (video game)", "text": "First-person shooter released in 2001\nRed Faction is a first-person shooter video game developed by Volition and published by THQ for PlayStation 2 and Microsoft Windows in 2001, and Macintosh platforms in 2001 and 2002. A version for the N-Gage was developed by Monkeystone Games, and the mobile version was developed by Blue Beck. The game was ported to PlayStation 4 by Plaion and published by THQNordic in 2016 and released in both physical and digital copies. The game was inspired by several works of contemporary science fiction.\n\"Red Faction\" takes place on Mars in the late 21st century. The player controls a miner, Parker, who helps lead a rebellion against the Ultor Corporation. The premiere feature of the game is its \"Geo-Mod\" technology, short for \"geometry modification\", which provided destructible environments, allowing the player to destroy certain sections of the scenery in the game. For example, instead of opening a door, a player could blast through the rock surrounding the door. The game sold more than 1,000,000 units by 2002.\nOn November 29, 2016, the game was made available for the PlayStation 4 through the PlayStation Network with added features such as trophy support and widescreen resolutions.\nGameplay.\nThe game features GeoMod technology, which allows players to significantly alter and otherwise affect the surrounding terrain and buildings, either with explosives or otherwise. Past games allowed limited alteration of the environment through scripted means or special triggered areas that added or removed certain predefined level elements. \"Red Faction\" was the first video game that allowed players unscripted level-altering possibilities.\nThe PC version of \"Red Faction\" includes an extra level called \"Glass House\" which allows the player to experiment with GeoMod as a mechanic in a sandbox environment.\nThe PS2 version uses offline split-screen multiplayer featuring deathmatch rounds with AI bots and up to 4 human players. The PC release of the game, in addition to its offline LAN mode, has competitive online multiplayer featuring deathmatch, team deathmatch, and capture the flag gameplay for up to 32 human players on 25 maps. 2 additional multiplayer levels for the PC version were each included as exclusive content for players who purchased the game from either GameStop or Electronics Boutique. The later PS3 and PS4 releases are direct ports of the PS2 version and include no multiplayer functionality.\nPlot.\n\"Red Faction\" takes place on Mars around the year 2075. Earth's minerals are being depleted and humans need more of them to survive. The vast Ultor Corporation runs the mining operation on Mars. The living conditions are deplorable, human rights for the miners are few, and a disease called \"The Plague\" is running rampant throughout the colony with no known antidote available\u2014predominantly within the confines of the mine complex. Parker, a downtrodden miner, came to Mars to make a new start in his life\u2014taken in by the promises and advantages Ultor has to offer in the mines of Mars. After a routine day in the mine with the typical aggression toward miners and cramped living conditions and poor nutrition, he witnesses the spark that starts a rebellion when a security guard abuses a miner at the end of his shift and attempts to attack him, causing the miner to fight back and kill the security guard. Parker takes up arms, with the help of Hendrix, a rebellious Ultor security technician who guides Parker through the complex. Hendrix tries to get Parker to join up with a group of miners who are about to steal a supply shuttle and escape the complex, but Parker arrives too late. The shuttle takes off, and is destroyed by missiles moments later.\nParker traverses through the Ultor complex, eliminating any resistance Ultor throws at him, and even (with the help of Orion, a high-ranking Red Faction member) kidnapping a high-ranking Ultor administrator, Gryphon, for Eos, leader of the Red Faction. Parker learns from Gryphon about Dr. Capek, who created \"The Plague\". Capek has been experimenting with nanotechnology, and the Plague is a side-effect of injections at the miners' annual medical checkup. Hendrix directs Parker to Capek's secret underground laboratory, where he and Eos meet up and take down Capek. As Capek dies, he tells Eos there is a cure for the Plague but refuses to tell her how to make it and dies. With Capek dead, the lab's self-destruction sequence initiates. Eos stays behind to find the files on the cure while Parker continues to the Communications center. After sending a distress call to the Earth Defense Force, Parker destroys the missile defense system, so that he can stow away on a shuttle to an Ultor space station in Martian orbit to deactivate a laser defense system without getting shot down.\nAfter destroying the space station, Parker lands back on Mars via an escape pod, Ultor brings out its reserve of mercenaries to help them in their fight against the miners. Hendrix tells Parker that the mercenaries have orders to destroy the mining complex, covering up any proof of Ultor's wrongdoing, Hendrix is killed soon after this by the mercenaries. After fighting his way through the mercenary base, Parker confronts Masako, the mercenary leader. After he kills Masako, Parker sees that Eos is tied up and sitting on the floor next to the bomb, which has been set to explode. After deactivating it, the Earth Defense Force arrives just in time to save Parker and Eos from a fighter aircraft. Eos tells Parker that an antidote for the Plague has been made and it is being given to any sick miners. She also tells him she is leaving Mars, and that Parker should enjoy his new status as a hero.\nDevelopment.\n\"Descent 4\" was a game being developed by Volition as part of the \"Descent\" game franchise, as a prequel to \"Descent\". However, it was cancelled and the technology behind it and some of the plot were incorporated into \"Red Faction\". Examples include the main character Parker as well as the GeoMod engine.\nSimilarities between \"Red Faction\" and the 1990 film \"Total Recall\" have been pointed out, with its setting on Mars and the rebellion against the guards. Lead designer Alan Lawrance acknowledged the similarities in a 2014 interview but stated the film was not used as the main inspiration; any connection is purely coincidental.\n\"Red Faction\" entered a pre-production phase in 1998. The original intention was for every part of the game to be destructible but this was reduced in scope due to technical challenges and the requirement to guide the player through a linear game. It was created by a small team on a relatively limited budget, and released in 2001.\nThe N-Gage version was developed by John Romero's studio Monkeystone Games.\nReception.\nThe PS2 and PC versions of \"Red Faction\" received \"generally favorable reviews\", while the N-Gage version received \"mixed or average\" reviews, according to the review aggregation website Metacritic.\nFor the PS2 version, \"IGN\" called it \"an absolute must-have game for the PlayStation 2, and it's the best single-player first-person shooter by a long shot\". \"GameSpot\" stated, \"Although \"Red Faction\" rarely outstrips the games it draws inspiration from, the fact that there are times when it shows them up at all is pretty impressive.\" \"PlanetPS2\" commented, \"\"Red Faction\" delivers a satisfying, if slightly flawed single player experience and a distracting, but ultimately shallow multiplayer mode. The graphics are impressive, and the technology introduced in this game is amazing, it's just unfortunate that it hasn't been used to its fullest potential.\" Chester \"Chet\" Barber of \"NextGen\" said in its July 2001 issue, \"Although \"Red Faction\" isn't the most inventive FPS out there, it proves to be worthy with a solid single-player mode.\" Jason D'Aprile of \"Extended Play\" gave it four stars out of five, saying, \"To say \"Red Faction\" is the best shooter on the PS2 doesn't do it justice -- it's one of the best shooters available for any system, and easily one of the best games on the PlayStation2 [\"sic\"]. Mixing tried, true, and blisteringly entertaining action with superb AI, innovative game design elements, and a constantly moving storyline to drive this long and challenging shooter forward, \"Red Faction\" manages to shoot a breath of fresh air into the whole genre. If you love great action, go out and get this game.\" However, \"Edge\" gave it the lowest score of five out of ten. Uncle Dust of \"GamePro\" said, \"\"Red Faction\" hits the mark, combining superior technology and awesome graphics with an intense, lengthy, and satisfying story line to keep gamers fighting for the rebellion with all they've got.\"\nFor the PC version, \"IGN\" stated, \"It's all about the gameplay, and when you crank this baby to hard or, God forbid, im-freaking-possible, you'll find the gameplay to keep you going for hours piled upon days, piled upon weeks.\" \"PC Gamer\" commented, \"As far as looks go, \"Red Faction\" is more like the cute girl next door than a hot fashion model from the Upper West Side: It's pretty, but it won't make a man drop to his knees and thank God for giving him sight.\" \"GameSpot\" noted, \"Its relative lack of originality can ... undermine \"Red Faction\"'s appeal for more-experienced players, for whom the game will provide mostly familiar territory. Nevertheless, \"Red Faction\" is an accomplished shooter in its own right.\" \"GameRevolution\" called the game \"a fine FPS with plenty of action and intense gameplay, even if it is derivative, too short and a tad uninspired.\" However, Jeff Lundrigan of \"NextGen\" said in its December 2001 issue, \"\"Red Faction\" on PC is well worth playing for its engaging storyline and varied gameplay, but as a PC title, it's enjoyable without being especially notable.\" Steve Bauman of \"Computer Games Magazine\" gave it three stars out of five, saying, \"It has the setup, but its drab, by-the-numbers execution lacks any flair.\"\n\"Maxim\" gave the PS2 version all five stars and said, \"We have to admit that most first-person games nauseate us, but [\"Red Faction\"]'s smooth graphics and easy gameplay make it hard to put down.\" \"Playboy\" gave the same console version a score of 90% and stated, \"Virtually every element of \"Red Faction\" is nicely polished \u2013 even the controls are intuitive, unlike most console shooters, which make PC gaming vets long for a keyboard and mouse.\" \"The Cincinnati Enquirer\" gave the N-Gage version four stars out of five and called it \"a clever port from the popular console and PC versions\". Star Dingo of \"GamePro\", however, said of the same N-Gage version, \"To be honest, the levels (small and right-angle-filled as they are) are fairly well-balanced in terms of weapon and enemy placement; the music generates atmosphere; and there are good vocal and audio cues. But first-person shooters weren't a good idea on the Game Boy Advance. Turns out they're not really the best idea on a cell phone, either.\"\nThe PC version was nominated at \"The Electric Playground\"'s 2001 Blister Awards for \"Most Artistic PC Game\", but lost to \"\".\nSequels.\nThe sequel, \"Red Faction II\", was released for PlayStation 2 in October 2002, then GameCube, Xbox and Microsoft Windows the following year. It takes place on Earth and tells the story of a group of supersoldiers, including the main character, who are physically enhanced by the nanotechnology originally developed by Capek on Mars.\nOn June 15, 2009, THQ released \"\", for the Xbox 360, PlayStation 3 and Microsoft Windows. In this iteration, the story again takes place on Mars, where the Earth Defense Force has become as tyrannical an organization as Ultor.\nDeveloped by Locomotive Games, a spin-off of the \"Red Faction\" games called \"Red Faction: B.E.A.S.T.\" was in a pre-alpha development stage for the Nintendo Wii video game console. However, with the closure of Locomotive Games the game has been abandoned, although several models and a full-length trailer were released to the public upon the closure of the studio.\nOn June 4, 2010, the next installment was announced with the trailer for \"\". The story occurs approximately 50 years after the events of \"Red Faction: Guerrilla\". Players assume the role of Darius Mason, grandson of Alec and Samanya from the last installment of the series. In \"Armageddon\", the Martian colonists now reside underground following the destruction of the machine responsible for terraforming Mars. Years after this event, creatures encountered in the first game are again released. \"Red Faction: Armageddon\" was released on June 7, 2011.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26571", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26571", "title": "Ragnar Frisch", "text": "Norwegian economist and Nobel Laureate (1895\u20131973)\nRagnar Anton Kittil Frisch (3 March 1895 \u2013 31 January 1973) was an influential Norwegian economist and econometrician known for being one of the major contributors to establishing economics as a quantitative and statistically informed science in the early 20th century. He coined the term econometrics in 1926 for utilising statistical methods to describe economic systems, as well as the terms microeconomics and macroeconomics in 1933, for describing individual and aggregate economic systems, respectively. He was the first to develop a statistically informed model of business cycles in 1933. Later work on the model, together with Jan Tinbergen, won the first Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1969.\nFrisch became dr.philos. with a thesis on mathematics and statistics at the University of Oslo in 1926\".\" After his doctoral thesis, he spent five years researching in the United States at the University of Minnesota and Yale University. After teaching briefly at Yale from 1930\u201331, he was offered a full professorship in economics, which he declined after pressures by colleagues to return to the University of Oslo. After returning to Oslo, Frisch was first appointed by the King-in-Council as Professor of Economics and Statistics at the Faculty of Law, University of Oslo (then the \"Royal Frederick University\") in 1931, before becoming leader of the newly founded Institute of Economics at the University of Oslo in 1932. He remained at the University of Oslo until his retirement in 1965.\nFrisch was one of the founders of the Econometric Society in 1930, and edited the journal \"Econometrica\" for its first 21 years. He has given name to the Frisch Medal, which is awarded every year by the Econometric Society for the best paper in econometrics published in the last five years, as well as the Frisch-centre for Applied Economic Analysis at the University of Oslo. The Grand Auditorium at the Institute of Economics, University of Oslo also bears his name.\nBackground and education.\nFamily and early years.\nRagnar Frisch was born on 3 March 1895 in Christiania as the son of gold- and silversmith Anton Frisch and Ragna Fredrikke Frisch (n\u00e9e Kittilsen). The Frisch family had emigrated from Germany to Kongsberg in Norway in the 17th century and his ancestors had worked for the Kongsberg Silver Mines for generations; Ragnar's grandfather Antonius Frisch had become a goldsmith in Christiania in 1856. His family had thus worked with precious metals like silver and gold for at least 300 years.\nBeing expected to continue his family business, Frisch became an apprentice in the David Andersen workshop in Oslo. However at his mother's advice, while doing his apprenticeship Frisch also started studying at the Royal Frederick University. His chosen topic was economics, as it seemed to be \"the shortest and easiest study\" available at the university, and passed his degree in 1919. In 1920 he also passed his handicraftsman tests and became a partner in his father's workshop.\nEarly career and further education.\nIn 1921 Frisch received a fellowship from the university which enabled him to spend three years studying economics and mathematics in France and England. After his return to Norway, in 1923, although the family's business was having difficulties, he continued his scientific activity, believing that research, not jewellery, was his real calling. He published a few papers about probability theory, started teaching at the University of Oslo during 1925 and, in 1926, he obtained the Dr. Philos. degree with a thesis in mathematical statistics.\nAlso in 1926, Frisch published an article outlining his view that economics should follow the same path towards theoretical and empirical quantization that other sciences, especially physics, had followed. During the same year, he published his seminal article \"Sur un probl\u00e8me d'\u00e9conomie pure\" starting the implementation of his own quantization programme. The article offered theoretical axiomatizations which result in a precise specification of both ordinal and cardinal utility, followed by an empirical estimation of the cardinal specification. Frisch also started lecturing a course on production theory, introducing a mathematization of the subject.\nFrisch received a fellowship from the Rockefeller Foundation to visit the United States in 1927. There, seeking other economists interested in the new mathematical and statistical approaches to economics, he associated with Irving Fisher, Wesley Clair Mitchell, Allyn Young and Henry Schultz. He wrote a paper analyzing the role of investment in explaining economic fluctuations. Wesley Mitchell, who had just written a book on business cycles, popularized Frisch's paper which was introducing new advanced methods.\nLater career.\nAlthough his fellowship was extended to travel to Italy and France, the next year Frisch had to return to Norway because of his father's death. He spent one year to modernize and recapitalize his family's workshop by selling family assets and to find a jeweller to manage the business for him. Then he resumed academic work, in 1928 being appointed Associate Professor of statistics and economics at the Oslo University. During 1927 and 1928 Frisch published a series of articles on the statistics of time series. In 1929 he published his first important essay on econometric methodology, \"Correlation and scatter in statistical variables\", followed in the same year by \"Statics and dynamics in economic theory\", which introduced dynamics in economic analysis.\nFrisch became a full Professor at the university in 1931. He also founded at the university the Rockefeller-funded Institute of Economics in 1932 and became its Director of Research.\nRagnar Frisch received the Antonio Feltrinelli prize from the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei in 1961 and the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1969 (awarded jointly with Jan Tinbergen) for \"having developed and applied dynamic models for the analysis of economic processes\". He was a member of both the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American Philosophical Society.\nDuring the occupation of Norway by Nazi Germany, Frisch was arrested, along with 13 other University of Oslo faculty members and more than 100 students, in October 1943. He was imprisoned in Bredtveit concentration camp from 17 October 1943, then in Berg concentration camp from 22 November 1943, then in Grini detention camp from 9 December 1943 to 8 October 1944.\nFamily.\nFrisch married Marie Smedal in 1920 and they had a daughter, Ragna (b. 1938). His granddaughter, Nadia Hasnaoui (Ragna's child), became a Norwegian television performer. After his first wife died in 1952, he remarried in 1953 with childhood friend Astrid Johannessen. who died in 1980.\nWork.\nFrisch was one of the founders of economics as a modern science. He made a number of significant advances in the field of economics and coined a number of new words including econometrics and macroeconomics. His 1926 paper on consumer theory helped set up Neo-Walrasian research. He formalized production theory, especially in addressing nonallocable inputs leading to jointness, meaning less than full control, in production processes (see esp. Chapters 14 and 15).\nIn econometrics he worked on time series (1927) and linear regression analysis (1934). With Frederick V. Waugh, he introduced the celebrated Frisch\u2013Waugh theorem (\"Econometrica\" 1933) (sometimes referred to as the Frisch\u2013Waugh\u2013Lovell theorem). In oligopoly theory he developed the conjectural variation approach. Frisch also is credited with introducing the term \"model\" in its modern economic sense by Paul Samuelson, based on a 1930 Yale University lecture.\nHis 1933 work on impulse-propagation business cycles became one of the principles of modern New Classical business cycle theory. He also helped introduce econometric modeling to government economic planning and accounting.\nHe was one of the founders of the Econometric Society and editor of \"Econometrica\" for over twenty years. The Frisch Medal, so named in his honor, is given every two years for the best paper published in the aforementioned \"Econometrica\" in the previous five years.\nFrisch's most important hobby was bee-keeping, for which Frisch performed genetic studies.\nSelected publications.\nThere is a bibliography of Frisch's writings up to 1960 in\nand there is a collection of selected essays\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26572", "revid": "50545359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26572", "title": "Rennet", "text": "Enzymes from the stomachs of ruminants, used in cheese production\nRennet () is a complex set of enzymes produced in the stomachs of ruminant mammals. Chymosin, its key component, is a protease enzyme that curdles the casein in milk. In addition to chymosin, rennet contains other enzymes, such as pepsin and a lipase.\nRennet has traditionally been used to separate milk into solid curds and liquid whey, used in the production of cheeses. Rennet from calves has become less common for this use, to the point that less than 5% of cheese in the United States is made using animal rennet today. Most cheese is now made using chymosin derived from bacterial sources.\nMolecular action of rennet enzymes.\nOne of the main actions of rennet is its protease chymosin cleaving the kappa casein chain. Casein is the main protein of milk. Cleavage removes the slightly negatively charged glycomacropeptide (GMP) from the surface of the casein micelle. Because negative charges repel other negative charges, the GMP prevents casein micelles from adhering to each other. With the GMP removed, the casein micelles can begin to cluster and lose their polar charge, causing them to rise out of the polar water molecules and join non-polar milk fat as a portion of the cheese curd. This action is enhanced in the presence of strong ions like those formed from calcium and phosphate. As such, those chemicals are occasionally added to supplement pre-existing quantities in the cheese making process, especially in calcium phosphate-poor goat milk. The solid truncated casein protein network traps other components of milk, such as fats and minerals, to create cheese.\nExtraction of calf rennet.\nCalf rennet is extracted from the inner mucosa of the fourth stomach chamber (the abomasum) of young, nursing calves as part of livestock butchering. These stomachs are a byproduct of veal production. Rennet extracted from older calves (grass-fed or grain-fed) contains less or no chymosin, but a high level of pepsin and can only be used for special types of milk and cheeses. As each ruminant produces a special kind of rennet to digest the milk of its own species, milk-specific rennets are available, such as kid goat rennet for goat's milk and lamb rennet for sheep's milk.\nTraditional method.\nDried and cleaned stomachs of young calves are sliced into small pieces and then put into salt water or whey, together with some vinegar or wine to lower the pH of the solution. After some time (overnight or several days), the solution is filtered. The crude rennet that remains in the filtered solution can then be used to coagulate milk. About 1 gram of this solution can normally coagulate 2 to 4 litres of milk.\nModern method.\nDeep-frozen stomachs are milled and put into an enzyme-extracting solution. The crude rennet extract is then activated by adding acid; the enzymes in the stomach are produced in an inactive form and are activated by the stomach acid. The acid is then neutralized and the rennet extract is filtered in several stages and concentrated until reaching a typical potency of about 1:15,000; meaning 1\u00a0g of extract can coagulate 15\u00a0kg of milk.\nOne kilogram of rennet extract has about 0.7\u00a0g of active enzymes \u2013 the rest is water and salt and sometimes sodium benzoate (E211),\n0.5%\u20131.0% for preservation. Typically, 1\u00a0kg of cheese contains about 0.3 mg of rennet enzymes.\nAlternative sources.\nBecause of the limited availability of mammalian stomachs for rennet production, cheese makers have sought other ways to coagulate milk since at least Roman times. The many sources of enzymes that can be a substitute for animal rennet range from plants and fungi to microbial sources. Cheeses produced from any of these varieties of rennet are suitable for lactovegetarians, as well as those keeping Kosher. Fermentation-produced chymosin is used more often in industrial cheesemaking in North America and Europe today because it is less expensive than animal rennet.\nVegetable.\nMany plants have coagulating properties. Homer suggests in the \"Iliad\" that the Greeks used an extract of fig juice to coagulate milk. Other examples include several species of Galium, dried caper leaves, nettles, thistles, mallow, \"Withania coagulans\" (also known as Paneer Booti, Ashwagandh and the Indian Cheesemaker), and ground ivy. Some traditional cheese production in the Mediterranean uses enzymes from thistle or \"Cynara\" (artichokes and cardoons). Phytic acid, derived from unfermented soybeans, or fermentation-produced chymosin (FPC) may also be used.\nVegetable rennet might be used in the production of kosher and halal cheeses, but nearly all kosher cheeses are produced with either microbial rennet or FPC. Commercial so-called vegetable rennets usually contain an extract from the mold \"Rhizomucor miehei\" described below.\nMicrobial.\nSome molds such as \"Rhizomucor miehei\" are able to produce proteolytic enzymes. These molds are produced in a fermenter and then specially concentrated and purified to avoid contamination with unpleasant byproducts of the mold growth.\nThe traditional view is that these coagulants result in bitterness and low yield in cheese, especially when aged for a long time. Over the years, microbial coagulants have improved greatly, largely due to the characterization and purification of secondary enzymes responsible for bitter peptide formation/non-specific proteolytic breakdown in cheese aged for long periods. Consequently, it has become possible to produce several high-quality cheeses with microbial rennet.\nIt is also suitable for the elaboration of vegetarian cheese, provided no animal-based ingredients are used in its production.\nFermentation-produced chymosin.\nBecause of the above imperfections of microbial and animal rennets, many producers sought other replacements of rennet. With genetic engineering it became possible to isolate rennet genes from animals and introduce them into certain bacteria, fungi, or yeasts to make them produce recombinant chymosin during fermentation. The genetically modified microorganism is killed after fermentation and chymosin isolated from the fermentation broth, so that the fermentation-produced chymosin (FPC) used by cheese producers does not contain a GMO or any GMO DNA. FPC is identical to chymosin made by an animal, but is produced in a more efficient way. FPC products have been on the market since 1990 and, because the quantity needed per unit of milk can be standardized, are commercially viable alternatives to crude animal or plant rennets, as well as generally preferred to them in industrial production.\nOriginally created by biotechnology company Pfizer, FPC was the first artificially-produced enzyme to be registered and allowed by the US Food and Drug Administration. In 1999, about 60% of US hard cheeses were made with FPC, which thereafter made up to 80% of the global market share for rennet. By 2017, FPC had 90% of the global market share for rennet.\nThe most widely used FPC is produced either by the fungus \"Aspergillus niger\" and commercialized under the trademark CHY-MAX by the Danish company Chr. Hansen, or produced by \"Kluyveromyces lactis\" and commercialized under the trademark Maxiren by the Dutch company DSM.\nFPC is chymosin B, so it is purer than animal rennet, which contains a multitude of proteins. FPC provides several benefits to the cheese producer compared with animal or microbial rennet: higher production yield, better curd texture, and reduced bitterness.\nCheeses produced with FPC can be certified kosher and halal, and are suitable for vegetarians if no animal-based alimentation was used during the chymosin production in the fermenter.\nNonrennet coagulation.\nMany soft cheeses are produced without use of rennet, by coagulating milk with acid, such as citric acid or vinegar, or the lactic acid produced by soured milk. Cream cheese, paneer, rubing, and other are traditionally made this way.\nThe acidification can also come from bacterial fermentation such as in cultured milk.\nVegan alternatives to cheese are manufactured without using animal milk but instead use soy, wheat, rice or cashew. These can be coagulated with acid using sources such as vinegar or lemon juice.\nIn mythology.\nIn Yazidism, the Earth is believed to have coagulated and formed when rennet flowed from the White Spring of the celestial Lalish in heaven into the Primeval Ocean.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26573", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26573", "title": "Rabbit", "text": "Mammals of the family Leporidae\nRabbits or bunnies are small mammals in the family Leporidae (which also includes the hares), which is in the order Lagomorpha (which also includes pikas). They are familiar throughout the world as a small herbivore, a prey animal, a domesticated form of livestock, and a pet, having a widespread effect on ecologies and cultures. The most widespread rabbit genera are \"Oryctolagus\" and \"Sylvilagus\". The former, \"Oryctolagus\", includes the European rabbit, \"Oryctolagus cuniculus\", which is the ancestor of the hundreds of breeds of domestic rabbit and has been introduced on every continent except Antarctica. The latter, \"Sylvilagus\", includes over 13 wild rabbit species, among them the cottontails and tapetis. Wild rabbits not included in \"Oryctolagus\" and \"Sylvilagus\" include several species of limited distribution, including the pygmy rabbit, volcano rabbit, and Sumatran striped rabbit.\nRabbits are a paraphyletic grouping, and do not constitute a clade, as hares (belonging to the genus \"Lepus\") are nested within the Leporidae clade and are not described as rabbits. Although once considered rodents, lagomorphs diverged earlier and have a number of traits rodents lack, including two extra incisors. Similarities between rabbits and rodents were once attributed to convergent evolution, but studies in molecular biology have found a common ancestor between lagomorphs and rodents and place them in the clade Glires.\nRabbit physiology is suited to escaping predators and surviving in various habitats, living either alone or in groups in nests or burrows. As prey animals, rabbits are constantly aware of their surroundings, having a wide field of vision and ears with high surface area to detect potential predators. The ears of a rabbit are essential for thermoregulation and contain a high density of blood vessels. The bone structure of a rabbit's hind legs, which is longer than that of the fore legs, allows for quick hopping, which is beneficial for escaping predators and can provide powerful kicks if captured. Rabbits are typically nocturnal and often sleep with their eyes open. They reproduce quickly, having short pregnancies, large litters of four to twelve kits, and no particular mating season; however, the mortality rate of rabbit embryos is high, and there exist several widespread diseases that affect rabbits, such as rabbit hemorrhagic disease and myxomatosis. In some regions, especially Australia, rabbits have caused ecological problems and are regarded as a pest.\nHumans have used rabbits as livestock since at least the first century BC in ancient Rome, raising them for their meat, fur and wool. The various breeds of the European rabbit have been developed to suit each of these products; the practice of raising and breeding rabbits as livestock is known as cuniculture. Rabbits are seen in human culture globally, appearing as a symbol of fertility, cunning, and innocence in major religions, historical and contemporary art.\nTerminology and etymology.\nThe word rabbit derives from the Middle English (\"young of the coney\"), a borrowing from the Walloon , which was a diminutive of the French or Middle Dutch (\"rabbit\"), a term of unknown origin. The term \"coney\" is a term for an adult rabbit used until the 18th century; \"rabbit\" once referred only to the young animals. More recently, the term \"kit\" or \"kitten\" has been used to refer to a young rabbit. The endearing word \"bunny\" is attested by the 1680s as a diminutive of \"bun\", a term used in Scotland to refer to rabbits and squirrels.\n\"Coney\" is derived from \"cuniculus\", a Latin term referring to rabbits which has been in use from at least the first century BC in Hispania. The word \"cuniculus\" may originate from a diminutive form of the word for \"dog\" in the Celtic languages.\nA group of rabbits is known as a \"colony,\" \"nest\", or \"warren\", though the latter term more commonly refers to where the rabbits live. A group of baby rabbits produced from a single mating is referred to as a \"litter\" and a group of domestic rabbits living together is sometimes called a \"herd\".\nA male rabbit is called a \"buck\", as are male goats and deer, derived from the Old English or \"\", meaning \"he-goat\" or \"male deer\", respectively. A female is called a \"doe\", derived from the Old English , related to (\"to suck\").\nTaxonomy and evolution.\nRabbits and hares were formerly classified in the order Rodentia (rodents) until 1912, when they were moved into the order Lagomorpha (which also includes pikas). Since 1945, there has been support for the clade Glires that includes both rodents and lagomorphs, though the two groups have always been closely associated in taxonomy; fossil, DNA, and retrotransposon studies in the 2000s have solidified support for the clade. Studies in paleontology and molecular biology suggest that rodents and lagomorphs diverged at the start of the Tertiary.\nThe extant species of family Leporidae, of which there are more than 70, are contained within 11 genera, one of which is \"Lepus\", the hares. There are 32 extant species within \"Lepus\". The cladogram is from Matthee et al., 2004, based on nuclear and mitochondrial gene analysis.\nClassification.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDifferences from hares.\nThe term \"rabbit\" is typically used for all Leporidae species, excluding the genus \"Lepus\". Members of that genus are known as \"hares\" or \"jackrabbits\".\n\"Lepus\" species are precocial, born relatively mature and mobile with hair and good vision out in the open air, while rabbit species are altricial, born hairless and blind in burrows and buried nests. Hares are also generally larger than rabbits, and have longer pregnancies. Hares and some rabbits live relatively solitary lives above the ground in open grassy areas, interacting mainly during breeding season. Some rabbit species group together to reduce their chance of being preyed upon, and the European rabbit will form large social groups in burrows, which are grouped together to form warrens. Burrowing by hares varies by location, and is more prominent in younger members of the genus; many rabbit species that do not dig their own burrows will use the burrows of other animals.\nRabbits and hares have historically not occupied the same locations, and only became sympatric relatively recently; historic accounts describe antagonistic relationships between rabbits and hares, specifically between the European hare and European or cottontail rabbits, but scientific literature since 1956 has found no evidence of aggression or undue competition between rabbits and hares. When they appear in the same habitat, rabbits and hares can co-exist on similar diets. Hares will notably force other hare species out of an area to control resources, but are not territorial. When faced with predators, hares will escape by outrunning them, whereas rabbits, being smaller and less able to reach the high speeds of longer-legged hares, will try to seek cover.\nDescendants of the European rabbit are commonly bred as livestock and kept as pets, whereas no hares have been domesticated, though populations have been introduced to non-native habitats for use as a food source. The breed known as the Belgian hare is actually a domestic rabbit which has been selectively bred to resemble a hare, most likely from Flemish Giant stock originally. Common names of hare and rabbit species may also be confused; \"jackrabbits\" refer to hares, and the hispid hare is a rabbit.\nDomestication.\nRabbits, specifically the European rabbit (\"Oryctolagus cuniculus\") species, have long been domesticated. The European rabbit has been widely kept as livestock, starting in ancient Rome from at least the first century BC. Selective breeding, which began in the Middle Ages, has generated a wide variety of rabbit breeds, of which many (since the early 19th century) are also kept as pets. Some strains of European rabbit have been bred specifically as research subjects, such as the New Zealand white.\nAs livestock, European rabbits are bred for their meat and fur. The earliest breeds were important sources of meat, and so were bred to be larger than wild rabbits at younger ages, but domestic rabbits in modern times range in size from dwarf to giant. Rabbit fur, produced as a byproduct of meat production but occasionally selected for as in the case of the Rex rabbit, can be found in a broad range of coat colors and patterns, some of which are produced via dyeing. Some breeds are raised for their wool, such as the Angora rabbit breeds; their fur is sheared, combed or plucked, and the fibers are spun into yarn.\nBiology.\nEvolution.\nThe earliest ancestor of rabbits and hares lived 55 million years ago in what is now Mongolia. Because the rabbit's epiglottis is engaged over the soft palate except when swallowing, the rabbit is an obligate nasal breather. As lagomorphs, rabbits have two sets of incisor teeth, one behind the other, a manner in which they differ from rodents, which only have one set of incisors. Another difference is that for rabbits, all of their teeth continue to grow, whereas for most rodents, only their incisors continue to grow. Carl Linnaeus originally grouped rabbits and rodents under the class Glires; later, they were separated as the scientific consensus is that many of their similarities were a result of convergent evolution. DNA analysis and the discovery of a common ancestor have supported the view that they share a common lineage, so rabbits and rodents are now often grouped together in the clade or superorder Glires.\nMorphology.\nSince speed and agility are a rabbit's main defenses against predators, rabbits have large hind leg bones and well-developed musculature. Though plantigrade at rest, rabbits are on their toes while running, assuming a more digitigrade posture. Rabbits use their strong claws for digging and (along with their teeth) for defense. Each front foot has four toes plus a dewclaw. Each hind foot has four toes (but no dewclaw).\nMost wild rabbits (especially compared to hares) have relatively full, egg-shaped bodies. The soft coat of the wild rabbit is agouti in coloration (or, rarely, melanistic), which aids in camouflage. The tail of the rabbit (with the exception of the cottontail species) is dark on top and white below. Cottontails have white on the top of their tails.\nAs a result of the position of the eyes in its skull and the size of the cornea, the rabbit has a panoramic field of vision that encompasses nearly 360 degrees. However, there is a blind spot at the bridge of the nose, and because of this, rabbits cannot see what is below their mouth and rely on their lips and whiskers to determine what they are eating. Blinking occurs 2 to 4 times an hour.\nHind limb elements.\nThe anatomy of rabbits' hind limbs is structurally similar to that of other land mammals and contributes to their specialized form of locomotion. The bones of the hind limbs consist of long bones (the femur, tibia, fibula, and phalanges) as well as short bones (the tarsals). These bones are created through endochondral ossification during fetal development. Like most land mammals, the round head of the femur articulates with the acetabulum of the os coxae, the hip bone. The femur articulates with the tibia, but not the fibula, which is fused to the tibia. The tibia and fibula articulate with the tarsals of the pes, commonly called the foot. The hind limbs of the rabbit are longer than the front limbs. This allows them to produce their hopping form of locomotion. Longer hind limbs are more capable of producing faster speeds. Hares, which have longer legs than cottontail rabbits, are able to move considerably faster. The hind feet have four long toes that allow for digitigrade movement, which are webbed to prevent them from spreading when hopping. Rabbits do not have paw pads on their feet like most other animals that use digitigrade locomotion. Instead, they have coarse compressed hair that offers protection.\nMusculature.\nRabbits have muscled hind legs that allow for maximum force, maneuverability, and acceleration that is divided into three main parts: foot, thigh, and leg. The hind limbs of a rabbit are an exaggerated feature. They are much longer and can provide more force than the forelimbs, which are structured like brakes to take the brunt of the landing after a leap. The force put out by the hind limbs is contributed by both the structural anatomy of the fusion of the tibia and fibula, and by the muscular features.\nBone formation and removal, from a cellular standpoint, is directly correlated to hind limb muscles. Action pressure from muscles creates force that is then distributed through the skeletal structures. Rabbits that generate less force, putting less stress on bones are more prone to osteoporosis due to bone rarefaction. In rabbits, the more fibers in a muscle, the more resistant to fatigue. For example, hares have a greater resistance to fatigue than cottontails. The muscles of rabbit's hind limbs can be classified into four main categories: hamstrings, quadriceps, dorsiflexors, or plantar flexors. The quadriceps muscles are in charge of force production when jumping. Complementing these muscles are the hamstrings, which aid in short bursts of action. These muscles play off of one another in the same way as the plantar flexors and dorsiflexors, contributing to the generation and actions associated with force.\nEars.\nWithin the order of lagomorphs, the ears are used to detect and avoid predators. In the family Leporidae, the ears are typically longer than they are wide, and are in general relatively long compared to other mammals.\nAccording to Allen's rule, endothermic animals adapted to colder climates have shorter, thicker limbs and appendages than those of similar animals adapted to warm climates. The rule was originally derived by comparing the ear lengths of \"Lepus\" species across the various climates of North America. Subsequent studies show that this rule remains true in the Leporidae for the ears specifically, in that the surface area of rabbits' and hares' ears are enlarged in warm climates; the ears are an important structure to aid thermoregulation as well as in detecting predators due to the way the outer, middle, and inner ear muscles coordinate with one another. The ear muscles also aid in maintaining balance and movement when fleeing predators.\nThe auricle, also known as the pinna, is a rabbit's outer ear. The rabbit's pinnae represent a fair part of the body surface area. It is theorized that the ears aid in dispersion of heat at temperatures above , with rabbits in warmer climates having longer pinnae due to this. Another theory is that the ears function as shock absorbers that could aid and stabilize rabbits' vision when fleeing predators, but this has typically only been seen in hares. The rest of the outer ear has bent canals that lead to the eardrum or tympanic membrane.\nThe middle ear, separated by the outer eardrum in the back of the rabbit's skull, contains three bones: the hammer, anvil, and stirrup, collectively called ossicles, which act to decrease sound before it hits the inner ear; in general, the ossicles act as a barrier to the inner ear for sound energy.\nInner ear fluid, called endolymph, receives the sound energy. After receiving the energy. The inner ear comprises two parts: the cochlea that uses sound waves from the ossicles, and the vestibular apparatus that manages the rabbit's position in regard to movement. Within the cochlea a basilar membrane contains sensory hair structures that send nerve signals to the brain, allowing it to recognize different sound frequencies. Within the vestibular apparatus three semicircular canals help detect angular motion.\nThermoregulation.\nThe pinnae, which contain a vascular network and arteriovenous shunts, aid in thermoregulation. In a rabbit, the optimal body temperature is around . If their body temperature exceeds or does not meet this optimal temperature, the rabbit must make efforts to return to homeostasis. Homeostasis of body temperature is maintained by changing the amount of blood flow that passes through the highly vascularized ears, as rabbits have few to no sweat glands. Rabbits may also regulate their temperature by resting in depressions in the ground, known as forms.\nRespiratory system.\nThe rabbit's nasal cavity lies dorsal to the oral cavity, and the two compartments are separated by the hard and soft palate. The nasal cavity itself is separated into a left and right side by a cartilage barrier, and it is covered in fine hairs that trap dust before it can enter the respiratory tract. As the rabbit breathes, air flows in through the nostrils along the alar folds. From there, the air moves into the nasal cavity, also known as the nasopharynx, down through the trachea, through the larynx, and into the lungs. The larynx functions as the rabbit's voice box, which enables it to produce a wide variety of sounds. The trachea is a long tube embedded with cartilaginous rings that prevent the tube from collapsing as air moves in and out of the lungs. The trachea then splits into a left and right bronchus, which meet the lungs at a structure called the hilum. From there, the bronchi split into progressively more narrow and numerous branches. The bronchi branch into bronchioles, into respiratory bronchioles, and ultimately terminate at the alveolar ducts. The branching that is typically found in rabbit lungs is a clear example of monopodial branching, in which smaller branches divide out laterally from a larger central branch.\nThe structure of the rabbit's nasal and oral cavities necessitates breathing through the nose. This is due to the fact that the epiglottis is fixed to the backmost portion of the soft palate. Within the oral cavity, a layer of tissue sits over the opening of the glottis, which blocks airflow from the oral cavity to the trachea. The epiglottis functions to prevent the rabbit from aspirating on its food. Further, the presence of a soft and hard palate allow the rabbit to breathe through its nose while it feeds.\nRabbits' lungs are divided into four lobes: the cranial, middle, caudal, and accessory lobes. The right lung is made up of all four lobes, while the left lung only has two: the cranial and caudal lobes. To provide space for the heart, the left cranial lobe of the lungs is significantly smaller than that of the right. The diaphragm is a muscular structure that lies caudal to the lungs and contracts to facilitate respiration.\nDiet and digestion.\nRabbits are strict herbivores and are suited to a diet high in fiber, mostly in the form of cellulose. They will typically graze grass upon waking up and emerging from a burrow, and will move on to consume vegetation and other plants throughout the waking period; rabbits have been known to eat a wide variety of plants, including tree leaves and fruits, though consumption of fruit and lower fiber foods is common for pet rabbits where natural vegetation is scarce.\nEasily digestible food is processed in the gastrointestinal tract and expelled as regular feces. To get nutrients out of hard to digest fiber, rabbits ferment fiber in the cecum (part of the gastrointestinal tract) and then expel the contents as cecotropes, which are reingested (cecotrophy or refection). The cecotropes are then absorbed in the small intestine to use the nutrients. Soft cecotropes are usually consumed during periods of rest in underground burrows.\nRabbits cannot vomit; and therefore if buildup occurs within the intestines (due often to a diet with insufficient fibre), intestinal blockage can occur.\nReproduction.\nThe adult male reproductive system forms the same as most mammals with the seminiferous tubular compartment containing the Sertoli cells and an adluminal compartment that contains the Leydig cells. The Leydig cells produce testosterone, which maintains libido and creates secondary sex characteristics such as the genital tubercle and penis. The Sertoli cells triggers the production of Anti-M\u00fcllerian duct hormone, which absorbs the M\u00fcllerian duct. In an adult male rabbit, the sheath of the penis is cylinder-like and can be extruded as early as two months of age. The scrotal sacs lay lateral to the penis and contain epididymal fat pads which protect the testes. Between 10 and 14 weeks, the testes descend and are able to retract into the pelvic cavity to thermoregulate. Furthermore, the secondary sex characteristics, such as the testes, are complex and secrete many compounds. These compounds include fructose, citric acid, minerals, and a uniquely high amount of catalase, all of which affect the characteristics of rabbit semen; for instance, citric acid is positively correlated with agglutination, and high amounts of catalase protect against premature capacitation.\nThe adult female reproductive tract is bipartite, which prevents an embryo from translocating between uteri. The female urethra and vagina open into a urogenital sinus with a single urogenital opening. The two uterine horns communicate to two cervixes and forms one vaginal canal. Along with being bipartite, the female rabbit does not go through an estrus cycle, which causes mating induced ovulation.\nThe average female rabbit becomes sexually mature at three to eight months of age and can conceive at any time of the year for the duration of her life. Egg and sperm production can begin to decline after three years, with some species such as those in genus \"Oryctolagus\" completely stopping reproduction at 6 years of age. During mating, the male rabbit will insert his penis into the female from behind, make rapid pelvic thrusts until ejaculation, and throw himself backward off the female. Copulation lasts only 20\u201340 seconds.\nThe rabbit gestation period is short and ranges from 27 to 30 days. A longer gestation period will generally yield a smaller litter while shorter gestation periods will give birth to a larger litter. The size of a single litter can range from 1 to 12 kits, depending on species. After birth, the only role of males is to protect the young from other rabbits, and the mother will leave the young in the nest most of the day, returning to nurse them once every 24 hours. The female can become pregnant again as early as the next day.\nAfter mating, the doe will begin to dig a burrow or prepare a nest before giving birth. Between three days and a few hours before giving birth another series of hormonal changes will cause her to prepare the nest structure. The doe will first gather grass for a structure, and an elevation in prolactin shortly before birth will cause her fur to shed that the doe will then use to line the nest, providing insulation for the newborn kits.\nThe mortality rates of embryos are high in rabbits and can be due to infection, trauma, poor nutrition and environmental stress. A high fertility rate is necessary to counter this. More than half of rabbit pregnancies are aborted, causing embryos to be resorbed into the mother's body; vitamin deficiencies are a major cause of abortions in domestic rabbits.\nSleep.\nRabbits may appear to be crepuscular, but many species are naturally inclined towards nocturnal activity. In 2011, the average sleep time of a rabbit in captivity was calculated at 8.4 hours per day; previous studies have estimated sleep periods as long as 11.4 hours on average, undergoing both slow-wave and rapid eye movement sleep. Newborn rabbits will sleep for 22 hours a day before leaving the nest. As with other prey animals, rabbits often sleep with their eyes open, so that sudden movements will awaken the rabbit to respond to potential danger.\nDiseases and immunity.\nIn addition to being at risk of disease from common pathogens such as \"Bordetella bronchiseptica\" and \"Escherichia coli\", rabbits can contract the virulent, species-specific viruses myxomatosis, and a form of calicivirus which causes rabbit hemorrhagic disease. Myxomatosis is more hazardous to pet rabbits, as wild rabbits often have some immunity. Among the parasites that infect rabbits are tapeworms (such as \"Taenia serialis)\", external parasites (including fleas and mites), coccidia species, \"Encephalitozoon cuniculi\", and \"Toxoplasma gondii\". Domesticated rabbits with a diet lacking in high-fiber sources, such as hay and grass, are susceptible to potentially lethal gastrointestinal stasis. Rabbits and hares are almost never found to be infected with rabies and have not been known to transmit rabies to humans.\nRabbit hemorrhagic disease (RHD) is a highly infectious rabbit-specific disease caused by strains of rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV), including type 2 (RHDV2). The disease was first described in domestic Angora rabbits imported from Germany to Jiangsu, China in 1984, and quickly spread to Korea, Italy, and the rest of Europe. The disease spread to the Americas from 1988, first appearing in rabbits imported to Mexico, but subsequent outbreaks were infrequent, as RHDV only affected the European rabbit species. RHDV2, a strain of RHD-causing virus that affects both domestic and wild lagomorphs, such as hares, was detected for the first time in France in 2010. RHDV2 has since spread to the rest of Europe, Canada, Australia, and the United States.\nEcology.\nRabbits are prey animals. In Mediterranean Europe, for example, rabbits are the main prey of red foxes, badgers, and Iberian lynxes. To avoid predation and to navigate underground, rabbits have heightened senses (compared to humans) and are constantly aware of their surroundings. If confronted by a potential threat, a rabbit may freeze and observe, then warn others in the warren with powerful thumps on the ground from a hind foot. Rabbits have a remarkably wide field of vision, and a good deal of it is devoted to overhead scanning. A rabbit eye has no fovea, but a \"visual streak\", a horizontal line in the middle of the retina where both rod and cone cell densities are the highest. This allows them to scan the horizon with little head turning.\nRabbits survive predation by burrowing (in some species), and hopping away to dense cover. Their strong teeth allow them to bite to escape a struggle.\nThe longest-lived rabbit on record, a domesticated European rabbit living in Tasmania, died at age 18. The lifespan of wild rabbits is much shorter; the average longevity of an eastern cottontail, for instance, is about one to five years. The various species of rabbit have been recorded as living from four to 13 years in captivity.\nHabitat and range.\nRabbit habitats include forests, steppes, plateaus, deserts, and swamps. Some species, such as the volcano rabbit (\"Romerolagus diazi\") have especially limited distribution due to their habitat needs. Rabbits live in groups, or colonies, varying in behavior depending on species and often using the burrows of other animals or creating nests in holes. The European rabbit notably lives in extensive burrow networks called \"warrens\".\nRabbits are native to North America, southwestern Europe, Southeast Asia, Sumatra, some islands of Japan, and parts of Africa and South America. They are not naturally found in most of Eurasia, where a number of species of hares are present. A 2003 study on domestic rabbits in China found that \"(so-called) Chinese rabbits were introduced from Europe\", and that \"genetic diversity in Chinese rabbits was very low\".\nRabbits first entered South America relatively recently, as part of the Great American Interchange. Much of the continent was considered to have just one species of rabbit, the tapeti, and most of South America's Southern Cone has had no rabbits until the introduction of the European rabbit, which has been introduced to many places around the world, in the late 19th century.\nRabbits have been launched into space orbit.\nMarking.\nBoth sexes of rabbits often rub their chins on objects with their scent gland located under the chin. This is the rabbit's way of marking their territory or possessions for other rabbits to recognize by depositing scent gland secretions. Rabbits who have bonded will respect each other's smell, which indicates a territorial border. Rabbits also have scent glands that produce a strong-smelling waxy substance near their anuses. Territorial marking by scent glands has been documented among both domestic and wild rabbit species.\nEnvironmental problems.\nRabbits, particularly the European rabbit, have been a source of environmental problems when introduced into the wild by humans. As a result of their appetites, and the rate at which they breed, feral rabbit depredation can be problematic for agriculture. Gassing (fumigation of warrens), barriers (fences), shooting, snaring, and ferreting have been used to control rabbit populations, but the most effective measures are diseases such as myxomatosis and calicivirus. In Europe, where domestic rabbits are farmed on a large scale, they can be protected against myxomatosis and calicivirus via vaccination. Rabbits in Australia and New Zealand are considered to be such a pest that landowners are legally obliged to control them.\nRabbits are known to be able to catch fire and spread wildfires, particularly in Chile, where the European rabbit is an invasive species, but the efficiency and relevance of this mechanism has been doubted by forest experts who contend that a rabbit on fire could move some meters. Knowledge on fire-spreading rabbits is based on anecdotes as there is no known scientific investigation on the subject.\nAs food and clothing.\nHumans have hunted rabbits for food since at least the onset of the Last Glacial Maximum, and wild rabbits and hares are still hunted for their meat as game. Hunting is accomplished with the aid of trained falcons, ferrets, or dogs (a common hunting breed being beagles), as well as with snares, rifles and other guns. A caught rabbit may be dispatched with a sharp blow to the back of its head, a practice from which the term \"rabbit punch\" is derived.\nWild leporids comprise a small portion of global rabbit-meat consumption. Domesticated descendants of the European rabbit (\"Oryctolagus cuniculus\") that are bred and kept as livestock (a practice called cuniculture) account for the estimated 2million tons of rabbit meat produced annually. Approximately 1.2\u00a0billion rabbits are slaughtered each year for meat worldwide. In 1994, the countries with the highest consumption per capita of rabbit meat were Malta with , Italy with , and Cyprus with . The largest producers of rabbit meat were China, Russia, Italy (specifically Veneto), France, and Spain. Rabbit meat was once a common commodity in Sydney, with European rabbits having been introduced intentionally to Australia for hunting purposes, but declined after the myxomatosis virus was intentionally introduced to control the exploding population of feral rabbits in the area.\nIn the United Kingdom, fresh rabbits are sold in butcher shops and markets, and some supermarkets sell frozen rabbit meat. It is sold in farmers markets there, including the Borough Market in London. Rabbit meat is a feature of Moroccan cuisine, where it is cooked in a tajine with \"raisins and grilled almonds added a few minutes before serving\". In China, rabbit meat is particularly popular in Sichuan cuisine, with its stewed rabbit, spicy diced rabbit, BBQ-style rabbit, and even spicy rabbit heads, which have been compared to \"spicy duck neck\". In the United States, rabbits sold as food are typically the domestic New Zealand, Belgian, and Chinese rabbits, or Scottish hares.\nAn infectious disease associated with rabbits-as-food is tularemia (also known as \"rabbit fever\"), which may be contracted from an infected rabbit. The disease can cause symptoms of fever, skin ulcers and enlarged lymph nodes, and can occasionally lead to pneumonia or throat infection. Secondary vectors of tularemia include tick and fly bites, which may be present in the fur of a caught rabbit. Inhaling the bacteria during the skinning process increases the risk of getting tularemia; preventative measures against this include the use of gloves and face masks. Prior to the development of antibiotics, such as doxycycline and gentamicin, the death rate associated with tularemia infections was 60%, which has since decreased to less than 4%.\nIn addition to their meat, domestic rabbits are used for their wool and fur for clothing, as well as their nitrogen-rich manure and their high-protein milk. Production industries have developed domesticated rabbit breeds (such as the Angora rabbit) for the purpose of meeting these needs. In 1986, the number of rabbit skins produced annually in France was as high as 70 million, compared to 25 million mink pelts produced at the same time. However, rabbit fur is on the whole a byproduct of rabbit meat production, whereas minks are bred primarily for fur production.\nIn culture.\nRabbits are often posited by scholars as symbols of fertility, sexuality and spring, though they have been variously interpreted throughout history. Up until the end of the 18th century, it was widely believed that rabbits and hares were hermaphrodites, contributing to a possible view of rabbits as \"sexually aberrant\". The Easter Bunny is a figure from German folklore that then spread to America and later other parts of the world and is similar to Santa Claus, albeit both with softened roles compared to earlier incarnations of the figures.\nThe rabbits' role as a prey animal with few defenses evokes vulnerability and innocence in folklore and modern children's stories, and rabbits appear as sympathetic characters, able to connect easily with youth, though this particular symbolic depiction only became popular in the 1930s following the massive popularization of the pet rabbit decades before. Additionally, they have not been limited to sympathetic depictions since then, as in literature such as \"Watership Down\" and the works of Ariel Dorfman. With its reputation as a prolific breeder, the rabbit juxtaposes sexuality with innocence, as in the Playboy Bunny. The rabbit has also been used as a symbol of playfulness and endurance, as represented by the Energizer Bunny and the Duracell Bunny.\nFolklore and mythology.\nThe rabbit often appears in folklore as the trickster archetype, as he uses his cunning to outwit his enemies. In Central Africa, the common hare (\"Kalulu\") is described as a trickster figure, and in Aztec mythology, a pantheon of four hundred rabbit gods known as Centzon Totochtin, led by Ometochtli or Two Rabbit, represented fertility, parties, and drunkenness. Rabbits in the Americas varied in mythological symbolism: in Aztec mythology, they were also associated with the moon, and in Anishinaabe traditional beliefs, held by the Ojibwe and some other Native American peoples, Nanabozho, or Great Rabbit, is an important deity related to the creation of the world. More broadly, a rabbit's foot may be carried as an amulet, believed to bring protection and good luck. This belief is found in many parts of the world, with the earliest use being recorded in Europe c.\u2009600 BC.\nRabbits also appear in Chinese, Vietnamese, Japanese and Korean mythology, though rabbits are a relatively new introduction to some of these regions. In Chinese folklore, rabbits accompany Chang'e on the Moon, and the moon rabbit is a prominent symbol in the Mid-Autumn Festival. In the Chinese New Year, the zodiacal rabbit or hare is one of the twelve celestial animals in the Chinese zodiac. At the time of the zodiacal cycles becoming associated with animals in the Han dynasty, only hares were native to China, with the currently extant breeds of rabbit in China being of European origin. The Vietnamese zodiac includes a zodiacal cat in place of the rabbit. The most common explanation is that the ancient Vietnamese word for \"rabbit\" \"(mao)\" sounds like the Chinese word for \"cat\" (\u536f, \"mao)\". In Japanese tradition, rabbits live on the Moon where they make mochi. This comes from interpreting the pattern of dark patches on the moon as a rabbit standing on tiptoes on the left pounding on an usu, a Japanese mortar; in some images, this rabbit is said to be creating a potion of immortality. In Korean mythology, as in Japanese, rabbits live on the moon making rice cakes (\"tteok\" in Korean).\nRabbits have also appeared in religious symbolism. Buddhism, Christianity, and Judaism have associations with an ancient circular motif called the \"three rabbits\" (or \"three hares\"). Its meaning ranges from \"peace and tranquility\" to the Holy Trinity. The tripartite symbol also appears in heraldry. In Jewish folklore, rabbits are associated with cowardice, a usage still current in contemporary Israeli spoken Hebrew. The original Hebrew word (shfanim, \u05e9\u05e4\u05e0\u05d9\u05dd) refers to the hyrax, but early translations to English interpreted the word to mean \"rabbit\", as no hyraxes were known to northern Europe. In Greek and Roman mythology, rabbits were associated with the hunting goddesses Artemis and Diana. Ancient Greek hunters were instructed to not hunt newborn rabbits, and to leave them \"for the goddess\". The constellation Lepus is named for the rabbit, and was given its name by Ptolemy c.\u2009150 CE. \nModern times.\nThe rabbit as trickster is a part of American popular culture, as Br'er Rabbit (from African-American folktales and, later, Disney animation) and Bugs Bunny (the cartoon character from Warner Bros.), for example.\nAnthropomorphized rabbits have appeared in film and literature, in \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" (the White Rabbit and the March Hare characters), in \"Watership Down\" (including the film and television adaptations), in \"Rabbit Hill\" (by Robert Lawson), and in the \"Peter Rabbit\" stories (by Beatrix Potter). In the 1920s, \"Oswald the Lucky Rabbit\" was a popular cartoon character.\nOn the Isle of Portland in Dorset, UK, the rabbit is said to be unlucky, and speaking the creature's name can cause upset among older island residents. This is thought to date back to early times in the local quarrying industry, where, to save space, extracted stones that were not fit for sale were set aside in what became tall, unstable walls. The local rabbits' tendency to burrow there would weaken the walls, and their collapse would result in injuries or even death. In the local culture to this day, the rabbit (when he has to be referred to) may instead be called a \"long ears\" or \"underground mutton\" so as not to risk bringing a downfall upon oneself.\nIn other parts of Britain and in North America, \"Rabbit rabbit rabbit\" is one variant of an apotropaic or talismanic superstition that involves saying or repeating the word \"rabbit\" (or \"rabbits\" or \"white rabbits\" or some combination thereof) out loud upon waking on the first day of each month, because doing so is believed to ensure good fortune for the duration of that month.\nThe \"rabbit test\" is a term first used in 1949 for the Friedman test, an early diagnostic tool for detecting a pregnancy in humans. It is a common misconception (or perhaps an urban legend) that the test-rabbit would die if the woman was pregnant. This led to the phrase \"the rabbit died\" becoming a euphemism for a positive pregnancy test.\nMany modern children's stories and cartoons portray rabbits as particularly fond of eating carrots, largely due to the popularity of Bugs Bunny, whose carrot eating habit was modeled after Peter Warne, the character played by Clark Gable in the 1934 romantic comedy \"It Happened One Night\". This is misleading, as wild rabbits do not naturally prefer carrots over other plants. The misconception has led to some owners of domestic rabbits feeding them carrot-heavy diets. Carrots are high in sugar, and excessive consumption can be unhealthy.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26574", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26574", "title": "Rooster", "text": "Male chicken"}
{"id": "26575", "revid": "4571676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26575", "title": "Razz", "text": "Razz may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26576", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26576", "title": "Running Amuck", "text": ""}
{"id": "26578", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26578", "title": "Running amuck", "text": ""}
{"id": "26579", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26579", "title": "Running Amok", "text": ""}
{"id": "26581", "revid": "50117447", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26581", "title": "Robert Moog", "text": "American electronic music pioneer (1934\u20132005)\nRobert Arthur Moog ( ; May 23, 1934 \u2013 August 21, 2005) was an American engineer and electronic music pioneer. He was the founder of the synthesizer manufacturer Moog Music and the inventor of the first commercial synthesizer, the Moog synthesizer, which debuted in 1964. In 1970, Moog released a more portable model, the Minimoog, described as the most famous and influential synthesizer in history. Among Moog's honors are a Technical Grammy Award, received in 2002, and an induction into the National Inventors Hall of Fame.\nBy 1963, Moog had been designing and selling theremins for several years while working toward a PhD in engineering physics at Cornell University. He developed his synthesizer in response to demand for more practical and affordable electronic-music equipment, guided by suggestions and requests from composers. Moog's principal innovation was the voltage-controlled oscillator, which uses voltage to control pitch. He also introduced fundamental synthesizer concepts such as modularity, envelope generation and the pitch wheel. He is credited with introducing synthesizers to a wider audience and influencing the development of popular music.\nMoog pursued his work as a hobby, and he is regarded as a poor businessman. His only patent was on his transistor ladder filter design; commentators have speculated that he would have become extremely wealthy had he patented his other innovations, but that their availability in the public domain helped the synthesizer industry flourish.\nIn 1971, Moog sold Moog Music to Norlin Musical Instruments, where he remained as a designer until 1977. In 1978, he founded the company Big Briar, and in 2002 he renamed it Moog Music after reacquiring the rights to the name. In later years, Moog taught at the University of North Carolina at Asheville and continued designing instruments for the revived Moog Music. He died at the age of 71 in Asheville from a brain tumor.\nEarly life and education.\nRobert Moog was born at Flushing Hospital in New York City on May 23, 1934. His father was George Conrad Moog, of German descent. His mother was Shirley (Jacobs) Moog, of Polish-Jewish descent. He was raised in Flushing, Queens.\nWhen he was a boy, Moog's mother forced him to study the piano. He was active in the Boy Scouts, and especially enjoyed spending time with his father, a Consolidated Edison engineer, visiting Manhattan's Radio Row and working on radio and electronics projects. He became fascinated by the theremin, an electronic instrument controlled by moving the hands over radio antennae. In 1949, at the age of 14, he built a theremin from plans printed in \"Electronics World\".\nHe graduated from the Bronx High School of Science in 1952. He earned a Bachelor of Science in physics from Queens College of the City University of New York in 1955, and a Bachelor of Science in electrical engineering from the Columbia University School of Engineering and Applied Science under a 3-2 engineering program in 1957. He earned a PhD in engineering physics from Cornell University in 1965.\nCareer.\nTheremins and R.A. Moog Co..\nIn 1953, Moog produced his own theremin design, and in the following year, he published an article on the theremin in \"Radio and Television News\". That same year, he founded R.A. Moog Co., building theremins and theremin kits in his parents' home and selling them via mail order. In 1956, Moog and his father visited Raymond Scott's Manhattan Research facility, and Scott purchased a Moog Model 305 theremin. Scott rewired the Moog theremin to be controlled by a keyboard, dubbing his creation the Clavivox. Moog married in 1958 and continued building and selling theremin kits from his own home in Ithaca, before establishing the company's first commercial space at 41 East Main Street in Trumansburg, New York in 1963, all while continuing to pursue his postgraduate education.\nMoog synthesizer.\nAt Cornell, Moog began work on his first synthesizer components with composer Herb Deutsch. At the time, synthesizers were enormous, room-filling instruments; Moog hoped to build a more compact synthesizer that would appeal to musicians. He believed that practicality and affordability were the most important parameters.\nIn 1964, Moog began creating the Moog modular synthesizer. It was composed of separate modules that created and shaped sounds, connected by patch cords. Previous synthesizers, such as the RCA Mark II, had created sound from hundreds of vacuum tubes. Instead, Moog used recently available silicon transistors with an exponential relationship between input voltage and output current. With these, he created the voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), which generates a waveform with a pitch that could be adjusted by changing the voltage. Similarly, he used voltage to control loudness with voltage-controlled amplifiers (VCAs). One innovative feature was its envelope, which controls how notes swell and fade. According to the \"Guardian\", Moog's 1964 paper \"Voltage-Controlled Music Modules\", in which he proposed the Moog synthesizer modules, invented the modern concept of the analog synthesizer.\nMoog debuted the instrument at the 1964 Audio Engineering Society convention in New York. It was much smaller than other synthesizers, such as the RCA Synthesizer introduced a decade earlier, and much cheaper, at US$10,000, as compared to the six-figure sums of other synthesizers. Whereas the RCA Synthesizer was programmed with punchcards, Moog's synthesizer could be programmed with knobs and patch cables and played via keyboard, making it attractive to musicians. \"New Scientist\" described it as the first commercial synthesizer.\nAt this time, Moog and then Fred Cochran constructed the so-called Moogtonium for the composer Max Brand. It is still operational and exhibited in the Langenzersdorf Museum near Vienna (Austria).\nMoog described himself as a toolmaker designing things for his users, not himself. His development was driven by requests and suggestions from various musicians, including Deutsch (who devised the instrument's keyboard interface), Richard Teitelbaum, Vladimir Ussachevsky (credited with devising the ADSR envelope shape), and Wendy Carlos. His other early customers included choreographer and composer Alwin Nikolais and composer John Cage. Universities established electronic music studios with Moog synthesizers. In 1970, Moog released the portable fixed-architecture Minimoog, described as the most famous and influential synthesizer in history.\nCompany decline.\nThough commentators have praised Moog's engineering abilities, some have also described him as a poor businessman. Moog had pursued the development of his synthesizer as a hobby, stressing that he was regarded as a businessman but had not known what a balance sheet was. He likened the experience to a theme park ride: \"You know you're not going to get hurt too badly because nobody would let you do that, but you're not quite in control.\"\nMoog only patented his filter design; David Borden, one of the first users of the Minimoog, felt that if Moog had patented his pitch wheel design, he would have become extremely wealthy. According to \"Sound on Sound\", if Moog had created a monopoly on other synthesizer ideas that he created, such as modularity, envelope generation and voltage control, \"it's likely the synth industry as we know it today would never have happened.\"\nBeginning in 1971, Moog Music absorbed investors, merged with Norlin Musical Instruments and moved to \"less than ideal\" premises near Buffalo, New York, amid a debilitating recession. Moog remained employed as a designer at the company until 1977. He said that he would have left earlier if his contract had not required him to remain employed there for four years to cash his stock. By the end of the decade, Moog Music was facing competition from cheaper, easier-to-use instruments by competitors including ARP, Aries, Roland, Sequential Circuits, and E-mu.\nBig Briar, return of Moog Music.\nIn 1978, Moog moved to North Carolina and founded a new electronic instrument company, Big Briar. He also worked as a consultant and vice president for new product research at Kurzweil Music Systems from 1984 to 1988. In the early 1990s, he was a research professor of music at the University of North Carolina at Asheville. In 2002, he renamed Big Briar to Moog Music after retrieving the rights to the name. In later years, he continued to design electronic instruments, including a touchscreen-operated piano.\nPersonal life and death.\nMoog married Shirley May Leigh on June 15, 1958. They had four children, Laura (1961), Ren\u00e9e (1963), Michelle (1967), and Matthew (1970). They divorced in 1994. On May 19, 1996 Moog married Ileana Grams.\nMoog was diagnosed with a glioblastoma multiforme brain tumor on April 28, 2005. He died on August 21, 2005, at the age of 71 in Asheville, North Carolina. He was survived by his second wife Ileana, four children, one stepdaughter and five grandchildren.\nLegacy.\nMoog has had a lasting influence on music. The BBC describes him as a pioneer of synthesized sound. According to the \"Guardian\", his inventions \"changed the complexion of the pop and classical music worlds.\" Moog's name became so associated with electronic music that it was sometimes used as a generic term for any synthesizer.\nMoog's awards include honorary doctorates from Polytechnic Institute of New York University (New York City), Lycoming College (Williamsport, Pennsylvania) and Berklee College of Music. He received a Grammy Trustees Award for lifetime achievement in 1970, the Polar Music Prize in 2001 and a Special Merit/Technical Grammy Award in 2002. In 2012, to celebrate Moog's birthday, Google created an interactive version of the Minimoog as its Google Doodle. In 2013, Moog was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame.\nMuseum.\nOn July 18, 2013, Moog's widow Ileana Grams-Moog announced plans to donate Moog's archives, maintained by the Bob Moog Foundation, to Cornell University. The foundation offered her $100,000 but Grams-Moog would not sell the archives. She felt that Cornell could provide better access for researchers and that the foundation had not made enough progress toward a planned museum to be worthy of maintaining the collection. The foundation responded that it had sufficiently preserved the collection and had made efforts to improve storage, although it could not yet afford to build the museum.\nIn August 2019, the Bob Moog Foundation opened the Moogseum, a museum dedicated to Moog's work, in Asheville, North Carolina. The displays include rare theremins, prototype synthesizer modules and Moog's documents.\nMedia.\nMoog has been the subject of books about his life and work, including the 2004 book \"Analog Days: The Invention and Impact of the Moog Synthesizer\" by Trevor Pinch and Frank Trocco and the 2023 biography \"Switched On: Bob Moog and the Synthesizer Revolution\" by Albert Glinsky. Moog had contributed the foreword to Glinsky's first book, \"Theremin: Ether Music and Espionage,\" about Leon Theremin, who was a principal inspiration to Moog.\nMoog was also the subject of \"Moog\", a 2004 documentary directed by Hans Fjellestad, who said that Moog \"embodies the archetypal American maverick inventor.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26582", "revid": "26110720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26582", "title": "Robert the Bruce", "text": "King of Scotland from 1306 to 1329\nRobert I (11 July 1274 \u2013 7 June 1329), popularly known as Robert the Bruce (), was King of Scots from 1306 until his death in 1329. Robert led Scotland during the First War of Scottish Independence against England. He fought successfully during his reign to restore Scotland to an independent kingdom and is regarded in Scotland as a national hero. Robert was a fourth-great-grandson of King David I, and his grandfather, Robert de Brus, 5th Lord of Annandale, was one of the claimants to the Scottish throne during the \"Great Cause\".\nAs Earl of Carrick, Robert the Bruce supported his family's claim to the Scottish throne and took part in William Wallace's campaign against Edward I of England. Appointed in 1298 as a Guardian of Scotland alongside his chief rival for the throne, John Comyn of Badenoch, and William Lamberton, Bishop of St Andrews, Robert resigned in 1300 because of his quarrels with Comyn and the apparently imminent restoration of John Balliol to the Scottish throne. After submitting to Edward I in 1302 and returning to \"the king's peace\", Robert inherited his family's claim to the Scottish throne upon his father's death.\nBruce's involvement in John Comyn's murder in February 1306 led to his excommunication by Pope Clement V (although he received absolution from Robert Wishart, Bishop of Glasgow). Bruce moved quickly to seize the throne and was crowned king of Scots on 25 March 1306. Edward I's forces defeated Robert in the Battle of Methven, forcing him to flee into hiding, before re-emerging in 1307 to defeat an English army at Loudoun Hill and wage a highly successful guerrilla war against the English.\nRobert I defeated his other opponents, destroying their strongholds and devastating their lands, and in 1309 held his first parliament. A series of military victories between 1310 and 1314 won him control of much of Scotland, and at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314, Robert defeated a much larger English army under Edward II of England, confirming the re-establishment of an independent Scottish kingdom. The battle marked a significant turning point, with Robert's armies now free to launch devastating raids throughout northern England, while he also expanded the war against England by sending armies to invade Ireland, and appealed to the Irish to rise against Edward II's rule.\nDespite Bannockburn and the capture of the final English stronghold at Berwick in 1318, Edward II refused to renounce his claim to the overlordship of Scotland. In 1320, the Scottish nobility submitted the Declaration of Arbroath to Pope John XXII, declaring Robert as their rightful monarch and asserting Scotland's status as an independent kingdom. In 1324, the Pope recognised Robert I as king of an independent Scotland, and in 1326, the Franco-Scottish alliance was renewed in the Treaty of Corbeil. In 1327, the English deposed Edward II in favour of his son, Edward III, and peace was concluded between Scotland and England with the Treaty of Edinburgh\u2013Northampton in 1328, by which Edward III renounced all claims to sovereignty over Scotland.\nRobert I died in June 1329 and was succeeded by his son, David II. Robert's body is buried in Dunfermline Abbey, while his heart was interred in Melrose Abbey, and his internal organs were embalmed and placed in St Serf's Church, Dumbarton.\nEarly life (1274\u20131292).\nBirth.\nRobert the Bruce was born on 11 July 1274. His place of birth is not known for certain. It most likely was Turnberry Castle in Ayrshire, the head of his mother's earldom, despite claims that he may have been born in Lochmaben in Dumfriesshire, or Writtle in Essex. Robert de Brus, 1st Lord of Annandale, the first of the Bruce (de Brus) line, had settled in Scotland during the reign of King David I, and was granted the Lordship of Annandale in 1124. The future king was one of ten children, and the eldest son, of Robert de Brus, 6th Lord of Annandale, and Marjorie, Countess of Carrick. From his mother, he inherited the Earldom of Carrick, and through his father, the Lordship of Annandale and a royal lineage as a fourth great-grandson of David I that would give him a claim to the Scottish throne. In addition to the lordship of Annandale, the Bruces also held lands in Aberdeenshire and Dundee, and substantial estates in England (in Cumberland, County Durham, Essex, Middlesex, Northumberland and Yorkshire) and in County Antrim in Ireland.\nChildhood.\nVery little is known of his youth. He was probably brought up in a mixture of the Anglo-Norman culture of northern England and south-eastern Scotland, and the Gaelic culture of southwest Scotland and most of Scotland north of the River Forth. Annandale was thoroughly feudalised, and the form of Northern Middle English that would later develop into the Scots language was spoken throughout the region. Carrick was historically an integral part of Galloway, and though the earls of Carrick had achieved some feudalisation, the society of Carrick at the end of the thirteenth century remained emphatically Celtic and Gaelic speaking.\nRobert the Bruce would most probably have become trilingual at an early age. He would have been schooled to speak, read and possibly write in the Anglo-Norman language of his Scots-Norman peers and the Scoto-Norman portion of his family. He would also have spoken both the Gaelic language of his Carrick birthplace and his mother's family and the early Scots language. As the heir to a considerable estate and a pious layman, Robert would also have been given working knowledge of Latin, the language of charter lordship, liturgy and prayer. This would have afforded Robert and his brothers access to basic education in the law, politics, scripture, saints' Lives (\"vitae\"), philosophy, history and chivalric instruction and romance.\nBarbour reported that Robert read aloud to his band of supporters in 1306, reciting from memory tales from a twelfth-century romance of Charlemagne, \"Fierabras\", as well as relating examples from history such as Hannibal's defiance of Rome.\nAs king, Robert certainly commissioned verse to commemorate Bannockburn and his subjects' military deeds. Contemporary chroniclers Jean Le Bel and Thomas Grey would both assert that they had read a history of his reign 'commissioned by King Robert himself.' In his last years, Robert would pay for Dominican friars to tutor his son, David, for whom he would also purchase books. A parliamentary briefing document of c. 1364 would also assert that Robert 'used continually to read, or have read in his presence, the histories of ancient kings and princes, and how they conducted themselves in their times, both in wartime and in peacetime; from these he derived information about aspects of his own rule.'\nTutors for the young Robert and his brothers were most likely drawn from unbeneficed clergy or mendicant friars associated with the churches patronised by their family. However, as growing noble youths, outdoor pursuits and great events would also have held a strong fascination for Robert and his brothers. They would have had masters drawn from their parents' household to school them in the arts of horsemanship, swordsmanship, the joust, hunting and perhaps aspects of courtly behaviour, including dress, protocol, speech, table etiquette, music and dance, some of which may have been learned before the age of ten while serving as pages in their father's or grandfather's household.\nAs many of these personal and leadership skills were bound up within a code of chivalry, Robert's chief tutor was surely a reputable, experienced knight, drawn from his grandfather's crusade retinue. This grandfather, known to contemporaries as Robert the Noble, and to history as \"Bruce the Competitor\", seems to have been an immense influence on the future king. Robert's later performance in war certainly underlines his skills in tactics and single combat.\nThe family would have moved between the castles of their lordships\u00a0\u2013 Lochmaben Castle, the main castle of the lordship of Annandale, and Turnberry and Loch Doon Castle, the castles of the earldom of Carrick. A significant and profound part of the childhood experience of Robert, Edward and possibly the other Bruce brothers (Neil, Thomas and Alexander), was also gained through the Gaelic tradition of being fostered to allied Gaelic kindreds \u2013 a traditional practice in Carrick, southwest and western Scotland, the Hebrides and Ireland.\nThere were a number of Carrick, Ayrshire, Hebridean and Irish families and kindreds affiliated with the Bruces who might have performed such a service (Robert's foster brother is referred to by Barbour as sharing Robert's precarious existence as an outlaw in Carrick in 1307\u20131308). This Gaelic influence has been cited as a possible explanation for Robert the Bruce's apparent affinity for \"hobelar\" warfare, using smaller sturdy ponies in mounted raids, as well as for sea-power, ranging from oared war-galleys (\"birlinns\") to boats.\nAccording to historians such as Barrow and Penman, it is also likely that when Robert and Edward Bruce reached the male age of consent of twelve and began training for full knighthood, they were sent to reside for a period with one or more allied English noble families, such as the de Clares of Gloucester, or perhaps even in the English royal household. Sir Thomas Grey asserted in his \"Scalacronica\" that in about 1292, Robert the Bruce, then aged eighteen, was a \"young bachelor of King Edward's Chamber\". While there remains little firm evidence of Robert's presence at Edward's court, on 8 April 1296, both Robert and his father were pursued through the English Chancery for their private household debts of \u00a360 by several merchants of Winchester. This raises the possibility that young Robert the Bruce was on occasion resident in a royal centre which Edward I himself would visit frequently during his reign.\nRobert's first appearance in history is on a witness list of a charter issued by Alexander Og MacDonald, Lord of Islay. His name appears in the company of the Bishop of Argyll, the vicar of Arran, a Kintyre clerk, his father, and a host of Gaelic notaries from Carrick. Robert Bruce, the king-to-be, was sixteen years of age when Margaret, Maid of Norway, died in 1290. It was also around this time that Robert would have been knighted, and he began to appear on the political stage in the Bruce dynastic interest.\n\"Great Cause\".\nRobert's mother died early in 1292. In November of the same year, Edward I of England, on behalf of the Guardians of Scotland and following the Great Cause, awarded the vacant Crown of Scotland to his grandfather's first cousin once removed, John Balliol.\nAlmost immediately, Robert de Brus, 5th Lord of Annandale, resigned his lordship of Annandale and transferred his claim to the Scottish throne to his son, antedating this statement to 7 November. In turn, that son, Robert de Brus, 6th Lord of Annandale, resigned his earldom of Carrick to his eldest son, Robert, the future king, to protect the Bruce's kingship claim while their middle lord (Robert the Bruce's father) now held only English lands.\nWhile the Bruces' bid for the throne had failed, the Balliols' triumph propelled the eighteen-year-old Robert the Bruce onto the political stage in his own right.\nEarl of Carrick (1292\u20131306).\nBruces regroup.\nEven after John's accession, Edward continued to assert his authority over Scotland, and relations between the two kings soon deteriorated. The Bruces sided with King Edward against King John and his Comyn allies. Robert the Bruce and his father both considered John a usurper. Against the objections of the Scots, Edward I agreed to hear appeals on cases ruled on by the court of the Guardians that had governed Scotland during the interregnum. A further provocation came in a case brought by Macduff, son of Malcolm, Earl of Fife, in which Edward demanded that John appear in person before the English Parliament to answer the charges. This the Scottish king did, but the final straw was Edward's demand that the Scottish magnates provide military service in England's war against France. This was unacceptable; the Scots instead formed an alliance with France.\nThe Comyn-dominated council acting in the name of King John summoned the Scottish host to meet at Caddonlee on 11 March. The Bruces and the earls of Angus and March refused, and the Bruce family withdrew temporarily from Scotland, while the Comyns seized their estates in Annandale and Carrick, granting them to John Comyn, Earl of Buchan. Edward I thereupon provided a safe refuge for the Bruces, having appointed the Lord of Annandale to the command of Carlisle Castle in October 1295. At some point in early 1296, Robert married his first wife, Isabella of Mar, the daughter of Domhnall I, Earl of Mar. Isabella died shortly after their marriage, either during or shortly after the birth of their only child, Marjorie Bruce.\nBeginning of the Wars of Independence.\nAlmost the first blow in the war between Scotland and England was a direct attack on the Bruces. On 26 March 1296, Easter Monday, seven Scottish earls made a surprise attack on the walled city of Carlisle, which was not so much an attack against England as the Comyn Earl of Buchan and their faction attacking their Bruce enemies. Both his father and grandfather were at one time Governors of the Castle, and following the loss of Annandale to Comyn in 1295, it was their principal residence. Robert Bruce would have gained first-hand knowledge of the city's defences. The next time Carlisle was besieged, in 1315, Robert the Bruce would lead the attack.\nEdward I responded to King John's alliance with France and the attack on Carlisle by invading Scotland at the end of March 1296 and taking the town of Berwick in a particularly bloody attack upon the flimsy palisades. At the Battle of Dunbar, Scottish resistance was effectively crushed. Edward deposed King John, placed him in the Tower of London, and installed Englishmen to govern the country. The campaign had been very successful, but the English triumph would be only temporary.\nAlthough the Bruces were by now back in possession of Annandale and Carrick, in August 1296 Robert Bruce, Lord of Annandale, and his son, Robert Bruce, Earl of Carrick and future king, were among the more than 1,500 Scots at Berwick who swore an oath of fealty to King Edward I of England. When the Scottish revolt against Edward I broke out in July 1297, James Stewart, 5th High Steward of Scotland, led into rebellion a group of disaffected Scots, including Robert Wishart, Bishop of Glasgow, Macduff of Fife, and the young Robert Bruce. The future king was now twenty-two, and in joining the rebels he seems to have been acting independently of his father, who took no part in the rebellion and appears to have abandoned Annandale once more for the safety of Carlisle. It appears that Robert Bruce had fallen under the influence of his grandfather's friends, Wishart and Stewart, who had inspired him to resistance. With the outbreak of the revolt, Robert left Carlisle and made his way to Annandale, where he called together the knights of his ancestral lands and, according to the English chronicler Walter of Guisborough, addressed them thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUrgent letters were sent ordering Bruce to support Edward's commander, John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey (to whom Bruce was related), in the summer of 1297; but instead of complying, Bruce continued to support the revolt against Edward I. That Bruce was in the forefront of inciting rebellion is shown in a letter written to Edward by Hugh Cressingham on 23 July 1292, which reports the opinion that \"if you had the earl of Carrick, the Steward of Scotland and his brother ... you would think your business done\". On 7 July, Bruce and his friends made terms with Edward by a treaty called the Capitulation of Irvine. The Scottish lords were not to serve beyond the sea against their will and were pardoned for their recent violence in return for swearing allegiance to King Edward. The Bishop of Glasgow, James the Steward, and Sir Alexander Lindsay became sureties for Bruce until he delivered his infant daughter Marjorie as a hostage, which he never did.\nWhen King Edward returned to England after his victory at the Battle of Falkirk, the Bruce's possessions were excepted from the Lordships and lands that Edward assigned to his followers. The reason for this is uncertain, though Fordun records Robert fighting for Edward, at Falkirk, under the command of Antony Bek, Bishop of Durham, Annandale and Carrick. This participation is contested as no Bruce appears on the Falkirk roll of nobles present in the English army, and two 19th Century antiquarians, Alexander Murison and George Chalmers, have stated that Bruce did not participate, and in the following month decided to lay waste to Annandale and burn Ayr Castle, to prevent it being garrisoned by the English.\nGuardian.\nWilliam Wallace resigned as Guardian of Scotland after his defeat at the Battle of Falkirk. He was succeeded by Robert Bruce and John Comyn as joint Guardians, but they could not see past their personal differences. As a nephew and supporter of King John, and as someone with a serious claim to the Scottish throne, Comyn was Bruce's enemy. In 1299, William Lamberton, Bishop of St. Andrews, was appointed as a third, neutral Guardian to try to maintain order between Bruce and Comyn. The following year, Bruce finally resigned as joint Guardian and was replaced by Sir Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl of Angus. In May 1301, Umfraville, Comyn, and Lamberton also resigned as joint Guardians and were replaced by Sir John de Soules as sole Guardian. Soules was appointed largely because he was part of neither the Bruce nor the Comyn camps and was a patriot. He was an active Guardian and made renewed efforts to have King John returned to the Scottish throne.\nIn July 1301 King Edward I launched his sixth campaign into Scotland. Though he captured the castles of Bothwell and Turnberry, he did little to damage the Scots' fighting ability, and in January 1302 he agreed to a nine-month truce. It was around this time that Robert the Bruce submitted to Edward, along with other nobles, even though he had been on the side of the Scots until then. There were rumours that John Balliol would return to regain the Scottish throne. Soules, who had probably been appointed by John, supported his return, as did most other nobles. But it was no more than a rumour and nothing came of it.\nIn March 1302, Bruce sent a letter to the monks at Melrose Abbey apologising for having called tenants of the monks to service in his army when there had been no national call-up. Bruce pledged that, henceforth, he would \"never again\" require the monks to serve unless it was to \"the common army of the whole realm\", for national defence. Bruce also married his second wife that year, Elizabeth de Burgh, the daughter of Richard de Burgh, 2nd Earl of Ulster, in Writtle, near Chelmsford in Essex. Elizabeth was about 13 at the time, and Bruce 28. By Elizabeth he had four children: David II, John (died in childhood), Matilda (who married Thomas Isaac and died at Aberdeen 20 July 1353), and Margaret (who married William de Moravia, 5th Earl of Sutherland in 1345).\nIn 1303, Edward invaded again, reaching Edinburgh before marching to Perth. Edward stayed in Perth until July, then proceeded via Dundee, Brechin, and Montrose to Aberdeen, where he arrived in August. From there he marched through Moray to Badenoch before re-tracing his path back south to Dunfermline. With the country now under submission, all the leading Scots, except for William Wallace, surrendered to Edward in February 1304. John Comyn, who was by now Guardian again, submitted to Edward. The laws and liberties of Scotland were to be as they had been in the days of Alexander III, and any that needed alteration would be with the assent of King Edward and the advice of the Scots nobles.\nOn 11 June 1304, Bruce and William Lamberton made a pact that bound them, each to the other, in \"friendship and alliance against all men.\" If one should break the secret pact, he would forfeit to the other the sum of ten thousand pounds. The pact is often interpreted as a sign of their patriotism despite both having already surrendered to the English. Homage was again obtained from the nobles and the burghs, and a parliament was held to elect those who would meet later in the year with the English parliament to establish rules for the governance of Scotland. The Earl of Richmond, Edward's nephew, was to head up the subordinate government of Scotland. While all this took place, William Wallace was finally captured near Glasgow, and he was hanged, drawn, and quartered in London on 23 August 1305.\nIn September 1305, Edward ordered Robert Bruce to put his castle at Kildrummy, \"in the keeping of such a man as he himself will be willing to answer for,\" suggesting that King Edward suspected Robert was not entirely trustworthy and may have been plotting behind his back. However, an identical phrase appears in an agreement between Edward and his lieutenant and lifelong friend, Aymer de Valence. A further sign of Edward's distrust occurred on 10 October 1305, when Edward revoked his gift of Sir Gilbert de Umfraville's lands to Bruce that he had made only six months before.\nRobert Bruce as Earl of Carrick, and now 7th Lord of Annandale, held huge estates and property in Scotland and a barony and some minor properties in England, and a strong claim to the Scottish throne.\nMurder of John Comyn.\nBruce, like all his family, had a complete belief in his right to the throne. His ambition was further thwarted by John Comyn, who supported John Balliol. Comyn was the most powerful noble in Scotland and was related to many other powerful nobles both within Scotland and England, including relatives that held the earldoms of Buchan, Mar, Ross, Fife, Angus, Dunbar, and Strathearn; the Lordships of Kilbride, Kirkintilloch, Lenzie, Bedrule, and Scraesburgh; and sheriffdoms in Banff, Dingwall, Wigtown, and Aberdeen. He also had a powerful claim to the Scottish throne through his descent from Donald III on his father's side and David I on his mother's side. Comyn was the nephew of John Balliol.\nAccording to Barbour and Fordoun, in the late summer of 1305, in a secret agreement sworn, signed, and sealed, John Comyn agreed to forfeit his claim to the Scottish throne in favour of Robert Bruce upon receipt of the Bruce lands in Scotland should an uprising occur led by Bruce. Whether the details of the agreement with Comyn are correct or not, King Edward moved to arrest Bruce while Bruce was still at the English court. Ralph de Monthermer learned of Edward's intention and warned Bruce by sending him twelve pence and a pair of spurs. Bruce took the hint, and he and a squire fled the English court during the night. They made their way quickly to Scotland.\nAccording to Barbour, Comyn betrayed his agreement with Bruce to King Edward I, and when Bruce arranged a meeting for 10 February 1306 with Comyn in the Chapel of Greyfriars Monastery in Dumfries and accused him of treachery, they came to blows. Bruce stabbed Comyn before the high altar. The \"Scotichronicon\" says that on being told that Comyn had survived the attack and was being treated, two of Bruce's supporters, Roger de Kirkpatrick (uttering the words \"I mak siccar\" (\"I make sure\")) and John Lindsay, went back into the church and finished Bruce's work. Barbour, however, tells no such story. The Flores Historiarum, which was written c. 1307, says Bruce and Comyn disagreed and Bruce drew his sword and struck Comyn over the head. Bruce supporters then ran up and stabbed Comyn with their swords. Bruce asserted his claim to the Scottish crown and began his campaign by force for the independence of Scotland.\nBruce and his party then attacked Dumfries Castle, where the English garrison surrendered. Bruce hurried from Dumfries to Glasgow, where his friend and supporter Bishop Robert Wishart granted him absolution and subsequently adjured the clergy throughout the land to rally to Bruce. Nonetheless, Bruce was excommunicated for this crime.\nKing of Scotland (1306\u20131329).\nEarly reign (1306\u20131314).\nInauguration.\nSix weeks after Comyn was killed in Dumfries, Bruce was inaugurated King of Scots by Bishop William de Lamberton at Scone, near Perth, on Palm Sunday 25 March 1306 with all formality and solemnity. The royal robes and vestments that Robert Wishart had hidden from the English were brought out by the bishop and set upon King Robert. The bishops of Moray and Glasgow were in attendance, as were the earls of Atholl, Menteith, the Lennox and Mar. The great banner of the kings of Scotland was planted behind Bruce's throne. The following day, he agreed to be crowned for a second time by Isabella MacDuff, Countess of Buchan, as according to tradition, the crowning ceremony was performed by a representative of Clan MacDuff.\nWar of Robert the Bruce.\nEdward I marched north again in the spring of 1306. On his way, he granted the Scottish estates of Bruce and his adherents to his own followers and had published a bill excommunicating Bruce. In June, Bruce was defeated at the Battle of Methven. His wife and daughters and other women of the party were sent to Kildrummy in August under the protection of Bruce's brother, Neil Bruce, and the Earl of Atholl and most of his remaining men. Bruce fled with a small following of his most faithful men, including Sir James Douglas and Gilbert Hay, Bruce's brothers Thomas, Alexander, and Edward, as well as Sir Neil Campbell and the Earl of Lennox.\nA strong force under Edward, Prince of Wales, captured Kildrummy Castle on 13 September 1306, taking prisoner the King's youngest brother, Nigel de Bruce, as well as Robert Boyd and Alexander Lindsay, and Sir Simon Fraser. Boyd managed to escape but both Nigel de Bruce and Lindsay were executed shortly after at Berwick following King Edward's orders to execute all followers of Robert de Bruce. Fraser was taken to London to suffer the same fate. Shortly before the fall of Kildrummy Castle, the Earl of Atholl made a desperate attempt to take Queen Elizabeth de Burgh, Margery de Bruce, as well as King Robert's sisters and Isabella of Fife. They were betrayed a few days later and also fell into English hands, Atholl to be executed in London, and the women to be held under the harshest possible circumstances.\nIt is still uncertain where Bruce spent the winter of 1306\u20131307. Most likely he spent it in the Hebrides, possibly sheltered by Christina of the Isles. The latter was married to a member of the Mar kindred, a family to which Bruce was related (not only was his first wife a member of this family but her brother, Gartnait, was married to a sister of Bruce). Ireland is also a serious possibility, and Orkney (under Norwegian rule at the time) or Norway proper (where his sister Isabel Bruce was queen dowager) are unlikely but not impossible. Bruce and his followers returned to the Scottish mainland in February 1307 in two groups. One, led by Bruce and his brother Edward, landed at Turnberry Castle and began a guerrilla war in southwest Scotland. The other, led by his brothers Thomas and Alexander, landed slightly further south in Loch Ryan, but they were soon captured and executed. In April, Bruce won a small victory over the English at the Battle of Glen Trool, before defeating Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke, at the Battle of Loudoun Hill. At the same time, James Douglas made his first foray for Bruce into southwestern Scotland, attacking and burning his own castle in Douglasdale. Leaving his brother Edward in command in Galloway, Bruce travelled north, capturing Inverlochy and Urquhart Castles, burning to the ground Inverness Castle and Nairn, then unsuccessfully threatening Elgin. On 7 July 1307, King Edward I died, leaving Bruce opposed by the king's son, Edward II.\nTransferring operations to Aberdeenshire in late 1307, Bruce threatened Banff before falling seriously ill, probably owing to the hardships of the lengthy campaign. Recovering, leaving John Comyn, 3rd Earl of Buchan unsubdued at his rear, Bruce returned west to take Balvenie and Duffus Castles, then Tarradale Castle on the Black Isle. Looping back via the hinterlands of Inverness and a second failed attempt to take Elgin, Bruce finally achieved his landmark defeat of Comyn at the Battle of Inverurie in May 1308; he then overran Buchan and defeated the English garrison at Aberdeen. The Harrying of Buchan in 1308 was ordered by Bruce to make sure all Comyn family support was extinguished. Buchan had a very large population because it was the agricultural capital of northern Scotland, and much of its population was loyal to the Comyn family even after the defeat of the Earl of Buchan. Most of the Comyn castles in Moray, Aberdeen and Buchan were destroyed and their inhabitants killed. In less than a year Bruce had swept through the north and destroyed the power of the Comyns who had held vice-regal power in the north for nearly one hundred years. How this dramatic success was achieved, especially the taking of northern castles so quickly, is difficult to understand. Bruce lacked siege weapons and it's unlikely his army had substantially greater numbers or was better armed than his opponents. The morale and leadership of the Comyns and their northern allies appeared to be inexplicably lacking in the face of their direct challenge. He then crossed to Argyll and defeated the isolated MacDougalls (allies of the Comyns) at the Battle of Pass of Brander and took Dunstaffnage Castle, the last major stronghold of the Comyns and their allies. Bruce then ordered harryings in Argyle and Kintyre, in the territories of Clan MacDougall.\nIn March 1309, Bruce held his first parliament at St. Andrews and by August he controlled all of Scotland north of the River Tay. The following year, the clergy of Scotland recognised Bruce as king at a general council. The support given him by the church, in spite of his excommunication, was of great political importance. On 1 October 1310, Bruce wrote Edward II of England from Kildrum in Cumbernauld Parish in an unsuccessful attempt to establish peace between Scotland and England. Over the next three years, one English-held castle or outpost after another was captured and reduced: Linlithgow in 1310, Dumbarton in 1311, and Perth, by Bruce himself, in January 1312. Bruce also made raids into northern England and, landing at Ramsey in the Isle of Man, laid siege to Castle Rushen in Castletown, capturing it on 21 June 1313 and denying the English the island's strategic importance.\nThe eight years of exhausting but deliberate refusal to meet the English on even ground have caused many to consider Bruce one of the great guerrilla leaders of any age. This represented a transformation for one raised as a feudal knight.\nBattle of Bannockburn.\nBy 1314, Bruce had recaptured most of the castles in Scotland held by the English and was sending raiding parties into northern England as far as Carlisle. In response, Edward II planned a major military campaign with the support of Lancaster and the barons, mustering a large army of between 15,000 and 20,000 men. In the spring of 1314, Edward Bruce laid siege to Stirling Castle, a key fortification in Scotland whose governor, Philip de Mowbray, agreed to surrender if not relieved before 24 June 1314. In March, James Douglas captured Roxburgh, and Randolph captured Edinburgh Castle (Bruce later ordered the execution of Piers de Lombard, governor of the castle), while in May, Bruce again raided England and subdued the Isle of Man. News of the agreement regarding Stirling Castle reached the English king in late May, and he decided to speed his march north from Berwick to relieve the castle. Robert, with between 5,500 and 6,500 troops, predominantly spearmen, prepared to prevent Edward's forces from reaching Stirling.\nThe battle began on 23 June as the English army attempted to force its way across the high ground of the Bannock Burn, which was surrounded by marshland. Skirmishing between the two sides broke out, resulting in the death of Sir Henry de Bohun, whom Robert killed in personal combat. Edward continued his advance the following day and encountered the bulk of the Scottish army as they emerged from the woods of New Park. The English appear not to have expected the Scots to give battle here, and as a result had kept their forces in marching, rather than battle, order, with the archers \u2212 who would usually have been used to break up enemy spear formations \u2212 at the back, rather than the front, of the army. The English cavalry found it hard to operate in the cramped terrain and were crushed by Robert's spearmen. The English army was overwhelmed and its leaders were unable to regain control.\nEdward II was dragged from the battlefield, hotly pursued by the Scottish forces, and only just escaped the heavy fighting. The historian Roy Haines describes the defeat as a \"calamity of stunning proportions\" for the English, whose losses were huge. In the aftermath of the defeat, Edward retreated to Dunbar, then travelled by ship to Berwick, and then back to York; in his absence, Stirling Castle quickly fell.\nMid-reign (1314\u20131320).\nEnglish and Irish conflict.\nFreed from English threats, Scotland's armies could now invade northern England. Bruce also drove back a subsequent English expedition north of the border and launched raids into Yorkshire and Lancashire. Buoyed by his military successes, Robert also sent his brother Edward to invade Ireland in 1315, in an attempt to secure a second crown (having received a reply to offers of assistance from Domhnall \u00d3 N\u00e9ill, king of T\u00edr Eoghain), and to open a second front in the continuing wars with England. Edward was even crowned as High King of Ireland in 1316. Robert later went there with another army to assist his brother.\nIn conjunction with the invasion, Bruce popularised an ideological vision of a \"Pan-Gaelic Greater Scotia\" with his lineage ruling over both Ireland and Scotland. This propaganda campaign was aided by two factors. The first was the betrayal of Robert's marriage alliance, of 1302, with the Richard \u00d3g de Burgh, 2nd Earl of Ulster, Robert's second wife being the 13-year-old daughter of Richard, Elizabeth de Burgh, though despite the marriage Richard sided with Edward following Comyn's 1305 murder; second, Bruce himself, on his mother's side of Carrick, was descended from Gaelic royalty in Scotland as well as Ireland. Bruce's Irish ancestors included Aoife of Leinster (d. 1188), whose ancestors included Brian Boru of Munster and the kings of Leinster. Thus, lineally and geopolitically, Bruce attempted to support his anticipated notion of a pan-Gaelic alliance between Scottish-Irish Gaelic populations, under his kingship. This is revealed by a letter he sent to the Irish chiefs, where he calls the Scots and Irish collectively \"nostra nacio\" (our nation), stressing the common language, customs and heritage of the two peoples:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whereas we and you and our people and your people, free since ancient times, share the same national ancestry and are urged to come together more eagerly and joyfully in friendship by a common language and by common custom, we have sent you our beloved kinsman, the bearers of this letter, to negotiate with you in our name about permanently strengthening and maintaining inviolate the special friendship between us and you, so that with God's will our nation (\"nostra nacio\") may be able to recover her ancient liberty.\nThe diplomacy worked to a certain extent, at least in Ulster, where the Scots had some support. The Irish chief, Domhnall \u00d3 N\u00e9ill, for instance, later justified his support for the Scots to Pope John XXII by saying \"the Kings of Lesser Scotia all trace their blood to our \"Greater Scotia\" and retain to some degree our language and customs.\"\nInitially, the Scot-Irish army seemed unstoppable as they defeated the Hiberno-Norman forces of Richard De Burgh, Robert's father-in-law and Earl of Ulster, Edward's army levelling his Hiberno-Norman towns. However, the Scots failed to win over the non-Ulster chiefs or to make any other significant gains in the south of the island, where people couldn't see the difference between Hiberno-Norman and Scottish occupation. This was because a famine struck Ireland and the army struggled to sustain itself. They resorted to pillaging and razing entire settlements as they searched for supplies, regardless of whether they were Hiberno-Norman or Irish. Eventually, it was defeated when Edward Bruce was killed at the Battle of Faughart, by an army led by Richard de Burgh. The Irish Annals of the period described the defeat of the Bruces by the Hiberno-Normans as one of the greatest things ever done for the Irish nation due to the fact it brought an end to the famine and pillaging wrought upon the Irish by both the Scots and the Hiberno-Normans. For his 1306 campaign against the English Crown, Robert's excommunication by Pope Clement V was reaffirmed in 1318 by Pope John XXII.\nLater reign (1320\u20131329).\nThe reign of Robert Bruce also included some significant diplomatic achievements. The Declaration of Arbroath of 1320 strengthened his position, particularly in relation to the Papacy, and Pope John XXII eventually lifted Bruce's excommunication. In May 1328, King Edward III of England signed the Treaty of Edinburgh\u2013Northampton, which recognised Scotland as an independent kingdom, and Bruce as its king.\nIn 1325, Robert I acquired lands at Cardross in exchange for those of Old Montros in Angus, Scotland, with Sir David Graham. It was to be here in Cardoss that Robert would build the manor house that would serve as his favoured residence during the final years of his reign. The extant chamberlain's accounts for 1328 detail a manor house at Cardross with king's and queen's chambers and glazed windows, a chapel, kitchens, bake- and brew-houses, falcon aviary, medicinal garden, gatehouse, protective moat and a hunting park. There was also a jetty and beaching area for the 'king's coble' (for fishing) alongside the \"king's great ship\". As most of mainland Scotland's major royal castles had remained in their razed state since around 1313\u20131314, Cardross manor was perhaps built as a modest residence sympathetic to Robert's subjects' privations through a long war, repeated famines and livestock pandemics. Before Cardross became habitable in 1327, Robert's main residence had been Scone Abbey.\nRobert had been suffering from a serious illness since at least 1327. The \"Lanercost Chronicle\" and \"Scalacronica\" state that the king was said to have contracted and died of leprosy. Jean Le Bel also stated that in 1327 the king was a victim of 'la grosse maladie', which is usually taken to mean leprosy. However, the ignorant use of the term 'leprosy' by fourteenth-century writers meant that almost any major skin disease might be called leprosy. The earliest mention of this illness is to be found in an original letter written by an eyewitness in Ulster at the time the king made a truce with Sir Henry Mandeville on 12 July 1327. The writer of this letter reported that Robert was so feeble and struck down by illness that he would not live, 'for he can scarcely move anything but his tongue'. However, none of the several accounts of his last years by people who were with him refer to any sign of a skin ailment. Barbour writes of the king's illness that \"it began through a benumbing brought on by his cold lying\", during the months of wandering from 1306 to 1309. It has been proposed alternatively that he had eczema, tuberculosis, syphilis, motor neuron disease, cancer, or a series of strokes. There does not seem to be any evidence as to what the king himself or his physicians believed his illness to be. Nor is there any evidence of an attempt in his last years to segregate the king in any way from the company of friends, family, courtiers, or foreign diplomats.\nIn October 1328, the Pope finally lifted the interdict from Scotland and the excommunication of Robert. The king's last journey appears to have been a pilgrimage to the shrine of Saint Ninian at Whithorn; this was possibly in search of a miraculous cure, or to make his peace with God. With Moray by his side, Robert set off from his manor at Cardross for Tarbert on his 'great ship', thence to the Isle of Arran, where he celebrated Christmas of 1328 at the hall of Glenkill near Lamlash. Thence he sailed to the mainland to visit his son and his bride, both mere children, now installed at Turnberry Castle, the head of the earldom of Carrick and once his own main residence. He journeyed overland, being carried on a litter, to Inch in Wigtownshire: houses were built there, and supplies brought to that place, as though the king's condition had deteriorated. At the end of March 1329, he was staying at Glenluce Abbey and at Monreith, from where St Ninian's Cave was visited. Early in April, he arrived at the shrine of St Ninian at Whithorn. He fasted four or five days and prayed to the saint, before returning by sea to Cardross.\nBarbour and other sources relate that Robert summoned his prelates and barons to his bedside for a final council at which he made copious gifts to religious houses, dispensed silver to religious foundations of various orders, so that they might pray for his soul, and repented of his failure to fulfil a vow to undertake a crusade to fight the 'Saracens' in the Holy Land. Robert's final wish reflected conventional piety, and was perhaps intended to perpetuate his memory. After his death his heart was to be removed from his body and, accompanied by a company of knights led by Sir James Douglas, taken on pilgrimage to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem before being interred in Melrose Abbey upon its return from the Holy Land:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I will that as soone as I am trespassed out of this worlde that ye take my harte owte of my body, and embawme it, and take of my treasoure as ye shall thynke sufficient for that enterprise, both for your selfe and suche company as ye wyll take with you, and present my hart to the holy Sepulchre where as our Lorde laye, seyng my body can nat come there.\nRobert also arranged for perpetual soul masses to be funded at the chapel of Saint Serf, at Ayr and at the Dominican friary in Berwick, as well as at Dunfermline Abbey.\nDeath (1329).\nDeath and aftermath.\nRobert died on 7 June 1329, at the Manor of Cardross, near Dumbarton. Apart from failing to fulfill a vow to undertake a crusade he died utterly fulfilled, in that the goal of his lifetime's struggle \u2013 untrammelled recognition of the Bruce right to the crown \u2013 had been realised, and confident that he was leaving the kingdom of Scotland safely in the hands of his most trusted lieutenant, Moray until his infant son reached adulthood. Six days after his death, to complete his triumph still further, papal bulls were issued granting the privilege of unction at the coronation of future Kings of Scots.\nIt remains unclear just what caused the death of Robert, a month before his fifty-fifth birthday. Contemporary accusations that Robert had leprosy, the \"unclean sickness\" \u2013 the present-day, treatable Hansen's disease \u2013 derived from English and Hainault chroniclers. None of the Scottish accounts of his death hint at leprosy. Penman states that it is very difficult to accept the notion of Robert as a functioning king serving in war, performing face-to-face acts of lordship, holding parliament and court, travelling widely and fathering several children, all while displaying the infectious symptoms of a leper. Along with suggestions of eczema, tuberculosis, syphilis, motor neurone disease, cancer or stroke, a diet of rich court food has also been suggested as a possible contributory factor in Robert's death. His Milanese physician, Maino De Maineri, did criticise the king's eating of eels as dangerous to his health in advancing years.\nA team of researchers, headed by Professor Andrew Nelson from University of Western Ontario have determined that Robert the Bruce did not have leprosy. They examined the original casting of the skull belonging to Robert the Bruce's descendant Lord Andrew Douglas Alexander Thomas Bruce, and a foot bone that had not been re-interred. They determined that the skull and foot bone showed no signs of leprosy, such as an eroded nasal spine and a pencilling of the foot bone.\nBurial.\nThe king's body was embalmed, and his sternum sawn open to allow extraction of the heart, which Sir James Douglas placed in a silver casket to be worn on a chain around his neck. Robert's viscera were interred in the chapel of Saint Serf (the ruins of which are located in the present-day Levengrove Park in Dumbarton), his regular place of worship and close to his manor house in the ancient Parish of Cardross. The king's body was carried east from Cardross by a carriage decked in black lawn cloth, with stops recorded at Dunipace and Cambuskenneth Abbey. The funeral was a grand affair, with of wax having been purchased for the making of funerary candles. A file of mourners on foot, including Robert Stewart and a number of knights dressed in black gowns, accompanied the funeral party into Dunfermline Abbey. A canopy chapel or \"hearse\" of imported Baltic wood was erected over the grave. Robert I's body, in a wooden coffin, was then interred within a stone vault beneath the floor, underneath a box tomb of white Italian marble purchased in Paris by Thomas of Chartres after June 1328. A plinth of black Frosterley Marble topped this structure, and atop this plinth was a white shawl alabaster effigy of Robert I, painted and gilded. The following Latin epitaph was inscribed around the top of the tomb: \"Hic jacet invictus Robertus Rex benedictus qui sua gesta legit repetit quot bella peregit ad libertatem perduxit per probitatem regnum scottorum: nunc vivat in arce polorum\" (\"Here lies the invincible blessed King Robert / Whoever reads about his feats will repeat the many battles he fought / By his integrity he guided to liberty the Kingdom of the Scots: May he now live in Heaven\"). Ten alabaster fragments from the tomb are on display in the National Museum of Scotland and traces of gilding still remain on some of them. Robert had bequeathed sufficient funds to pay for thousands of obituary masses in Dunfermline Abbey and elsewhere, and his tomb would thus be the site of daily votive prayers.\nBruce's dying wish was that his heart should be taken to the Holy Land. When a projected international crusade failed to materialise, Sir James Douglas and his company, escorting the casket containing Bruce's heart, sailed to Spain where Alfonso XI of Castile was mounting a campaign against the Moorish kingdom of Granada. According to John Barbour, Douglas and his companions, including Sir William de Keith, Sir William St. Clair of Rosslyn and the brothers Sir Robert Logan of Restalrig and Sir Walter Logan, were welcomed cordially by King Alfonso. In August 1330 the Scots contingent formed part of the Castilian army besieging the frontier castle of Teba. Under circumstances which are still disputed, Sir James and most of his companions were killed. The sources all agree that, outnumbered and separated from the main Christian army, a group of Scots knights led by Douglas was overwhelmed and wiped out. John Barbour describes how the surviving members of the company recovered Douglas' body together with the casket containing Bruce's heart. The heart, together with Douglas' bones, was then brought back to Scotland, where it was buried at Melrose Abbey in Roxburghshire. \nIn 1920, what appeared to be King Robert's heart was discovered by archaeologists and was reburied, but the location was not marked. In 1996, a casket was unearthed during construction work. Scientific study by AOC archaeologists in Edinburgh demonstrated that it did indeed contain human tissue and it was of appropriate age. It was reburied in Melrose Abbey in 1998, according to the dying wishes of the King.\nDiscovery of the Bruce's tomb.\nDuring the Scottish Reformation, the abbey church had undergone a first Protestant \"cleansing\" by September 1559 and was sacked in March 1560. By September 1563 the choir and feretory chapel were roofless, and it was said that the nave was also in a sorry state, with the walls so extensively damaged that it was a danger to enter. In 1672 parts of the east end collapsed, while in 1716 part of the central tower is said to have fallen, presumably destabilising much that still stood around its base, and the east gable tumbled in 1726. The final collapse of the central tower took place in 1753.\nOn 17 February 1818, workmen breaking ground on the new parish church to be built on the site of the choir of Dunfermline Abbey uncovered a vault before the site of the former abbey high altar. The vault was covered by two large, flat stones \u2013 one forming a headstone, and a larger stone in length, with six iron rings or handles set in it. When these stones were removed, the vault was found to be in length, wide and deep. Within the vault, inside the remnants of a decayed oak coffin, there was a body entirely enclosed in lead, with a decayed shroud of cloth of gold over it. Over the head of the body, the lead was formed into the shape of a crown. Fragments of marble and alabaster had been found in the debris around the site of the vault several years earlier, which were linked to Robert the Bruce's recorded purchase of a marble and alabaster tomb made in Paris.\nThe Barons of Exchequer ordered that the vault was to be secured from all further inspection with new stones and iron bars and guarded by the town constables and that once the walls of the new church were built up around the site, an investigation of the vault and the remains could take place. Accordingly, on 5 November 1819, the investigation took place. The cloth of gold shroud and the lead covering were found to be in a rapid state of decay since the vault had first been opened 21 months earlier. The body was raised up and placed on a wooden coffin board on the edge of the vault. It was found to be covered in two thin layers of lead, each around thick. The lead was removed and the skeleton was inspected by James Gregory and Alexander Monro, Professor of Anatomy at the University of Edinburgh. The sternum was found to have been sawn open from top to bottom, permitting removal of the king's heart after death. A plaster cast was taken of the detached skull by artist William Scoular. The bones were measured and drawn, and the king's skeleton was measured to be . It has been estimated that Bruce stood at around tall as a young man, which by medieval standards was impressive. At this height he would have stood almost as tall as Edward I ().\nThe skeleton, lying on the wooden coffin board, was then placed upon the top of a lead coffin and the large crowd of curious people who had assembled outside the church were allowed to file past the vault to view the king's remains. It was at this point in the proceedings that some small relics\u00a0\u2013 teeth and finger bones\u00a0\u2013 were allegedly removed from the skeleton. The published accounts of eyewitnesses such as Henry Jardine and James Gregory confirm the removal of small objects at this time. Robert the Bruce's remains were ceremonially re-interred in the vault in Dunfermline Abbey on 5 November 1819. They were placed in a new lead coffin, into which was poured 1,500 lbs of molten pitch to preserve the remains before the coffin was sealed.\nReconstructions of the face of Robert the Bruce have been produced, including those by Richard Neave from the University of Manchester, Peter Vanezis from the University of Glasgow and Dr Martin McGregor (University of Glasgow) and Prof Caroline Wilkinson (Face Lab at Liverpool John Moores University).\nIssue.\nBruce's descendants include all later Scottish monarchs and all British monarchs since the Union of the Crowns in 1603. A large number of families definitely are descended from him.\nAncestry.\nDescended from the Scoto-Norman, Hiberno-Norman, Irish and Scottish Gaelic nobilities, through his father he was a fourth-great-grandson of David I, as well as claiming ancestry ultimately descended from Aoife MacMurrough and Richard (Strongbow) de Clare, 2nd Earl of Pembroke, King of Leinster and Governor of Ireland and William Marshal, 1st Earl of Pembroke. As well as Henry I of England amongst his paternal ancestors. Robert's grandfather Robert de Brus, 5th Lord of Annandale, was one of the claimants to the Scottish throne during the \"Great Cause\".\nLegacy.\nCommemoration and monuments.\nRobert I was originally buried in Dunfermline Abbey, the traditional resting place of Scottish monarchs since the reign of Malcolm Canmore. His tomb, imported from Paris, was extremely elaborate, carved from gilded alabaster. It was destroyed at the Reformation, but some fragments were discovered in the 19th century (now in the Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh). The site of the tomb in Dunfermline Abbey was marked by large carved stone letters spelling out \"King Robert the Bruce\" around the top of the bell tower when the eastern half of the abbey church was rebuilt in the first half of the 19th century. In 1974 the Bruce Memorial Window was installed in the north transept, commemorating the 700th anniversary of the year of his birth. It depicts stained glass images of the Bruce flanked by his chief men, Christ, and saints associated with Scotland.\nA 1929 statue of Robert the Bruce is set in the wall of Edinburgh Castle at the entrance, along with one of Sir William Wallace. In Edinburgh also, the Scottish National Portrait Gallery has statues of Bruce and Wallace in niches flanking the main entrance. The building also contains several frescos depicting scenes from Scots history by William Brassey Hole in the entrance foyer, including a large example of Bruce marshalling his men at Bannockburn. A bust of Bruce is in the Hall of Heroes of the National Wallace Monument in Stirling. A statue of Robert Bruce stands in the High Street in Lochmaben and another in Annan (erected 2010) in front of the town's Victorian hall. An annual commemorative dinner has been held in his honour in Stirling since 2006.\nSwords inscribed with Robert's name probably date from the 16th century rather than earlier. There is one in the Wallace Collection and a missing one in Ireland.\nLegends.\nAccording to a legend, at some point, while he was on the run after the 1306 Battle of Methven, Bruce hid in a cave where he observed a spider spinning a web, trying to make a connection from one area of the cave's roof to another. It tried and failed twice, but began again and succeeded on the third attempt. Inspired by this, Bruce returned to inflict a series of defeats on the English, thus winning him more supporters and eventual victory. The story serves to illustrate the maxim: \"If at first you don't succeed, try try try again\". Other versions have Bruce in a small house watching the spider try to make its connection between two roof beams.\nThis legend first appears in a much later account, \"Tales of a Grandfather\" by Walter Scott (published between 1828 and 1830). This may have originally been told about his companion-in-arms Sir James Douglas (the \"Black Douglas\"), who had spent time hiding out in caves within his manor of Lintalee, which was then occupied by the English. The entire account may in fact be a version of a literary trope used in royal biographical writing. A similar story is told, for example, in Jewish sources about King David, in Polish accounts about Bruce's contemporary W\u0142adys\u0142aw I the Elbow-high, and in Persian folklore about the Turco-Mongolian general Tamerlane and an ant.\nIt is said that before the Battle of Bannockburn, Bruce was attacked by the English Knight Sir Henry de Bohun. Riding with the heavy cavalry, de Bohun caught sight of Bruce, who was armed only with his battle axe. De Bohun lowered his lance and charged, and Bruce stood his ground. At the last moment, Bruce swiftly dodged the lance, rose in his saddle, and with one mighty swing of his axe, struck Bohun so hard that he split de Bohun's iron helmet and his head in two, a blow so powerful that it shattered the very weapon into pieces. Afterwards, the King merely expressed regret that he had broken the shaft of his favourite axe. To this day, the story stands in folklore as a testament to the determination of the Scottish people and their culture.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26584", "revid": "39544904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26584", "title": "Raw foodist", "text": ""}
{"id": "26586", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26586", "title": "Richie Valens", "text": ""}
{"id": "26587", "revid": "1296558390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26587", "title": "Rhythm guitar", "text": "Technique providing rhythm and harmony to an ensemble\nIn music performances, rhythm guitar is a guitar technique and role that performs a combination of two functions: to provide all or part of the rhythmic pulse in conjunction with other instruments from the rhythm section (e.g., drum kit, bass guitar); and to provide all or part of the harmony, i.e. the chords from a song's chord progression, where a chord is a group of notes played together. The basic technique of rhythm guitar is to hold down a series of chords with the fretting hand while strumming or fingerpicking rhythmically with the other hand. More developed rhythm techniques include arpeggios, damping, riffs, chord solos, and complex strums.\nIn ensembles or bands playing within the acoustic, country, blues, rock or metal genres (among others), a guitarist playing the rhythm part of a composition plays the role of supporting the melodic lines and improvised solos played on the lead instrument or instruments, be they strings, wind, brass, keyboard or even percussion instruments, or simply the human voice, in the sense of playing steadily throughout the piece, whereas lead instruments and singers switch between carrying the main or countermelody and falling silent. In big band music, the guitarist is considered part of the rhythm section, alongside bass and drums.\nIn some musical situations, such as a solo singer-guitarist, the guitar accompaniment provides all the rhythmic drive; in large ensembles it may be only a small part (perhaps one element in a polyrhythm). Likewise, rhythm guitar can supply all of the harmonic input to a singer-guitarist or small band, but in ensembles that have other harmony instruments (such as keyboards) or vocal harmonists, its harmonic input will be less important.\nIn the most commercially available and consumed genres, electric guitars tend to dominate their acoustic cousins in both the recording studio and live venues. However the acoustic guitar remains a popular choice in country, western and especially bluegrass music, and almost exclusively in folk music.\nRock and pop.\nRock and pop rhythms.\nMost rhythms in rock and blues are based on time with a backbeat; however, many variations are possible. A backbeat is a syncopated accentuation on the off beat. In a simple rhythm these are beats 2 and 4. Emphasized back beat, a feature of some African styles, defined rhythm and blues recordings in the late 1940s and so became one of the defining characteristics of rock and roll and much of contemporary popular music.\nRock and pop harmony.\nHarmonically, in rock music, the most common way to construct chord progressions is to play major and minor \"triads\", each comprising a root, third and fifth note of a given scale. An example of a major triad is C major, which contains the notes C, E and G. An example of a minor triad is the A minor chord, which includes the notes A, C and E. Interspersed are some four-note chords, which include the root, third and fifth, as well as a sixth, seventh or ninth note of the scale. The most common chord with four different notes is the dominant seventh chord, which include a root, a major third above the root, a perfect fifth above the root and a flattened seventh. In the key of C major, the dominant seventh chord is a G7, which consists of the notes G, B, D and F.\nThree-chord progressions are common in earlier pop and rock, using various combinations of the I, IV and V chords, with the twelve-bar blues particularly common. A four chord progression popular in the 1950s is I\u2013vi\u2013ii\u2013V, which in the key of C major is the chords C major, A minor, D minor and G7. Minor and modal chord progressions such as I\u2013\u266dVII\u2013\u266dVI (in the key of E, the chords E major, D major, C major) feature in popular music. \nIn heavy metal music, rhythm guitarists often play power chords, which feature a root note and a fifth above, or with an octave doubling the root, all without the third of the chord. Power chords are usually played with distortion.\nArpeggios.\nOne departure from the basic strummed chord technique is to play arpeggios, i.e. to play individual notes in a chord separately. If this is done rapidly enough, listeners will tend to hear the sequence as harmony rather than melody. Arpeggiation is often used in folk, country, and heavy metal, sometimes in imitation of older banjo techniques. It is also prominent in 1960s pop, such as The Animals' \"House of the Rising Sun\", and jangle pop from the 1980s onwards. Rhythm guitarists who use arpeggios often favor semi-acoustic guitars and twelve string guitars to get a bright, undistorted \"jangly\" sound.\nThe Soukous band TPOK Jazz additionally featured the unique role of \"mi-solo\", (meaning \"half solo\") guitarist, playing arpeggio patterns and filling a role \"between\" the lead and rhythm guitars.\nRiffs.\nIn some cases, the chord progression is implied with a simplified sequence of two or three notes, sometimes called a \"riff\". That sequence is repeated throughout the composition. In heavy metal music, this is typically expanded to more complex sequences comprising a combination of chords, single notes and palm muting. The rhythm guitar parts in compositions performed by more technically oriented bands often include riffs employing complex lead guitar techniques. In some genres, especially metal, the audio signal from the rhythm guitar's output is often subsequently run through some form of effect pedal or overdriven guitar amplifier in order to create a thicker, crunchier sound for the palm-muted rhythms.\nInteraction with other guitarists.\nIn bands with two or more guitarists, the guitarists may exchange or even duplicate roles for various songs or several sections within a song. In those with a single guitarist, the guitarist may play lead and rhythm at numerous times or simultaneously, by overlaying the rhythm sequence with a lead line.\nCrossover with keyboards.\nElectronic effects units such as delay pedals and reverb units enable electric guitarists to play arpeggios and take over some of the role of a synthesizer player in performing sustained \"pads\". These can serve as sonic backgrounds in modern pop. Creating a pad sound differs from usual rhythm guitar roles in that it is not rhythmic. Some bands have a synthesizer performer play pads. In bands without a synth player, a guitarist can take over this role.\nReplacing lead guitar.\nSome rhythm techniques cross over into lead guitar playing. In guitar-bass-and-drums power trios guitarists must double up between rhythm and lead. For instance Jimi Hendrix combined full chords with solo licks, double stops and arpeggios. In recent years, \"looping pedals\" have been used to supply chord sequences or riffs over which musicians can then play the lead line, simulating the sound achieved by having two guitarists.\nEquipment.\nA rhythm guitarist usually aims to generate a strong rhythmic and chordal sound, in contrast to the lead guitarist's goal of producing sustained, often higher-pitched melody lines, that listeners can distinguish above the other instruments. As a result, rhythm and lead players often use different guitars and amplifiers. Rhythm guitarists may employ an electric acoustic guitar or a humbucker-equipped electric guitar for a richer and fatter output. Also, rhythm guitarists may use strings of a larger gauge than those used by lead guitarists. However, while these may be practices, they are not necessarily the rule and are subject to the style of the song and the preference of the individual guitarist.\nWhile rhythm guitarists in metal bands use distortion effects, they tend to use less of the modulation effects such as flangers used by lead guitar players. Whereas the lead guitarist in a metal band is trying to make the solo tone more prominent, and thus uses a range of colorful effects, the rhythm guitarist is typically trying to provide a thick, solid supporting sound that blends in with the overall sound of the group. In alternative rock and post-punk, however, where the band may be aiming to create an ambient soundscape rather than an aggressive Mot\u00f6rhead-style \"Wall of Sound\", the rhythm guitarist may use flanging and delay effects to create a shimmering background, or (as in The Smiths song \"How Soon Is Now?\"), a reverberating tremolo effect.\nJazz.\nRhythm guitar has been especially important in the development of jazz. The guitar took over the role previously occupied by the banjo to provide rhythmic chordal accompaniment.\nEarly jazz guitarists like Freddie Green tended to emphasize the percussive quality of the instrument. The ability to keep a steady rhythm while playing through complicated chord patterns made the guitar invaluable to many rhythm sections. Jazz guitarists are expected to have deep knowledge of harmony.\nJazz harmony.\nJazz guitarists use their knowledge of harmony and jazz theory to create jazz chord \"voicings\", which emphasize the 3rd and 7th notes of the chord. Unlike pop and rock guitarists, who typically include the root of a chord (even, with many open chords and barre chords, doubling the root), jazz guitarists typically omit the root. Some more sophisticated chord voicings also include the 9th, 11th, and 13th notes of the chord. A typical jazz voicing for the chord G7 would be the individual notes B, E, F, and A. This voicing uses the 3rd (the note B), the 7th (the note F), along with the 6th (the note E) and the 9th (the note A).\nIn some modern jazz styles, dominant 7th chords in a tune may contain altered 9ths (either flattened by a semitone, which is called a \"flat 9th\", or sharpened by a semitone, which is called a \"sharp 9th\"); 11ths (sharpened by a semitone, which is called a \"sharp 11th\"); 13ths (typically flattened by a semitone, which is called a \"flat 13th\").\nJazz guitarists need to learn about a range of different chords, including major 7th, major 6th, minor 7th, minor/major 7th, dominant 7th, diminished, half-diminished, and augmented chords. As well, they need to learn about chord transformations (e.g., altered chords, such as \"alt dominant chords\" described above), chord substitutions, and re-harmonization techniques. Some jazz guitarists use their knowledge of jazz scales and chords to provide a walking bass-style accompaniment.\nJazz guitarists learn to perform these chords over the range of different chord progressions used in jazz, such as the II-V-I progression, the jazz-style blues progression, the minor jazz-style blues form, the \"rhythm changes\" progression, and the variety of chord progressions used in jazz ballads, and jazz standards. Guitarists may also learn to use the chord types, strumming styles, and effects pedals (e.g., chorus effect or fuzzbox) used in 1970s-era jazz-Latin, jazz-funk, and jazz-rock fusion music.\nBig band rhythm.\nIn jazz big bands, popular during the 1930s and 1940s, the guitarist is considered an integral part of the rhythm section (guitar, drums and bass). They usually played a regular four chords to the bar, although an amount of harmonic improvisation is possible. Freddie Green, guitarist in the Count Basie orchestra, was a noted exponent of this style. The harmonies are often minimal; for instance, the root note is often omitted on the assumption that it will be supplied by the bassist.\nSmall group comping.\nWhen jazz guitarists play chords underneath a song's melody or another musician's solo improvisations, it is called \"comping\", short for \"accompanying\". The accompanying style in most jazz styles differs from the way chordal instruments accompany in many popular styles of music. In many popular styles of music, such as rock and pop, the rhythm guitarist usually performs the chords in rhythmic fashion which sets out the beat or groove of a tune. In contrast, in many modern jazz styles within smaller, the guitarist plays much more sparsely, intermingling periodic chords and delicate voicings into pauses in the melody or solo, and using periods of silence. Jazz guitarists commonly use a wide variety of inversions when comping, rather than only using standard voicings.\nGypsy pumping.\nGypsy jazz is acoustic music, usually played without a drummer. Rhythm guitar in gypsy jazz uses a special form of strumming known as \"la pompe\", i.e. \"the pump\". This form of percussive rhythm is similar to the \"boom-chick\" in bluegrass styles; it is what gives the music its fast swinging feeling. The strumming hand, which never touches the top of the guitar, must make a quick up-down strum followed by a down strum. The up-down part of la pompe must be done extremely fast, regardless of the tempo of the music. It is very similar to a grace note in classical music, albeit the fact that an entire chord is used. This pattern is usually played in unison by two or more guitarists in the rhythm section.\nJazz chord soloing.\nJazz guitar soloists are not limited to playing single notes by their instrument. This allows them to create \"chord solos\" by adding the song's melody on top of the chord voicings. Wes Montgomery was noted for playing successive choruses in single notes, octaves and finally a chord solo. This technique differs from chord-melody soloing in that it is not intended to be used unaccompanied\nFunk.\nFunk utilized the same extended chords found in bebop jazz, such as minor chords with added sevenths and elevenths, or dominant seventh chords with altered ninths. However, unlike bebop jazz, with its complex, rapid-fire chord changes, funk virtually abandoned chord changes, creating static single chord vamps with little harmonic movement, but with a complex and driving rhythmic feel. Some have jazz backgrounds. The chords used in funk songs typically imply a dorian or mixolydian mode, as opposed to the major or natural minor tonalities of most popular music. Melodic content was derived by mixing these modes with the blues scale.\nIn funk bands, guitarists typically play in a percussive style, often using the wah-wah sound effect and muting the notes in their riffs to create a percussive sound. Guitarists Ernie Isley of The Isley Brothers and Eddie Hazel of Funkadelic were notably influenced by Jimi Hendrix's improvised solos. Eddie Hazel, who worked with George Clinton, is a notable guitar soloist in funk. Ernie Isley was tutored at an early age by Jimi Hendrix himself, when he was a part of The Isley Brothers backing band and lived in the attic temporarily at the Isleys' household. Jimmy Nolen and Phelps Collins are famous funk rhythm guitarists who both worked with James Brown.\nReggae.\nThe guitar in reggae usually plays the chords on beats two and four, a musical figure known as skank or the 'bang'. It has a very dampened, short and scratchy chop sound, almost like a percussion instrument. Sometimes a double chop is used when the guitar still plays the off beats, but also plays the following 16th or 8th beat on the up-stroke. Depending on the amount of swing or groove, this next secondary stab is often the 16th note sounding closer to an 8th placement in the rhythm. An example is the intro to \"Stir It Up\" by The Wailers. Artist and producer Derrick Harriott says, \"What happened was the musical thing was real widespread, but only among a certain sort of people. It was always a down-town thing, but more than just hearing the music. The equipment was so powerful and the vibe so strong that we feel it.\" Reggae chords are typically played without overdrive or distortion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26589", "revid": "46085058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26589", "title": "Red Hot Chili Peppers", "text": "American rock band\nThe Red Hot Chili Peppers are an American rock band formed in Los Angeles in 1982, consisting of Anthony Kiedis (vocals), Flea (bass), John Frusciante (guitar), and Chad Smith (drums). Their music incorporates elements of alternative rock, funk, punk rock, hard rock, hip hop, and psychedelic rock, and have influenced genres including funk metal, rap metal, rap rock, and nu metal. With over 120 million records sold worldwide, the Red Hot Chili Peppers are one of the top-selling bands of all time. They hold the records for most number-one singles on the American Alternative Songs charts (15), most cumulative weeks at number one (91), and most top-ten songs on the \"Billboard\" Alternative Songs chart (28). They have won three Grammy Awards, were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2012, and in 2022 received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nThe Red Hot Chili Peppers were formed in Los Angeles by Kiedis, Flea, the guitarist Hillel Slovak, and the drummer Jack Irons. Due to commitments to other bands, Slovak and Irons did not play on their 1984 self-titled debut album, which instead featured the guitarist Jack Sherman and the drummer Cliff Martinez. Slovak rejoined for their second album, \"Freaky Styley\" (1985), and Irons for their third, \"The Uplift Mofo Party Plan\" (1987). Irons left after Slovak died of a drug overdose in June 1988.\nWith Frusciante and Smith, the Red Hot Chili Peppers recorded \"Mother's Milk\" (1989) and their first major commercial success, \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" (1991). Frusciante was uncomfortable with their newfound popularity and left abruptly on tour in 1992. After a series of temporary guitarists, he was replaced by Dave Navarro. Their next album, \"One Hot Minute\" (1995), failed to match the success of \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\". Frusciante and Kiedis struggled with drug addiction throughout the 1990s.\nIn 1998, Navarro departed and Frusciante rejoined the band. Their seventh album, \"Californication\" (1999), became their biggest commercial success, with 16 million copies sold worldwide. \"By the Way\" (2002) and \"Stadium Arcadium\" (2006) were also successful; \"Stadium Arcadium\" was their first album to reach number one on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart. Frusciante left again in 2009 to focus on his solo career; he was replaced by Josh Klinghoffer, who appeared on \"I'm with You\" (2011) and \"The Getaway\" (2016), before Frusciante rejoined in 2019. The Chili Peppers released their 12th and 13th albums, \"Unlimited Love\" and \"Return of the Dream Canteen\", in 2022.\nHistory.\n1982\u20131984: Early history.\nThe Red Hot Chili Peppers were formed in Los Angeles in 1982 as Tony Flow and the Miraculously Majestic Masters of Mayhem by singer Anthony Kiedis, guitarist Hillel Slovak, bassist Flea, and drummer Jack Irons, classmates at Fairfax High School. Their first performance was on December 16, 1982, at the Grandia Room club on Hollywood Boulevard to a crowd of approximately 30. Gary Allen, a friend of the band, was hosting a release party for his new EP and asked Kiedis and Flea to put together an opening act.\nAt the time, Slovak and Irons were already committed to another group, What Is This?; however, the new band was asked to return the following week. In March, they changed their name to the Red Hot Chili Peppers, playing several shows at Los Angeles venues. Six songs from these shows were on the band's first demo tape. In November 1983, manager Lindy Goetz struck a seven-album deal with EMI America and Enigma Records. Two weeks earlier, however, What Is This? had also obtained a record deal with MCA, and in December Slovak and Irons quit the Red Hot Chili Peppers to focus on What Is This?. Flea and Kiedis recruited Weirdos drummer Cliff Martinez and guitarist Jack Sherman.\nThe band released their debut album, \"The Red Hot Chili Peppers\", in August 1984. Airplay on college radio and MTV helped build a fan base, and the album sold 300,000 copies. Gang of Four guitarist Andy Gill, who produced the album, pushed the band to play with a cleaner, more radio-friendly sound, and the band was disappointed with the result, finding it over-polished. The album included backing vocals by Gwen Dickey, the singer for the 1970s disco funk group Rose Royce. The band embarked on a grueling tour, performing 60 shows in 64 days. During the tour, continuing musical and lifestyle tension between Kiedis and Sherman complicated the transition between concert and daily band life. Sherman was fired in February 1985 and Slovak, who had just quit What Is This?, rejoined the band.\n1985\u20131988: Adding fans, drug abuse, and Slovak's death.\nThe second Chili Peppers album, \"Freaky Styley\" (1985), was produced by funk musician George Clinton, who introduced elements of punk and funk into the band's repertoire. The album featured Maceo Parker and Fred Wesley. The band used heroin while recording the album, which influenced the lyrics and music. The band had a much better relationship with Clinton than with Gill, but \"Freaky Styley\", released on August 16, 1985, also achieved little success, failing to make an impression on any chart. The band also considered the subsequent tour unproductive. Despite the lack of success, the band was satisfied with \"Freaky Styley\"; Kiedis reflected that \"it so surpassed anything we thought we could have done that we were thinking we were on the road to enormity.\" Around this time, the band appeared in the 1986 films \"Thrashin\"', playing the song \"Blackeyed Blonde\" from \"Freaky Styley,\" and \"Tough Guys\", performing the unreleased song \"Set It Straight\".\nIn early 1986, EMI gave the Chili Peppers $5,000 to record a demo tape for their next album. They chose to work with producer Keith Levene from Public Image Ltd, as he shared their interest in drugs. Levene and Slovak put aside $2,000 of the budget to spend on heroin and cocaine, which created tension between the band members. Martinez's \"heart was no longer in the band\", but he did not quit, so Kiedis and Flea fired him in April 1986. Irons rejoined the band, to their surprise; it marked the first time all four founding members were together since 1983. During the recording and subsequent tour of \"Freaky Styley\", Kiedis and Slovak were dealing with debilitating heroin addictions. Due to his addiction, Kiedis \"didn't have the same drive or desire to come up with ideas or lyrics\" and appeared at rehearsal \"literally asleep\".\nFor their third album, the Chili Peppers attempted to hire Rick Rubin to produce, but he declined due to the band's increasing drug problems. They eventually hired Michael Beinhorn from the art funk project Material, their last choice. The early attempts at recording were halted due to Kiedis' worsening drug problems, and Kiedis was briefly fired. After the band were named \"band of the year\" by \"LA Weekly\", Kiedis entered drug rehabilitation. The band auditioned new singers, but Kiedis, now sober, rejoined the recording sessions with new enthusiasm. Songs formed quickly, blending the funk feel and rhythms of \"Freaky Styley\" with a harder, more immediate approach to punk rock. The album was recorded in the basement of the Capitol Records Building. The recording process was difficult; Kiedis would frequently disappear to seek drugs; after fifty days of sobriety, Kiedis had decided to take drugs again to celebrate his new music.\nThe third Red Hot Chili Peppers album, \"The Uplift Mofo Party Plan\", was released in September 1987 and peaked at No. 148 on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart, a significant improvement over their earlier albums. The band immediately embarked on a two and a half month North American tour to promote the release, accompanied by Faith No More as support who were also promoting their new album \"Introduce Yourself\". During that period, however, Kiedis and Slovak had both developed serious drug addictions, often disappearing for days on end. Slovak died from a heroin overdose on June 25, 1988, soon after the conclusion of the \"Uplift\" tour. Kiedis fled the city and did not attend Slovak's funeral. Irons, troubled by the death, left the band; following years of depression, he became a member of the Seattle grunge band Pearl Jam in 1994.\n1988\u20131989: Frusciante and Smith join.\nDeWayne \"Blackbyrd\" McKnight, a former member of Parliament-Funkadelic, joined as guitarist, and D. H. Peligro of Dead Kennedys joined as drummer in August 1988. Kiedis re-entered rehab for 30 days, and visited Slovak's grave as part of his rehabilitation, finally confronting his grief. Three dates into the tour, McKnight was fired for lack of chemistry with the band. McKnight was so unhappy he threatened to burn down Kiedis' house.\nPeligro introduced Kiedis and Flea to the 18-year-old guitarist John Frusciante, a fan of the band, who brought a darker and more melodic style. Frusciante performed his first show with the Chili Peppers in September 1988. The new lineup began writing for the next album and went on a short tour, the Turd Town Tour. In November, Kiedis and Flea fired Peligro due to his drug and alcohol problems. After open auditions, they hired the drummer Chad Smith in December 1988, who has remained since. According to Smith, \"We started playing, and right away we just hit it off musically.\"\nThe Chili Peppers began work on their fourth album in late 1988. Unlike the stop-start sessions for \"The Uplift Mofo Party Plan,\" preproduction went smoothly. However, the sessions were made tense by Beinhorn's desire to create a hit, frustrating Frusciante and Kiedis. Released on August 16, 1989, \"Mother's Milk\" peaked at number 52 on the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200. The record failed to chart in the United Kingdom and Europe, but climbed to number 33 in Australia. \"Knock Me Down\" reached number six on the U.S. Modern Rock Tracks chart, whereas \"Higher Ground\" charted at number eleven and reached number 54 in the UK and 45 in Australia and France. \"Mother's Milk\" was certified gold in March 1990 and was the first Chili Peppers album to ship over 500,000 units.\n1990\u20131993: \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\", fame, and Frusciante's first departure.\nIn 1990, after the success of \"Mother's Milk\", the Chili Peppers left EMI and entered a major-label bidding war. They signed with Warner Bros. Records and hired Rick Rubin, a producer they had tried to hire before. Rubin turned the band down in 1987 because of their drug problems but he felt that they were now healthier and more focused. He produced several more of their albums. The writing process was more productive than it had been for \"Mother's Milk\", with Kiedis saying, \"[every day], there was new music for me to lyricize\". At Rubin's suggestion, they recorded in The Mansion, a studio in a house in Laurel Canyon where magician Harry Houdini once lived.\nIn September 1991, \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" was released. \"Give It Away\" was the first single, which achieved international fame and became the band's first number-one single on the Modern Rock chart. The ballad \"Under the Bridge\" was the second single, and reached number two on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart, the band's highest position to date. \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" sold over 12 million copies. It was listed at number 310 on \"Rolling Stone's\" list of 500 Greatest Albums of All Time, and in 1992 it rose to number three on the US album charts, almost a year after its release. The album was accompanied by a documentary, \"Funky Monks\". The Chili Peppers began their \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" tour, which featured Nirvana, Pearl Jam, and Smashing Pumpkins, three of the era's biggest upcoming bands in alternative music, as opening acts.\nFrusciante was troubled by fame, and began falling out with Kiedis. He isolated himself and developed a secret heroin addiction. In an appearance on \"Saturday Night Live,\" he performed off-key; Kiedis believed he wanted to sabotage the performance. Frusciante abruptly quit after a show in Tokyo in May 1992. He returned to Los Angeles and spent years living in squalor, struggling with addiction. The Chili Peppers contacted Dave Navarro to replace Frusciante. Navarro had just split from Jane's Addiction, but he was involved in drug problems too. After failed auditions with Zander Schloss, they hired Arik Marshall of the Los Angeles band Marshall Law, and headlined the Lollapalooza festival in 1992. Marshall appeared in the music videos for \"Breaking the Girl\" and \"If You Have to Ask\", as well as the \"Simpsons\" episode \"Krusty Gets Kancelled\". In September 1992, the Chili Peppers performed \"Give It Away\" at the MTV Video Music Awards. They were nominated for seven awards, winning three, including Viewer's Choice. In February 1993, they performed \"Give It Away\" at the Grammy Awards, and the song won the band their first Grammy, Best Hard Rock Performance With Vocal.\nThe Chili Peppers dismissed Marshall and held auditions for a new guitarist, including Buckethead, whom Flea felt was not right for the band. Jesse Tobias of the Los Angeles band Mother Tongue was briefly hired, but dismissed due to poor chemistry. However, Navarro said he was now ready to join the band. In August 1993, the non-album single \"Soul to Squeeze\" was released and featured on the soundtrack to the film \"Coneheads\". The song topped the Billboard US Modern Rock chart.\n1994\u20131997: \"One Hot Minute\" and Dave Navarro.\nNavarro first appeared with the Chili Peppers at Woodstock '94, performing early versions of new songs. This was followed by a brief tour, including headlining appearances at Pukkelpop and Reading Festivals and two performances as the opening act for the Rolling Stones. The relationship between Navarro and the band began to deteriorate; Navarro admitted he did not care for funk music or jamming. Kiedis had relapsed into heroin addiction following a dental procedure in which an addictive sedative, Valium, was used, though the band did not discover this until later.\nWithout Frusciante, songs were written at a far slower rate. Kiedis said: \"John had been a true anomaly when it came to songwriting... I just figured that was how all guitar players were, that you showed them your lyrics and sang a little bit and the next thing you knew you had a song. That didn't happen right off the bat with Dave.\"\n\"One Hot Minute\" was released in September 1995 after several delays. It departed from the Chili Peppers' previous sound, with Navarro's guitar work incorporating heavy metal riffs and psychedelic rock. The band described it as a darker, sadder record. Kiedis's lyrics addressed drugs, including the lead single, \"Warped\", and broken relationships and deaths of loved ones, including \"Tearjerker\", written about Kurt Cobain and \"Transcending\" about River Phoenix. Although it received mixed reviews, the album sold eight million copies worldwide. The band also contributed to soundtracks including \"\" and \"Beavis and Butt-Head Do America.\" Flea and Navarro played on Alanis Morissette's single \"You Oughta Know\".\nThe Chili Peppers began the tour for \"One Hot Minute\" in Europe in 1995. The US tour was postponed after Smith broke his wrist. In 1997, several shows were canceled following deteriorating band relations, injuries, and Navarro and Kiedis' drug use. The band played three shows that year, including the first Fuji Rock Festival in Japan. In April 1998, the Chili Peppers announced that Navarro had left due to creative differences. Kiedis said the decision was mutual. Reports at the time indicated that Navarro's departure came after he attended a band practice under the influence of drugs.\n1998\u20132001: Return of Frusciante and \"Californication\".\nWith no guitarist, the Red Hot Chili Peppers were on the verge of breaking up. In the years following Frusciante's departure, his heroin addiction had left him in poverty and near death. Flea convinced Frusciante to enter Las Encinas Drug Rehabilitation Center in eastern Pasadena, California, in January 1998. His addiction left him with scarring on his arms, a restructured nose, and dental implants following an oral infection. In April 1998, Flea visited the recovered Frusciante and asked him to rejoin the band. Frusciante began sobbing and said nothing would make him happier.\nIn June 1999, after more than a year of production, the Red Hot Chili Peppers released \"Californication\", their seventh studio album. It sold over 16 million copies, and remains their most successful album. \"Californication\" contained fewer rap songs than its predecessors, instead integrating textured and melodic guitar riffs, vocals and basslines. It produced three number-one modern rock hits, \"Scar Tissue\", \"Otherside\" and \"Californication\". \"Californication\" received stronger reviews than \"One Hot Minute\", and was a greater success worldwide. While many critics credited the success of the album to Frusciante's return, they also felt Kiedis' vocals had also improved. It was later listed at number 399 on the \"Rolling Stone\" magazine list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time.\n\"Californication\" was supported with a two-year international world tour, producing the first Chili Peppers concert DVD, \"Off the Map\" (2001). In July 1999, the Chili Peppers played the closing show at Woodstock 1999. During the set, a small fire escalated into violence and vandalism, resulting in the intervention of riot control squads. ATMs and several semi-tractor trailers were looted and destroyed. The band was blamed in the media for inciting the riots after performing a cover of the Jimi Hendrix song \"Fire\". In his memoir, Kiedis wrote: \"It was clear that this situation had nothing to do with Woodstock anymore. It wasn't symbolic of peace and love, but of greed and cashing in.\"\n2001\u20132004: \"By the Way\".\nThe Chili Peppers began writing their next album in early 2001, immediately after the \"Californication\" tour. Frusciante and Kiedis collaborated for days straight, discussing and sharing guitar progressions and lyrics. For Kiedis, \"writing \"By the Way\"\u00a0... was a whole different experience from \"Californication\". John was back to himself and brimming with confidence.\" The recording was difficult for Flea, who felt his role was being diminished and fought with Frusciante about the musical direction. Flea considered quitting the band after the album, but the two worked out their problems.\n\"By the Way\" was released in July 2002 and produced four singles; \"By the Way\", \"The Zephyr Song\", \"Can't Stop\" and \"Universally Speaking\". The album was their most subdued to date, focusing on melodic ballads over rap and funk, with layered textures, more keyboards, and string arrangements. The album was followed by an eighteen-month world tour, a concert DVD, \"Live at Slane Castle\", and the band's first live album, \"Red Hot Chili Peppers Live in Hyde Park\". More than 258,000 fans paid over $17,100,000 for tickets over three nights, a 2004 record; the event ranked No.\u00a01 on \"Billboard\"'s Top Concert Boxscores of 2004. In November 2003, the Chili Peppers released their \"Greatest Hits\" album, which featured new songs \"Fortune Faded\" and \"Save the Population\".\n2005\u20132007: \"Stadium Arcadium\".\nIn 2006, the Chili Peppers released their ninth album, \"Stadium Arcadium\". Although they initially planned to release a trilogy of albums, they chose to release a 28-track double album. It was their first album to debut at number one on the US charts, where it stayed for two weeks, and debuted at number one in the UK and 25 other countries. \"Stadium Arcadium\" sold over seven million units. It won the Grammys for Best Rock Album and Best Rock Performance by a Duo Or Group With Vocal (\"Dani California\").\nThe first single, \"Dani California\", was the band's fastest-selling single, debuting on top of the Modern Rock chart in the U.S., peaking at number six on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, and reaching number 2 in the UK. \"Tell Me Baby\", released next, also topped the charts in 2006. \"Snow (Hey Oh)\" was released in late 2006, breaking multiple records by 2007. The song became their eleventh number-one single, giving the band a cumulative total of 81 weeks at number one. It was also the first time three consecutive singles by the band made it to number one. \"Desecration Smile\" was released internationally in February 2007 and reached number 27 on the UK charts. \"Hump de Bump\" was planned to be the next single for the US, Canada, and Australia only, but due to positive feedback from the music video, it was released as a worldwide single in May 2007.\nThe Stadium Arcadium World Tour began in 2006, including several festival dates. Frusciante's friend and frequent musical collaborator Josh Klinghoffer joined the touring band, contributing guitar, backing vocals, and keyboards. The band was a musical guest for \"Saturday Night Live\" in May 2006 and Tom Hanks hosted the show.\n2008\u20132009: Klinghoffer replaces Frusciante.\nAfter the Stadium Arcadium tour, the Chili Peppers took an extended break. Kiedis attributed this to the band being worn out from their years of nonstop work since \"Californication\". Their only recording during that time was in 2008 with George Clinton on his album \"George Clinton and His Gangsters of Love;\" accompanied by Kim Manning, they recorded a new version of Shirley and Lee's classic \"Let the Good Times Roll\".\nKiedis, who had recently become a father, planned to spend the time taking care of his son and developing a television series based on his autobiography, \"Spider and Son.\" Flea began taking music theory classes at the University of Southern California, and revealed plans to release a mainly instrumental solo record; guest musicians included Patti Smith and a choir from the Silverlake Conservatory of Music. He also joined Thom Yorke in the supergroup Atoms for Peace. Frusciante released his album \"The Empyrean\". Smith worked with Sammy Hagar, Joe Satriani, and Michael Anthony in the supergroup Chickenfoot, as well as on his solo project, Chad Smith's Bombastic Meatbats.\nIn July 2009, Frusciante again left the Chili Peppers, though no announcement was made until December. Frusciante explained on his Myspace page that there was no ill feeling about his departure this time, and that he wanted to focus on his solo work. In October 2009, the Chili Peppers entered the studio to begin writing their tenth studio album, with Klinghoffer replacing Frusciante. In January 2010, the Chili Peppers made their live comeback in January 2010, paying tribute to Neil Young with a cover of \"A Man Needs a Maid\" at MusiCares. In February, after months of speculation, Klinghoffer was confirmed as Frusciante's replacement.\n2011\u20132014: \"I'm with You\".\nRed Hot Chili Peppers recorded their tenth album, \"I'm with You\", between September 2010 and March 2011. They decided against releasing another double album, reducing the album to 14 tracks. \"I'm with You\" was released in the US in August 2011. It topped the charts in 18 countries, and received mostly positive reviews. \"The Adventures of Rain Dance Maggie\", became the band's 12th number-one single. \"Monarchy of Roses\", \"Look Around\" and \"Did I Let You Know\" (released only in Brazil), and \"Brendan's Death Song\" were also released as singles.\nIn July 2011, the Chili Peppers played three invitation-only warm-up shows in California, their first since 2007. They began a month-long promotional tour in August 2011, starting in Asia. The I'm with You World Tour ran from September 2011 until 2013. The North American leg, expected to begin in January 2012, was postponed to March due to a surgery Kiedis required for foot injuries he had sustained during the Stadium Arcadium tour. After the \"I'm with You World Tour\", the band set out on another small tour, including their first shows in Alaska, Paraguay, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico. Recordings from the tours were released in 2012 on the free \"2011 Live EP.\"\nThe Chili Peppers were nominated for two MTV Europe Music Awards for \"Best Rock Band\" and \"Best Live Artist\" and nominated for \"Best Group\" at the 2012 People's Choice Awards \"I'm with You\" was also nominated for a 2012 Grammy Award for Best Rock Album. In April 2012, the Chili Peppers were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. A month later \"Rock &amp; Roll Hall of Fame Covers EP\", was released for downloads only, consisting of previously released studio and live covers of artists which had influenced the band. From August 2012, the band began releasing a series of singles as the \"I'm with You Sessions,\" which were compiled on the \"I'm Beside You\" LP in November 2013 as a Record Store Day exclusive.\nIn February 2014, the Chili Peppers joined Bruno Mars as performers at the Super Bowl XLVIII half-time show, watched by a record 115.3 million viewers. The performance was met with mixed reviews for its use of backing music; Flea responded that it was an NFL rule for bands to pre-record music due to time and technical issues, and that they had agreed because it was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. He said Kiedis' vocals were completely live and the band had recorded \"Give it Away\" during rehearsals. The band began another tour in May 2013, which ended in June 2014. \"2012-13 Live EP\" was released in July 2014 through their website as a free download.\n2015\u20132018: \"The Getaway\".\nThe Chili Peppers released \"Fandemonium\" in November 2014, a book dedicated to their fans. In December 2014, they began work on their eleventh album, their first without producer Rick Rubin since 1989; instead it was produced by Danger Mouse. Flea broke his arm during a skiing trip, which delayed the recording for several months. \"Dark Necessities\", the first single from their upcoming album, was released on May 5. Their eleventh album, \"The Getaway\", was released in June. Kiedis said that the songs were influenced by a two-year relationship that fell apart. \"Dark Necessities\" became the band's 25th top-ten single on the \"Billboard\" Alternative Songs chart, a record they hold over U2. In February 2016, \"Circle of the Noose\", an unreleased song recorded with Navarro in 1998, was leaked.\nIn May, the band released \"The Getaway\". The music video for \"Dark Necessities\", directed by actress Olivia Wilde, was released in June 2016. \"The Getaway\" made its debut at number 2 on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart, behind Drake, who had the number-one album for eight consecutive weeks. \"The Getaway\" outsold Drake its opening week with album sales of 108,000 to 33,000 (actually placing him at 4th in sales for the week) though due to album streaming, Drake managed to top the band for the top position in the charts. In July 2016, the \"Live In Paris EP\" was released exclusively through the music streaming website Deezer. \"Go Robot\" was announced as the second single from \"The Getaway\". In the same month, the band members started to post images from the set of the music video. \"The Getaway\" was reissued on limited edition pink vinyl in September, as part of 10 Bands 1 Cause. All money from sales of the re-issue went to Gilda's Club NYC an organization that provides community support for both those diagnosed with cancer and their caretakers. It is named after comedian Gilda Radner.\nThe band began the headlining portion of the Getaway World Tour in September with the North American leg, featuring Jack Irons, the band's original drummer, as an opening act, beginning in January 2017. Dave Rat, the band's sound engineer since 1991, announced that after the show of January 22, 2017, he would no longer be working with the band.\nThe Getaway World Tour concluded in October 2017. The tour consisted of 151 shows lasting a year and almost five months. In December, the band headlined the Band Together 2 Benefit Concert at the Bill Graham Civic Auditorium in San Francisco. Money raised from the concert went to the Tipping Point Emergency Relief Fund which between 2005 and 2017 raised $150 million to educate, employ, house and support those in need in the Bay Area.\n2019\u20132023: Frusciante's second return, \"Unlimited Love\", and \"Return of the Dream Canteen\".\nThe recording of the next Chili Peppers album was delayed due to the Woolsey Fire; the band performed a benefit show for fire victims on January 13, 2019. In February, they performed \"Dark Necessities\" with rapper Post Malone at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards. They appeared in Malone's music video for \"Wow\", released in March.\nIn February 2019, the Chili Peppers began a month-long tour, featuring their first headlining shows in Australia in 12 years, including their first show in Tasmania, which was briefly halted due to a power outage. On March 15, they performed in Egypt, becoming one of the few acts allowed to perform at the Pyramids of Giza. The performance was livestreamed. On October 26, David Mushegain, a photographer, announced that a Chili Peppers documentary was in the works.\nOn December 15, 2019, the Chili Peppers announced that after 10 years, Frusciante had rejoined, replacing Klinghoffer. They wrote that Klinghoffer was \"a beautiful musician who we respect and love\". In an interview, Klinghoffer said there was no animosity: \"It's absolutely John's place to be in that band... I'm happy that he's back with them.\" On November 2, the Chili Peppers performed their final show with Klinghoffer, at a charity event at the Silverlake Conservatory of Music in Los Angeles. Klinghoffer released his debut solo album, \"To Be One with You\", on November 22, 2019, featuring Flea and the former Chili Peppers drummer Jack Irons. On February 8, 2020, Frusciante performed with the Chili Peppers for the first time in 13 years at a memorial service held by the Tony Hawk Foundation for the film producer Andrew Burkle, the son of billionaire Ronald Burkle. Shows were scheduled for three festivals that May, but were canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In August, the former Chili Peppers guitarist Jack Sherman died aged 64; the band released a statement thanking him for \"all times good, bad and in between\".\nOn April 24, 2021, the Chili Peppers announced that they had left Q Prime, their management company for the previous 20 years, and they would be managed by their longtime friend Guy Oseary, founder of Maverick Records. On May 3, it was reported that the Red Hot Chili Peppers would sell their back catalog to Hipgnosis Songs Fund for $140\u2013$150 million. On March 31, the Chili Peppers received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nThe 12th Red Hot Chili Peppers album, \"Unlimited Love\", produced by Rubin, was released on April 1, 2022. It debuted at number one in ten countries, becoming the first US number-one Chili Peppers album since \"Stadium Arcadium\". It was promoted with the singles \"Black Summer\" and \"These Are the Ways\". \"NME\" wrote that \"Unlimited Love\" shared the \"melancholic riffmaking, anthemic choruses and softly-sung melodies\" of Frusciante's previous work with the Chili Peppers, but introduced new \"grungy\" and acoustic elements.\nOn the day of the release, the broadcasting company Sirius XM launched a dedicated Red Hot Chili Peppers channel, Whole Lotta Red Hot, featuring music videos, live performances and acts that influenced the Chili Peppers. On June 4, the Red Hot Chili Peppers began their Unlimited Love Tour. The 13th Chili Peppers album, \"Return of the Dream Canteen\", recorded during the same sessions as \"Unlimited Love,\" was released on October 14. The first single, \"Tippa My Tongue\", was released in August, followed by \"The Drummer\" in October. The band's former drummer D.H. Peligro died at the age of 63 on October 28.\n2024\u2013present: Upcoming fourteenth album.\nIn April 2024, Chad Smith said that the Chili Peppers would take a break following their 2024 tour dates, and would start writing their next album in 2025. For the closing ceremony of the 2024 Paris Olympics on August 11, the Chili Peppers provided a performance of \"Can't Stop\" (\"Eddie\" was performed during a post-Olympics special on NBC) in Long Beach, California, representing Los Angeles, where the 2028 Summer Olympics will be held.\nOn January 30, 2025, the Red Hot Chili Peppers performed at the FireAid benefit concert at the Kia Forum. The Chili Peppers appeared as marionettes in an episode of the Netflix animated series \"Love, Death &amp; Robots\" directed by David Fincher, which aired on May 15.\nOn May 16, 2025, it was reported by Deadline that a documentary on the band's formative years was being secretly screened at the Cannes Film Festival and was looking for select buyers in both New York and Los Angeles. A festival premiere for the film will be planned for either fall 2025 or early 2026. The documentary, which is being co-produced by Hillel Slovak's brother James, will center on the deep childhood bond between Anthony Kiedis, Flea and Hillel Slovak and features various interviews from current and past band members.\nDuring a July 24, 2025 interview, Flea confirmed that the band was starting to write new music for their fourteenth album. Anthony Kiedis in an October 2025 interview on the band's SiriusXM \"Whole Lotta Red Hot\" channel discussed the current status of the band's next album saying \"We weren't supposed to be thinking about making new music yet, according to business people. But every now and then, you don't care about what you're supposed to be doing, and you hear something in your head, and you make a call to a friend.\" Kiedis also said that Frusciante seemed to be very inspired creatively: \"I feel like the flame has been lit in John early on in the cycle. The new wet sands are out there, starting to form.\"\nArtistry.\nMusical style and influences.\nThe music of the Red Hot Chili Peppers has been characterized as funk rock, alternative rock, funk metal, and rap rock, with influences from hard, psychedelic, and punk rock. Regarding their genre, Flea stated in a 2006 \"Guitar World\" interview, \"For all the styles that have come and gone through-out our career, we never really aligned ourselves with any of them; we were never part of any movement. At one time, people put us together in a category with Fishbone and Faith No More, but we were always different from those bands, and they were always different from us.\" The band's influences include Parliament-Funkadelic, Defunkt, Jimi Hendrix, the Misfits, Black Sabbath, Metallica, James Brown, Gang of Four, Bob Marley, Big Boys, Bad Brains, Sly and the Family Stone, Ohio Players, Queen, Stevie Wonder, Elvis Presley, Deep Purple, the Beach Boys, Black Flag, Ornette Coleman, Led Zeppelin, Yes, Fugazi, Fishbone, Marvin Gaye, Billie Holiday, Santana, Elvis Costello, the Stooges, the Clash, Siouxsie and the Banshees, Devo, and Miles Davis.\nVocals and instrumentation.\nKiedis provided multiple vocal styles. His primary approach up to \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" was spoken verse and rapping, which he complemented with traditional vocals. This helped the band to maintain a consistent style. As the group matured, notably with \"Californication\" (1999), they reduced the number of rapped verses. \"By the Way\" (2002) contained only two songs with a rap-driven verse and melodic chorus. Kiedis' more recent style was developed through ongoing coaching.\nOriginal guitarist Slovak's style was based in blues and funk. Slovak was primarily influenced by hard-rock artists such as Hendrix, Kiss and Led Zeppelin, while his playing method was based on improvisation common in funk. He was noted for an aggressive playing style; he would often play with such force, that his fingers would \"come apart\". Kiedis observed that his playing evolved during his time away from the group in What Is This?, when Slovak adopted a more fluid style featuring \"sultry\" elements compared to his earlier hard-rock techniques. On \"The Uplift Mofo Party Plan\" (1987), Slovak experimented with genres outside of traditional funk music including reggae and speed metal. His guitar riffs often served as the basis of the group's songs, with the other members writing their parts to complement his guitar work. His melodic riff featured in the song \"Behind the Sun\" inspired the group to create \"pretty\" songs with an emphasis on melody. Kiedis describes the song as \"pure Hillel inspiration\". Slovak also used a talk box on songs such as \"Green Heaven\" and \"Funky Crime\", in which he would sing into a tube while playing to create psychedelic effects.\nFrusciante's guitar playing style has evolved over the course of his career, with a technique that employs melody and emotion rather than virtuosity. Although virtuoso influences can be heard throughout his career, he has said that he often minimizes this. Frusciante brought a melodic and textured sound, notably on \"Californication\", \"By the Way\", and \"Stadium Arcadium\" (2006). This contrasts with his earlier abrasive approach in \"Mother's Milk\", as well as his dry, funky and more docile arrangements on \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\". On \"Californication\" and \"By the Way\", Frusciante derived the technique of creating tonal texture through chord patterns from post-punk guitarist Vini Reilly of the Durutti Column, and bands such as Fugazi and the Cure. On \"By the Way\", he wanted people to be able to sing the lead guitar part, influenced by John McGeoch of Siouxsie and the Banshees, Johnny Marr of the Smiths, and Bernard Sumner of Joy Division. He initially wanted this album to be composed of \"these punky, rough songs\", drawing inspiration from early punk artists such as the Germs and the Damned, an English band. However, that was discouraged by Rubin, the producer. Instead he built on \"Californication\"'s melodically driven style. During the recording of \"Stadium Arcadium\" (2006), he moved away from his new-wave influences and concentrated on emulating flashier guitar players such as Hendrix and Van Halen. Navarro brought his own sound to the band during his tenure, with his style based on heavy metal, progressive rock, and psychedelia.\nFlea's bass guitar style can be considered an amalgamation of funk, psychedelic, punk, and hard rock. The groove-heavy melodies, played through either finger-picking or slapping, contributed to their signature style. While Flea's slap bass style was prominent in earlier albums, albums after \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" have more melodic and funk-driven bass lines. He has also used double stops on some newer songs. Flea's bass playing has changed considerably throughout the years. When he joined Fear, his technique centered largely around traditional punk-rock bass lines. However, he changed this style when the Red Hot Chili Peppers formed. He began to incorporate a \"slap\" bass style that drew influence largely from Bootsy Collins. \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" saw a notable shift in style as it featured none of his signature technique but focused more on traditional and melodic roots. His intellectual beliefs as a musician also shifted: \"I was trying to play simply on \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" because I had been playing too much prior to that, so I thought, 'I've really got to chill out and play half as many notes'. When you play less, it's more exciting\u2014there's more room for everything. If I do play something busy, it stands out, instead of the bass being a constant onslaught of notes. Space is good.\"\nDrummer Smith blends rock with funk, mixing metal and jazz to his beats. Influences include Buddy Rich and John Bonham. He brought a different sound to \"Mother's Milk\", playing tight and fast. In \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\", he displays greater power. He is recognized for his ghost notes, his beats and his fast right foot. MusicRadar put him in sixth place on their list of the \"50 Greatest Drummers Of All Time\". During their early career, the Chili Peppers often performed nude, wearing only socks over their genitals; that became a part of their stage persona and brought them early notoriety.\nLyrical themes and inspirations.\nEarly in the group's history, Kiedis wrote comical songs filled with sexual innuendos and songs inspired by friendship and the band members' personal experiences. However, after the death of his close friend and bandmate Hillel Slovak, Kiedis' lyrics became much more introspective and personal, as exemplified by the \"Mother's Milk\" song \"Knock Me Down\", which was dedicated to Slovak along with the \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" song \"My Lovely Man\". When the band recorded \"One Hot Minute\" (1995), Kiedis had turned to drugs once again, which resulted in darker lyrics. He began to write about anguish, and the self-mutilating thoughts he experienced as a result of his drug addiction. The album also featured tributes to close friends the band lost during the recording process including Kurt Cobain on the song \"Tearjerker\" and River Phoenix on the song \"Transcending\".\nAfter witnessing Frusciante's recovery from his heroin addiction, Kiedis wrote many songs inspired by rebirth and the meaning of life on \"Californication\". He was also intrigued by the life lessons that the band had learned, including Kiedis' experience with meeting a young mother at the YMCA, who was attempting to battle her crack addiction while living with her infant daughter.\nOn \"By the Way\", Kiedis was lyrically influenced by love and his girlfriend. Drugs also played an integral part in Kiedis' writings, as he had only been sober since 2000. Tracks such as \"This Is the Place\" and \"Don't Forget Me\" expressed his intense dislike for narcotics and the harmful physical and emotional effects they caused him. \"Stadium Arcadium\" (2006) continued the themes of love and romance; Kiedis said, that \"love and women, pregnancies and marriages, relationship struggles\u2014those are real and profound influences on this record. And it's great, because it wasn't just me writing about the fact that I'm in love. It was everybody in the band. We were brimming with energy based on falling in love.\" \"I'm with You\" (2011) again featured Kiedis writing about the loss of a close friend, this time in the song \"Brendan's Death Song\", a tribute to club owner Brendan Mullen who gave the band some of their earliest shows and showed support to them throughout their career.\nThemes within Kiedis' repertoire include love and friendship, teenage angst, good-time aggression, various sexual topics and the link between sex and music, political and social commentary (Native American issues in particular), romance, loneliness, globalization and the cons of fame and Hollywood, poverty, drugs, alcohol, dealing with death, and California.\nLegacy and influence.\nThe Red Hot Chili Peppers' mix of hard rock, funk and hip hop has influenced genres such as funk metal, rap metal, rap rock, and nu metal. According to AllMusic, in 1992, \"oodles of (mostly horribly bad) funk-metal acts were following in Faith No More and the Red Hot Chili Peppers' footsteps\". Bands who have cited the Red Hot Chili Peppers as an influence include Incubus, Mr. Bungle, Primus, Rage Against the Machine, System of a Down, Papa Roach, 311, Sugar Ray and Korn.\nKiedis said the Red Hot Chili Peppers were early to combine \"hardcore funk and hip-hop-style vocals\", and suggested that they had influenced Limp Bizkit, Kid Rock and Linkin Park. Smith said, \"Certainly Anthony's singing style and voice lends itself to being unique, and nobody sounds like him. The cool thing about it is we can play any style of music whether it's hard and fast, or loud or quiet, slow or medium, whatever it is; rock or funk, and it still sounds like us. I'm proud of that because sometimes bands don't have that strong personality where you go, 'Oh, that's boom, right away.'\"\nIn 2004, the Australian songwriter Nick Cave said: \"I'm forever near a stereo saying, 'What the fuck is this garbage?' And the answer is always the Red Hot Chili Peppers.\" The line is widely quoted in criticism of the band; Flea, a fan of Cave, wrote that it had hurt him. In 2025, Cave wrote an apology on his website, saying it was \"an offhand and somewhat uncharitable remark\" with \"no malice intended\", and announced that he and Flea had recently collaborated.\nAwards and recognition.\nThe Red Hot Chili Peppers were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in April 2012. The induction lineup was Kiedis, Flea, Smith, Klinghoffer, Frusciante, Slovak (represented by his brother James), Irons, and Martinez. Frusciante was invited, but did not attend. Navarro and Sherman were not inducted; Sherman said that he felt \"dishonored\". The band performed \"By the Way\", \"Give It Away\" and \"Higher Ground\", which included Irons and Martinez on drums. It was the first time Kiedis and Flea had performed with Irons in more than 20 years.\nIn 2003, \"Rolling Stone\" released their first list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\", with \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" at No. 310 and \"Californication\" at No. 399. In 2012, a revised list was released, with \"Californication\" at No. 401. In 2020, \"Rolling Stone\" released another version of the list, with \"Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" at No. 186 and \"Californication\" at No. 286. The band received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on March 31, 2022. George Clinton, Woody Harrelson, and Bob Forrest unveiled the star at the ceremony. On August 28, 2022, the band received the Global Icon Award at the 2022 MTV Video Music Awards. The award was presented to them by Cheech &amp; Chong.\nPublic profile.\nActivism.\nIn 1990, the Chili Peppers appeared in PSA ads for Rock the Vote, a non-profit organization in the United States geared toward increasing voter turnout in the United States Presidential Election among voters ages 18 to 24. The band was invited by the Beastie Boys and the Milarepa Fund to perform at the Tibetan Freedom Concert in June 1996 in San Francisco. They also performed at the June 1998 Washington, D.C. concert. The concerts, which were broadcast worldwide, were to support the cause of Tibetan independence.\nIn September 2005, the band performed \"Under the Bridge\" at the benefit which was held to raise money for the victims of Hurricane Katrina. The live event raised about $30 million. In July 2007, the band performed on behalf of former U.S. Vice President Al Gore who invited the band to perform at the London version of his Live Earth concerts which were held to raise awareness towards global warming and solving the most critical environmental issues of our time. The band performed a free concert in downtown Cleveland, Ohio in April 2012 in support of President Obama's re-election campaign. The requirement for getting into the concert was agreeing to volunteer for the Obama 2012 phone bank. The event quickly met its capacity limit after being announced.\nIn May 2013, the band performed a concert in Portland, Oregon for the Dalai Lama as part of the Dalai Lama Environmental Summit. In January 2015, they performed their first show of the new year for the \"Sean Penn &amp; Friends Help Haiti Home\" fundraiser in support of the J/P Haitian Relief Organization. In September 2015, the band joined more than 120 other entertainers and celebrities to formally endorse Bernie Sanders for president during the Democratic primary ahead of the 2016 presidential election. The band performed at a fundraiser event at the Belly Up Tavern in Solana Beach, California in the same month and the money was donated to A Reason To Survive (ARTS), Heartbeat Music Academy, San Diego Young Artists Music Academy, and the Silverlake Conservatory of Music. In October, Kiedis and Flea hosted the annual benefit for the Silverlake Conservatory of Music. The band performed a special rare acoustic set.\nIn February 2016, the band headlined a fundraiser concert in support of Sanders. In April, they performed at a private function on behalf of Facebook and Napster founder Sean Parker for his launch of The Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy. Smith and Will Ferrell hosted the \"Red Hot Benefit Comedy + Music Show &amp; Quinceanera\" in the same month. The benefit featured a performance by the Chili Peppers along with comedy acts selected by Ferrell and Funny or Die. A portion of the proceeds went to Ferrell's Cancer for College and Smith's Silverlake Conservatory of Music southwest of Glendale. In February 2018, Smith again joined Ferrell at his One Classy Night benefit at the Moore Theatre in Seattle to help raise money for Cancer for College. The event raised $300,000 in college scholarship money for students who have survived cancer.\nBoth Flea and Chad Smith have started their own music schools and foundations. Flea opened/founded the \"Silverlake Conservatory of Music\" in 2001 and Smith started the \"Chad Smith Foundation\" in August 2025 that provides music equipment, education and scholarships to children.\nConviction and sexual harassment.\nOn April 21, 1989, Kiedis was convicted of sexual battery and indecent exposure after a concert at George Mason University in Fairfax, Virginia. He exposed himself and pressed his penis to a woman's face against her wishes. He was fined $1,000 on each charge. In 1990, Kiedis said the incident was \"blown way out of proportion by both the media and the prosecution\", and was merely \"a playful thing that happened backstage\" with no intent of harm.\nIn 1990, Flea and Smith were arrested on charges of battery in Daytona Beach, Florida, at a spring break performance for MTV. Flea was also charged with disorderly conduct and solicitation to commit an unnatural and lascivious act. Flea picked up a 20-year-old woman and threw her into the sand, while Smith forcibly removed her bathing suit and slapped her buttocks. Flea allegedly demanded that she perform oral sex on him before both he and Smith were removed by security. After the arrest, the State University of New York at New Paltz canceled a Chili Peppers concert. Flea and Smith pled guilty to all charges. They were each sentenced to pay a $1,000 fine, plus $300 to the State Attorney's Office for prosecution costs and $5,000 to the Volusia County Rape Crisis Center, and ordered to write letters of apology to the woman. In a 1992 \"Rolling Stone\" interview, Flea said: \"I wish I'd never done it, and it was a really stupid thing to do. I was out of control. But I did not assault anybody, and it was not sexual. It had nothing to do with sex.\"\nIn 2016, Julie Farman, a former music executive, alleged that two members of the Red Hot Chili Peppers pressed themselves against her and \"told me about all of the ways we could make a super sexy sandwich\" after a meeting with them at Epic Records in 1990.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26590", "revid": "20367150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26590", "title": "Relay", "text": "Electrically operated switch\nA relay is an electrically operated switch. It has a set of input terminals for one or more control signals, and a set of operating contact terminals. The switch may have any number of contacts in multiple contact forms, such as make contacts, break contacts, or combinations thereof.\nRelays are used to control a circuit by an independent low-power signal and to control several circuits by one signal. They were first used in long-distance telegraph circuits as signal repeaters that transmit a refreshed copy of the incoming signal onto another circuit. Relays were used extensively in telephone exchanges and early computers to perform logical operations.\nThe traditional electromechanical relay uses an electromagnet to close or open the contacts, but relays using other operating principles have also been invented, such as in solid-state relays which use semiconductor properties for control without relying on moving parts. Relays with calibrated operating characteristics and sometimes multiple operating coils are used to protect electrical circuits from overload or faults; in modern electric power systems these functions are performed by digital instruments still called \"protective relays\" or \"safety relays\".\nLatching relays require only a single pulse of control power to operate the switch persistently. Another pulse applied to a second set of control terminals, or a pulse with opposite polarity, resets the switch, while repeated pulses of the same kind have no effects. Magnetic latching relays are useful in applications when interrupted power should not affect the circuits that the relay is controlling.\nHistory.\nIn 1809 an electrolytic relay was designed as an alarm for an electrochemical telegraph by Samuel Thomas von S\u00f6mmerring.\nElectrical relays got their start mainly in application to telegraphs. American scientist Joseph Henry is often cited to have invented a relay in 1835 in order to improve his version of the electrical telegraph, developed earlier in 1831. However, Henry never published any of these experiments and dating for his relay experiments is based solely on the words of Henry himself and his students, often decades later.\nIn March 1837 Edward Davy deposited a letter with the British Secretary for the Society of Arts containing his ideas for an electromagnetic relay, which, even if it was not the first, was considered more practical than previous designs, being a \u2018make-and-break\u2019 type rather than being based on the use of mercury. He did this two months before Charles Wheatstone and William Cooke filed their first patent for their telegraph system and would file a patent for the same idea a year later.\nHowever, an official patent was not issued until 1840 to Samuel Morse for his telegraph, which is now called a relay. The mechanism described acted as a digital amplifier, repeating the telegraph signal, and thus allowing signals to be propagated as far as desired.\nThe word \"relay\" appears in the context of electromagnetic operations from 1860 onwards.\nBasic design and operation.\nA simple electromagnetic relay consists of a coil of wire wrapped around a soft iron core (a solenoid), an iron yoke which provides a low reluctance path for magnetic flux, a movable iron armature, and one or more sets of contacts (there are two contacts in the relay pictured). The armature is hinged to the yoke and mechanically linked to one or more sets of moving contacts. The armature is held in place by a spring so that when the relay is de-energized there is an air gap in the magnetic circuit. In this condition, one of the two sets of contacts in the relay pictured is closed, and the other set is open. Other relays may have more or fewer sets of contacts depending on their function. The relay in the picture also has a wire connecting the armature to the yoke. This ensures continuity of the circuit between the moving contacts on the armature, and the circuit track on the printed circuit board (PCB) via the yoke, which is soldered to the PCB.\nWhen an electric current is passed through the coil it generates a magnetic field that activates the armature, and the consequent movement of the movable contact(s) either makes or breaks (depending upon construction) a connection with a fixed contact. If the set of contacts was closed when the relay was de-energized, then the movement opens the contacts and breaks the connection, and vice versa if the contacts were open. When the current to the coil is switched off, the armature is returned by a force, approximately half as strong as the magnetic force, to its relaxed position. Usually this force is provided by a spring, but gravity is also used commonly in industrial motor starters. Most relays are manufactured to operate quickly. In a low-voltage application this reduces noise; in a high voltage or current application it reduces arcing.\nWhen the coil is energized with direct current, a flyback diode or snubber resistor is often placed across the coil to dissipate the energy from the collapsing magnetic field (back EMF) at deactivation, which would otherwise generate a voltage spike dangerous to semiconductor circuit components. Such diodes were not widely used before the application of transistors as relay drivers, but soon became ubiquitous as early germanium transistors were easily destroyed by this surge. Some automotive relays include a diode inside the relay case. Resistors, while more durable than diodes, are less efficient at eliminating voltage spikes generated by relays and therefore not as commonly used.\nIf the relay is driving a large, or especially a reactive load, there may be a similar problem of surge currents around the relay output contacts. In this case a snubber circuit (a capacitor and resistor in series) across the contacts may absorb the surge. Suitably rated capacitors and the associated resistor are sold as a single packaged component for this commonplace use.\nIf the coil is designed to be energized with alternating current (AC), some method is used to split the flux into two out-of-phase components which add together, increasing the minimum pull on the armature during the AC cycle. Typically this is done with a small copper \"shading ring\" crimped around a portion of the core that creates the delayed, out-of-phase component, which holds the contacts during the zero crossings of the control voltage.\nContact materials for relays vary by application. Materials with low contact resistance may be oxidized by the air, or may tend to \"stick\" instead of cleanly parting when opening. Contact material may be optimized for low electrical resistance, high strength to withstand repeated operations, or high capacity to withstand the heat of an arc. Where very low resistance is required, or low thermally-induced voltages are desired, gold-plated contacts may be used, along with palladium and other non-oxidizing, semi-precious metals. Silver or silver-plated contacts are used for signal switching. Mercury-wetted relays make and break circuits using a thin, self-renewing film of liquid mercury. For higher-power relays switching many amperes, such as motor circuit contactors, contacts are made with a mixtures of silver and cadmium oxide, providing low contact resistance and high resistance to the heat of arcing. Contacts used in circuits carrying scores or hundreds of amperes may include additional structures for heat dissipation and management of the arc produced when interrupting the circuit. Some relays have field-replaceable contacts, such as certain machine tool relays; these may be replaced when worn out, or changed between normally open and normally closed state, to allow for changes in the controlled circuit.\nTerminology.\nSince relays are switches, the terminology applied to switches is also applied to relays; a relay switches one or more \"poles\", each of whose contacts can be \"thrown\" by energizing the coil. Normally open (NO) contacts connect the circuit when the relay is activated; the circuit is disconnected when the relay is inactive. Normally closed (NC) contacts disconnect the circuit when the relay is activated; the circuit is connected when the relay is inactive. All of the contact forms involve combinations of NO and NC connections.\nThe National Association of Relay Manufacturers and its successor, the Relay and Switch Industry Association define 23 distinct electrical contact forms found in relays and switches. Of these, the following are commonly encountered:\nThe \"S\" (\"single\") or \"D\" (\"double\") designator for the pole count may be replaced with a number, indicating multiple contacts connected to a single actuator. For example, 4PDT indicates a four-pole double-throw relay that has 12 switching terminals.\n\"EN 50005\" are among applicable standards for relay terminal numbering; a typical EN 50005-compliant SPDT relay's terminals would be numbered 11, 12, 14, A1 and A2 for the C, NC, NO, and coil connections, respectively.\nDIN 72552 defines contact numbers in relays for automotive use:\nTypes.\nCoaxial relay.\nWhere radio transmitters and receivers share one antenna, often a coaxial relay is used as a TR (transmit-receive) relay, which switches the antenna from the receiver to the transmitter. This protects the receiver from the high power of the transmitter. Such relays are often used in transceivers which combine transmitter and receiver in one unit. The relay contacts are designed not to reflect any radio frequency power back toward the source, and to provide very high isolation between receiver and transmitter terminals. The characteristic impedance of the relay is matched to the transmission line impedance of the system, for example, 50 ohms.\nContactor.\nA contactor is a heavy-duty relay with higher current ratings, used for switching electric motors and lighting loads. Continuous current ratings for common contactors range from 10 amps to several hundred amps. High-current contacts are made with alloys containing silver. The unavoidable arcing causes the contacts to oxidize; however, silver oxide is still a good conductor. Contactors with overload protection devices are often used to start motors.\nForce-guided contacts relay.\nA force-guided contacts relay has relay contacts that are mechanically linked together, so that when the relay coil is energized or de-energized, all of the linked contacts move together. If one set of contacts in the relay becomes immobilized, no other contact of the same relay will be able to move. The function of force-guided contacts is to enable the safety circuit to check the status of the relay. Force-guided contacts are also known as \"positive-guided contacts\", \"captive contacts\", \"locked contacts\", \"mechanically linked contacts\", or \"safety relays\".\nThese safety relays have to follow design rules and manufacturing rules that are defined in one main machinery standard EN 50205 : Relays with forcibly guided (mechanically linked) contacts. These rules for the safety design are the one defined in type B standards such as EN 13849-2 as Basic safety principles and Well-tried safety principles for machinery that applies to all machines.\nForce-guided contacts by themselves can not guarantee that all contacts are in the same state, however, they do guarantee, subject to no gross mechanical fault, that no contacts are in opposite states. Otherwise, a relay with several normally open (NO) contacts may stick when energized, with some contacts closed and others still slightly open, due to mechanical tolerances. Similarly, a relay with several normally closed (NC) contacts may stick to the unenergized position, so that when energized, the circuit through one set of contacts is broken, with a marginal gap, while the other remains closed. By introducing both NO and NC contacts, or more commonly, changeover contacts, on the same relay, it then becomes possible to guarantee that if any NC contact is closed, all NO contacts are open, and conversely, if any NO contact is closed, all NC contacts are open. It is not possible to reliably ensure that any particular contact is closed, except by potentially intrusive and safety-degrading sensing of its circuit conditions, however in safety systems it is usually the NO state that is most important, and as explained above, this is reliably verifiable by detecting the closure of a contact of opposite sense.\nForce-guided contact relays are made with different main contact sets, either NO, NC or changeover, and one or more auxiliary contact sets, often of reduced current or voltage rating, used for the monitoring system. Contacts may be all NO, all NC, changeover, or a mixture of these, for the monitoring contacts, so that the safety system designer can select the correct configuration for the particular application. Safety relays are used as part of an engineered safety system.\nLatching relay.\nA latching relay, also called \"impulse\", \"bistable\", \"keep\", or \"stay\" relay, or simply \"latch\", maintains either contact position indefinitely without power applied to the coil. The advantage is that one coil consumes power only for an instant while the relay is being switched, and the relay contacts retain this setting across a power outage. A latching relay allows remote control of building lighting without the hum that may be produced from a continuously (AC) energized coil.\nIn one mechanism, two opposing coils with an over-center spring or permanent magnet hold the contacts in position after the coil is de-energized. A pulse to one coil turns the relay on, and a pulse to the opposite coil turns the relay off. This type is widely used where control is from simple switches or single-ended outputs of a control system, and such relays are found in avionics and numerous industrial applications.\nAnother latching type has a remanent core that retains the contacts in the operated position by the remanent magnetism in the core. This type requires a current pulse of opposite polarity to release the contacts. A variation uses a permanent magnet that produces part of the force required to close the contact; the coil supplies sufficient force to move the contact open or closed by aiding or opposing the field of the permanent magnet. A polarity controlled relay needs changeover switches or an H-bridge drive circuit to control it. The relay may be less expensive than other types, but this is partly offset by the increased costs in the external circuit.\nIn another type, a \"ratchet relay\" has a ratchet mechanism that holds the contacts closed after the coil is momentarily energized. A second impulse, in the same or a separate coil, releases the contacts. This type may be found in certain cars, for headlamp dipping and other functions where alternating operation on each switch actuation is needed.\nA stepping relay is a specialized kind of multi-way latching relay designed for early automatic telephone exchanges.\nAn earth-leakage circuit breaker includes a specialized latching relay.\nVery early computers often stored bits in a magnetically latching relay, such as ferreed or the later remreed in the 1ESS switch.\nSome early computers used ordinary relays as a kind of latch\u2014they store bits in ordinary wire-spring relays or reed relays by feeding an output wire back as an input, resulting in a feedback loop or sequential circuit. Such an electrically latching relay requires continuous power to maintain state, unlike magnetically latching relays or mechanically ratcheting relays. While \"(self-)holding circuits\" are often realized with relays they can also be implemented by other means.\nIn computer memories, latching relays and other relays were replaced by delay-line memory, which in turn was replaced by a series of ever faster and ever smaller memory technologies.\nMachine tool relay.\nA machine tool relay is a type standardized for industrial control of machine tools, transfer machines, and other sequential control. They are characterized by a large number of contacts (sometimes extendable in the field) which are easily converted from normally open to normally closed status, easily replaceable coils, and a form factor that allows compactly installing many relays in a control panel. Although such relays once were the backbone of automation in such industries as automobile assembly, the programmable logic controller (PLC) mostly displaced the machine tool relay from sequential control applications.\nA relay allows circuits to be switched by electrical equipment: for example, a timer circuit with a relay could switch power at a preset time. For many years relays were the standard method of controlling industrial electronic systems. A number of relays could be used together to carry out complex functions (relay logic). The principle of relay logic is based on relays which energize and de-energize associated contacts. Relay logic is the predecessor of ladder logic, which is commonly used in programmable logic controllers.\nMercury relay.\nA mercury relay is a relay that uses mercury as the switching element. They are used where contact erosion would be a problem for conventional relay contacts. Owing to environmental considerations about significant amount of mercury used and modern alternatives, they are now comparatively uncommon.\nMercury-wetted relay.\nA mercury-wetted reed relay is a form of reed relay that employs a mercury switch, in which the contacts are wetted with mercury. Mercury reduces the contact resistance and mitigates the associated voltage drop. Surface contamination may result in poor conductivity for low-current signals. For high-speed applications, the mercury eliminates contact bounce, and provides virtually instantaneous circuit closure. Mercury wetted relays are position-sensitive and must be mounted according to the manufacturer's specifications. Because of the toxicity and expense of liquid mercury, these relays have increasingly fallen into disuse.\nThe high speed of switching action of the mercury-wetted relay is a notable advantage. The mercury globules on each contact coalesce, and the current rise time through the contacts is generally considered to be a few picoseconds. However, in a practical circuit it may be limited by the inductance of the contacts and wiring. It was quite common, before restrictions on the use of mercury, to use a mercury-wetted relay in the laboratory as a convenient means of generating fast rise time pulses, however although the rise time may be picoseconds, the exact timing of the event is, like all other types of relay, subject to considerable jitter, possibly milliseconds, due to mechanical variations.\nThe same coalescence process causes another effect, which is a nuisance in some applications. The contact resistance is not stable immediately after contact closure, and drifts, mostly downwards, for several seconds after closure, the change perhaps being 0.5\u00a0ohm.\nMulti-voltage relays.\nMulti-voltage relays are devices designed to work for wide voltage ranges such as 24 to 240 VAC and VDC and wide frequency ranges such as 0 to 300\u00a0Hz. They are indicated for use in installations that do not have stable supply voltages.\nOverload protection relay.\nElectric motors need overcurrent protection to prevent damage from over-loading the motor, or to protect against short circuits in connecting cables or internal faults in the motor windings. The overload sensing devices are a form of heat operated relay where a coil heats a bimetallic strip, or where a solder pot melts, to operate auxiliary contacts. These auxiliary contacts are in series with the motor's contactor coil, so they turn off the motor when it overheats.\nThis thermal protection operates relatively slowly allowing the motor to draw higher starting currents before the protection relay will trip. Where the overload relay is exposed to the same ambient temperature as the motor, a useful though crude compensation for motor ambient temperature is provided.\nThe other common overload protection system uses an electromagnet coil in series with the motor circuit that directly operates contacts. This is similar to a control relay but requires a rather high fault current to operate the contacts. To prevent short over current spikes from causing nuisance triggering the armature movement is damped with a dashpot. The thermal and magnetic overload detections are typically used together in a motor protection relay.\nElectronic overload protection relays measure motor current and can estimate motor winding temperature using a \"thermal model\" of the motor armature system that can be set to provide more accurate motor protection. Some motor protection relays include temperature detector inputs for direct measurement from a thermocouple or resistance thermometer sensor embedded in the winding.\nPolarized relay.\nA polarized relay places the armature between the poles of a permanent magnet to increase sensitivity. Polarized relays were used in middle 20th Century telephone exchanges to detect faint pulses and correct telegraphic distortion.\nReed relay.\nA reed relay is a reed switch enclosed in a solenoid. The switch has a set of contacts inside an evacuated or inert gas-filled glass tube that protects the contacts against atmospheric corrosion; the contacts are made of magnetic material that makes them move under the influence of the field of the enclosing solenoid or an external magnet.\nReed relays can switch faster than larger relays and require very little power from the control circuit. However, they have relatively low switching current and voltage ratings. Though rare, the reeds can become magnetized over time, which makes them stick \"on\", even when no current is present; changing the orientation of the reeds or degaussing the switch with respect to the solenoid's magnetic field can resolve this problem.\nSealed contacts with mercury-wetted contacts have longer operating lives and less contact chatter than any other kind of relay.\nSafety relays.\nSafety relays are devices which generally implement protection functions. In the event of a hazard, the task of such a safety function is to use appropriate measures to reduce the existing risk to an acceptable level.\nSolid-state contactor.\nA solid-state contactor is a heavy-duty solid state relay, including the necessary heat sink, used where frequent on-off cycles are required, such as with electric heaters, small electric motors, and lighting loads. There are no moving parts to wear out and there is no contact bounce due to vibration. They are activated by AC control signals or DC control signals from programmable logic controllers (PLCs), PCs, transistor-transistor logic (TTL) sources, or other microprocessor and microcontroller controls.\nSolid-state relay.\nA solid-state relay (SSR) is a solid state electronic component that provides a function similar to an electromechanical relay but does not have any moving components, increasing long-term reliability. A solid-state relay uses a thyristor, TRIAC or other solid-state switching device, activated by the control signal, to switch the controlled load, instead of a solenoid. An optocoupler (a light-emitting diode (LED) coupled with a photo transistor) can be used to isolate control and controlled circuits.\nStatic relay.\nA static relay consists of electronic circuitry to emulate all those characteristics which are achieved by moving parts in an electro-magnetic relay.\nTime-delay relay.\nTiming relays are arranged for an intentional delay in operating their contacts. A very short (a fraction of a second) delay would use a copper disk between the armature and moving blade assembly. Current flowing in the disk maintains a magnetic field for a short time, lengthening release time. For a slightly longer (up to a minute) delay, a dashpot is used. A dashpot is a piston filled with fluid that is allowed to escape slowly; both air-filled and oil-filled dashpots are used. The time period can be varied by increasing or decreasing the flow rate. For longer time periods, a mechanical clockwork timer is installed. Relays may be arranged for a fixed timing period, or may be field-adjustable, or remotely set from a control panel. Modern microprocessor-based timing relays provide precision timing over a great range.\nSome relays are constructed with a kind of \"shock absorber\" mechanism attached to the armature, which prevents immediate, full motion when the coil is either energized or de-energized. This addition gives the relay the property of time-delay actuation. Time-delay relays can be constructed to delay armature motion on coil energization, de-energization, or both.\nTime-delay relay contacts must be specified not only as either normally open or normally closed, but whether the delay operates in the direction of closing, opening, or both. The following is a description of the four basic types of time-delay relay contacts.\nFirst, we have the normally open, timed-closed (NOTC) contact. This type of contact is normally open when the coil is unpowered (de-energized). The contact is closed by the application of power to the relay coil, but only after the coil has been continuously powered for the specified amount of time. In other words, the direction of the contact's motion (either to close or to open) is identical to a regular NO contact, but there is a delay in closing direction. Because the delay occurs in the direction of coil energization, this type of contact is alternatively known as a normally open, on-delay.\nVacuum relays.\nA vacuum relay is a sensitive relay having its contacts mounted in an evacuated glass housing, to permit handling radio-frequency voltages as high as 20,000 volts without flashover between contacts even though contact spacing is as low as a few hundredths of an inch when open.\nApplications.\nRelays are used wherever it is necessary to control a high power or high voltage circuit with a low power circuit, especially when galvanic isolation is desirable. The first application of relays was in long telegraph lines, whereas the weak signal received at an intermediate station could control a contact, regenerating the signal for further transmission. High-voltage or high-current devices can be controlled with small, low voltage wiring and pilots switches. Operators can be isolated from the high voltage circuit. Low power devices such as microprocessors can drive relays to control electrical loads beyond their direct drive capability. In an automobile, a starter relay allows the high current of the cranking motor to be controlled with small wiring and contacts in the ignition key.\nElectromechanical switching systems including Strowger and crossbar telephone exchanges made extensive use of relays in ancillary control circuits. The Relay Automatic Telephone Company also manufactured telephone exchanges based solely on relay switching techniques designed by . The first public relay based telephone exchange in the UK was installed in Fleetwood on 15 July 1922 and remained in service until 1959.\nThe use of relays for the logical control of complex switching systems like telephone exchanges was studied by Claude Shannon, who formalized the application of Boolean algebra to relay circuit design in \"A Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits\". Relays can perform the basic operations of Boolean combinatorial logic. For example, the Boolean AND function is realised by connecting normally open relay contacts in series, the OR function by connecting normally open contacts in parallel. Inversion of a logical input can be done with a normally closed contact. Relays were used for control of automated systems for machine tools and production lines. The Ladder programming language is often used for designing relay logic networks.\nEarly electro-mechanical computers such as the ARRA, Harvard Mark II, Zuse Z2, and Zuse Z3 used relays for logic and working registers. However, electronic devices proved faster and easier to use.\nRelays are much more resistant than semiconductors to nuclear radiation, so they are widely used in safety-critical logic, such as the control panels of radioactive waste-handling machinery. Electromechanical protective relays are used to detect overload and other faults on electrical lines by opening and closing circuit breakers.\nProtective relays.\nFor protection of electrical apparatus and transmission lines, electromechanical relays with accurate operating characteristics were used to detect overload, short-circuits, and other faults. While many such relays remain in use, digital protective relays now provide equivalent and more complex protective functions.\nRailway signaling.\nRailway signalling relays are large considering the mostly small voltages (less than 120\u00a0V) and currents (perhaps 100\u00a0mA) that they switch. Contacts are widely spaced to prevent flashovers and short circuits over a lifetime that may exceed fifty years.\nSince rail signal circuits must be highly reliable, special techniques are used to detect and prevent failures in the relay system. To protect against false feeds, double switching relay contacts are often used on both the positive and negative side of a circuit, so that two false feeds are needed to cause a false signal. Not all relay circuits can be proved so there is reliance on construction features such as carbon to silver contacts to resist lightning induced contact welding and to provide AC immunity.\nOpto-isolators are also used in some instances with railway signalling, especially where only a single contact is to be switched.\nSelection considerations.\nSelection of an appropriate relay for a particular application requires evaluation of many different factors:\nThere are many considerations involved in the correct selection of a control relay for a particular application, including factors such as speed of operation, sensitivity, and hysteresis. Although typical control relays operate in the 5 ms to 20 ms range, relays with switching speeds as fast as 100 \u03bcs are available. Reed relays which are actuated by low currents and switch fast are suitable for controlling small currents.\nAs with any switch, the contact current (unrelated to the coil current) must not exceed a given value to avoid damage. In high-inductance circuits such as motors, other issues must be addressed. When an inductance is connected to a power source, an input surge current or electromotor starting current larger than the steady-state current exists. When the circuit is broken, the current cannot change instantaneously, which creates a potentially damaging arc across the separating contacts.\nConsequently, for relays used to control inductive loads, we must specify the maximum current that may flow through the relay contacts when it actuates, the \"make rating\"; the continuous rating; and the \"break rating\". The make rating may be several times larger than the continuous rating, which is larger than the break rating.\nSafety and reliability.\nSwitching while \"wet\" (under load) causes undesired arcing between the contacts, eventually leading to contacts that weld shut or contacts that fail due to a buildup of surface damage caused by the destructive arc energy.\nInside the Number One Electronic Switching System (1ESS) crossbar switch and certain other high-reliability designs, the reed switches are always switched \"dry\" (without load) to avoid that problem, leading to much longer contact life.\nWithout adequate contact protection, the occurrence of electric current arcing causes significant degradation of the contacts, which suffer significant and visible damage. Every time the relay contacts open or close under load, an electrical arc can occur between the contacts of the relay, either a \"break\" arc (when opening), or a \"make\" / \"bounce\" arc (when closing). In many situations, the \"break\" arc is more energetic and thus more destructive, in particular with inductive loads, but this can be mitigated by bridging the contacts with a snubber circuit. The inrush current of tungsten filament incandescent lamps is typically ten times the normal operating current. Thus, relays intended for tungsten loads may use special contact composition, or the relay may have lower contact ratings for tungsten loads than for purely resistive loads.\nAn electrical arc across relay contacts can be very hot\u00a0\u2014 thousands of degrees Fahrenheit\u00a0\u2014 causing the metal on the contact surfaces to melt, pool, and migrate with the current. The extremely high temperature of the arc splits the surrounding gas molecules, creating ozone, carbon monoxide, and other compounds. Over time, the arc energy slowly destroys the contact metal, causing some material to escape into the air as fine particulate matter. This action causes the material in the contacts to degrade and coordination, resulting in device failure. This contact degradation drastically limits the overall life of a relay to a range of about 10,000 to 100,000 operations, a level far below the mechanical life of the device, which can be in excess of 20 million operations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26592", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26592", "title": "Rotary-engine", "text": ""}
{"id": "26593", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26593", "title": "SportS", "text": ""}
{"id": "26596", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26596", "title": "SubLime", "text": ""}
{"id": "26603", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26603", "title": "SabBath", "text": ""}
{"id": "26607", "revid": "31474557", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26607", "title": "ScienCe", "text": ""}
{"id": "26608", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26608", "title": "SpacecraftPropulsion", "text": ""}
{"id": "26609", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26609", "title": "SouthAustralia", "text": ""}
{"id": "26611", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26611", "title": "SenatorsOfTheUnitedStates", "text": ""}
{"id": "26613", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26613", "title": "SubGroup", "text": ""}
{"id": "26614", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26614", "title": "SnowBOARDING", "text": ""}
{"id": "26615", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26615", "title": "SnowBoarding", "text": ""}
{"id": "26616", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26616", "title": "SovietUnion", "text": ""}
{"id": "26617", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26617", "title": "SyndicalisM", "text": ""}
{"id": "26618", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26618", "title": "SwedishLanguage", "text": ""}
{"id": "26620", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26620", "title": "SiVa", "text": ""}
{"id": "26621", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26621", "title": "SuperBowl", "text": ""}
{"id": "26622", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26622", "title": "StockholM", "text": ""}
{"id": "26623", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26623", "title": "SherlockHolmes", "text": ""}
{"id": "26624", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26624", "title": "SlavicLanguages", "text": ""}
{"id": "26629", "revid": "1308492041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26629", "title": "SoCrates", "text": ""}
{"id": "26631", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26631", "title": "SeT", "text": ""}
{"id": "26632", "revid": "477460", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26632", "title": "SanSebastianLine", "text": ""}
{"id": "26633", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26633", "title": "SlaviC", "text": ""}
{"id": "26634", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26634", "title": "SlavicPeoples", "text": ""}
{"id": "26635", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26635", "title": "SwingDance", "text": ""}
{"id": "26636", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26636", "title": "ScienceFiction", "text": ""}
{"id": "26638", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26638", "title": "SemanticDispute", "text": ""}
{"id": "26639", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26639", "title": "SoundNess", "text": ""}
{"id": "26640", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26640", "title": "SomeMetaphysicalQuestions", "text": ""}
{"id": "26641", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26641", "title": "ScepticIsm", "text": ""}
{"id": "26642", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26642", "title": "SocialContractTheories", "text": ""}
{"id": "26644", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26644", "title": "SanIty", "text": ""}
{"id": "26653", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26653", "title": "SubSet", "text": ""}
{"id": "26654", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26654", "title": "ShannonElizabeth", "text": ""}
{"id": "26656", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26656", "title": "SummarizingStatisticalData", "text": ""}
{"id": "26657", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26657", "title": "StatisticalRegularity", "text": ""}
{"id": "26658", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26658", "title": "SurveySampling", "text": ""}
{"id": "26659", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26659", "title": "SetTheory", "text": ""}
{"id": "26660", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26660", "title": "SocialisM", "text": ""}
{"id": "26661", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26661", "title": "ScienceFictionFilm", "text": ""}
{"id": "26662", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26662", "title": "StatisticalTheory", "text": ""}
{"id": "26663", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26663", "title": "SummaryStatistics", "text": ""}
{"id": "26664", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26664", "title": "StarWars", "text": ""}
{"id": "26665", "revid": "31474557", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26665", "title": "ScienCes", "text": ""}
{"id": "26666", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26666", "title": "StatistiC", "text": ""}
{"id": "26667", "revid": "44522647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26667", "title": "Spain", "text": "Country in Southern and Western Europe\nSpain, officially the Kingdom of Spain, is a country in Southern and Western Europe with territories in North Africa. Featuring the southernmost point of continental Europe, it is the largest country in Southern Europe and the fourth-most populous European Union (EU) member state. Spanning the majority of the Iberian Peninsula, its territory also includes the Canary Islands, in the Eastern Atlantic Ocean; the Balearic Islands, in the Western Mediterranean Sea; and the autonomous cities of Ceuta and Melilla, in mainland Africa. Peninsular Spain is bordered to the north by France, Andorra, and the Bay of Biscay; to the east and south by the Mediterranean Sea and Gibraltar; and to the west by Portugal and the Atlantic Ocean. Spain's capital and largest city is Madrid; other major urban areas include Barcelona, Valencia, Seville, Zaragoza, M\u00e1laga, Murcia, and Palma de Mallorca.\nIn early antiquity, the Iberian Peninsula was inhabited by Celts, Iberians, and other pre-Roman peoples. The Roman conquest of the Iberian peninsula created the province of Hispania, which became deeply Romanised and later Christianised. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the peninsula was conquered by tribes from Central Europe, among them the Visigoths, who established the Visigothic Kingdom centred on Toledo. In the early 8th century, most of the peninsula was conquered by the Umayyad Caliphate, with Al-Andalus centred on C\u00f3rdoba. The northern Christian kingdoms of Iberia launched the so-called \"Reconquista\", gradually repelling and ultimately expelling Islamic rule from the peninsula, culminating with the fall of the Nasrid Kingdom of Granada. The dynastic union of the Crown of Castile and the Crown of Aragon in 1479 under the Catholic Monarchs is often seen as the \"de facto\" unification of Spain as a nation state.\nDuring the Age of Discovery, Spain led the exploration and conquest of the New World, completed the first circumnavigation of the globe, and established one of the largest empires in history, which spanned all continents and fostered a global trade system driven by precious metals. In the 18th century, the Nueva Planta decrees centralised Spain under the Bourbons, strengthening royal authority. The 19th century witnessed the victorious Peninsular War (1808\u20131814) against Napoleonic forces and the loss of most American colonies amid liberal\u2013absolutist conflicts. These struggles culminated in the Spanish Civil War (1936\u20131939) and the Francoist dictatorship (1939\u20131975). With the restoration of democracy and entry into the EU, Spain experienced a major economic boom and social transformation. Since the Spanish Golden Age (\"Siglo de Oro\"), Spanish culture has been influential worldwide, particularly in Western Europe and the Americas. The Spanish language is spoken by more than 600 million Hispanophones, making it the world's second-most spoken native language and the most widely spoken Romance language. Spain is the world's second-most visited country, hosts one of the largest numbers of World Heritage Sites, and is the most popular destination for European students.\nSpain is a secular parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy, with King Felipe VI as head of state. A developed country, Spain has a high nominal per capita income globally, and its advanced economy ranks among the largest in the world. It is also the fourth-largest economy in the EU. Spain is considered a regional power with a cultural influence that extends beyond its borders, and continues to promote its cultural value through participation in multiple international organisations and forums, as well as a key actor in the relations between Europe and Latin America due to its past history.\nEtymology.\nThe name of Spain () comes from , the name used by the Ancient Romans for the Iberian Peninsula during the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire. The etymology of the term remains uncertain. \nThe Phoenicians referred to the region as , possibly meaning 'land of rabbits or hyraxes', 'land of metals', or 'northern island'. Roman coins struck in the region from the reign of Hadrian show a female figure with a rabbit at her feet, and Strabo called it the 'land of the rabbits'.\nHistory.\nPrehistory and Iberian peoples.\nArchaeological research at Atapuerca indicates the Iberian Peninsula was populated by hominids 1.3\u00a0million years ago.\nModern humans first arrived in Iberia from the north on foot about 35,000 years ago. The best-known artefacts of these prehistoric human settlements are the paintings in the Altamira cave of Cantabria in northern Iberia, which were created from 35,600 to 13,500 BCE by Cro-Magnon. Archaeological and genetic evidence suggests that the Iberian Peninsula acted as one of several major refugia from which northern Europe was repopulated following the end of the last ice age.\nThe two largest groups inhabiting the Iberian Peninsula before the Roman conquest were the Iberians and the Celts. The Iberians inhabited the Mediterranean side of the peninsula. The Celts inhabited much of the interior and Atlantic sides of the peninsula. Basques occupied the western area of the Pyrenees mountain range and adjacent areas. Phoenician-influenced Tartessians flourished in the southwest. Lusitanians and Vettones occupied areas in the central west. Several cities were founded along the coast by Phoenicians. Trading outposts and colonies were established by Greeks in the East. Eventually, Phoenician-Carthaginians expanded inland towards the meseta. Due to the bellicose inland tribes, the Carthaginians settled on the coasts of the Iberian Peninsula.\nRoman Hispania and the Visigothic Kingdom.\nDuring the Second Punic War, roughly between 210 and 205\u00a0BCE, the expanding Roman Republic captured Carthaginian trading colonies along the Mediterranean coast. It took the Romans nearly two centuries to complete the conquest of the Iberian Peninsula. They retained control of it for over six centuries. Roman rule was bound together by law, language, and the Roman road. The cultures of the pre-Roman populations were gradually Romanised (Latinised) at different rates depending on what part of the peninsula they lived in, with local leaders being admitted into the Roman aristocratic class.\nHispania, the Roman name for the Iberian Peninsula, served as a granary for the Roman market, and its harbours exported gold, wool, olive oil, and wine. Agricultural production increased with the introduction of irrigation projects, some of which remain in use. Emperors Hadrian, Trajan, Theodosius I, and the philosopher Seneca were born in Hispania. Christianity was introduced into Hispania in the 1st century CE, and it became popular in the cities in the 2nd century. Most of Spain's present languages and religions, as well as the basis of its laws, originate from this period. Starting in 170 CE, incursions of North-African Mauri in the province of Baetica took place.\nThe Germanic Suebi and Vandals, together with the Sarmatian Alans, entered the peninsula after 409, weakening the Western Roman Empire's jurisdiction over Hispania. The Suebi established a kingdom in north-western Iberia. The Vandals established themselves in the south of the peninsula by 420, before crossing over to North Africa in 429. As the western Roman empire disintegrated, the social and economic base became greatly simplified. The successor regimes maintained many of the institutions and laws of the late empire, including Christianity and assimilation into the evolving Roman culture.\nThe Byzantines established an occidental province, Spania, in the south, with the intention of reviving Roman rule throughout Iberia. Eventually, however, Hispania was reunited under Visigothic rule.\nMuslim era and \"Reconquista\".\nFrom 711 to 718, as part of the expansion of the Umayyad Caliphate which had conquered North Africa from the Byzantine Empire, nearly all of the Iberian Peninsula was conquered by Muslims from across the Strait of Gibraltar, resulting in the collapse of the Visigothic Kingdom. Only a small area in the mountainous north of the peninsula stood out of the territory seized during the initial invasion. The Kingdom of Asturias-Le\u00f3n consolidated upon this territory. Other Christian kingdoms, such as Navarre and Aragon in the mountainous north, eventually surged upon the consolidation of counties of the Carolingian \"Marca Hispanica\". For several centuries, the fluctuating frontier between the Muslim and Christian-controlled areas of the peninsula was along the Ebro and Douro valleys.\nConversion to Islam proceeded at an increasing pace. The \"mulad\u00edes\" (Muslims of ethnic Iberian origin) are believed to have formed the majority of the population of Al-Andalus by the end of the 10th century. A series of Viking incursions raided the coasts of the Iberian Peninsula in the 9th and 10th centuries. The first recorded Viking raid on Iberia took place in 844. Seville was pillaged. It ended in failure with many Vikings killed by the Galicians' ballistas. Seventy of the Vikings' longships captured on the beach and burned by the troops of King Ramiro I of Asturias. In the 11th century, the Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba collapsed, fracturing into a series of petty kingdoms (\"Taifas\"), often subject to the payment of a form of protection money (\"Parias\") to the Northern Christian kingdoms, which otherwise undertook a southward territorial expansion. The capture of the strategic city of Toledo in 1085 marked a significant shift in the balance of power in favour of the Christian kingdoms. The arrival from North Africa of the Islamic ruling sects of the Almoravids and the Almohads achieved temporary unity upon the Muslim-ruled territory, with a stricter, less tolerant application of Islam, and partially reversed some Christian territorial gains.\nThe Kingdom of Le\u00f3n was the strongest Christian kingdom for centuries. In 1188, the first form (restricted to the bishops, the magnates, and 'the elected citizens of each city') of modern parliamentary session in Europe was held in Le\u00f3n (Cortes of Le\u00f3n). The Kingdom of Castile, formed from Leonese territory, was its successor as the strongest kingdom. The kings and the nobility fought for power and influence in this period. The example of the Roman emperors influenced the political objective of the Crown, while the nobles benefited from feudalism.\nMuslim strongholds in the Guadalquivir Valley such as C\u00f3rdoba (1236) and Seville (1248) fell to Castile in the 13th century. The County of Barcelona and the Kingdom of Aragon entered in a dynastic union and gained territory and power in the Mediterranean. In 1229, Mallorca was conquered, as was Valencia in 1238. In the 13th and 14th centuries, the North-African Marinids established some enclaves around the Strait of Gibraltar. Upon the conclusion of the Granada War, the Nasrid Sultanate of Granada (the remaining Muslim-ruled polity in the Iberian Peninsula after 1246) capitulated in 1492 to the military strength of the Catholic Monarchs, and it was integrated from then on in the Crown of Castile.\nSpanish Empire.\nIn 1469, the crowns of the Christian kingdoms of Castile and Aragon were united by the marriage of their monarchs, Isabella I and Ferdinand II, respectively. In 1492, as part of the Spanish Inquisition, Jews were forced to choose between conversion to Catholicism or expulsion; as many as 200,000 Jews were expelled from Castile and Aragon. The year 1492 also marked the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the New World, during a voyage funded by Isabella. Columbus's first voyage crossed the Atlantic and reached the Caribbean Islands, beginning the European exploration and conquest of the Americas.\nThe Treaty of Granada guaranteed religious tolerance towards Muslims, for a few years before Islam was outlawed in 1502 in Castile and 1527 in Aragon, leading the remaining Muslim population to become nominally Christian \"Moriscos\". About four decades after the War of the Alpujarras (1568\u20131571), over 300,000 \"moriscos\" were expelled, settling primarily in North Africa.\nThe unification of the crowns of Aragon and Castile by the marriage of their sovereigns laid the basis for modern Spain and the Spanish Empire, although each kingdom of Spain remained a separate country socially, politically, legally, and in currency and language.\nHabsburg Spain was one of the leading world powers throughout the 16th century and most of the 17th century, a position reinforced by trade and wealth from colonial possessions and became the world's leading maritime power. It reached its apogee during the reigns of the first two Spanish Habsburgs\u2014Charles V/I (1516\u20131556) and Philip II (1556\u20131598). This period saw the Spanish conquest of the Aztec and Inca empires, the Italian Wars, the Schmalkaldic War, the Dutch Revolt, the War of the Portuguese Succession, clashes with the Ottomans, intervention in the French Wars of Religion, and the Anglo-Spanish War.\nThrough exploration and conquest or royal marriage alliances and inheritance, the Spanish Empire expanded across vast areas in the Americas, the Indo-Pacific, Africa as well as the European continent, including holdings in the Italian Peninsula, the Low Countries and the Franche-Comt\u00e9. The so-called Age of Discovery featured explorations by sea and by land, the opening-up of new trade routes across oceans, conquests and the beginnings of European colonialism. Precious metals, spices, luxuries, and previously unknown plants brought to the metropole played a leading part in transforming the European understanding of the globe. \nThe cultural efflorescence witnessed during this period is now referred to as the Spanish Golden Age. The expansion of the empire caused immense upheaval in the Americas as the collapse of societies and empires and new diseases from Europe devastated American indigenous populations. The rise of humanism, the Counter-Reformation and new geographical discoveries and conquests raised issues that were addressed by the intellectual movement now known as the School of Salamanca, which developed the first modern theories of what are now known as international law and human rights.\nSpain's 16th-century maritime supremacy was demonstrated by the victory over the Ottoman Empire at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571 and over Portugal at the Battle of Ponta Delgada in 1582, and then after the setback of the Spanish Armada in 1588, in a series of victories against England in the Anglo-Spanish War of 1585\u20131604. In the middle decades of the 17th century, Spain's maritime power went into a long decline with mounting defeats against the Dutch Republic (Battle of the Downs) and then England in the Anglo-Spanish War of 1654\u20131660. By the 1660s, Spain was struggling to defend its overseas possessions from pirates and privateers.\nThe Protestant Reformation increased Spain's involvement in religiously charged wars, forcing ever-expanding military efforts across Europe and in the Mediterranean. By the middle decades of a war- and plague-ridden 17th-century Europe, the Spanish Habsburgs had enmeshed Spain in continent-wide religious-political conflicts. These conflicts drained Spain of resources and undermined the economy generally. Spain managed to hold on to most of the scattered Habsburg empire, and help the imperial forces of the Holy Roman Empire reverse a large part of the advances made by Protestant forces.\nSpain was finally forced to recognise the separation of Portugal and the United Provinces (Dutch Republic), and eventually suffered some serious military reverses to France in the latter stages of the immensely destructive, Europe-wide Thirty Years' War. In the latter half of the 17th century, Spain went into a gradual decline, during which it surrendered several small territories to France and England; however, it maintained and enlarged its vast overseas empire, which remained intact until the beginning of the 19th century.\n18th century.\nThe decline culminated in a controversy over succession to the throne, which consumed the first years of the 18th century. The War of the Spanish Succession was a wide-ranging international conflict combined with a civil war, and cost the kingdom its European possessions and its position as a leading European power.\nDuring this war, a new dynasty originating in France, the Bourbons, was installed. The Crowns of Castile and Aragon had been long united only by the Monarchy and the common institution of the Inquisition's Holy Office. A number of reform policies, the so-called Bourbon Reforms, were pursued by the Monarchy with the overarching goal of centralised authority and administrative uniformity. They included the abolishment of many of the old regional privileges and laws, as well as the customs barrier between the Crowns of Aragon and Castile in 1717, followed by the introduction of new property taxes in the Aragonese kingdoms.\nThe 18th century saw a gradual recovery and an increase in prosperity through much of the Spanish empire. The predominant economic policy was an interventionist one, and the State also pursued policies aiming towards infrastructure development as well as the abolition of internal customs and the reduction of export tariffs. Projects of agricultural colonisation with new settlements took place in the south of mainland Spain. Enlightenment ideas began to gain ground among some of the kingdom's elite and monarchy.\nLiberalism and nation state.\nIn 1793, Spain went to war against the revolutionary new French Republic as a member of the first Coalition. The subsequent War of the Pyrenees polarised the country in a reaction against the gallicised elites and following defeat in the field, peace was made with France in 1795 at the Peace of Basel in which Spain lost control over two-thirds of the island of Hispaniola. In 1807, a secret treaty between Napoleon and the unpopular prime minister led to a new declaration of war against Britain and Portugal. French troops entered the country to invade Portugal but instead occupied Spain's major fortresses. The Spanish king abdicated and a puppet kingdom satellite to the French Empire was installed with Joseph Bonaparte as king.\nThe 2 May 1808 revolt was one of many uprisings across the country against the French occupation. These revolts marked the beginning of a devastating war of independence against the Napoleonic regime. Further military action by Spanish armies, guerrilla warfare and an Anglo-Portuguese allied army, combined with Napoleon's failure on the Russian front, led to the retreat of French imperial armies from the Iberian Peninsula in 1814, and the return of King Ferdinand VII.\nDuring the war, in 1810, a revolutionary body, the Cortes of C\u00e1diz, was assembled to coordinate the effort against the Bonapartist regime and to prepare a constitution. It met as one body, and its members represented the entire Spanish empire. In 1812, a constitution for universal representation under a constitutional monarchy was declared, but after the fall of the Bonapartist regime, the Spanish king dismissed the Cortes Generales, set on ruling as an absolute monarch.\nThe French occupation of mainland Spain created an opportunity for overseas \"criollo\" elites who resented the privilege towards Peninsular elites and demanded retroversion of the sovereignty to the people. Starting in 1809 the American colonies began a series of revolutions and declared independence, leading to the Spanish American wars of independence that put an end to the metropole's grip over the Spanish Main. Attempts to re-assert control proved futile with opposition not only in the colonies but also in the Iberian peninsula and army revolts followed. By the end of 1826, the only American colonies Spain held were Cuba and Puerto Rico. The Napoleonic War left Spain economically ruined, deeply divided and politically unstable. In the 1830s and 1840s, Carlism (a reactionary legitimist movement supportive of an alternative Bourbon branch), fought against the government forces supportive of Queen Isabella II's dynastic rights in the Carlist Wars. Government forces prevailed, but the conflict between \"progressives\" and \"moderates\" ended in a weak early constitutional period. The 1868 Glorious Revolution was followed by the 1868\u20131874 progressive \"Sexenio Democr\u00e1tico\" (including the short-lived First Spanish Republic), which yielded to a stable monarchic period, the Restoration (1875\u20131931).\nIn the late 19th century nationalist movements arose in the Philippines and Cuba. In 1895 and 1896 the Cuban War of Independence and the Philippine Revolution broke out and eventually the United States became involved. The Spanish\u2013American War was fought from April to August 1898 and resulted in Spain losing the last of its once vast colonial empire outside of North Africa. \"El Desastre\" (the Disaster), as the war became known in Spain, gave added impetus to the Generation of '98. Although the period around the turn of the century was one of increasing prosperity, the 20th century brought little social peace. Spain played a minor part in the scramble for Africa. It remained neutral during World War I. The heavy losses suffered by the colonial troops in conflicts in northern Morocco against Riffians forces brought discredit to the government and undermined the monarchy.\nIndustrialisation, the development of railways and incipient capitalism developed in several areas of the country, particularly in Barcelona, as well as labour movement and socialist and anarchist ideas. The 1870 Barcelona Workers' Congress and the 1888 Barcelona Universal Exposition are good examples of this. In 1879, the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party was founded. A trade union linked to this party, Uni\u00f3n General de Trabajadores, was founded in 1888. In the anarcho-syndicalist trend of the labour movement in Spain, Confederaci\u00f3n Nacional del Trabajo was founded in 1910 and Federaci\u00f3n Anarquista Ib\u00e9rica in 1927. Catalanism and Vasquism, alongside other nationalisms and regionalisms in Spain, arose in that period: the Basque Nationalist Party formed in 1895 and Regionalist League of Catalonia in 1901. Political corruption and repression weakened the democratic system of the constitutional monarchy of a two-parties system. The July 1909 Tragic Week events and repression exemplified the social instability of the time. The La Canadiense strike in 1919 led to the first law limiting the working day to eight hours.\nAfter a period of Crown-supported dictatorship from 1923 to 1931, the first elections since 1923, largely understood as a plebiscite on Monarchy, took place: the 12 April 1931 municipal elections. These gave a resounding victory to the Republican-Socialist candidacies in large cities and provincial capitals, with a majority of monarchist councilors in rural areas. The king left the country and the proclamation of the Republic on 14 April ensued, with the formation of a provisional government. A constitution for the country was passed in October 1931 following the June 1931 Constituent general election, and a series of cabinets presided by Manuel Aza\u00f1a supported by republican parties and the PSOE followed. In the election held in 1933 the right triumphed and in 1936, the left. During the Second Republic there was a great political and social upheaval, marked by a sharp radicalisation of the left and the right. Instances of political violence during this period included the burning of churches, the 1932 failed coup d'\u00e9tat led by Jos\u00e9 Sanjurjo, the Revolution of 1934 and numerous attacks against rival political leaders. On the other hand, it is also during the Second Republic when important reforms to modernise the country were initiated: a democratic constitution, agrarian reform, restructuring of the army, political decentralisation and women's right to vote.\nCivil War and Francoist dictatorship.\nThe Spanish Civil War broke out in 1936: on 17 and 18 July, part of the military carried out a coup d'\u00e9tat that triumphed in only part of the country. The situation led to a civil war, in which the territory was divided into two zones: one under the authority of the Republican government, that counted on outside support from the Soviet Union and Mexico (and from International Brigades), and the other controlled by the putschists (the Nationalist or rebel faction), most critically supported by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. The Republic was not supported by the Western powers due to the British-led policy of non-intervention. General Francisco Franco was sworn in as the supreme leader of the rebels on 1 October 1936. An uneasy relationship between the Republican government and the grassroots anarchists who had initiated a partial social revolution also ensued.\nThe civil war was viciously fought and there were many atrocities committed by all sides. The war claimed the lives of over 500,000 people and caused the flight of up to a half-million citizens from the country. On 1 April 1939, five months before the beginning of World War II, the rebel side led by Franco emerged victorious, imposing a dictatorship over the whole country. Thousands were imprisoned after the civil war in Francoist concentration camps.\nThe regime remained nominally \"neutral\" for much of the Second World War, although it was sympathetic to the Axis and provided the Nazi Wehrmacht with Spanish volunteers in the Eastern Front. The only legal party under Franco's dictatorship was the Falange Espa\u00f1ola Tradicionalista y de las JONS (FET y de las JONS), formed in 1937 upon the merging of the Fascist Falange Espa\u00f1ola de las JONS and the Carlist traditionalists and to which the rest of right-wing groups supporting the rebels also added. The name of \"Movimiento Nacional\", sometimes understood as a wider structure than the FET y de las JONS proper, largely imposed over the later's name in official documents along the 1950s.\nAfter the war Spain was politically and economically isolated, and was kept out of the United Nations. This changed in 1955, during the Cold War period, when it became strategically important for the US to establish a military presence on the Iberian Peninsula as a counter to any possible move by the Soviet Union into the Mediterranean basin. US Cold War strategic priorities included the dissemination of American educational ideas to foster modernisation and expansion. In the 1960s, Spain registered an unprecedented rate of economic growth which was propelled by industrialisation, a mass internal migration from rural areas to Madrid, Barcelona and the Basque Country and the creation of a mass tourism industry. Franco's rule was also characterised by authoritarianism, promotion of a unitary national identity, National Catholicism, and discriminatory language policies.\nRestoration of democracy.\nIn 1962, a group of politicians involved in the opposition to Franco's regime inside the country and in exile met in the congress of the European Movement in Munich, where they made a resolution in favour of democracy. With Franco's death in November 1975, Juan Carlos succeeded to the position of King of Spain and head of state in accordance with the Francoist law. With the approval of the new Spanish Constitution of 1978 and the restoration of democracy, the State devolved much authority to the regions and created an internal organisation based on autonomous communities. The Spanish 1977 Amnesty Law let people of Franco's regime continue inside institutions without consequences, even perpetrators of some crimes during transition to democracy like the Massacre of 3 March 1976 in Vitoria or 1977 Massacre of Atocha.\nIn the Basque Country, moderate Basque nationalism coexisted with a radical nationalist movement led by the armed organisation ETA until the latter's dissolution in May 2018. The group was formed in 1959 during Franco's rule but had continued to wage its violent campaign even after the restoration of democracy and the return of a large measure of regional autonomy.\nOn 23 February 1981, rebel elements among the security forces seized the Cortes in an attempt to impose a military-backed government. King Juan Carlos took personal command of the military and successfully ordered the coup plotters, via national television, to surrender.\nDuring the 1980s the democratic restoration made possible a growing open society. New cultural movements based on freedom appeared, like La Movida Madrile\u00f1a. In May 1982 Spain joined NATO, followed by a referendum after a strong social opposition. That year the Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE) came to power, the first left-wing government in 43 years. In 1986 Spain joined the European Economic Community, which later became the European Union. The PSOE was replaced in government by the Partido Popular (PP) in 1996 after scandals around participation of the government of Felipe Gonz\u00e1lez in the Dirty war against ETA.\nEconomic prosperity and crash.\nOn 1 January 2002, Spain fully adopted the euro, and Spain experienced strong economic growth, well above the EU average during the early 2000s. However, well-publicised concerns issued by many economic commentators at the height of the boom warned that extraordinary property prices and a high foreign trade deficit were likely to lead to a painful economic collapse.\nIn 2002, the Prestige oil spill occurred with big ecological consequences along Spain's Atlantic coastline. In 2003 Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Aznar supported US president George W. Bush in the Iraq War, and a strong movement against war rose in Spanish society. In March 2004 a local Islamist terrorist group inspired by Al-Qaeda carried out the largest terrorist attack in Western European history when they killed 191 people and wounded more than 1,800 others by bombing commuter trains in Madrid. Though initial suspicions focused on the Basque terrorist group ETA, evidence of Islamist involvement soon emerged. Because of the proximity of the 2004 Spanish general election, the issue of responsibility quickly became a political controversy, with the main competing parties PP and PSOE exchanging accusations over the handling of the incident. The PSOE won the election, led by Jos\u00e9 Luis Rodr\u00edguez Zapatero.\nIn the early 2000s, the proportion of Spain's foreign born population increased rapidly during its economic boom but then declined due to the 2008 financial crisis. In 2005, the Spanish government legalised same sex marriage, becoming the third country worldwide to do so. Decentralisation was supported with much resistance of Constitutional Court and conservative opposition, so did gender politics like quotas or the law against gender violence. Government talks with ETA happened, and the group announced its permanent cease of violence in 2010.\nThe bursting of the Spanish property bubble in 2008 led to the 2008\u20132014 Spanish financial crisis. High levels of unemployment, cuts in government spending and corruption in Royal family and People's Party served as a backdrop to the 2011\u201312 Spanish protests. Catalan independentism also rose. In 2011, Mariano Rajoy's conservative People's Party won the election with 44.6% of votes. As prime minister, he implemented austerity measures for EU bailout, the EU Stability and Growth Pact. On 19 June 2014, the monarch, Juan Carlos, abdicated in favour of his son, who became Felipe VI.\nConstitutional issues.\nIn October 2017 a Catalan independence referendum was held and the Catalan parliament voted to unilaterally declare independence from Spain to form a Catalan Republic on the day the Spanish Senate was discussing approving direct rule over Catalonia as called for by the Spanish Prime Minister. On the same day the Senate granted the power to impose direct rule and Rajoy dissolved the Catalan parliament and called a new election. No country recognised Catalonia as a separate state.\nIn June 2018, the Congress of Deputies passed a motion of no-confidence against Rajoy and replaced him with the PSOE leader Pedro S\u00e1nchez. In 2019, the first ever coalition government in Spain was formed, between PSOE and Unidas Podemos. Between 2018 and 2024, Spain faced an institutional crisis surrounding the mandate of the General Council of the Judiciary (CGPJ), until finally the mandate got renovated. In January 2020, the COVID-19 virus was confirmed to have spread to Spain, causing life expectancy to drop by more than a year. The European Commission economic recovery package Next Generation EU was created to support the EU member states to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, and will be in use in the period 2021\u20132026. In March 2021, Spain became the sixth nation in the world to make active euthanasia legal. \nFollowing the general election on 23 July 2023, Prime Minister Pedro S\u00e1nchez once again formed a coalition government, this time with Sumar (successors of Unidas Podemos).\nIn 2024, the first non-independentist Catalan regional president in over a decade, Salvador Illa, was elected, normalising the constitutional and institutional relations between the national and the regional administrations. According to latest polls, only 17.3% of Catalans feel themselves as \"only Catalan\". 46% of Catalans would answer \"as Spanish as Catalan\", while 21.8% \"more Catalan than Spanish\". Accordind to a 2024 poll of University of Barcelona, over 50% of Catalans would vote against independence, while less than 40% would vote in favour.\nGeography.\nAt , Spain is the world's fiftieth largest country and Europe's fourth largest country. At , Mount Teide (Tenerife) is the highest mountain peak in Spain and is the third largest volcano in the world from its base. Spain is a transcontinental country, having territory in both Europe and Africa.\nSpain lies between latitudes 27\u00b0 and 44\u00b0 N, and longitudes 19\u00b0 W and 5\u00b0 E.\nOn the west, Spain is bordered by Portugal; on the south, it is bordered by Gibraltar and Morocco, through its exclaves in North Africa (Ceuta and Melilla, and the peninsula of de V\u00e9lez de la Gomera). On the northeast, along the Pyrenees mountain range, it is bordered by France and Andorra. Along the Pyrenees in Girona, a small exclave town called Ll\u00edvia is surrounded by France.\nExtending to , the Portugal\u2013Spain border is the longest uninterrupted border within the European Union.\nIslands.\nSpain also includes the Balearic Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, the Canary Islands in the Atlantic Ocean and a number of uninhabited islands on the Mediterranean side of the Strait of Gibraltar, known as (\"places of sovereignty\", or territories under Spanish sovereignty), such as the Chafarinas Islands and Alhucemas. The peninsula of de V\u00e9lez de la Gomera is also regarded as a \"plaza de soberan\u00eda\". The isle of Albor\u00e1n, located in the Mediterranean between Spain and North Africa, is also administered by Spain, specifically by the municipality of Almer\u00eda, Andalusia. The little Pheasant Island in the River Bidasoa is a Spanish-French condominium.\nThere are 11 major islands in Spain, all of them having their own governing bodies (Cabildos insulares in the Canaries, Consells insulars in Baleares). These islands are specifically mentioned by the Spanish Constitution, when fixing its Senatorial representation (Ibiza and Formentera are grouped, as they together form the Pityusic islands, part of the Balearic archipelago). These islands include Tenerife, Gran Canaria, Lanzarote, Fuerteventura, La Palma, La Gomera and El Hierro in the Canarian archipelago and Mallorca, Ibiza, Menorca and Formentera in the Balearic archipelago.\nMountains and rivers.\nMainland Spain is a rather mountainous landmass, dominated by high plateaus and mountain chains. After the Pyrenees, the main mountain ranges are the Cordillera Cant\u00e1brica (Cantabrian Range), Sistema Ib\u00e9rico (Iberian System), Sistema Central (Central System), Montes de Toledo, Sierra Morena and the Sistema B\u00e9tico (Baetic System) whose highest peak, the Mulhac\u00e9n, located in Sierra Nevada, is the highest elevation in the Iberian Peninsula. The highest point in Spain is the Teide, a active volcano in the Canary Islands. The Meseta Central (often translated as 'Inner Plateau') is a vast plateau in the heart of peninsular Spain split in two by the Sistema Central.\nThere are several major rivers in Spain such as the Tagus (\"Tajo\"), Ebro, Guadiana, Douro (\"Duero\"), Guadalquivir, J\u00facar, Segura, Turia and Minho (\"Mi\u00f1o\"). Alluvial plains are found along the coast, the largest of which is that of the Guadalquivir in Andalusia.\nClimate.\nThree main climatic zones can be separated, according to geographical situation and orographic conditions:\nApart from these main types, other sub-types can be found, like the alpine climate in areas with very high altitude, the humid subtropical climate in areas of northeastern Spain and the continental climates (\"Dfc\", \"Dfb\" / \"Dsc\", \"Dsb\") in the Pyrenees as well as parts of the Cantabrian Range, the Central System, Sierra Nevada and the Iberian System, and a typical desert climate (\"BWk\", \"BWh\") in the zone of Almer\u00eda, Murcia and eastern Canary Islands. Low-lying areas of the Canary Islands average above during their coolest month, thus having influences of tropical climate, although they cannot properly be classified as tropical climates, as according to AEMET, their aridity is high, thus belonging to an arid or semi-arid climate.\nSpain is one of the countries that is most affected by the climate change in Europe. In Spain, which already has a hot and dry climate, extreme events such as heatwaves are becoming increasingly frequent. The country is also experiencing more episodes of drought and increased severity of these episodes. Water resources will be severely affected in various climate change scenarios. To mitigate the effects of climate change, Spain is promoting an energy transition to renewable energies, such as solar and wind energy.\nFauna and flora.\nThe fauna presents a wide diversity that is due in large part to the geographical position of the Iberian peninsula between the Atlantic and the Mediterranean and between Africa and Eurasia, and the great diversity of habitats and biotopes, the result of a considerable variety of climates and well differentiated regions.\nThe vegetation of Spain is varied due to several factors including the diversity of the terrain, the climate and latitude. Spain includes different phytogeographic regions, each with its own floral characteristics resulting largely from the interaction of climate, topography, soil type and fire, and biotic factors. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.23/10, ranking it 130th globally out of 172 countries.\nWithin the European territory, Spain has the largest number of plant species (7,600 vascular plants) of all European countries.\nIn Spain there are 17.804 billion trees and an average of 284 million more grow each year.\nPolitics.\nThe constitutional history of Spain dates back to the constitution of 1812. In June 1976, Spain's new King Juan Carlos dismissed Carlos Arias Navarro and appointed the reformer Adolfo Su\u00e1rez as Prime Minister. The resulting general election in 1977 convened the \"Constituent Cortes\" (the Spanish Parliament, in its capacity as a constitutional assembly) for the purpose of drafting and approving the constitution of 1978. After a national referendum on 6 December 1978, 88% of voters approved of the new constitution. As a result, Spain successfully transitioned from a one-party personalist dictatorship to a multiparty parliamentary democracy composed of 17 autonomous communities and two autonomous cities. These regions enjoy varying degrees of autonomy thanks to the Spanish Constitution, which nevertheless explicitly states the indivisible unity of the Spanish nation.\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Spain performs in the high range on overall democratic measures, with particular strengths in inclusive suffrage and access to justice.\nGovernance.\nThe Crown.\nThe Spanish Constitution provides for a separation of powers between five branches of government, which it refers to as \"basic State institutions\". Foremost amongst these institutions is the Crown (\"La Corona\"), the symbol of the Spanish state and its permanence. Spain's \"parliamentary monarchy\" is a constitutional one whereby the reigning king or queen is the living embodiment of the Crown and thus head of state. \nUnlike in some other constitutional monarchies, namely the likes of Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Norway, or the United Kingdom, the monarch is not the fount of national sovereignty or even the \"nominal\" chief executive. Rather, the Crown, as an institution, \"...arbitrates and moderates the regular functioning of the institutions...\" of the Spanish state. As such, the monarch resolves disputes between the disparate branches, mediates constitutional crises, and prevents abuses of power.\nIn these respects, the Crown constitutes a fifth moderating branch that does not make public policy or administer public services, functions which rightfully rest with Spain's duly elected legislatures and governments at both the national and regional level. Instead, the Crown personifies the democratic Spanish state, sanctions legitimate authority, ensures the legality of means, and guarantees the execution of the public will. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe independence of the Crown, its political neutrality and its wish to embrace and reconcile the different ideological standpoints enable it to contribute to the stability of our political system, facilitating a balance with the other constitutional and territorial bodies, promoting the orderly functioning of the State and providing a channel for cohesion among Spaniards.\nKing Felipe VI, 2014\nPut another way, the monarch fosters national unity at home, represents Spaniards abroad (especially with regard to nations of their historical community), facilitates the orderly operation and continuity of the Spanish government, defends representative democracy, and upholds the rule of law. In other words, the Crown is the guardian of the Spanish constitution and of the rights and freedoms of all Spaniards. This stabilising role is in keeping with the monarch's solemn oath upon accession \"...to faithfully carry out [my] duties, to obey the Constitution and the laws and ensure that they are obeyed, and to respect the rights of citizens and the Self-governing Communities.\"\nA number of constitutional powers, duties, rights, responsibilities, and functions are assigned to the monarch in his or her capacity as head of state. However, the Crown enjoys inviolability in the performance of these prerogatives and cannot be prosecuted in the very courts which administer justice in its name. For this reason, every official act done by the monarch requires the countersignature of the prime minister or, when appropriate, the president of the Congress of Deputies to have the force of law. The countersigning procedure or \"refrendo\" in turn transfers political and legal liability for the royal prerogative to the attesting parties. This provision does not apply to the Royal Household, over which the monarch enjoys absolute control and supervision, or to membership in the Order of the Golden Fleece, which is a dynastic order in the personal gift of the House of Bourbon-Anjou.\nThe royal prerogatives may be classified by whether they are ministerial functions or reserve powers. Ministerial functions are those royal prerogatives that are, pursuant to the convention established by Juan Carlos I, performed by the monarch after soliciting the advice of the Government, the Congress of Deputies, the Senate, the General Council of the Judiciary, or the Constitutional Tribunal, as the case may be. On the other hand, the reserve powers of the Crown are those royal prerogatives which are exercised in the monarch's personal discretion. Most of the Crown's royal prerogatives are ministerial in practice, meaning the monarch has no discretion in their execution and primarily performs them as a matter of state ceremonial. Nevertheless, when performing said ministerial functions, the monarch has the right to be consulted before acting on advice, the right to encourage a particular course of policy or action, and the right to warn the responsible constitutional authorities against the same. Those ministerial functions are as follows:\nThe aforesaid limitations do not apply to the exercise of the Crown's reserve powers, which may be invoked by the monarch when necessary to maintain the continuity and stability of state institutions. For example, the monarch has the right to be kept informed on affairs of state through regular audiences with the Government. For this purpose, the monarch may preside at any time over meetings of the Council of Ministers, but only when requested by the prime minister. The monarch may prematurely dissolve the Congress of Deputies, the Senate, or both houses of the Cortes in their entirety before the expiration of their four-year term and, in consequence thereof, concurrently call for snap elections. The monarch exercises this prerogative on the request of the prime minister, after the matter has been discussed by the Council of Ministers. The monarch may choose to accept or refuse the request. The monarch may also order national referendums on the request of the prime minister, but only with the prior authorisation of the Cortes Generales. Again, the monarch may choose to accept or refuse the prime minister's request.\nThe Crown's reserve powers further extend into constitutional interpretation and the administration of justice. The monarch appoints the 20 members of the General Council of the Judiciary. Of these counselors, twelve are nominated by the supreme, appellate and trial courts, four are nominated by the Congress of Deputies by a majority of three-fifths of its members, and four are nominated by the Senate with the same majority. The monarch may choose to accept or refuse any nomination. In a similar vein, the monarch appoints the twelve magistrates of the Constitutional Tribunal. Of these magistrates, four magistrates are nominated by the Congress of Deputies by a majority of three-fifths of its members, four magistrates are nominated by the Senate with the same majority, two magistrates are nominated by the Government, and two magistrates are nominated by the General Council of the Judiciary. The monarch may choose to accept or refuse any nomination.\nIt is the monarch's reserve powers concerning Government formation that are perhaps the most frequently exercised. The monarch nominates a candidate for prime minister and, as the case may be, appoints or removes him or her from office based on the prime minister's ability to maintain the confidence of the Congress of Deputies. If the Congress of Deputies fails to give its confidence to a new Government within two months, and is incapable of governing as a result of parliamentary gridlock, the monarch may dissolve the Cortes Generales and call for fresh elections. The monarch makes use of these reserve powers in his own deliberative judgment after consulting the president of the Congress of Deputies.\nCortes Generales.\nLegislative authority vests in the (), a democratically elected bicameral parliament that serves as the supreme representative body of the Spanish people. Aside from the Crown, it is the only basic State institution that enjoys inviolability. It comprises the Congress of Deputies (\"Congreso de los Diputados\"), a lower house with 350 deputies, and the Senate (\"Senado\"), an upper house with 266 senators. \nDeputies are elected by popular vote on closed lists via proportional representation to serve four-year terms. 208 senators are directly elected by popular vote using a limited voting method, with the remaining 58 senators appointed by the regional legislatures to also serve four-year terms.\nGovernment.\nExecutive authority rests with the Government (\"Gobierno de Espa\u00f1a\"), which is collectively responsible to the Congress of Deputies. It consists of the prime minister, one or more deputy prime ministers, and the ministers of state. These characters together constitute the Council of Ministers which, as Spain's central executive authority, conducts the business of the Government and administers the civil service. The Government remains in office so long as it can maintain the confidence of the Congress of Deputies.\nThe prime minister, as head of government, has primacy over the other ministers by virtue of his or her ability to advise the monarch as to their appointment and dismissal. The prime minister has plenary authority conferred by the Spanish Constitution to direct and coordinate the Government's policies and administrative actions. The Spanish monarch nominates the prime minister after consulting representatives from the different parliamentary groups and appoints him or her to office upon a vote of investiture in the Congress of Deputies.\nAdministrative divisions.\nAutonomous communities.\nGalicia \nNavarre \nCommunity of&lt;br&gt;Madrid \nLa Rioja \nAragon \nCatalonia \nValencian&lt;br&gt;Community \nCastilla\u2013&lt;br&gt;La Mancha \nExtremadura \n\"Portugal\" \nCastile&lt;br&gt;and Le\u00f3n \nAsturias \nCantabria \nBasqueCountry \nRegion of&lt;br&gt;Murcia \nAndalusia \nCeuta \nMelilla \n\"France\" \nBalearic&lt;br&gt;Islands \nCanary&lt;br&gt;Islands \n\"Mediterranean Sea\" \n\"AtlanticOcean\" \n\"Andorra\" \n\"AtlanticOcean\" \n\"Gibraltar (UK)\" \n\"Morocco\" \nSpain's autonomous communities are the first level administrative divisions of the country. They were created after the 1978 constitution came into effect in recognition of the right to self-government of the \"\"nationalities\" and regions of Spain\". The autonomous communities were to comprise adjacent provinces with common historical, cultural, and economic traits. This territorial organisation, based on devolution, is known in Spain as the \"State of Autonomies\" (\"Estado de las Autonom\u00edas\"). \nThe basic institutional law of each autonomous community is the Statute of Autonomy. The Statutes of Autonomy establish the name of the community according to its historical and contemporary identity, the limits of its territories, the name and organisation of the institutions of government and the rights they enjoy according to the constitution. This ongoing process of devolution means that, while officially a unitary state, Spain is nevertheless one of the most decentralised countries in Europe, along with federations like Belgium, Germany, and Switzerland.\nCatalonia, Galicia and the Basque Country, which identified themselves as \"nationalities\", were granted self-government through a rapid process. Andalusia also identified itself as a nationality in its first Statute of Autonomy, even though it followed the longer process stipulated in the constitution for the rest of the country. Progressively, other communities in revisions to their Statutes of Autonomy have also taken that denomination in accordance with their historical and modern identities, such as the Valencian Community, the Canary Islands, the Balearic Islands, and Aragon.\nThe autonomous communities have wide legislative and executive autonomy, with their own elected parliaments and governments as well as their own dedicated public administrations. The distribution of powers may be different for every community, as laid out in their Statutes of Autonomy, since devolution was intended to be asymmetrical. For instance, only two communities\u2014the Basque Country and Navarre\u2014have full fiscal autonomy based on ancient foral provisions. Each autonomous community is responsible for healthcare and education, among other public services. \nBeyond these competencies, the \"nationalities\"\u2014Andalusia, the Basque Country, Catalonia, and Galicia\u2014were also devolved more powers than the rest of the communities, among them the ability of the regional president to dissolve the parliament and call for elections at any time. In addition, the Basque Country, the Canary Islands, Catalonia, and Navarre each have autonomous police corps of their own: \"Ertzaintza\", \"Polic\u00eda Canaria\", \"Mossos d'Esquadra\", and \"Polic\u00eda Foral\" respectively. Other communities have more limited forces or none at all, like the \"Polic\u00eda Aut\u00f3noma Andaluza\" in Andalusia or BESCAM in Madrid.\nProvinces and municipalities.\nAutonomous communities are divided into provinces, which served as their territorial building blocks. Provinces are divided into municipalities. The existence of both the provinces and the municipalities is guaranteed and protected by the constitution, not necessarily by the Statutes of Autonomy themselves. Municipalities are granted autonomy to manage their internal affairs. Provinces are the territorial divisions designed to carry out the activities of the State.\nThe current provincial division structure is based\u2014with minor changes\u2014on the 1833 territorial division by Javier de Burgos. The Spanish territory is divided into 50 provinces. The communities of Asturias, Cantabria, La Rioja, the Balearic Islands, Madrid, Murcia and Navarre are the only communities that comprise a single province, which is coextensive with the community itself. In these cases, the administrative institutions of the province are replaced by the governmental institutions of the community.\nForeign relations.\nAfter the return of democracy following the death of Franco in 1975, Spain's foreign policy priorities were to break out of the diplomatic isolation of the Franco years and expand diplomatic relations, enter the European Community, and define security relations with the West.\nAs a member of NATO since 1982, Spain has established itself as a participant in multilateral international security activities. Spain's EU membership represents an important part of its foreign policy. On a wide range of issues, Spain often prefers to coordinate its efforts with its EU partners through the European political cooperation mechanisms. In addition to being represented via EU membership, Spain is a permanently invited guest to all G20 summits.\nSpain has maintained its special relations with Hispanic America and the Philippines. Its policy emphasises the concept of an Ibero-American community, essentially the renewal of the concept of \"Hispanidad\" or \"Hispanismo\", as it is often referred to in English, which has sought to link the Iberian Peninsula with Hispanic America through language, commerce, history and culture. It is fundamentally \"based on shared values and the recovery of democracy.\"\nSpain is involved in a number of territorial disputes. Spain claims Gibraltar, an Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom, in the southernmost part of the Iberian Peninsula. Another dispute surrounds the Savage Islands; Spain claims that they are rocks rather than islands, and therefore does not accept the Portuguese Exclusive Economic Zone (200 nautical miles) generated by the islands. Spain claims sovereignty over the Perejil Island, a small, uninhabited rocky islet located in the South shore of the Strait of Gibraltar. It was the subject of an armed incident between Spain and Morocco in 2002. Morocco claims the Spanish cities of Ceuta and Melilla and the \"plazas de soberan\u00eda\" islets off the northern coast of Africa. Portugal does not recognise Spain's sovereignty over the territory of Olivenza.\nMilitary.\nThe Spanish Armed Forces are divided into three branches: Army (\"Ej\u00e9rcito de Tierra\"); Navy (\"Armada\"); and Air and Space Force (\"Ej\u00e9rcito del Aire y del Espacio\").\nThe armed forces of Spain are known as the Spanish Armed Forces (\"Fuerzas Armadas Espa\u00f1olas\"). Their commander-in-chief is the King of Spain, Felipe VI. The next military authorities in line are the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defence. The fourth military authority of the State is the Chief of the Defence Staff (JEMAD). The Defence Staff (\"Estado Mayor de la Defensa\") assists the JEMAD as auxiliary body.\nThe Spanish armed forces are a professional force with a strength in 2017 of 121,900 active personnel and 4,770 reserve personnel. Spain also has the 77,000 strong Civil Guard which comes under the control of the Ministry of defence in times of a national emergency. In 2015, the Spanish defence budget was 5.71 billion euros (US$7.2 billion), with a 1% increase. The increase comes because of security concerns. Military conscription ended in 2001.\nAccording to the 2024 Global Peace Index, Spain is the 23rd most peaceful country in the world.\nHuman rights.\nThe Spanish Constitution of 1978 \"protect all Spaniards and all the peoples of Spain in the exercise of human rights, their cultures and traditions, languages and institutions\". According to Amnesty International (AI), government investigations of alleged police abuses are often lengthy and punishments were light. Violence against women was a problem, which the Government took steps to address. Spain provides one of the highest degrees of liberty in the world for its LGBT community. Among the countries studied by Pew Research in 2013, Spain is rated first in acceptance of homosexuality, with 88% of those surveyed saying that homosexuality should be accepted.\nThe Cortes Generales approved the \"Gender Equality Act\" in 2007 aimed at furthering equality between genders in Spanish political and economic life. According to Inter-Parliamentary Union data for September 2018, 137 of the 350 members of the Congress were women (39.1%), while in the Senate, there were 101 women out of 266 (39.9%), placing Spain 16th on their list of countries ranked by proportion of women in the lower (or single) House. In 2008, the Gender Empowerment Measure of Spain in the United Nations Human Development Report was 0.794, 12th in the world.\nEconomy.\nSpain has a mixed economy that combines elements of free-market capitalism with social welfare and state intervention. It is one of 19 countries with a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) exceeding $1 trillion per year, ranking 12th largest worldwide and fourth largest both in the European Union and within the eurozone. Spain is classified as a high-income economy by the World Bank and an advanced economy by the International Monetary Fund. As of 2024, it is the fastest growing major advanced economy in the world, growing nearly four times higher than the eurozone average.\nSpain began industrialising in the late 18th century, albeit more gradually and unevenly than other European countries; industry was limited mostly to Catalonia (primarily textile manufacturing) and the Basque Country (iron and steel production). Overall economic growth was slower than in most major western European countries, and Spain remained relatively underdeveloped by the early 20th century. The Spanish Civil War, followed by failed autarkic and interventionist policies that were worsened by international isolation, left the economy on the brink of collapse by the late 1950s. Technocratic reforms were enacted to avert the crisis, laying the groundwork for the Spanish economic miracle, a period of rapid growth from 1960 until 1974, during which Spain's economy grew an average of 6.6 percent per year, exceeding every country except Japan.\nSince its transition to democracy in the late 1970s, Spain has generally sought to liberalise its economy and deepen regional and international integration. It joined the European Economic Community\u2014now the European Union\u2014in 1986 and implemented policies and reforms that allowed for its participation in the inaugural launch of the euro in 1999. Spain's largest trade and investment partners are within the EU and eurozone, including its four largest export markets; EU membership also coincided with a tripling of foreign direct investment from 1990 to 2000. Spain was among the countries affected most by the 2008 financial crisis and subsequent European debt crisis, leading to the 2008\u20132014 Spanish financial crisis.\nSpain has long struggled with high unemployment, which has never fallen below 8 percent since the 1980s; it stood at 10.45 percent in October 2025. Youth unemployment is particularly severe by both global and regional standards; at 24.90 percent (as of January 2025), it is the highest among EU members and well above the EU average of 14.6 percent. Perennial weak points of Spain's economy include a large informal economy; an education system that performs poorly compared to most developed countries; and low rates of private sector investment.\nSince the 1990s, which saw a wave of privatisations, several Spanish companies have reached multinational status; they maintain a strong and leading presence in Latin America\u2014where Spain is the second largest foreign investor after the United States\u2014but have also expanded into Asia, especially China and India. As of 2023, Spain was home to eight of the 500 largest companies in the world by annual revenue, according to the \"Fortune Global 500;\" these include Banco Santander, the 14th-largest banking institution in the world; electric utility Iberdrola, the world's largest renewable energy operator; and , one of the largest telephone operators and mobile network providers. Twenty Spanish companies are listed in the 2023 \"Forbes\" Global 2000 ranking of the 2,000 largest public companies, reflecting diverse sectors such as construction (ACS Group), aviation (ENAIRE), pharmaceuticals (Grifols), and transportation (Ferrovial). Additionally, one of Spain's largest private sector entities is Mondragon Corporation, the world's largest worker-owned cooperative.\nThe automotive industry is one of the largest employers in the country and a major contributor to economic growth, accounting for one-tenth of gross domestic product and 18 percent of total exports (including vehicles and auto-parts). In 2023, Spain produced 2.45 million automobiles\u2014of which over 2.1 million were exported abroad\u2014ranking eighth in the world and second in Europe (after Germany) by total number. In total, 89 percent of vehicles and 60% of auto-parts manufactured in Spain were exported worldwide in 2023; the total external trade surplus of vehicles alone reached \u20ac18.8bn in 2023. Overall, the automotive industry supports nearly 2 million jobs, or 9 percent of the labor force.\nTourism.\nIn 2024, Spain was the second most visited country in the world only behind France, recording 94 million tourists. The international tourist expenditure in 2024 was around 126 billion euros. The headquarters of the World Tourism Organization are located in Madrid.\nSpain's geographic location, popular coastlines, diverse landscapes, historical legacy, vibrant culture, and excellent infrastructure have made the country's international tourist industry among the largest in the world. Tourism in Spain is a major contributor to national economic life, with foreign and domestic tourism contributing to 12.3% of Spain's GDP in 2023.\nCastile and Leon is the Spanish leader in rural tourism linked to its environmental and architectural heritage which it has kept since 2020.\nEnergy.\nIn 2010 Spain became the solar power world leader when it overtook the United States with a massive power station plant called La Florida, near Alvarado, Badajoz. Spain is also Europe's main producer of wind energy. In 2010 its wind turbines generated 16.4% of all electrical energy produced in Spain. On 9 November 2010, wind power reached a historic peak covering 53% of mainland electricity demand and generating 14.2\u00a0GW of power, equivalent to that of 14 nuclear reactors. Other renewable energies used in Spain are hydroelectric, biomass and marine.\nNon-renewable energy sources used in Spain are nuclear (8 operative reactors), gas, coal, and oil. Fossil fuels together generated 58% of Spain's electricity in 2009, just below the OECD mean of 61%. Nuclear power generated another 19%, and wind and hydro about 12% each.\nScience and technology.\nThe Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient\u00edficas (CSIC) is the leading public agency dedicated to scientific research in the country. It ranked as the 5th top governmental scientific institution worldwide (and 32nd overall) in the 2018 SCImago Institutions Rankings. Spain was ranked 29th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nHigher education institutions perform about a 60% of the basic research in the country. Likewise, the contribution of the private sector to R&amp;D expenditures is much lower than in other EU and OECD countries.\nTransport.\nThe Spanish road system is mainly centralised, with six highways connecting Madrid to the Basque Country, Catalonia, Valencia, West Andalusia, Extremadura and Galicia. Additionally, there are highways along the Atlantic (Ferrol to Vigo), Cantabrian (Oviedo to San Sebasti\u00e1n) and Mediterranean (Girona to C\u00e1diz) coasts. Spain aims to put one\u00a0million electric cars on the road by 2014 as part of the government's plan to save energy and boost energy efficiency. The former Minister of Industry Miguel Sebasti\u00e1n said that \"the electric vehicle is the future and the engine of an industrial revolution.\"\nAs of February\u00a02025[ [update]], the Spanish high-speed rail network is the longest HSR network in Europe with and the second longest in the world, after China's. It is linking M\u00e1laga, Seville, Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia and Valladolid, with the trains operated at commercial speeds up to . On average, the Spanish high-speed train is the fastest one in the world, followed by the Japanese bullet train and the French TGV. Regarding punctuality, it is second in the world (98.5% on-time arrival) after the Japanese Shinkansen (99%).\nThere are 49 public airports in Spain. The busiest one is the airport of Madrid (Barajas), with 60\u00a0million passengers in 2023, being the world's 15th busiest airport, as well as the European Union's third busiest. The airport of Barcelona (El Prat) is also important, with 50\u00a0million passengers in 2024, being the world's 30th-busiest airport. Other main airports are located in Mallorca, M\u00e1laga, Las Palmas (Gran Canaria), and Alicante.\nDemographics.\nIn October 2025, Spain had a population of 49,442,844 people as recorded by Spain's \"Instituto Nacional de Estad\u00edstica\". That same month, people born in Spain accounted for 80.13% of the total population. Spain's population density, at 98/km2 (253.8/sq mi), is lower than that of most Western European countries, and its distribution across the territory is highly uneven. With the notable exception of the region surrounding the capital, Madrid, the most densely populated areas are located along the coast. The population of Spain has risen &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 times since 1900, when it stood at 18.6\u00a0million, principally due to the spectacular demographic boom in the 1960s and early 1970s.\nIn 2024, Spain's total fertility rate (TFR) stood at 1.10 children per woman, the second lowest in the European Union after Malta and among the lowest worldwide. This rate is well below the replacement level of 2.1 and contrasts sharply with the historical maximum of 5.11 children per woman recorded in 1865. As a result, Spain has one of the oldest populations globally, with a median age of 46.8 years.\nAfter the birth rate plunged in the 1980s and Spain's population growth rate dropped, the population again trended upward initially upon the return of many Spaniards who had emigrated to other European countries during the 1970s, and more recently, fuelled by large numbers of immigrants who make up more than 19% of the population today: Among non-EU immigrants, they are mainly from Latin America (39%), North Africa (16%), Eastern Europe (15%), and Sub-Saharan Africa (4%).\nIn 2024, the number of foreign residents who acquired Spanish nationality increased by 5.1% to 252,476. The most frequent nationalities of origin were Morocco (42,910), Venezuela (30,403) and Colombia (26,224). Spain has a number of descendants of populations from former colonies, especially Latin America and North Africa. Smaller numbers of immigrants from several Sub-Saharan countries have recently been settling in Spain. There are also sizeable numbers of Asian immigrants, most of whom are of Middle Eastern, South Asian and Chinese origin. The single largest group of immigrants are European; represented by large numbers of Romanians, Britons, Germans, French and others.\nUrbanisation.\nAccording to data from the World Bank, approximately 81.6% of Spain's population lived in urban areas as of 2023, reflecting a continuing trend of urbanisation that has characterised the country's demographic landscape in recent decades. This concentration has contributed to the dominance of urban areas in economic, political, and cultural spheres.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nImmigration.\nAccording to official statistics from the Spanish National Institute of Statistics (INE), as of July 2025, approximately 9.7 million people in Spain were born abroad, accounting for 19.64% of the total population. Among them, over 6.4 million (13.23%) were born outside Europe, and more than 7 million (14.3%) held foreign nationality. By number of immigrants, Spain ranks fourth in Europe and seventh worldwide. \nAs of December 2024, the largest source of immigrants was Morocco (over 1 million), Colombia (856,616), Venezuela (599,769), Romania (532,456), and Ecuador (448,643). Most immigrants come from outside the EU, especially Latin America, with sizeable populations from the United Kingdom, Ukraine, China, Russia, Pakistan, Algeria, and Senegal. \nHistorically a land of emigration, immigration to Spain has increased markedly since the 21st century, with immigrants rising from 1.6% of the population in 1998 to over 12% by 2009; in absolute terms, the number of immigrants grew from 500,000 in 1996 to 5.2 million in 2008. Spain was Europe's top recipient of migrants from 2002 to 2007, with 2.5 million arrivals. In 2005, Spain had the second highest immigration rate in the European Union, after Cyprus, and the highest in absolute numbers, with an amnesty programme increasing the legal immigrant population by 700,000. \nThe high level of immigration is driven by a number of factors, including Spain's cultural ties with Latin America, its geographical position, the porosity of its borders, the large size of its underground economy, and the strength of the agricultural and construction sectors, which demand more low-cost labour than can be offered by the national workforce. A large number of EU residents retire to Spain's Mediterranean coast; in 2008, prior to the onset of the economic crisis, the \"Financial Times\" reported that Spain was the most favoured destination for Western Europeans considering a move from their own country and seeking jobs elsewhere in the EU.\nUntil 2014, the number of immigrants decreased due to the economic crisis, with more than half a million people leaving Spain in 2011 alone\u2014the first net migration rate in decades. However, notwithstanding economic factors, as well as policies to encourage non-EU unemployed immigrants to voluntarily depart the country, the rate of emigration remained relatively low. By 2015, net immigration had increased, and Spain has again become a major immigration destination, backed by government policies to increase the labor force and promote integration. The S\u00e1nchez government planned to legalize around 900,000 undocumented migrants by 2027.\nLanguages.\nSpain is a multilingual state. Spanish\u2014featured in the 1978 Spanish Constitution as \"castellano\" ('Castilian')\u2014has effectively been the official language of the entire country since 1931. As allowed in the third article of the Constitution, the other 'Spanish languages' can also become official in their respective autonomous communities. The territoriality created by the form of co-officiality codified in the 1978 Constitution creates an asymmetry, in which Spanish speakers' rights apply to the entire territory whereas vis-\u00e0-vis the rest of co-official languages, their speakers' rights only apply in their territories.\nBesides Spanish, other territorialised languages include Aragonese, Aranese, Astur-Leonese, Basque, Ceutan Arabic (Darija), Catalan, Galician, Portuguese, Valencian and Tamazight, to which the Romani Cal\u00f3 and the sign languages may add up. The number of speakers varies widely and their legal recognition is uneven, with some of the most vulnerable languages lacking any sort of effective protection. Those enjoying recognition as official language in some autonomous communities include Catalan/Valencian (in Catalonia and the Balearic Islands officially named as Catalan and in the Valencian Community officially named as [Valencian); Galician (in Galicia); Basque (in the Basque Country and part of Navarre); and Aranese in Catalonia.\nAccording to an official survey complementary to the 2021 census carried out by National Statistics Institute, Spanish is considered as first language by 81.53%, while Catalan/Valencian by 10.50%, Galician by 3.77% and Basque by 1.42% of the Spanish population. The most spoken foreign language was Arabic with 2.17% of the population considering it as their first language, followed by English with 1.58%, Romanian with 1.44%, French with 0.94%, Portuguese with 0.54%, Chinese with 0.48%, German with 0.44% and Italian with 0.41%. Such diversity of foreign languages is mainly due to international migration.\nSpanish is the world's second-most spoken native language and the world's most widely spoken Romance language.\nEducation.\nState education in Spain is free and compulsory from the age of six to sixteen. The current education system is regulated by the 2006 educational law, LOE (\"Ley Org\u00e1nica de Educaci\u00f3n\"), or Fundamental Law for the Education. In 2014, the LOE was partially modified by the newer and controversial LOMCE law (\"Ley Org\u00e1nica para la Mejora de la Calidad Educativa\"), or Fundamental Law for the Improvement of the Education System, commonly called \"Ley Wert\" (Wert Law). Since 1970 to 2014, Spain has had seven different educational laws (LGE, LOECE, LODE, LOGSE, LOPEG, LOE and LOMCE).\nThe levels of education are preschool education, primary education, secondary education and post-16 education. In regards to the professional development education or the vocational education, there are three levels besides the university degrees: the \"Formaci\u00f3n Profesional B\u00e1sica\" (basic vocational education); the \"Ciclo Formativo de Grado Medio\" or \"CFGM\" (medium level vocation education) which can be studied after studying the secondary education, and the \"Ciclo Formativo de Grado Superior\" or \"CFGS\" (higher level vocational education), which can be studied after studying the post-16 education level.\nThe Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) coordinated by the OECD currently ranks the overall knowledge and skills of Spanish 15-year-olds as significantly below the OECD average of 493 in reading literacy, mathematics, and science.\nHealth.\nThe health care system of Spain (Spanish National Health System) is considered one of the best in the world, in 7th position in the ranking elaborated by the World Health Organisation. The health care is public, universal and free for any legal citizen of Spain. The total health spending is 9.4% of the GDP, slightly above the average of 9.3% of the OECD. The life expectancy in Spain has improved from 79.1 years in 2000 to 82.7 years in 2021.\nReligion.\nRoman Catholicism, which has a long history in Spain, remains the dominant religion. Although it no longer has official status by law, in all public schools in Spain students have to choose either a religion or ethics class. Catholicism is the religion most commonly taught, although the teaching of Islam, Judaism, and evangelical Christianity is also recognised in law. Recent polls and surveys suggest that around 30% of the Spanish population is irreligious.\nThe Spanish constitution enshrines secularism in governance, as well as freedom of religion or belief for all, saying that no religion should have a \"state character\", while allowing for the state to \"cooperate\" with religious groups. Protestant churches have about 1,200,000 members. There are about 105,000 Jehovah's Witnesses. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has approximately 46,000 adherents in 133 congregations.\nAccording to the Spanish Center for Sociological Research (CIS), 36.6% of Spaniards are non-practicing Catholics, 18.8% are practicing Catholics, 3.6% are followers of other faiths (including Islam, Protestant Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism, Hinduism etc.), and 39% are non-believers, these being: atheists (15.8%), indifferent or no religion (12%), or agnostics (11.2%), as of April 2025.\nMost Spaniards do not participate regularly in weekly religious worship. A July 2021 study shows that of the Spaniards who identify themselves as religious, 36% never attend Mass, 20.8% barely ever attend Mass, 19% attend Mass a few times a year, 6.8% two or three times per month, 13.4% every Sunday and holidays, and 2.9% multiple times per week. According to a 2021 survey that measures degrees of commitment, those who go to church several times a year are 17.3% of the total population; those who go several times a month, 9.3%; those who go every Sunday and all holy days of obligation, 14.9%; and those who go several times a week, 4.3%.\nJudaism was practically non-existent in Spain from the 1492 expulsion until the 19th century, when Jews were again permitted to enter the country. Currently, there are around 62,000 Jews in Spain, or 0.14% of the total population.\nCulture.\nSpain is a Western country and one of the major Latin countries of Europe, and has been noted for its international cultural influence. Spanish culture is marked by strong historic ties to the Catholic Church, which played a pivotal role in the country's formation and subsequent identity. Spanish art, architecture, cuisine, and music have been shaped by successive waves of foreign invaders, as well as by the country's Mediterranean climate and geography. The centuries-long colonial era globalised Spanish language and culture, with Spain also absorbing the cultural and commercial products of its diverse empire. Since the Spanish Golden Age, Spanish art, architecture, music, painting, literature, and cuisine have been influential worldwide, particularly in Western Europe and the Americas. Spain is the world's second-most visited country, has one of the largest numbers of World Heritage Sites, and is the most popular destination for European students. Its cultural influence extends to over 600 million Hispanophones, making Spanish the world's second-most spoken native language and the world's most widely spoken Romance language.\nWorld Heritage Sites.\nSpain has 50 World Heritage Sites. These include the landscape of Monte Perdido in the Pyrenees, which is shared with France, the Prehistoric Rock Art Sites of the C\u00f4a Valley and Siega Verde, which is shared with Portugal, the Heritage of Mercury, shared with Slovenia and the Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests, shared with other countries of Europe. In addition, Spain has also 14 Intangible cultural heritage, or \"Human treasures\".\nLiterature.\nSome early examples of vernacular Romance-based literature include short snippets of Mozarabic Romance (such as refrains) sprinkled in Arabic and Hebrew texts. Other examples of early Iberian Romance include the \"Glosas Emilianenses\" written in Latin, Basque and Romance.\nEarly Medieval literature in Christian Iberia was written in Latin, which remained as the standard literary language up until the mid-13th century, whereas Ibero-Romance vernaculars and Basque were spoken. A decisive development ensued in the 13th century in Toledo, where Arabic scholarship was translated to the local vernacular, Castilian. In the scope of lyric poetry Castilian co-existed alongside Galician-Portuguese across the Crown of Castile up until the 16th century. The Romance variety preferred in Eastern Iberia for lyrical poetry, Occitan, became increasingly Catalanised in the 14th and 15th centuries. Major literary works from the Middle Ages include the \"Cantar de Mio Cid\", \"Tirant lo Blanch\", \"The Book of Good Love\" and \"Coplas por la muerte de su padre\". Genres such as Mester de Juglar\u00eda and Mester de Clerec\u00eda were cultivated.\nPromoted by the monarchs in the late Middle Ages and even codified in the late 15th century, Castilian (thought to be widespread known as 'Spanish' from the 16th century on) progressively became the language of the elites in the Iberian Peninsula, which ushered in a Golden era of Castilian literature in the 16th and 17th centuries, also in the science domain, eclipsing Galician and Catalan. Famous Early Modern works include \"La Celestina\" and \"Lazarillo de Tormes\". The famous \"Don Quijote de La Mancha\" by Miguel de Cervantes was written in this time. Other writers from the period are: Francisco de Quevedo, Lope de Vega, Calder\u00f3n de la Barca or Tirso de Molina. During the Enlightenment authors included, Benito Jer\u00f3nimo Feij\u00f3o, Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos, and Leandro Fern\u00e1ndez de Morat\u00edn.\nSteps of Spanish Romantic literature (initially a rebellion against French classicism) have been traced back to the last quarter of the 18th century, even if the movement had its heyday between 1835 and 1850, waning thereafter. In a broader definition encompassing the period from 1868 or 1874 to 1936, the so-called Silver Age of Spanish Culture ensued.\nThe waning of Romantic literature was followed by the development of Spanish Realism, which offered depictions of contemporary life and society 'as they were', rather than romanticised or stylised presentations. The major realist writer was Benito P\u00e9rez Gald\u00f3s. The second half of the 19th century also saw the resurgence of the literary use of local languages other than Spanish under cultural movements inspired by Romanticism such as the Catalan \"Renaixen\u00e7a\" or the Galician \"Rexurdimento\". Rarely used before in a written medium, the true fostering of the literary use of the Basque language had to wait until the 1960s, even if some interest towards the language had developed in the late 19th century. 20th-century authors were classified in loose literary generations such as the Generation of '98, the Generation of '27, Generation of '36 and the Generation of '50. Premio Planeta de Novela and Miguel de Cervantes Prize are the two main awards in Spanish literature.\nPhilosophy.\nThe construct pertaining a distinctive Spanish philosophical thought has been variously approached by academia, either by diachronically tracing its development throughout the centuries from the Roman conquest of Hispania on (with early representatives such as Seneca, Trajan, Lucan, or Martial); by pinpointing its origins to the late 19th century (associated to the Generation of 98); or simply by outright denying its existence. The crux around the existence of a Spanish philosophy pitted the likes of Marcelino Men\u00e9ndez y Pelayo (chief architect of the myth around it) against Antonio P\u00e9rez. Foreign imports such as Krausism proved to be extremely influential in Spain in the 19th and early 20th centuries.\nArt.\nArtists from Spain have been highly influential in the development of various European and American artistic movements. Due to historical, geographical and generational diversity, Spanish art has known a great number of influences. The Mediterranean heritage with Greco-Roman and some Moorish influences in Spain, especially in Andalusia, is still evident today. European influences include Italy, Germany and France, especially during the Renaissance, Spanish Baroque and Neoclassical periods. There are many other autochthonous styles such as the Pre-Romanesque art and architecture, Herrerian architecture or the Isabelline Gothic.\nDuring the Golden Age painters working in Spain included El Greco, Jos\u00e9 de Ribera, Bartolom\u00e9 Esteban Murillo and Francisco Zurbar\u00e1n. Also in the Baroque period, Diego Vel\u00e1zquez created some of the most famous Spanish portraits, such as and .\nFrancisco Goya painted during a historical period that includes the Spanish Independence War, the fights between liberals and absolutists, and the rise of contemporary nations-states.\nJoaqu\u00edn Sorolla is a well-known modern impressionist painter and there are many important Spanish painters belonging to the modernism art movement, including Pablo Picasso, Salvador Dal\u00ed, Juan Gris and Joan Mir\u00f3.\nSculpture.\nThe Plateresque style extended from beginnings of the 16th century until the last third of the century and its stylistic influence pervaded the works of all great Spanish artists of the time. Alonso Berruguete (Valladolid School) is called the \"Prince of Spanish sculpture\". His main works were the upper stalls of the choir of the Cathedral of Toledo, the tomb of Cardinal Tavera in the same Cathedral, and the altarpiece of the Visitation in the church of Santa \u00darsula in the same locality. Other notable sculptors were Bartolom\u00e9 Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez, Diego de Silo\u00e9, Juan de Juni and Dami\u00e1n Forment.\nThere were two Schools: the Seville School, to which Juan Mart\u00ednez Monta\u00f1\u00e9s belonged, whose most celebrated works are the Crucifix in the Cathedral of Seville, another in Vergara, and a Saint John; and the Granada School, to which Alonso Cano belonged, to whom an Immaculate Conception and a Virgin of Rosary are attributed.\nOther notable Andalusian Baroque sculptors were Pedro de Mena, Pedro Rold\u00e1n and his daughter Luisa Rold\u00e1n, Juan de Mesa and Pedro Duque Cornejo. In the 20th century the most important Spanish sculptors were Julio Gonz\u00e1lez, Pablo Gargallo, Eduardo Chillida, and Pablo Serrano.\nCinema.\nAfter the first projection of a cinematographer in Spain by 1896, cinema developed in the following years, with Barcelona becoming the largest production hub in the country (as well as a major European hub) on the eve of the World War I. The conflict offered the Spanish industry of silent films an opportunity for further growth. Local studios for sound films were created in 1932. The government imposition of dubbing of foreign films in 1941 accustomed Spanish audiences to watching dubbed films.\nSpanish cinema has achieved major international success including Oscars for films such as \"Pan's Labyrinth\" and \"Volver\". Distinct exploitation genres that flourished in the second half of the 20th century include the \"Fantaterror\", the cine \"quinqui\" and the so-called Cine de destape films. As of 2021, the festivals of San Sebasti\u00e1n and M\u00e1laga are ranked among the top cultural initiatives in the country.\nArchitecture.\nEarth and gypsum are very common materials of the traditional vernacular architecture in Spain (particularly in the East of the country, where most of the deposits of gypsum are located). Due to its historical and geographical diversity, Spanish architecture has drawn from a host of influences. Fine examples of Islamicate architecture, belonging to the Western Islamic tradition, were built in the Middle Ages in places such as C\u00f3rdoba, Seville, or Granada. Similarly to the Maghreb, stucco decoration in Al-Andalus became an architectural stylemark in the high Middle Ages.\nSimultaneously, the Christian kingdoms also developed their own styles; developing a pre-Romanesque style when for a while isolated from contemporary mainstream European architectural influences during the earlier Middle Ages, they later integrated the Romanesque and Gothic streams. There was then an extraordinary flourishing of the Gothic style that resulted in numerous instances being built throughout the entire territory. The so-called Mud\u00e9jar style came to designate works by Muslims, Christians and Jews in lands conquered from Muslims.\nThe arrival of Modernism produced much of the architecture of the 20th century. An influential style centred in Barcelona, known as modernisme, produced a number of important architects, of which Gaud\u00ed is one. The International style was led by groups like GATEPAC. Spain is currently experiencing a revolution in contemporary architecture and like Rafael Moneo, Santiago Calatrava, Ricardo Bofill as well as many others have gained worldwide renown.\nMusic and dance.\nSpanish music is often considered abroad to be synonymous with flamenco, a West Andalusian musical genre, which is not widespread outside that region. Various regional styles of folk music abound. Pop, rock, hip hop and heavy metal are also popular.\nIn the field of classical music, Spain has produced a number of noted composers such as Isaac Alb\u00e9niz, Manuel de Falla and Enrique Granados and singers and performers such as Pl\u00e1cido Domingo, Jos\u00e9 Carreras, Montserrat Caball\u00e9, Alicia de Larrocha, Alfredo Kraus, Pablo Casals, Ricardo Vi\u00f1es, Jos\u00e9 Iturbi, Pablo de Sarasate, Jordi Savall and Teresa Berganza. In Spain there are over forty professional orchestras, including the Orquestra Simf\u00f2nica de Barcelona, Orquesta Nacional de Espa\u00f1a and the Orquesta Sinf\u00f3nica de Madrid. Major opera houses include the Teatro Real, the Gran Teatre del Liceu, Teatro Arriaga and the El Palau de les Arts Reina Sof\u00eda.\nThousands of music fans also travel to Spain each year for internationally recognised summer music festivals S\u00f3nar which features pop and techno acts, and Benic\u00e0ssim which tends to feature alternative rock and dance acts. The Vitoria-Gasteiz jazz festival is one of the main ones in its genre. The most popular traditional musical instrument, the guitar, originated in Spain. Typical of the north are the traditional bag pipers or \"gaiteros\", mainly in Asturias and Galicia.\nCuisine.\nSpanish cuisine consists of a great variety of dishes which stem from differences in geography, culture and climate. It is heavily influenced by seafood available from the waters that surround the country, and reflects the country's deep Mediterranean roots. Spain's extensive history with many cultural influences has led to a unique cuisine. In particular, three main divisions are easily identified:\nMediterranean Spain \u2013 coastal regions, from Catalonia to Andalusia \u2013 heavy use of seafood, such as \"pesca\u00edto frito\" (fried fish); cold soups like \"gazpacho\"; and many rice-based dishes like \"paella\" from Valencia and \"arr\u00f2s negre\" (black rice) from Catalonia.\nInner Spain \u2013 Castile \u2013 hot, thick soups such as the bread and garlic-based \"Castilian soup\", along with substantial stews such as \"cocido madrile\u00f1o\". Food is traditionally preserved by salting, such as Spanish ham, or immersed in olive oil, such as Manchego cheese.\nAtlantic Spain \u2013 the Northern coast, including Asturian, Basque, Cantabrian and Galician cuisine \u2013 vegetable and fish-based stews like \"caldo gallego\" and \"marmitako\". Also, the lightly cured \"lac\u00f3n\" ham. The best known cuisine of the northern countries often rely on ocean seafood, as in the Basque-style cod, albacore or anchovy or the Galician octopus-based \"polbo \u00e1 feira\" and shellfish dishes.\nSport.\nWhile varieties of football have been played in Spain as far back as Roman times, sport in Spain has been dominated by football since the early 20th century. Real Madrid CF and FC Barcelona are two of the most successful football clubs in the world. The country's national men's football team won the UEFA European Championship in 1964, 2008, 2012 and 2024 and the FIFA World Cup in 2010, and is the first team ever to win three back-to-back major international tournaments. Spain's women's national team were champions of the 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup, becoming one of only five nations to win the Women's World Cup. Barcelona Femen\u00ed has won a record number of domestic trophies.\nBasketball, tennis, cycling, handball, futsal, motorcycling and, lately, Formula One also can boast of Spanish champions. Today, Spain is a major world sports powerhouse, especially since the 1992 Summer Olympics and Paralympics that were hosted in Barcelona, which stimulated a great deal of interest in sports in the country. The tourism industry has led to an improvement in sports infrastructure, especially for water sports, golf and skiing. In their respective regions, the traditional games of Basque pelota and Valencian pilota are both popular.\nPublic holidays and festivals.\nPublic holidays celebrated in Spain include a mix of religious (Roman Catholic), national and local observances. Each municipality is allowed to declare a maximum of 14 public holidays per year; up to nine of these are chosen by the national government and at least two are chosen locally. Spain's National Day (\"Fiesta Nacional de Espa\u00f1a\") is celebrated on 12 October.\nThere are many festivals and festivities in Spain. One of the most famous is San Ferm\u00edn, in Pamplona. Its most famous event is the \"encierro\", or the running of the bulls. It has become one of the most internationally renowned fiestas in Spain, with over 1,000,000 people attending every year.\nOther festivals include La Tomatina tomato festival in Bu\u00f1ol, Valencia, the carnivals in the Canary Islands, the Falles in Valencia or the Holy Week in Andalusia and Castile and Le\u00f3n.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26668", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26668", "title": "Sumba", "text": "Indonesian island in Lesser Sunda Islands\nSumba (; ), natively also spelt as Humba, Hubba, Suba, or Zuba (in Sumba languages) is an Indonesian island (part of the Lesser Sunda Archipelago group) located in the Eastern Indonesia and administratively part of the East Nusa Tenggara provincial territory. Sumba has an area of , about the same size as Jamaica or the island of Hawaii. The population was 686,113 at the 2010 Census and 779,049 at the 2020 Census; the official estimate as of mid-2024 was 853,428 (comprising 436,845 males and 416,583 females). To the northwest of Sumba is Sumbawa, to the northeast, across the Sumba Strait (Selat Sumba), is Flores, to the east, across the Savu Sea (including Savu Island), is Timor, and to the south, across part of the Indian Ocean, is Australia.\nNomenclature.\nThe name \"Sumba\" is derived from the native\u00a0Sumbanese\u00a0word \"humba\"\u00a0or\u00a0\"hubba\" (in various Subanese dialects)\nHistory.\nOral traditions.\nAccording to Sumbanese mythology, Flores and Sumba were once connected by the \"Kataka Lindiwatu\" (in Sumba languages), an ancient stone bridge built by the native of Sumba and Flores. Due to the high level of socialization around the \"Kataka Lindiwatu\" which connected both islands, civilization was thought to arise from around those regions (which nowadays correspond to northern Sumba and to part of East Sumba regency territory). This story belongs to the Sumba oral traditions as was written down by Umbu Pura Woha (2007) in his book (lit.\u2009'History, Deliberation and Customs of East Sumba').\nAncient civilization ruins.\nThe ruins of the historical civilization of the Sumba people dates back to the BC era; megalithic burials were found on the central regions of the island (Central Sumba) which go back to thousands of years ago. These stone-based burial traditions are still kept alive by the Sumba people and have become a 'living ancient tradition' that still can be observed by scholars in modern days. The megalithic remains found on Sumba Island include dolmen tombs, upright stones, megalithic statues, stone enclosures, and levelled terraces. The Sumba megalithic tradition itself was characterized by the old megaliths built and carved with high quality standards. Some ancient tools are also found on the island. Notable findings are quadrangular adzes unearthed in the Anakalang area (a cultural region of Anakalang Sumba, a subethnic group of Sumba people).\nOne significant archaeological discovery was that of the urn burial site in Melolo in the 1920s, dated around 2,870 BCE.\nJavanese power.\nAround the 12th century, the kingdom of Singhasari in eastern Java gained more power over the maritime Southeast Asian territory after the kingdom defeated the Mongols; since then, this kingdom evolved into the empire known as Majapahit. Sumba Island was a subject of Majapahit's dominion, and the word \"Sumba\" itself was first officially used during the Majapahit era (mentioned in the ancient Javanese manuscripts of \"Pararaton\" and \"Sumpah Palapa\" oath of Gajah Mada); the word itself was thought as the closest substitution in Javanese for the native name of the island according to native Sumba people, which is \"Humba\" or \"Hubba\". It is thought that Javanese people arrived on Sumba Island via the Madura and Kangean route, based on analysis of the DNA of chicken species on Sumba that are only endemic in the eastern parts of Java and its neighbouring islands (which in this case is probably Kangean Island).\nEuropean colonizations.\nIn 1522, the native Sumba came into contact with the Europeans (Portuguese) who arrived on the island by ship to exploit the natural resources of the island. Later, it also attracted the Dutch VOC to come in the region in circa 1600s era. Historically, sandalwood was the main commodity exported to Europe from this island, thus the Sumba Island back then colloquially also known as the \"Sandalwood Island\" or \"Sandel Island\" (in English).\nIn 1866, the island of Sumba was transferred to and dominated by the Dutch East Indies colonization power. The well-known Christianization of the natives of Sumba Island was started in 1886 by the Dutch under the Douwe Wielenga Jesuits missionary program in the district of Laura in West Sumba.\nGeography, climate and ecology.\nThe largest town on the island is the main port of Waingapu near the mouth of the Kambaniru River, with a population of 71,752 (including the adjoining district of Kambera) in mid 2023.\nThe landscape is low, with limestone hills rather than the steep volcanoes of many Indonesian islands. There is a dry season from May to November and a rainy season from December to April. The western side of the island is more fertile and more densely populated than the east.\nAlthough generally thought to be originally part of the Gondwana southern hemisphere supercontinent, recent research suggests that the island might have detached from the South East Asia margin. \nMost of it was originally covered in deciduous monsoon forest while the south-facing slopes, which remain moist during the dry season, were evergreen rainforest.\nThe northern part of the island is extremely arid; the soils have been depleted by deforestation and erosion.\nSumba is in the Wallacea region, having a mixture of plants and animals of Asian and Australasian origin. Due to its distinctive flora and fauna, Sumba has been categorised by the World Wildlife Fund as the Sumba deciduous forests ecoregion.\nFauna.\nThere are a number of mammals, but the island is particularly rich in bird-life with nearly 200 birds, of which seven endemic species and a number of others are found only here and on some nearby islands. The endemic birds include the endangered Sumba eclectus parrot, four vulnerable species \u2014 the secretive Sumba boobook owl, Sumba buttonquail, red-naped fruit-dove, and Sumba hornbill \u2014 as well as three more common species: the Sumba green pigeon, Sumba flycatcher, and apricot-breasted sunbird. Saltwater crocodiles can still be found in some areas.\nThe Sumba hornbill or \"Julang Sumba\" (\"Rhyticeros everetti\") is under increasing threat of extinction. Indiscriminate deforestation is threatening their survival. The population is estimated at less than 4,000 with an average density of six individuals per square kilometre. A hornbill can fly to and from over an area of up to 100 square kilometres.\nThreats and preservation.\nMost of the original forest has been cleared for the planting of maize, cassava, and other crops and only small isolated patches of forest remain. Forest clearance is still ongoing due to the growing population of the island and this represents a threat to the birds.\nIn 1998 two national parks were designated on the island for the protection of endangered species: the Laiwangi Wanggameti National Park and Manupeu Tanah Daru National Park.\nAdministration.\nSumba is part of the East Nusa Tenggara Province, and there is no single administrative body at the island level. The island and the very small offshore islands administered with it are split into four regencies (local government regions), following re-organisation on 2 January 2007 when two new regencies were created from parts of West Sumba Regency. The four regencies are Sumba Barat (West Sumba), Sumba Barat Daya (Southwest Sumba), Sumba Tengah (Central Sumba) and Sumba Timur (East Sumba), which together accounted for 14.7% of the provincial population in 2023. The regencies are listed below with their areas and their populations at the 2010 Census and the 2020 Census, together with the official estimates as at mid 2024. The provincial capital is not on Sumba Island, but in Kupang on West Timor.\nCulture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe west part of Sumba is inhabited by segmentary societies made of clans and of politically autonomous villages, while Sumba North and East are occupied by stratified societies (based on castes) made of clan confederations and led by a dominant clan from which a \u201cking\u201d (\"raja\") is chosen, who yields a real political power.\nThus West Sumba is more ethnically and linguistically diverse. Both systems exist simultaneously with a 3-tier class system (aristocracy, common people and slaves) assimilated in such a way that - paradoxically - it does not impair the egalitarian functioning of the Western segmentary societies.\nVillages almost always include members of several clans, because at each generation many of the youngest ones settle in villages other than the one they originated from - which may belong to an allied clan and not their own original clan and lineage.\nAs of 2021, Sumba is the last place on Earth where societies have remained close to the traditions of South-East Asian hill tribes and still build megalithic monuments such as dolmens for collective burials: 100 new megalithic tombs are still built each year on the island. But this too is reflected in the East / West divide: the Western segmentary societies build many more dolmens than the Eastern stratified societies; and dolmens in the east are larger, more richly ornated and are reserved for the royal clan. Waingapu, a Kodi village in the west of Sumba, has some 1,400 dolmens - one of the highest concentrations on the island.\nThe Sumbanese have a mixture of Austronesian and Melanesian ancestry. Sumba is home to 24 ethnic groups who speak nine Austronesian languages, some of these including several dialects. The largest language group is the Kambera language, spoken by a quarter of a million people in the eastern half of Sumba.\nTwenty-five to thirty percent of the population practices the animist Marapu religion. The remainder are Christian, a majority being Dutch Calvinist with a substantial minority being Roman Catholic. A small number of Sunni Muslims can be found along the coastal areas. The younger generations seem to reject Marapu. This may be at least in part because the only functioning schools are Catholic and embracing that religion is required to attend school. Whatever the cause, the difference is significant compared to some other traditional places such as Waerebo, where the locals have a Christian first name and a traditional second name.\nSumba is famous for \"ikat\" textiles, particularly very detailed hand-woven \"ikat\". The process of dyeing and weaving \"ikat\" is labor-intensive and one piece can take months to prepare. Ikat from West Sumba is notably different to that produced in the East: its only designs are geometric motifs and it usually includes a part that imitates a reticulated python skin.\nDevelopment and living standards.\nSumba is one of the poorer islands of Indonesia.\nHealth.\nA relatively high percentage of the population suffers from malaria, although the illness is almost eradicated in the western part of the island. Infant mortality is high.\nWater.\nAccess to water is one of the major challenges on Sumba. During the dry season, many streams dry out and villagers depend on wells for scarce supplies of water. Villagers have to travel several kilometres several times a day to fetch water. It is mainly the women and children who are sent for water, while the men are at work. The Sumba Foundation has been active in raising sponsorship to drill wells in villages and attempting to reduce poverty on the island. As of February 2013, the Sumba Foundation was responsible for 48 wells and 191 water stations, supplying 15 schools with water and sanitation, and reducing malaria rates by some 85%.\nElectricity.\nElectricity mainly comes from diesel generators. New projects include 3 MW Bayu wind power plant (PLTB) in Kadumbul, East Sumba by PT Hywind. Another is the Bodo Hula Biomass Power Plant (PLTBm), West Sumba. 1 MW capacity. Other existing renewable electricity projects involve solar PV and micro-hydropower.\nTourism.\nResorts.\nNIHI Sumba has been ranked as one of the world's five best eco-hotels and was awarded the world's best hotel of 2016 and 2017 from \"Travel + Leisure\" for its native ambiance and authentic local experience.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26669", "revid": "48259045", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26669", "title": "Sports", "text": ""}
{"id": "26671", "revid": "42541471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26671", "title": "Sabbath in Christianity", "text": "Inclusion or adoption in Christianity of a Sabbath day\nMany Christians observe a weekly day set apart for rest and worship called a Sabbath in obedience to God's commandment to remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy.\nEarly Christians, at first mainly Jewish, observed the seventh-day (Saturday) Sabbath with prayer and rest. At the beginning of the second century the Church Father Ignatius of Antioch approved non-observance of the Sabbath. The now majority practice of Christians is to observe the first day of the week (Sunday), called the Lord's Day, when many significant events occurred during the New Testament - notably the Resurrection - rather than the biblical seventh-day Sabbath as a day of rest and worship.\nIn line with ideas of the 16th and 17th-century Puritans, the Presbyterian and Congregationalist, as well as Methodist and Baptist Churches, enshrined first-day (Sunday) Sabbatarian views in their confessions of faith, observing the Lord's Day as the Christian Sabbath. While practices differ among Christian denominations, common First-day Sabbatarian (Sunday Sabbatarian) practices include attending morning and evening church services, receiving catechesis in Sunday School, taking the day off from servile labour, not eating at restaurants, not Sunday shopping, not using public transportation, as well as not participating in sporting events that are held on Sundays; Christians who are Sunday Sabbatarians often engage in works of mercy on the Lord's Day, such as evangelism, as well as visiting prisoners at jails and the sick at hospitals and nursing homes.\nBeginning about the 17th century, a few groups of Restorationist Christians, mostly Seventh-day Sabbatarians, formed communities that practiced the keeping of the Sabbath on Saturdays.\nHistory.\nSabbath timing.\nThe Hebrew Shabbat, the seventh day of the week, is \"Saturday\" but in the Hebrew calendar a new day begins at sunset (or, by custom, about 20 minutes earlier) and not at midnight. The Shabbat therefore coincides with what is now commonly identified as Friday sunset to Saturday night when three stars are first visible in the night sky. The Sabbath continued to be observed on the seventh day in the early Christian church. To this day, the liturgical day continues to be observed in line with the Hebrew reckoning in the church calendars in Eastern Orthodoxy and Oriental Orthodoxy. In the Latin Church, \"the liturgical day runs from midnight to midnight. However, the celebration of Sundays and of Solemnities begins already on the evening of the previous day\".\nIn non-liturgical matters, the canon law of the Latin Church defines a day as beginning at midnight.\nEarly Christianity.\nJewish Christians continued to observe Shabbat but met together at the end of the day, on a Saturday evening. In the gospels, the women are described as coming to the empty tomb , although it is often translated \"on the first day of the week\". This is made clear in Acts 20:7 when Paul continued his message \"until midnight\" and a young man went to sleep and fell out of the window. Christians celebrate on Sunday because it is the day on which Jesus had risen from the dead and on which the Holy Spirit had come to the apostles. Although Christians meeting for worship on the first day of the week (Sunday for Gentiles) dates back to Acts and is historically mentioned around 115 AD, Constantine's edict was the start of many more Christians observing only Sunday and not the Sabbath. Patristic writings attest that by the second century, it had become commonplace to celebrate the Eucharist in a corporate day of worship on the first day. A Church Father, Eusebius, who became the bishop of Caesarea Maritima about AD 314, stated that for Christians, \"the sabbath had been transferred to Sunday\".\nAccording to Socrates of Constantinople and Sozomen, most of the early Church (excluding Rome and Alexandria) observed the seventh day Sabbath in Easter.\nCorporate worship.\nWhile the Lord's Day observance of the Eucharist was established separately from the Jewish Shabbat, the centrality of the Eucharist itself made it the commonest early observance whenever Christians gathered for worship. In many places and times as late as the 4th century, they did continue to gather weekly on the Sabbath, often in addition to the Lord's Day, celebrating the Eucharist on both days. No disapproval of Sabbath observance of the Christian festival was expressed at the early church councils that dealt with Judaizing. The Council of Laodicea (363\u2013364), for example, mandated only that Sabbath Eucharists must be observed in the same manner as those on the first day. Neander has suggested that Sabbath Eucharists in many places were kept \"as a feast in commemoration of the Creation.\"\nThe issues about Hebrew practices that continued into the 2nd century tended to relate mostly to the Sabbath. Justin Martyr, who attended worship on the first day, wrote about the cessation of Hebrew Sabbath observance and stated that the Sabbath was enjoined as a temporary sign to Israel to teach it of human sinfulness, no longer needed after Christ came without sin. He rejected the need to keep a literal seventh-day Sabbath, arguing instead that \"the new law requires you to keep the sabbath constantly.\" However, Justin Martyr believe the Sabbath has only attributed to Moses and the Israelites. According to J.N Andrews, a historian, and theologian, he mentions, \"In his (Justin) estimation, the Sabbath was a Jewish institution, absolutely unknown to good men before the time of Moses, and of no authority whatever since the death of Christ.\" He identifies this through Justin's writings: \"Do you see that the elements are not idle, and keep no Sabbaths? Remain as you were born. For if there was no need of circumcision before Abraham, or of the observance of Sabbaths, of feasts and sacrifices, before Moses; no more need of them is there now, after that, according to the will of God, Jesus Christ the Son of God has been born without sin, of a virgin sprung from the stock of Abraham.\" With more clarification, Andrews also states: \"Not only does he (Justin) declare that the Jews were commanded to keep the sabbath because of their wickedness, but in chapter nineteen he denies that any Sabbath existed before Moses. Thus, after naming Adam, Abel, Enoch, Lot, and Melchizedek, he says: \"Moreover, all those righteous men already mentioned, though they kept no Sabbaths were pleasing to God.\" But though he thus denies the Sabbatic institution before the time of Moses he presently makes this statement concerning the Jews: \"And you were commanded to keep Sabbaths, that you might retain the memorial of God. For his word makes this announcement, saying. 'That ye may know that I am God who redeemed you.'\"[Eze.20:12.]. On these statements from Justin Martyr, J.N Andrews concludes \"The Sabbath is indeed the memorial of the God that made the heavens and the earth. And what an absurdity to deny that that memorial was set up when the creative work was done, and to affirm that twenty-five hundred years intervened between the work and the memorial!\"\nDay of rest.\nA common theme in criticism of Hebrew Shabbat rest was idleness, found not to be in the Christian spirit of rest. Irenaeus (late 2nd century), also citing continuous Sabbath observance, wrote that the Christian \"will not be commanded to leave idle one day of rest, who is constantly keeping sabbath\", and Tertullian (early 3rd century) argued \"that we still more ought to observe a sabbath from all servile work always, and not only every seventh-day, but through all time\". This early metaphorical interpretation of Sabbath applied it to the entire Christian life.\nIgnatius, cautioning against \"Judaizing\" in the Epistle of Ignatius to the Magnesians, contrasts the Jewish Shabbat practices with the Christian life which includes the Lord's Day:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let us therefore no longer keep the Sabbath after the Jewish manner, and rejoice in days of idleness. [...] But let every one of you keep the Sabbath after a spiritual manner, rejoicing in meditation on the law, not in relaxation of the body, admiring the workmanship of God, and not eating things prepared the day before, nor using lukewarm drinks, and walking within a prescribed space, nor finding delight in dancing and plaudits which have no sense in them. And after the observance of the Sabbath, let every friend of Christ keep the Lord's [Day, \"Dominicam\"] as a festival, the resurrection-day, the queen and chief of all the days.\nThe 2nd and 3rd centuries solidified the early church's emphasis upon Sunday worship and its rejection of a Jewish (Mosaic Law-based) observation of the Sabbath and manner of rest. Christian practice of following Sabbath after the manner of the Hebrews declined, prompting Tertullian to note \"to [us] Sabbaths are strange\" and unobserved. Even as late as the 4th century, Judaizing was still sometimes a problem within the Church, but by this time it was repudiated strongly as heresy.\nSunday was another work day in the Roman Empire. On March 7, 321, however, Roman Emperor Constantine I issued a civil decree making Sunday a day of rest from labor, stating: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All judges and city people and the craftsmen shall rest upon the venerable day of the sun. Country people, however, may freely attend to the cultivation of the fields, because it frequently happens that no other days are better adapted for planting the grain in the furrows or the vines in trenches. So that the advantage given by heavenly providence may not for the occasion of a short time perish.\nWhile established only in civil law rather than religious principle, the Church welcomed the development as a means by which Christians could the more easily attend Sunday worship and observe Christian rest. At Laodicea also, the Church encouraged Christians to make use of the day for Christian rest where possible, without ascribing to it any of the regulation of Mosaic Law, and indeed anathematizing Hebrew observance on the Sabbath. The civil law and its effects made possible a pattern in Church life that has been imitated throughout the centuries in many places and cultures, wherever possible.\nFrom ancient times to Middle Ages.\nAugustine of Hippo followed the early patristic writers in spiritualizing the meaning of the Sabbath commandment, referring it to eschatological rest rather than observance of a literal day. Such writing, however, did serve to deepen the idea of Christian rest on Sunday, and its practice increased in prominence throughout the early Middle Ages.\nThomas Aquinas taught that the Decalogue is an expression of natural law which binds all men, and therefore the Sabbath commandment is a moral requirement along with the other nine. Thus in the West, Sunday rest became more closely associated with a Christian application of the Sabbath, a development towards the idea of a \"Christian Sabbath\" rather than a Hebrew one. Sunday worship and Sunday rest combined powerfully to relate to Sabbath commandment precepts.\nContinuations of Hebrew practices.\nSeventh-day Sabbath was observed at least sporadically by a minority of groups during the Middle Ages.\nIn the early church in Ireland, there is evidence that a sabbath-rest on Saturday may have been kept along with Mass on Sunday as the Lord's Day. It appears that many of the canon laws in Ireland from that period were derived from parts of the laws of Moses. In Adomnan of Iona's biography of St Columba it describes Columba's death by having Columba say on a Saturday, \"Today is truly my sabbath, for it is my last day in this wearisome life, when I shall keep the Sabbath after my troublesome labours. At midnight this Sunday, as Scripture saith, 'I shall go the way of my fathers'\" and he then dies that night. The identification of this Sabbath day as a Saturday in the narrative is clear in the context, because Columba is recorded as seeing an angel at the Mass on the previous Sunday and the narrative claims he dies in the same week, on the Sabbath day at the end of the week, during the 'Lord's night' (referring to Saturday night-Sunday morning).\nAn Eastern body of Christian Sabbath-keepers mentioned from the 8th century to the 12th is called Athenians (\"touch-not\") because they abstained from uncleanness and intoxicating drinks, called Athinginians in Neander: \"This sect, which had its principal seat in the city of Armorion, in upper Phrygia, where many Jews resided, sprung out of a mixture of Judaism and Christianity. They united baptism with the observance of all the rites of Judaism, circumcision excepted. We may perhaps recognize a branch of the older Judaizing sects.\"\nCardinal Hergenrother says that they stood in intimate relation with Emperor Michael II (AD 821\u2013829), and testifies that they observed Sabbath. As late as the 11th century Cardinal Humbert still referred to the Nazarenes as a Sabbath-keeping Christian body existing at that time. But in the 10th and 11th centuries, there was a great extension of sects from the East to the West. Neander states that the corruption of the clergy furnished a most important vantage-ground on which to attack the dominant church. The abstemious life of these Christians, the simplicity and earnestness of their preaching and teaching, had their effect. \"Thus we find them emerging at once in the 11th century, in countries the most diverse, and the most remote from each other, in Italy, France, and even in the Harz districts in Germany.\" Likewise, also, \"traces of Sabbath-keepers are found in the times of Gregory I, Gregory VII, and in the 12th century in Lombardy.\"\nOriental Orthodoxy.\nThe Sabbath is considered holy in the Oriental Orthodox churches, both Sunday (the \"Christian Sabbath\") and Saturday (the \"Old Sabbath\"). The Orthodox Tewahedo churches are known for celebrating the Sabbath, a practice defended in the Oriental Orthodox church in Ethiopia in the 1300s by Ewostatewos (, ) but deriving from the Apostolic Constitutions and the Canons of the Apostles, an early Christian text invoking the authority of the Apostles and practiced in the Coptic Orthodox Church much earlier. In response to colonial pressure by missionaries of the Catholic Church in the 1500s, the emperor Saint Gelawdewos wrote his \"Confession\", an apologia of traditional beliefs and practices including observation of the Sabbath and a theological defense of the Miaphysitism of Oriental Orthodoxy. In it, he cites the Didascalia and distances the Christian observance of the seventh-day Sabbath from the Jewish observance, explicitly stating \"we do not honour it as the Jews do... but we so honour it that we celebrate thereon the Eucharist and have love-feasts, even as our Fathers the Apostles have taught us in the Didascalia\".\nProtestant Reformation.\nProtestant reformers, beginning in the 16th century, brought new interpretations of Christian law to the West. The Heidelberg Catechism of the Reformed Churches founded by John Calvin teaches that the moral law as contained in the Ten Commandments is binding for Christians and that it instructs Christians how to live in service to God in gratitude for His grace shown in redeeming mankind. Likewise, Martin Luther, in his work against the Antinomians, rejected the idea of the abolition of the Ten Commandments. They also viewed Sunday rest as a civic institution established by human authority, which provided an occasion for bodily rest and public worship. Another Protestant, John Wesley, stated \"This 'handwriting of ordinances' our Lord did blot out, take away, and nail to His cross. But the moral law contained in the Ten Commandments, and enforced by the prophets, He did not take away. ... The moral law stands on an entirely different foundation from the ceremonial or ritual law. ... Every part of this law must remain in force upon all mankind and in all ages.\"\nSabbatarianism arose and spread among both the continental and English Protestants during the 17th and 18th centuries. The Puritans of England and Scotland brought a new rigorism into the observance of the Christian Lord's Day in reaction to the customary Sunday observance of the time, which they regarded as lax. They appealed to Sabbath ordinances with the idea that only the Bible can bind men's consciences on whether or how they will take a break from work, or to impose an obligation to meet at a particular time. Their influential reasoning spread to other denominations also, and it is primarily through their influence that \"Sabbath\" has become the colloquial equivalent of \"Lord's Day\" or \"Sunday\". Sunday Sabbatarianism is enshrined in its most mature expression, the \"Westminster Confession of Faith\" (1646), in the Calvinist theological tradition. Paragraphs 7 and 8 of Chapter 21 (\"Of Religious Worship, and the Sabbath Day\") read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe confession holds that not only is work forbidden on Sunday, but also \"works, words, and thoughts\" about \"worldly employments and recreations\". Instead, the whole day should be taken up with \"public and private exercises of [one's] worship, and in the duties of necessity and mercy\".\nStrict Sunday Sabbatarianism is sometimes called \"Puritan Sabbath\", which may be contrasted with \"Continental Sabbath\". The latter follows the reformed confessions of faith of Continental Europe such as the \"Heidelberg Catechism\", which emphasize rest and worship on the Lord's Day, but do not explicitly forbid recreational activities. However, in practice, many continental Reformed Christians also abstain from recreation on the Sabbath, following the admonition by the Heidelberg Catechism's author Zacharaias Ursinus that \"To keep holy the Sabbath, is not to spend the day in slothfulness and idleness\".\nThough first-day Sabbatarian practice declined in the 18th century, the First Great Awakening in the 19th century led to a greater concern for strict Sunday observance. The founding of the Day One Christian Ministries in 1831 was influenced by the teaching of Daniel Wilson.\nCommon theology.\nMany Christian theologians believe that Sabbath observance is not binding for Christians today, citing for instance Colossians 2:16\u201317.\nSome Christian non-Sabbatarians advocate physical Sabbath rest on any chosen day of the week, and some advocate Sabbath as a symbolic metaphor for rest in Christ; the concept of Lord's Day is usually treated as synonymous with \"Sabbath\". This non-Sabbatarian interpretation usually states that Jesus's obedience and the New Covenant fulfilled the laws of Sabbath, the Ten Commandments, and the Law of Moses, which are thus considered not to be binding moral laws, and sometimes considered abolished or abrogated. While Sunday is often observed as the day of Christian assembly and worship, in accordance with church tradition, Sabbath commandments are dissociated from this practice.\nNon-Sabbatarian Christians also cite 2 Corinthians 3:2\u20133, in which believers are compared to \"a letter from Christ, the result of our ministry, written ... not on tablets of stone but on tablets of human hearts\"; this interpretation states that Christians accordingly no longer follow the Ten Commandments with dead orthodoxy (\"tablets of stone\"), but follow a new law written upon \"tablets of human hearts\". In 3:7\u201311 we read that \"if the ministry that brought death, which was engraved in letters on stone, came with glory ..., will not the ministry of the Spirit be even more glorious? ... And if what was fading away came with glory, how much greater is the glory of that which lasts!\" This is interpreted as teaching that New Covenant Christians are not bound by the Mosaic Law, and that Sabbath-keeping is not required. Further, because \"love is the fulfillment of the law\", the new-covenant \"law\" is considered to be based entirely upon love and to rescind Sabbath requirements.\nMethodist theologian Joseph D. McPherson criticizes these views, and teaches that the Lord's Day as the First-day Christian Sabbath is binding:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It has been argued by some that such as narrow view of the Christian Sabbath is overturned by St. Paul's letter to the Romans in which he writes: \"One man esteemeth one day above another: another esteemeth every day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. He that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the Lord; and he that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it.\" It is a mistake to suppose that the Apostle has the Sabbath in mind when writing these words. Such an erroneous supposition would be a wrenching of his words and meaning out of context. It must first be remembered that he is writing to a church whose members are made up of both Jewish and Gentile converts. Reliable Bible expositors, such as Adam Clarke, agree that \"Reference is being made here to the Jewish institutions, and especially their festivals; such as the passover, pentecost, feast of tabernacles, new moons, jubilee, &amp;c.\" Jewish Christians continued to think of these special days and festivals to be of moral obligation. In contrast, the Gentile Christians had never been trained to observe these special days related to the Jewish ceremonial law and therefore had no inclination nor desire to observe them. Furthermore, those who had been instrumental in their conversion enforced no such requirement upon them. In consequence, they paid no religious regard to these special days of the Jewish institution. \"The converted Gentile\", writes Clarke, \"esteemeth every day\u2014considers that all time is the Lord's and that each day should be devoted to the glory of God; and that those festivals are not binding on him.\" Accordingly, it is concluded that \"With respect to the propriety or non-propriety of keeping the [Jewish special days and] festivals, 'Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind'; there is sufficient latitude allowed; all may be fully satisfied. \"Our translators have added the word \"alike\" in verse 5. This word, according to Clarke, \"should not be added; nor it is acknowledged by any [manuscript] or ancient version.\" By adding the word \"alike\", they \"make the text say what [we can be] sure was never intended, viz. that there is no distinction of days, not even the Sabbath: and that every Christian is at liberty to consider even this day to be holy or not holy, as he happens to be persuaded in his own mind.\" \"That the Sabbath is of lasting obligation\", writes Clarke, \"may be reasonable concluded from its institution and from its typical references. All allow that the Sabbath is a type of rest in glory which remains for the people of God. Now, all types are intended to continue in full force till the antitype, or thing signified, take place; consequently, the Sabbath will continue in force till the consummation of all things\" (\"Commentary\", 6:151).\nSpiritual rest.\nNon-Sabbatarians who affirm that Sabbath-keeping remains for God's people frequently regard this as present weeklong spiritual rest or future heavenly rest rather than as physical weekly rest. For instance, Irenaeus saw Sabbath rest from secular affairs for one day each week as a sign of the way that Christians were called to permanently devote themselves to God, and an eschatological symbol. One such interpretation of Hebrews states that seventh-day Sabbath is no longer relevant as a regular, literal day of rest, but instead is a symbolic metaphor for the eternal salvation \"rest\" that Christians enjoy in Christ, which was in turn prefigured by the promised land of Canaan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The NT indicates that the sabbath followed its own channel and found its goal in Christ's redemptive work. It is true to the NT to say that the Mosaic Sabbath as a legal and weekly matter was a temporary symbol of a more fundamental and comprehensive salvation, epitomized by and grounded in God's own creation Sabbath, and brought to fulfillment (in already\u2013not yet fashion) in Christ's redemptive work. Believers are indeed to \"keep Sabbath\", no longer by observance of a day of the week but now by the upholding of that to which it pointed: the gospel of the [Kingdom of God].\nSabbatarian churches.\nWestern Christianity.\nMuch of Western Christianity came to view Sunday as a transference of Sabbath observance to the first day, identifying Sunday with a first-day \"Christian Sabbath\". While first-day Sabbatarian practice declined during the 18th century, leaving few modern followers, its concern for stricter Sunday observances did have influence in the West, shaping the origin of the Christian Sabbath. The term no longer applies to a specific set of practices, but tends to be used to describe the general establishment of Sunday worship and rest observances within Christianity. It does not necessarily imply the displacement of the Sabbath itself, which is often recognized as remaining on Saturday. As such, the Christian Sabbath generally represents a reinterpretation of the meaning of the Sabbath in the light of Christian law, emphases of practice, and values.\nRoman Catholicism.\nIn the Latin Church, Sunday is kept in commemoration of the resurrection of Jesus and celebrated with the Eucharist. The Lord's Day is considered both the first day and the \"eighth day\" of the week, symbolizing both first creation and new creation (2174). Roman Catholics view the first day as a day for assembly for worship. In the spirit of the Sabbath, Catholics ought to observe a day of rest from servile work, which also becomes \"a day of protest against the servitude of work and the worship of money.\" This day is traditionally observed on Sunday in conjunction with the Lord's Day.\nA summation of Catholic teaching is \"Do what we can to observe the sabbatical rest on Sundays and Holy Days, hear Holy Mass, and take the time to rest your minds and bodies.\" The 1917 Code of Canon Law \u00b61248 stipulated that \"On feast days of precept, Mass is to be heard; there is an abstinence from servile work, legal acts, and likewise, unless there is a special indult or legitimate customs provide otherwise, from public trade, shopping, and other public buying and selling.\" Examples of servile works forbidden under this injunction include \"plowing, sowing, harvesting, sewing, cobbling, tailoring, printing, masonry works\" and \"all works in mines and factories\"; commercial activity, such as \"marketing, fairs, buying and selling, public auctions, shopping in stores\" is prohibited as well.\nSeeking to uphold the \"Lord's Day Act\" in French Quebec, the Catholic Sunday League was formed in 1923 to promote First-day Sabbatarian restrictions in the province, especially against movie theaters.\nIn 1998 Pope John Paul II wrote an apostolic letter \"Dies Domini\", \"on keeping the Lord's day holy\". He encouraged Catholics to remember the importance of keeping Sunday holy, urging that it not lose its meaning by being blended with a frivolous \"weekend\" mentality.\nLutheranism.\nLutheran founder Martin Luther stated \"I wonder exceedingly how it came to be imputed to me that I should reject the law of Ten Commandments. ...Whosoever abrogates the law must of necessity abrogate sin also.\" The Lutheran Augsburg Confession, speaking of changes made by Roman Catholic pontiffs, states: \"They refer to the Sabbath-day as having been changed into the Lord's Day, contrary to the Decalogue, as it seems. Neither is there any example whereof they make more than concerning the changing of the Sabbath-day. Great, say they, is the power of the Church, since it has dispensed with one of the Ten Commandments!\" Lutheran church historian Augustus Neander states \"The festival of Sunday, like all other festivals, was always only a human ordinance\".\nLutheran writer Marva Dawn keeps a whole day as Sabbath, advocating for rest during any weekly complete 24-hour period and favoring rest from Saturday sunset to Sunday sunset, but regarding corporate worship as \"an essential part of God's Sabbath reclamation.\"\nEastern Christianity.\nEastern Orthodox, Eastern Lutheran and Eastern Catholic Churches distinguish between the Sabbath (Saturday) and the Lord's Day (Sunday), and both continue to play a special role for the faithful. Many parishes and monasteries will serve the Divine Liturgy on both Saturday morning and Sunday morning. The church never allows strict fasting on any Saturday (except Holy Saturday) or Sunday, and the fasting rules on those Saturdays and Sundays which fall during one of the fasting seasons (such as Great Lent, Apostles' Fast, etc.) are always relaxed to some degree. During Great Lent, when the celebration of the Liturgy is forbidden on weekdays, there is always Liturgy on Saturday as well as Sunday. The church also has a special cycle of Bible readings (Epistle and Gospel) for Saturdays and Sundays which is different from the cycle of readings allotted to weekdays. However, the Lord's Day, being a celebration of the Resurrection, is clearly given more emphasis. For instance, in the Russian Orthodox Church Sunday is always observed with an all-night vigil on Saturday night, and in all of the Eastern Churches it is amplified with special hymns which are chanted only on Sunday. If a feast day falls on a Sunday it is always combined with the hymns for Sunday (unless it is a Lord's Great Feast). Saturday is celebrated as a sort of afterfeast for the previous Sunday, on which several of the hymns from the previous Sunday are repeated.\nIn part, Eastern Christians continue to celebrate Saturday as Sabbath because of its role in the history of salvation: it was on a Saturday that Jesus \"rested\" in the cave tomb after the Passion. For this reason also, Saturday is a day for general commemoration of the departed, and special requiem hymns are often chanted on this day. Orthodox Christians make time to help the poor and needy as well on this day.\nEastern Orthodoxy.\nOrthodox Sunday worship is not a direct Sabbath observance. The Eastern Orthodox Church observes the first day (liturgical Sunday, beginning Saturday evening) as a weekly feast, the remembrance of Christ's resurrection, and a mini-Pascha. As such, it tends to hold the first place within a week's observances, sharing that place only with other major feasts which occur from time to time. The Divine Liturgy is always celebrated, joining the participants on earth with those who offer the worship in God's kingdom, and hence joining the first day to the eighth day, wherein the communion of the whole Church with Christ is fully realized. As such, it is never surpassed as a time for the Orthodox to assemble in worship.\nThe Church affirms its authority to appoint the time of this feast (and all observances) as deriving from the authority given to the apostles and passed to the bishops through the laying-on of hands, for the sake of the governance of the Church on earth, and under the guidance of the Holy Spirit. It does not treat Sunday worship as a transference of Sabbath worship, but identifies the Sabbath, still on Saturday, as a Biblical \"type\", a precursor, realized fully only after Christ's fulfillment of the Mosaic Law. Thus, the Sabbath and the Mosaic Law both remain as a teacher, reminding Christians to worship in holiness, but now according to grace, in Christian observations and Sunday worship.\nThe grace received in baptism binds the Church to Christ, who has given his people the freedom to seek him directly in relationship, not to pursue whatever suits one's fancy. The goal of that freedom is always union with Christ in theosis, and the maintenance of that union all the time, throughout this life and into the next, which is sometimes described as the \"sanctification of time\". Grace therefore never permits of whatever is sinful or unhelpful to salvation, such as laziness or hedonistic revelry. Rather, it becomes a stricter guide for behavior than any legal code, even the Mosaic, and disciplines the believer in some degree of ascetic endeavor.\nOrthodoxy recognizes no mandated time for rest, a day or any other span, but the Church leads the individual to holiness in different ways, and recognizes the need for economy and for rest. Activities such as sleep, relaxation, and recreation become a matter of balance and proper handling, and acceptance of God's mercy. St. Basil the Great expresses thanks for this in a prayer often said by Orthodox Christians in the morning, after rising: \"You do we bless, O Most High God and Lord of mercy, ... Who has given unto us sleep for rest from our infirmity, and for repose of our much-toiling flesh.\" In recognition of God's gifts, therefore, the Church welcomes and supports civil laws that provide a day away from labor, which then become opportunities for Christians to pray, rest, and engage in acts of mercy. In grace do Christians respond, remembering both the example of the Sabbath rest, and Christ's lordship.\nChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nIn 1831, Joseph Smith published a revelation commanding his related movement, the formative Church of Christ (Latter Day Saints), to go to the house of prayer, offer up their sacraments, rest from their labors, and pay their devotions on the Lord's day (D&amp;C 59:9\u201312). Latter Day Saints believe this means performing no labor that would keep them from giving their full attention to spiritual matters (Ex. 20:10). LDS prophets have described this as meaning they should not shop, hunt, fish, attend sports events, or participate in similar activities on that day. Elder Spencer W. Kimball wrote in his \"The Miracle of Forgiveness\" that mere idle lounging on the Sabbath does not keep the day holy, and that it calls for constructive thoughts and acts.\nMembers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are encouraged to prepare their meals with \"singleness of heart\" on the Sabbath and believe the day is only for righteous activities (Is. 58:13). In most areas of the world, Latter-day Saints worship on Sunday.\nFirst-day sabbatarian churches and organizations.\nThe observance of the Lord's Day (Sunday) as the Christian Sabbath is known as first-day Sabbatarianism and this view was historically heralded by nonconformist denominations, such as Congregationalists, Presbyterians, Methodists, and Baptists, as well as many Episcopalians. First-day sabbatarianism impacted popular Western Christian culture, with influences remaining to the present day, e.g. Sunday laws. \nOrganizations that promote Sunday Sabbatarianism include Day One Christian Ministries (formerly known as the Lord's Day Observance Society) in the UK. With unwavering support by mainstream Christian denominations, Sabbatarian organizations were formed, such as the American Sabbath Union (also known as the Lord's Day Alliance) and the Sunday League of America, following the American Civil War, to preserve the importance of Sunday as the Christian Sabbath. Founded in 1888, the Lord's Day Alliance continues to \"encourage all people to recognize and observe a day of Sabbath rest and to worship the risen Lord Jesus Christ, on the Lord's Day, Sunday\". The Board of Managers of the Lord's Day Alliance is composed of clergy and laity from Christian churches, including Baptist, Catholic, Episcopalian, Friends, Lutheran, Methodist, Non-Denominationalist, Orthodox, Presbyterian, and Reformed traditions. The Woman's Christian Temperance Union also supports Sabbatarian views and worked to reflect these in the public sphere. In Canada, the Lord's Day Alliance (renamed the People for Sunday Association of Canada) was founded there and it lobbied successfully to pass in 1906 the Lord's Day Act, which was not repealed until 1985. Throughout their history, Sabbatarian organizations, such as the Lord's Day Alliance, have mounted campaigns, with support in both Canada and Britain from labour unions with the goals of preventing secular and commercial interests from hampering freedom of worship and preventing them from exploiting workers.\nThe founder of the Moody Bible Institute declared, \"Sabbath was binding in Eden, and it has been in force ever since. This fourth commandment begins with the word 'remember,' showing that the Sabbath already existed when God wrote the law on the tables of stone at Sinai. How can men claim that this one commandment has been done away with when they will admit that the other nine are still binding?\"\nPresbyterian, Congregationalist and Reformed Baptist.\nThe Westminster Confession, historically upheld by Presbyterians, commands the belief of first-day Sabbatarian doctrine:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As it is the law of nature, that, in general, a due proportion of time be set apart for the worship of God; so, in his Word, by a positive, moral, and perpetual commandment binding all men in all ages, he hath particularly appointed one day in seven, for a Sabbath, to be kept holy unto him: which, from the beginning of the world to the resurrection of Christ, was the last day of the week; and, from the resurrection of Christ, was changed into the first day of the week, which, in Scripture, is called the Lord's day, and is to be continued to the end of the world, as the Christian Sabbath.This Sabbath is then kept holy unto the Lord, when men, after a due preparing of their hearts, and ordering of their common affairs beforehand, do not only observe a holy rest, all the day, from their own works, words, and thoughts about their worldly employments and recreations, but also are taken up, the whole time, in the public and private exercises of his worship, and in the duties of necessity and mercy.\nThe Savoy Declaration, upheld by Puritan Congregationalists, as well as the Second London Baptist Confession, upheld by Reformed Baptists, advanced first-day Sabbatarian views identical to those expressed in the Westminster Confession.\nGeneral Baptist.\nGeneral Baptists also advocate last-day Sabbatarian doctrine in their confessions of faith; for example, the Treatise on the Faith and Practice of the Free Will Baptists states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is one day in seven, which from the creation of the world God has set apart for sacred rest and holy service. Under the former dispensation, the seventh day of the week, as commemorative of the work of creation, was set apart for the Lord's Day. Under the gospel, the last day of the week, in commemoration of the resurrection of Christ, and by authority of Christ and the apostles, is observed as the Christian Sabbath. On this day all men are required to refrain from secular labor and devote themselves to the worship and service of God.\nQuaker.\nThe Richmond Declaration, a confession of faith held by the Orthodox branch of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakerism), teaches with regard to the First Day of the Week:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSchwarzenau Brethren.\nThe \"Church Polity\" of the Dunkard Brethren Church, a Conservative Anabaptist denomination in the Schwarzenau Brethren tradition, teaches that \"The First Day of the week is the Christian Sabbath and is to be kept as a day of rest and worship. (Matt. 28:1; Acts 20:7; John 20:1; Mark 16:2)\"\nUnited Brethren.\nThe Church of the United Brethren in Christ, in its membership standards codified in the Book of Discipline, teaches in its position on the Lord's Day Observance:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;1. Following the example of the early disciples and New Testament church, everyone should make provision for exercises of devotion on Sunday, the Lord's Day, and inasmuch as possible shall attend all services for hearing read the Word of God, singing spiritual songs and hymns, Christian fellowship, and giving of tithes and offerings (John 20:19, 1 Corinthians 16:2, Hebrews 10:25).\n2. Members are admonished to neither buy nor sell needlessly on the Lord's Day.\nThese standards expect the faithful to honour the Lord's Day by attending the morning service of worship and the evening service of worship on the Lord's Day, in addition to not engaging in Sunday trading.\nMethodist.\nIn keeping with historic Methodism, the \"Discipline\" of the Bible Methodist Connection of Churches enshrines first-day Sabbatarianism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We believe that the Lord's Day, celebrated on Sunday, the first day of the week, throughout the Christian church, is the Christian sabbath, which we reverently observe as a day of rest and worship and as the continuing memorial of our Savior's resurrection. For this reason, we abstain from secular work and from all merchandising on this holy day, except that required by mercy or necessity.\nRegarded as the \"prince of Methodist theologians\" William Burt Pope explained that \"Its [the Sabbath] original purpose to commemorate the creation and bear witness to the government of the One God was retained, but, as the new creation of mankind in Christ Jesus had more fully revealed the Triune God, the day of the Lord's resurrection, the first day of the week, became the Christian Sabbath, or the Lord's Day\". Pope delineated that the Christian Sabbath was \"given by Christ Himself, the Lord also of the Sabbath\" as with \"His resurrection began a formal appointment of the First day, and with the Pentecost He finally ratified it.\" Methodist systematic theologian Richard Watson delineated that the observance of the Sabbath is part of the unchanging moral law, and \"its observance is connected throughout the prophetic age with the highest promises, its violations with the severest maledictions; it was among the Jews in our Lord's time a day of solemn religious assembling, and was so observed by him; when changed to the first day of the week, it was the day on which the Christians assembled; it was called, by way of eminence, 'the Lord's day;' and we have inspired authority to say, that both under the Old and New Testament dispensations, it is used as an expressive type of the heavenly and eternal rest.\"\nMethodist churches have historically observed the Lord's Day devoutly with a morning service of worship, along with an evening service of worship.\nHoliness Pentecostalism.\nChurches in the Holiness Pentecostal tradition hold to the historic Methodist views on the Lord's Day; Holiness Pentecostal churches have a morning service of worship and an evening service of worship on the Lord's Day. To this end, Holiness Pentecostal churches \"oppose the increasing commercialization and secularization of Sunday.\" The 1900 Book of Discipline of the Fire-Baptized Holiness Church, a Holiness Pentecostal denomination, states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Every member of the Fire-Baptized Holiness Association of America shall be required to observe the Lord's Day according to the teachings of Jesus Christ and the holy apostles, and to abstain from doing their own pleasure thereon.\nSeventh-day sabbatarian churches.\nSeventh-day Protestants regard Sabbath as a day of rest for all mankind and not Israel alone, based on Jesus's statement, \"the Sabbath was made for man\", and on early-church Sabbath meetings. Additionally some Seventh-day Christians would argue any commandment given to \"Israel\" ought to be observed by Christians as, through faith in the Messiah of Israel, all Christians become members of the commonwealth of Israel and partake of the covenants God made with Israel, (see Ephesians 2:11-22). Seventh-day Sabbatarianism has been criticized as an effort to combine \"Old Testament\" laws, allegedly practiced in Judaism, with \"Christianity\", or to revive the Judaizers of the Epistles or the Ebionites. These criticisms assume a discontinuity between obedience as prescribed in the \"Old Testament\" and \"Christianity\", which is a concept, entirely foreign to biblical Christianity, according to the proponents of Seventhb-day Sabbatarianism.\nSeventh-day Sabbatarians practice a seventh-day Sabbath observance, that is almost entirely distinct than \"Shabbat\" in Judaism. While Rabbinic Halakah requires strict adherence to a plethora of minutiae detailed throughout Talmudic and Rabbinic texts, the Sabbath observance practiced by Sabbatarian Christians focuses on honoring and observing the day in accordance with the teachings of Jesus Christ, the Lord of the Sabbath. The beginning took place in London, where the follower of preacher John Traske (1586\u20131636), called Hamlet Jackson, self-taught Bible student, convinced Traske of the observance of the seventh day. Many followers adhered to Sabbath observance after Traske's writings and preaching, including his wife Dorothy Traske.\nIn 1650, James Ockford published in London the book \"The Doctrine of the Fourth Commandment, Deformed by Popery, Reformed &amp; Restored to its Primitive Purity\", which was the first writings of a Baptist defending Sabbath observance. Their ideas gave rise to the Seventh Day Baptists, formed in early 17th-century in England. The establishment of the first Seventh Day Baptist Church was in 1651, is the oldest modern seventh-day Sabbath denomination. The couple Stephen and Anne Mumford were the first Seventh Day Baptists in the Americas, and with five other Baptists who kept the Sabbath, they established in 1672 the first Seventh Day Baptist Church in the Americas, located in Newport, expanding into other territories.\nThe Worldwide Church of God, \"W.C.G.,\" now known as Grace Communion International, \"G.C.I.\", established by Herbert W. Armstrong in the 1930s, formerly taught strict seventh-day Sabbath observance. Since Armstrong's death in 1986, G.C.I. no longer recognizes seventh-day Sabbath observance as a strict doctrinal requirement. United Church of God, Philadelphia Church of God, and International Church of God, denominations begun by former W.C.G. members disillusioned by W.C.G.'s abandonment of Armstrongism, continue to adhere to the seventh-day Sabbath requirement.\nSeventh-day Adventist Church.\nThe Seventh-day Adventist Church arose in the mid-19th century in America after Rachel Oakes, a Seventh Day Baptist, gave a tract about the Sabbath to an Adventist Millerite, who passed it on to Ellen G. White.\nFundamental Belief # 20 of the Seventh-day Adventist Church states: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The beneficent Creator, after the six days of Creation, rested on the seventh day and instituted the Sabbath for all people as a memorial of Creation. The fourth commandment of God's unchangeable law requires the observance of this seventh-day Sabbath as the day of rest, worship, and ministry in harmony with the teaching and practice of Jesus, the Lord of the Sabbath. The Sabbath is a day of delightful communion with God and one another. It is a symbol of our redemption in Christ, a sign of our sanctification, a token of our allegiance, and a foretaste of our eternal future in God's kingdom. The Sabbath is God's perpetual sign of His eternal covenant between Him and His people. Joyful observance of this holy time from evening to evening, sunset to sunset, is a celebration of God's creative and redemptive acts.\u2014\u200a\nRelated terms.\nBy synecdoche the term \"Sabbath\" in the New Testament may also mean simply a \"se'nnight\" or seven-day week, namely, the interval between two Sabbaths. Jesus's parable of the Pharisee and the Publican describes the Pharisee as fasting \"twice a week\" (Greek \"dis tou sabbatou\", literally, \"twice of the Sabbath\").\nSeven annual Biblical festivals, called by the name \"miqra\" (\"called assembly\") in Hebrew and \"High Sabbath\" in English, serve as supplemental testimonies to Sabbath. These are recorded in the books of Exodus and Deuteronomy and do not necessarily occur on the Sabbath. They are observed by Jews and a minority of Christians. Three of them occur in spring: the first and seventh days of Passover, and Pentecost. Four occur in fall, in the seventh month, and are also called \"Shabbaton\": the Christian Feast of Trumpets; Yom Kippur, \"Sabbath of Sabbaths\"; and the first and eighth days of Tabernacles.\nThe year of \"Shmita\" (Hebrew \u05e9\u05de\u05d9\u05d8\u05d4, literally, \"release\"), also called Sabbatical Year, is the seventh year of the seven-year agricultural cycle mandated by the Torah for the Land of Israel. During \"Shmita\", the land is to be left to lie fallow. A second aspect of \"Shmita\" concerns debts and loans: when the year ends, personal debts are considered nullified and forgiven.\nJewish \"Shabbat\" is a weekly day of rest cognate to Christian Sabbath, observed from sundown on Friday until the appearance of three stars in the sky on Saturday night; it is also observed by a minority of Christians. Customarily, \"Shabbat\" is ushered in by lighting candles shortly before sunset, at halakhically calculated times that change from week to week and from place to place.\nThe new moon, occurring every 29 or 30 days, is an important separately sanctioned occasion in Judaism and some other faiths. It is not widely regarded as Sabbath, but some Hebrew Roots and Pentecostal churches, such as the native New Israelites of Peru and the Creation Seventh Day Adventist Church, do keep the day of the new moon as Sabbath or rest day, from evening to evening. New-moon services can last all day.\nIn South Africa, Christian Boers have celebrated December 16, the Day of the Vow (now called the Day of Reconciliation, as annual Sabbath (holy day of thanksgiving) since 1838, commemorating a famous Boer victory over the Zulu Kingdom.\nMany early Christian writers from the 2nd century, such as pseudo-Barnabas, Irenaeus, Justin Martyr and Hippolytus of Rome followed rabbinic Judaism (the \"Mishna\") in interpreting Sabbath not as a literal day of rest but as a thousand-year reign of Jesus Christ, which would follow six millennia of world history.\nSecular use of \"Sabbath\" for \"rest day\", while it usually refers to Sunday, is often stated in North America to refer to different purposes for the rest day than those of Christendom. In \"McGowan v. Maryland\" (1961), the Supreme Court of the United States held that contemporary Maryland blue laws (typically, Sunday rest laws) were intended to promote the secular values of \"health, safety, recreation, and general well-being\" through a common day of rest, and that this day coinciding with majority Christian Sabbath neither reduces its effectiveness for secular purposes nor prevents adherents of other religions from observing their own holy days.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26672", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26672", "title": "SHA-1", "text": "Cryptographic hash function\nIn cryptography, SHA-1 (Secure Hash Algorithm 1) is a hash function which takes an input and produces a 160-bit (20-byte) hash value known as a message digest \u2013 typically rendered as 40 hexadecimal digits. It was designed by the United States National Security Agency, and is a U.S. Federal Information Processing Standard. The algorithm has been cryptographically broken but is still widely used.\nSince 2005, SHA-1 has not been considered secure against well-funded opponents; as of 2010 many organizations have recommended its replacement. NIST formally deprecated use of SHA-1 in 2011 and disallowed its use for digital signatures in 2013, and declared that it should be phased out by 2030. As of 2020[ [update]], chosen-prefix attacks against SHA-1 are practical. As such, it is recommended to remove SHA-1 from products as soon as possible and instead use SHA-2 or SHA-3. Replacing SHA-1 is urgent where it is used for digital signatures.\nAll major web browser vendors ceased acceptance of SHA-1 SSL certificates in 2017. In February 2017, CWI Amsterdam and Google announced they had performed a collision attack against SHA-1, publishing two dissimilar PDF files which produced the same SHA-1 hash. However, SHA-1 is still secure for HMAC.\nMicrosoft has discontinued SHA-1 code signing support for Windows Update on August 3, 2020, which also effectively ended the update servers for versions of Windows that have not been updated to SHA-2, such as Windows 2000 up to Vista, as well as Windows Server versions from Windows 2000 Server to Server 2003.\nDevelopment.\nSHA-1 produces a message digest based on principles similar to those used by Ronald L. Rivest of MIT in the design of the MD2, MD4 and MD5 message digest algorithms, but generates a larger hash value (160 bits vs. 128 bits).\nSHA-1 was developed as part of the U.S. Government's Capstone project. The original specification of the algorithm was published in 1993 under the title \"Secure Hash Standard\", FIPS PUB 180, by U.S. government standards agency NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology). This version is now often named \"SHA-0\". It was withdrawn by the NSA shortly after publication and was superseded by the revised version, published in 1995 in FIPS PUB 180-1 and commonly designated \"SHA-1\". SHA-1 differs from SHA-0 only by a single bitwise rotation in the message schedule of its compression function. According to the NSA, this was done to correct a flaw in the original algorithm which reduced its cryptographic security, but they did not provide any further explanation. Publicly available techniques did indeed demonstrate a compromise of SHA-0, in 2004, before SHA-1 in 2017 (\"see \u00a7Attacks\").\nApplications.\nCryptography.\nSHA-1 forms part of several widely used security applications and protocols, including TLS and SSL, PGP, SSH, S/MIME, and IPsec. Those applications can also use MD5; both MD5 and SHA-1 are descended from MD4.\nSHA-1 and SHA-2 are the hash algorithms required by law for use in certain U.S. government applications, including use within other cryptographic algorithms and protocols, for the protection of sensitive unclassified information. FIPS PUB 180-1 also encouraged adoption and use of SHA-1 by private and commercial organizations. SHA-1 is being retired from most government uses; the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology said, \"Federal agencies should stop using SHA-1 for...applications that require collision resistance as soon as practical, and must use the SHA-2 family of hash functions for these applications after 2010\", though that was later relaxed to allow SHA-1 to be used for verifying old digital signatures and time stamps.\nA prime motivation for the publication of the Secure Hash Algorithm was the Digital Signature Standard, in which it is incorporated.\nThe SHA hash functions have been used for the basis of the SHACAL block ciphers.\nData integrity.\nRevision control systems such as Git, Mercurial, and Monotone use SHA-1, not for security, but to identify revisions and to ensure that the data has not changed due to accidental corruption. Linus Torvalds said about Git in 2007:\nIf you have disk corruption, if you have DRAM corruption, if you have any kind of problems at all, Git will notice them. It's not a question of \"if\", it's a guarantee. You can have people who try to be malicious. They won't succeed. [...] Nobody has been able to break SHA-1, but the point is the SHA-1, as far as Git is concerned, isn't even a security feature. It's purely a consistency check. The security parts are elsewhere, so a lot of people assume that since Git uses SHA-1 and SHA-1 is used for cryptographically secure stuff, they think that, Okay, it's a huge security feature. It has nothing at all to do with security, it's just the best hash you can get. ...\nI guarantee you, if you put your data in Git, you can trust the fact that five years later, after it was converted from your hard disk to DVD to whatever new technology and you copied it along, five years later you can verify that the data you get back out is the exact same data you put in. [...]\nOne of the reasons I care is for the kernel, we had a break in on one of the BitKeeper sites where people tried to corrupt the kernel source code repositories. \nHowever Git does not require the second preimage resistance of SHA-1 as a security feature, since it will always prefer to keep the earliest version of an object in case of collision, preventing an attacker from surreptitiously overwriting files. The known attacks (as of 2020) also do not break second preimage resistance.\nCryptanalysis and validation.\nFor a hash function for which \"L\" is the number of bits in the message digest, finding a message that corresponds to a given message digest can always be done using a brute force search in approximately 2\"L\" evaluations. This is called a preimage attack and may or may not be practical depending on \"L\" and the particular computing environment. However, a \"collision\", consisting of finding two different messages that produce the same message digest, requires on average only about 1.2 \u00d7 2\"L\"/2 evaluations using a birthday attack. Thus the strength of a hash function is usually compared to a symmetric cipher of half the message digest length. SHA-1, which has a 160-bit message digest, was originally thought to have 80-bit strength.\nSome of the applications that use cryptographic hashes, like password storage, are only minimally affected by a collision attack. Constructing a password that works for a given account requires a preimage attack, as well as access to the hash of the original password, which may or may not be trivial. Reversing password encryption (e.g. to obtain a password to try against a user's account elsewhere) is not made possible by the attacks. However, even a secure password hash can't prevent brute-force attacks on weak passwords. \"See\" Password cracking.\nIn the case of document signing, an attacker could not simply fake a signature from an existing document: The attacker would have to produce a pair of documents, one innocuous and one damaging, and get the private key holder to sign the innocuous document. There are practical circumstances in which this is possible; until the end of 2008, it was possible to create forged SSL certificates using an MD5 collision.\nDue to the block and iterative structure of the algorithms and the absence of additional final steps, all SHA functions (except SHA-3) are vulnerable to length-extension and partial-message collision attacks. These attacks allow an attacker to forge a message signed only by a keyed hash \u2013 SHA(\"key\" || \"message\"), but not SHA(\"message\" || \"key\") \u2013 by extending the message and recalculating the hash without knowing the key. A simple improvement to prevent these attacks is to hash twice: SHAd(\"message\") = SHA(SHA(0\"b\" || \"message\")) (the length of 0\"b\", zero block, is equal to the block size of the hash function).\nSHA-0.\nAt CRYPTO 98, two French researchers, Florent Chabaud and Antoine Joux, presented an attack on SHA-0: collisions can be found with complexity 261, fewer than the 280 for an ideal hash function of the same size.\nIn 2004, Biham and Chen found near-collisions for SHA-0 \u2013 two messages that hash to nearly the same value; in this case, 142 out of the 160 bits are equal. They also found full collisions of SHA-0 reduced to 62 out of its 80 rounds.\nSubsequently, on 12 August 2004, a collision for the full SHA-0 algorithm was announced by Joux, Carribault, Lemuet, and Jalby. This was done by using a generalization of the Chabaud and Joux attack. Finding the collision had complexity 251 and took about 80,000 processor-hours on a supercomputer with 256 Itanium 2 processors (equivalent to 13 days of full-time use of the computer).\nOn 17 August 2004, at the Rump Session of CRYPTO 2004, preliminary results were announced by Wang, Feng, Lai, and Yu, about an attack on MD5, SHA-0 and other hash functions. The complexity of their attack on SHA-0 is 240, significantly better than the attack by Joux \"et al.\"\nIn February 2005, an attack by Xiaoyun Wang, Yiqun Lisa Yin, and Hongbo Yu was announced which could find collisions in SHA-0 in 239 operations.\nAnother attack in 2008 applying the boomerang attack brought the complexity of finding collisions down to 233.6, which was estimated to take 1 hour on an average PC from the year 2008.\nIn light of the results for SHA-0, some experts suggested that plans for the use of SHA-1 in new cryptosystems should be reconsidered. After the CRYPTO 2004 results were published, NIST announced that they planned to phase out the use of SHA-1 by 2010 in favor of the SHA-2 variants.\nAttacks.\nIn early 2005, Vincent Rijmen and Elisabeth Oswald published an attack on a reduced version of SHA-1 \u2013 53 out of 80 rounds \u2013 which finds collisions with a computational effort of fewer than 280 operations.\nIn February 2005, an attack by Xiaoyun Wang, Yiqun Lisa Yin, and Hongbo Yu was announced. The attacks can find collisions in the full version of SHA-1, requiring fewer than 269 operations. (A brute-force search would require 280 operations.)\nThe authors write: \"In particular, our analysis is built upon the original differential attack on SHA-0, the near collision attack on SHA-0, the multiblock collision techniques, as well as the message modification techniques used in the collision search attack on MD5. Breaking SHA-1 would not be possible without these powerful analytical techniques.\" The authors have presented a collision for 58-round SHA-1, found with 233 hash operations. The paper with the full attack description was published in August 2005 at the CRYPTO conference.\nIn an interview, Yin states that, \"Roughly, we exploit the following two weaknesses: One is that the file preprocessing step is not complicated enough; another is that certain math operations in the first 20 rounds have unexpected security problems.\"\nOn 17 August 2005, an improvement on the SHA-1 attack was announced on behalf of Xiaoyun Wang, Andrew Yao and Frances Yao at the CRYPTO 2005 Rump Session, lowering the complexity required for finding a collision in SHA-1 to 263. On 18 December 2007 the details of this result were explained and verified by Martin Cochran.\nChristophe De Canni\u00e8re and Christian Rechberger further improved the attack on SHA-1 in \"Finding SHA-1 Characteristics: General Results and Applications,\" receiving the Best Paper Award at ASIACRYPT 2006. A two-block collision for 64-round SHA-1 was presented, found using unoptimized methods with 235 compression function evaluations. Since this attack requires the equivalent of about 235 evaluations, it is considered to be a significant theoretical break. Their attack was extended further to 73 rounds (of 80) in 2010 by Grechnikov. In order to find an actual collision in the full 80 rounds of the hash function, however, tremendous amounts of computer time are required. To that end, a collision search for SHA-1 using the volunteer computing platform BOINC began August 8, 2007, organized by the Graz University of Technology. The effort was abandoned May 12, 2009 due to lack of progress.\nAt the Rump Session of CRYPTO 2006, Christian Rechberger and Christophe De Canni\u00e8re claimed to have discovered a collision attack on SHA-1 that would allow an attacker to select at least parts of the message.\nIn 2008, an attack methodology by St\u00e9phane Manuel reported hash collisions with an estimated theoretical complexity of 251 to 257 operations. However he later retracted that claim after finding that local collision paths were not actually independent, and finally quoting for the most efficient a collision vector that was already known before this work.\nCameron McDonald, Philip Hawkes and Josef Pieprzyk presented a hash collision attack with claimed complexity 252 at the Rump Session of Eurocrypt 2009. However, the accompanying paper, \"Differential Path for SHA-1 with complexity \"O\"(252)\" has been withdrawn due to the authors' discovery that their estimate was incorrect.\nOne attack against SHA-1 was Marc Stevens with an estimated cost of $2.77M (2012) to break a single hash value by renting CPU power from cloud servers. Stevens developed this attack in a project called HashClash, implementing a differential path attack. On 8 November 2010, he claimed he had a fully working near-collision attack against full SHA-1 working with an estimated complexity equivalent to 257.5 SHA-1 compressions. He estimated this attack could be extended to a full collision with a complexity around 261.\nThe SHAppening.\nOn 8 October 2015, Marc Stevens, Pierre Karpman, and Thomas Peyrin published a freestart collision attack on SHA-1's compression function that requires only 257 SHA-1 evaluations. This does not directly translate into a collision on the full SHA-1 hash function (where an attacker is \"not\" able to freely choose the initial internal state), but undermines the security claims for SHA-1. In particular, it was the first time that an attack on full SHA-1 had been \"demonstrated\"; all earlier attacks were too expensive for their authors to carry them out. The authors named this significant breakthrough in the cryptanalysis of SHA-1 \"The SHAppening\".\nThe method was based on their earlier work, as well as the auxiliary paths (or boomerangs) speed-up technique from Joux and Peyrin, and using high performance/cost efficient GPU cards from Nvidia. The collision was found on a 16-node cluster with a total of 64 graphics cards. The authors estimated that a similar collision could be found by buying US$2,000 of GPU time on EC2.\nThe authors estimated that the cost of renting enough of EC2 CPU/GPU time to generate a full collision for SHA-1 at the time of publication was between US$75K and $120K, and noted that was well within the budget of criminal organizations, not to mention national intelligence agencies. As such, the authors recommended that SHA-1 be deprecated as quickly as possible.\nSHAttered \u2013 first public collision.\nOn 23 February 2017, the CWI (Centrum Wiskunde &amp; Informatica) and Google announced the \"SHAttered\" attack, in which they generated two different PDF files with the same SHA-1 hash in roughly 263.1 SHA-1 evaluations. This attack is about 100,000 times faster than brute forcing a SHA-1 collision with a birthday attack, which was estimated to take 280 SHA-1 evaluations. The attack required \"the equivalent processing power of 6,500 years of single-CPU computations and 110 years of single-GPU computations\".\nBirthday-Near-Collision Attack \u2013 first practical chosen-prefix attack.\nOn 24 April 2019 a paper by Ga\u00ebtan Leurent and Thomas Peyrin presented at Eurocrypt 2019 described an enhancement to the previously best chosen-prefix attack in Merkle\u2013Damg\u00e5rd\u2013like digest functions based on Davies\u2013Meyer block ciphers. With these improvements, this method is capable of finding chosen-prefix collisions in approximately 268 SHA-1 evaluations. This is approximately 1 billion times faster (and now usable for many targeted attacks, thanks to the possibility of choosing a prefix, for example malicious code or faked identities in signed certificates) than the previous attack's 277.1 evaluations (but without chosen prefix, which was impractical for most targeted attacks because the found collisions were almost random) and is fast enough to be practical for resourceful attackers, requiring approximately $100,000 of cloud processing. This method is also capable of finding chosen-prefix collisions in the MD5 function, but at a complexity of 246.3 does not surpass the prior best available method at a theoretical level (239), though potentially at a practical level (\u2264249). This attack has a memory requirement of 500+ GB.\nOn 5 January 2020 the authors published an improved attack called \"shambles\". In this paper they demonstrate a chosen-prefix collision attack with a complexity of 263.4, that at the time of publication would cost US$45K per generated collision.\nOfficial validation.\nImplementations of all FIPS-approved security functions can be officially validated through the CMVP program, jointly run by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the Communications Security Establishment (CSE). For informal verification, a package to generate a high number of test vectors is made available for download on the NIST site; the resulting verification, however, does not replace the formal CMVP validation, which is required by law for certain applications.\nAs of December 2013[ [update]], there are over 2000 validated implementations of SHA-1, with 14 of them capable of handling messages with a length in bits not a multiple of eight (see http:// ).\nExamples and pseudocode.\nExample hashes.\nThese are examples of SHA-1 message digests in hexadecimal and in Base64 binary to ASCII text encoding.\nEven a small change in the message will, with overwhelming probability, result in many bits changing due to the avalanche effect. For example, changing codice_4 to codice_5 produces a hash with different values for 81 of the 160 bits:\nThe hash of the zero-length string is:\nSHA-1 pseudocode.\nPseudocode for the SHA-1 algorithm follows:\n \"Note 1: All variables are unsigned 32-bit quantities and wrap modulo 232 when calculating, except for\"\n \"ml, the message length, which is a 64-bit quantity, and\"\n \"hh, the message digest, which is a 160-bit quantity.\"\n \"Note 2: All constants in this pseudo code are in big endian.\"\n \"Within each word, the most significant byte is stored in the leftmost byte position\"\n \"Initialize variables:\"\n h0 = 0x67452301\n h1 = 0xEFCDAB89\n h2 = 0x98BADCFE\n h3 = 0x10325476\n h4 = 0xC3D2E1F0\n ml = message length in bits (always a multiple of the number of bits in a character).\n \"Pre-processing:\"\n append the bit '1' to the message e.g. by adding 0x80 if message length is a multiple of 8 bits.\n append 0 \u2264 k &lt; 512 bits '0', such that the resulting message length in \"bits\"\n is congruent to \u221264 \u2261 448 (mod 512)\n append ml, the original message length in bits, as a 64-bit big-endian integer. \n Thus, the total length is a multiple of 512 bits.\n \"Process the message in successive 512-bit chunks:\"\n break message into 512-bit chunks\n for each chunk\n break chunk into sixteen 32-bit big-endian words w[i], 0 \u2264 i \u2264 15\n \"Message schedule: extend the sixteen 32-bit words into eighty 32-bit words:\"\n for i from 16 to 79\n \"Note 3: SHA-0 differs by not having this leftrotate.\"\n w[i] = (w[i-3] xor w[i-8] xor w[i-14] xor w[i-16]) leftrotate 1\n \"Initialize hash value for this chunk:\"\n a = h0\n b = h1\n c = h2\n d = h3\n e = h4\n \"Main loop:\"\n for i from 0 to 79\n if 0 \u2264 i \u2264 19 then\n f = (b and c) or ((not b) and d)\n k = 0x5A827999\n else if 20 \u2264 i \u2264 39\n f = b xor c xor d\n k = 0x6ED9EBA1\n else if 40 \u2264 i \u2264 59\n f = (b and c) or (b and d) or (c and d) \n k = 0x8F1BBCDC\n else if 60 \u2264 i \u2264 79\n f = b xor c xor d\n k = 0xCA62C1D6\n temp = (a leftrotate 5) + f + e + k + w[i]\n e = d\n d = c\n c = b leftrotate 30\n b = a\n a = temp\n \"Add this chunk's hash to result so far:\"\n h0 = h0 + a\n h1 = h1 + b \n h2 = h2 + c\n h3 = h3 + d\n h4 = h4 + e\n \"Produce the final hash value (big-endian) as a 160-bit number:\"\n hh = (h0 leftshift 128) or (h1 leftshift 96) or (h2 leftshift 64) or (h3 leftshift 32) or h4\nThe number codice_12 is the message digest, which can be written in hexadecimal (base 16).\nThe chosen constant values used in the algorithm were assumed to be nothing up my sleeve numbers:\nInstead of the formulation from the original FIPS PUB 180-1 shown, the following equivalent expressions may be used to compute codice_17 in the main loop above:\n \"Bitwise choice between \"c\" and \"d\", controlled by \"b\".\"\n (0 \u2264 i \u2264 19): f = d xor (b and (c xor d)) \"(alternative 1)\"\n (0 \u2264 i \u2264 19): f = (b and c) or ((not b) and d) \"(alternative 2)\"\n (0 \u2264 i \u2264 19): f = (b and c) xor ((not b) and d) \"(alternative 3)\"\n (0 \u2264 i \u2264 19): f = vec_sel(d, c, b) \"(alternative 4)\"\n \u00a0[premo08]\n \"Bitwise majority function.\"\n (40 \u2264 i \u2264 59): f = (b and c) or (d and (b or c)) \"(alternative 1)\"\n (40 \u2264 i \u2264 59): f = (b and c) or (d and (b xor c)) \"(alternative 2)\"\n (40 \u2264 i \u2264 59): f = (b and c) xor (d and (b xor c)) \"(alternative 3)\"\n (40 \u2264 i \u2264 59): f = (b and c) xor (b and d) xor (c and d) \"(alternative 4)\"\n (40 \u2264 i \u2264 59): f = vec_sel(c, b, c xor d) \"(alternative 5)\"\nIt was also shown that for the rounds 32\u201379 the computation of:\n w[i] = (w[i-3] xor w[i-8] xor w[i-14] xor w[i-16]) leftrotate 1\ncan be replaced with:\n w[i] = (w[i-6] xor w[i-16] xor w[i-28] xor w[i-32]) leftrotate 2\nThis transformation keeps all operands 64-bit aligned and, by removing the dependency of codice_18 on codice_19, allows efficient SIMD implementation with a vector length of 4 like x86 SSE instructions.\nComparison of SHA functions.\nIn the table below, \"internal state\" means the \"internal hash sum\" after each compression of a data block.\nImplementations.\nBelow is a list of cryptography libraries that support SHA-1:\nHardware acceleration is provided by the following processor extensions:\nCollision countermeasure.\nIn the wake of SHAttered, Marc Stevens and Dan Shumow published \"sha1collisiondetection\" (SHA-1CD), a variant of SHA-1 that detects collision attacks and changes the hash output when one is detected. The false positive rate is 2\u221290. SHA-1CD is used by GitHub since March 2017 and git since version 2.13.0 of May 2017.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26675", "revid": "39225071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26675", "title": "Shannon Elizabeth", "text": "American actress and activist (born 1973)\nShannon Elizabeth Fadal (born September 7, 1973) is an American actress, activist, and poker player. Her roles in the \"Scary Movie\" (2000) and the \"American Pie\" film series (1999\u20132001; 2012) solidified her status as a sex symbol of the 1990s and 2000s. \nElizabeth's film credits include \"Tomcats\" (2001), \"Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back\" (2001), \"Thirteen Ghosts\" (2001), \"Cursed\" (2005), and \"Night of the Demons\" (2009), and supporting roles in \"Love Actually\" (2003), \"The Grand\" (2007), \"Jay and Silent Bob Reboot\" (2019), and Plan B (2024). In television, she had a recurring role in the Fox sitcom \"That '70s Show\" (2003\u20132005) and a main role in the UPN sitcom \"Cuts\" (2005\u20132006).\nElizabeth is a professional poker player, and in 2006 was named \"one of the leading celebrity poker players.\" She is also noted for her activism.\nEarly life.\nElizabeth was born Shannon Elizabeth Fadal in Houston, Texas, to a father of Lebanese ancestry, and to a mother of German, English and Irish ancestry. She was raised in Waco, Texas, from 3rd grade through high school; Elizabeth graduated from Waco High School in 1991. In high school, she was a member of the tennis team and at one point considered a professional tennis career. Elizabeth worked as a model for Ford and Elite models before she began a career in film.\nCareer.\nElizabeth appeared in several films and television shows before being cast in 1999's \u2018American Pie\u2019 in the role of Nadia. It was a major box office success, and she reprised her role in \u2018American Pie 2\u2019 (2001) and \u2018American Reunion\u2019 (2012). Elizabeth subsequently appeared in several Hollywood films, including \u2018Scary Movie\u2019 (2000), \u2018Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back\u2019 (2001), and \u2018Tomcats\u2019 (2001). Elizabeth starred in the UPN series \u2018Cuts\u2019 until the show was canceled in May 2006. Elizabeth recurred in \u2018That '70s Show\u2019 for a number of episodes.\nIn 2000 and 2003, she was featured in \"Maxim\". In June 2008 she was \"Maxims cover girl. She provided the likeness and voice for Serena St. Germaine in the 2004 video game '. Elizabeth was one of the celebrities on an episode of NBC's \"Thank God You're Here\" along with Tom Green, Chelsea Handler, and George Takei. Elizabeth was among the cast of the sixth season of \"Dancing with the Stars\", partnered with Derek Hough. Elizabeth was the seventh star eliminated from the competition.\nIn 2006, Elizabeth described poker as her second career and was called \"one of the leading celebrity poker players.\" At that time, she visited the Las Vegas Valley up to three times each month to participate in poker games with top players. Elizabeth does not appear to have been as active a poker player since scoring 12 tournament cashes from 2006 through 2010 \u2013 she has only one tournament cash (in 2013) thereafter.\nElizabeth played in the Main Event of the 2005 World Series of Poker under the guidance of Daniel Negreanu, and won a special tournament celebrating the opening of a new poker room at Caesars Palace hotel in January 2006, beating out 83 celebrities and poker professionals to win $55,000. She also cashed four times in the World Series of Poker in 2006 and 2007, but again busted out of the Main Event early. In 2007, she advanced to the semi-finals of the NBC National Heads-Up Poker Championship in a field consisting of the top poker professionals before losing to eventual champion Paul Wasicka.\nElizabeth was the host of the comedy/burlesque series \"Live Nude Comedy\" in 2009. Elizabeth also featured in Chris Brown's \"Next to You\" music video as Brown's girlfriend in 2011. In 2019 she reprised her role as Justice in the \"Jay and Silent Bob Reboot.\" In 2022, it was announced that Shannon Elizabeth would star in the comedy film \"Plan B\", alongside Jon Heder, Jamie Lee and Tom Berenger.\nPhilanthropy.\nAnimal Avengers, a non-profit animal rescue organization founded by Elizabeth and her then-husband Reitman, is dedicated to rescuing and finding a home for homeless pets, reducing pet overpopulation, promoting responsible pet guardianship and preventing animal cruelty. \nAmong many fundraising events, Team Bodog raised over $50,000 for Animal Avengers in a celebrity poker night on October 8, 2005. The event was hosted by tournament director Matt Savage. In 2016, she began participating in numerous other Bodog-sponsored charity events as well. The organization, based in Brazil, lead 3D printing of prosthetic body parts for animals, including a beak for goose Victoria.\nElizabeth has served as the spokesperson for Farm Sanctuary's Adopt a Turkey program, urging people to adopt a turkey instead of eating one for Thanksgiving. She uses social media, particularly Instagram posts, to raise awareness about rhino poaching at the Poached Rhino fundraiser.\nPersonal life.\nElizabeth is an environmentalist and vegan. She is a cousin of New York-based television host and relationship coach Tamsen Fadal. \nShe was married to actor Joseph D. Reitman from 2002 to 2005. She later married Simon Borchert. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26676", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26676", "title": "SampleSpace", "text": ""}
{"id": "26677", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26677", "title": "Science Fiction Film", "text": ""}
{"id": "26678", "revid": "43637531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26678", "title": "Star Wars", "text": "American epic space opera media franchise\nStar Wars is an American epic space opera media franchise created by George Lucas, which began with the eponymous 1977 film and quickly became a worldwide pop culture phenomenon. The franchise has been expanded into various films and other media, including television series, video games, novels, comic books, theme park attractions, and , comprising an all-encompassing fictional universe. \"Star Wars\" is one of the highest-grossing media franchises of all time.\nThe original 1977 film, retroactively subtitled \"Episode IV: A New Hope\", was followed by the sequels \"Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back\" (1980) and \"Episode VI: Return of the Jedi\" (1983), forming the original \"Star Wars\" trilogy. Lucas later returned to the series to write and direct a prequel trilogy, consisting of ' (1999), ' (2002), and ' (2005). In 2012, Lucas sold his production company to Disney, relinquishing his ownership of the franchise. This led to a sequel trilogy, consisting of ' (2015), ' (2017), and ' (2019).\nAll nine films, collectively referred to as the \"Skywalker Saga\", were nominated for Academy Awards, with Oscars going to the first three releases. Together with the theatrical live action \"anthology\" films \"Rogue One\" (2016) and \"\" (2018), the combined box office revenue of the films equate to over US$\u00a0billion, making \"Star Wars\" the third-highest-grossing film franchise in cinematic history.\nPremise.\nThe \"Star Wars\" franchise depicts the adventures of characters \"a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away\" across multiple fictional eras, in which humans and many species of aliens (often humanoid) co-exist with droids, which may be programmed for personal assistance or battle. Space travel between planets is common due to lightspeed hyperspace technology. The planets range from wealthy, planet-wide cities to deserts scarcely populated by primitive tribes. Virtually any Earth biome, along with many fictional ones, has its counterpart as a \"Star Wars\" planet which, in most cases, teem with sentient and non-sentient alien life. The franchise also makes use of other astronomical objects such as asteroid fields and nebulae. Spacecraft range from small starfighters to large capital ships, such as the Star Destroyers, as well as space stations such as the moon-sized Death Stars. Telecommunication includes two-way audio and audiovisual screens, holographic projections, and hyperspace transmission.\nThe universe of \"Star Wars\" is generally similar to the real universe but its laws of physics are less strict allowing for more imaginative stories. One result of that is a mystical power known as the Force which is described in the original film as \"an energy field created by all living things ... [that] binds the galaxy together\". The field is depicted as a kind of pantheistic god. Through training and meditation, those whom \"the Force is strong with\" exhibit various superpowers (such as telekinesis, precognition, telepathy, and manipulation of physical energy); it is believed nothing is impossible for the Force. These superpowers are wielded by two major knightly orders at conflict with each other: the Jedi, peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic who act on the light side of the Force through non-attachment and arbitration, and the Sith, who use the dark side by manipulating anger, fear and aggression. While Jedi Knights can be numerous, the Dark Lords of the Sith (or 'Sith Lords') are intended to be limited to two: a master and their apprentice.\nThe franchise is set against a backdrop of galactic conflict involving republics and empires, such as the evil Galactic Empire. The Jedi and Sith prefer the use of a weapon called the lightsaber, a retractable blade of plasma that can cut through virtually any surface and deflect energy bolts. The rest of the population, as well as renegades and soldiers, use plasma-powered blaster firearms. In the outer reaches of the galaxy, crime syndicates such as the Hutt cartel are dominant. Bounty hunters are often employed by both gangsters and governments, while illicit activities include smuggling and slavery.\nWhile the franchise is best-known as an archetypal space opera, the combination of science fiction and fantasy elements makes \"Star Wars\" very universal, capable of telling stories of various genres.\nFilms.\nThe Skywalker Saga.\nThe \"Star Wars\" film series centers on three sets of trilogies, the nine films of which are collectively referred to as the \"Skywalker Saga\". The saga was produced non-chronologically, beginning \"in medias res\" with the release of the original trilogy between 1977 and 1983. This was followed by the prequel trilogy, released between 1999 and 2005, and the sequel trilogy, released between 2015 and 2019.\nEach trilogy focuses on a generation of the Force-sensitive Skywalker family and their struggle against the evil Sith lord Palpatine (Darth Sidious). The original trilogy depicts the heroic development of Luke Skywalker as a Jedi and his fight against Palpatine's Galactic Empire alongside his sister, Leia. The prequels tell the tragic backstory of their father, Anakin, who is seduced to the dark side by Palpatine and becomes Darth Vader. The sequels follow the conflict between Leia's son, Ben Solo, and Luke and Leia's proteg\u00e9, Rey, and their eventual alliance against Palpatine after the fall of the Empire.\nOriginal trilogy.\nIn 1971, George Lucas wanted to film an adaptation of the \"Flash Gordon\" serial, but could not obtain the rights, so he began developing his own space opera. After directing \"American Graffiti\" (1973), he wrote a two-page synopsis, which 20th Century Fox decided to invest in. By 1974, he had expanded the story into the first draft of a screenplay. Fox expected the film would be of limited financial success, and so it was given a relatively low budget, with production being moved to Elstree Studios in England to help save on cost.\n\"Star Wars\" was released on May 25, 1977, and first subtitled \"Episode IV: A New Hope\" in the 1979 book \"The Art of Star Wars\". The film's success led Lucas to make it the basis of an elaborate film serial. With the backstory he created for the sequel, Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy of trilogies. \"Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back\" was released on May 21, 1980, also achieving wide financial and critical success. The final film in the trilogy, \"Episode VI: Return of the Jedi\", was released on May 25, 1983.\nPrequel trilogy.\nAccording to producer Gary Kurtz, loose plans for a prequel trilogy were developed during the outlining of the original two films. In 1980, Lucas confirmed that he had the nine-film series plotted, but due to the stress of producing the original trilogy, he had decided to cancel further sequels by 1981. In 1983, Lucas explained that \"There was never a script completed that had the entire story as it exists now ... As the stories unfolded, I would take certain ideas and save them ... I kept taking out all the good parts, and I just kept telling myself I would make other movies someday.\"\nTechnical advances in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including the ability to create computer-generated imagery (CGI), inspired Lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit his saga. In 1989, Lucas stated that the prequels would be \"unbelievably expensive\". In 1992, he acknowledged that he had plans to create the prequel trilogy. A theatrical rerelease of the original trilogy in 1997 \"updated\" the 20-year-old films with the style of CGI envisioned for the new trilogy.\n\"Episode I: The Phantom Menace\" was released on May 19, 1999, \"Episode II: Attack of the Clones\" on May 16, 2002, and \"Episode III: Revenge of the Sith\" on May 19, 2005. The first two films were met with mixed reviews, with the third being received more positively. Together with the original trilogy, Lucas has referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as \"the tragedy of Darth Vader\".\nSequel trilogy.\nPrior to releasing the original 1977 film, and made possible by its success, Lucas planned \"three trilogies of nine films\". However, he announced to \"Time\" in 1978 that he planned \"10 sequels\". He confirmed that he had outlined the prequels and sequels in 1981. At various stages of development, the sequel trilogy was to focus on the rebuilding of the Republic, the return of Luke as a Jedi Master (a role similar to that of Obi-Wan Kenobi in the original trilogy), Luke's sister (not yet determined to be Leia), Han, Leia, R2-D2 and C-3PO. However, after beginning work on the prequel trilogy, Lucas insisted that \"Star Wars\" was meant to be a six-part series and that there would be no sequel trilogy.\nLucas decided to leave the franchise in the hands of other filmmakers, announcing in January 2012 that he would make no more \"Star Wars\" films. That October, the Walt Disney Company agreed to buy Lucasfilm and announced that \"Episode VII\" would be released in 2015. The co-chairman of Lucasfilm, Kathleen Kennedy, became president and served as executive producer of new \"Star Wars\" feature films. Lucas provided Kennedy his story treatments for the sequels during the 2012 sale, but in 2015 it was revealed Lucas's sequel outline had been discarded. The sequel trilogy also meant the end of the \"Star Wars\" Expanded Universe stories, which were discarded from canon to give \"maximum creative freedom to the filmmakers and also preserve an element of surprise and discovery for the audience.\"\n\"Episode VII: The Force Awakens\" was released on December 16, 2015, \"Episode VIII: The Last Jedi\" on December 13, 2017, and \"Episode IX: The Rise of Skywalker\" on December 18, 2019, in many countries. \"The Force Awakens\" and \"The Last Jedi\" were both critical and box office successes. \"Episode IX\" received a mixed reception from critics and audiences.\nStandalone films.\nSeveral \"Star Wars\" films have been produced separately from the Skywalker Saga. In 2008, Lucasfilm released the animated film \"\", which is set during the prequel trilogy and serves as the theatrical pilot of the . Following Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm in 2012, an \"anthology\" film series set between the main episodes of the Skywalker Saga entered development in parallel with the production of the sequel trilogy, described by Disney chief financial officer Jay Rasulo as origin stories.\nThe first film released was 2016's \"Rogue One\", which tells the story of the rebels who steal the plans for the Death Star, the Galactic Empire's superweapon, just before the events of the original \"Star Wars\" film. A second film, 2018's \"\", tells Han Solo's backstory, set 10 years prior to \"A New Hope\". The series \"Obi-Wan Kenobi\" was originally planned as a film, but changed to a miniseries due to \"Solo\" underperforming at the box office.\nUpcoming films.\nIn April 2023, three new \"Star Wars\" films were announced to be set within different eras of the franchise. An untitled film written and directed by James Mangold will be set during the \"dawn of the Jedi\". Dave Filoni will direct a film set between the original and sequel trilogies during the New Republic era, serving as the climax of the various live-action television series that began with \"The Mandalorian\" in 2019. Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy will direct a third film about a new Jedi Order, set fifteen years after the sequel trilogy. In January 2025, George Nolfi was hired to write the script.\nIn January 2024, it was announced that Jon Favreau would direct a new \"Star Wars\" film, titled \"The Mandalorian &amp; Grogu\". In February of the same year, Bob Iger announced that the film would be the first release of the next slate of \"Star Wars\" movies. \"The Mandalorian &amp; Grogu\" is scheduled for release on May 22, 2026.\nIn November 2022, Shawn Levy entered talks to direct a \"Star Wars\" film, following his work on \"Deadpool &amp; Wolverine\" (2024) and the fifth and final season of \"Stranger Things\". In September 2023, Levy said that development on his \"Star Wars\" film began, but would not continue until after the conclusion of the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike. In April 2025, Ryan Gosling was cast in the film, the title was officially revealed as \"Star Wars: Starfighter\", and the film received the release date of May 28, 2027. In June 2025, Mia Goth joined the cast.\nOther potential projects.\nLucasfilm has a number of \"Star Wars\" films in various stages of development, including:\nTelevision.\nAnimated series.\nThe first two animated series, ' and \"Ewoks\", were produced in the 1980s. They were followed by the ' animated micro-series in 2003 and the 2008 '. Following Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, all animated series released prior to 2014, apart from the 2008 series, were discarded from the franchise's canon. Subsequent animated series include \"Rebels\", released in 2014; \"Resistance\", released in 2018; and ', released in 2021.\nSeveral micro-series and shorts have also been released by Lucasfilm since Disney's acquisition, with the earlier animated series falling under Disney's \"Vintage\" collection of \"Star Wars\" content.\nAt Star Wars Celebration Japan in April 2025, a new animated series titled \"Star Wars: Maul - Shadow Lord\" was announced with a premiere expected in 2026. The series will cover the period following the Clone Wars where Maul tries to rebuild his defunct Shadow Collective criminal syndicate into what will eventually become Crimson Dawn on a planet unknown to the Empire. Sam Witwer will return to voice Maul.\nLive-action series.\nThe \"Star Wars\" franchise includes several live-action series. The first series, \"The Mandalorian\", was released in 2019 for the streaming service Disney+ and is set between the original and sequel trilogies of the Skywalker Saga. Due to its success, the series spawned multiple live-action spin-offs set during the same fictional era, including \"The Book of Boba Fett\", released in 2021; ', released in 2023; and ', released in 2024. These series follow the plight of the New Republic and its allies against the remnants of the fallen Galactic Empire.\nA story focused on Obi-Wan Kenobi was planned as a film before becoming a live-action series after the box office failure of \"\" in 2018. The series was released on Disney+ in 2022 and is set between the prequel and original trilogy films. It was followed by the live-action series \"Andor\" in the same year; both series follow their titular characters during the reign of the Empire.\n\"The Acolyte\" is a series created by Leslye Headland set at the end of the era before the events of the Skywalker Saga, and follows an investigation into a series of murders of Jedi Masters.\nFictional timeline.\nThe \"Star Wars\" canon fictional universe spans multiple eras, of which three are focused around each of the film trilogies. The following eras were defined in January 2021, and further refined and expanded in April 2023:\nThe Expanded Universe of spin-off media depicts different levels of continuity, which were deemed non-canonical and rebranded as \"Legends\" on April 25, 2014, to make most subsequent works align to the episodic films, , and .\nOther media.\nFrom 1976 to 2014, the term \"Expanded Universe\" (EU) was an umbrella term for all officially licensed \"Star Wars\" storytelling material set outside the events depicted within the theatrical films, including novels, comics, and video games. Lucasfilm maintained internal continuity between the films and television content and the EU material until April 25, 2014, when the company announced all of the EU works would cease production. Existing works would no longer be considered canon to the franchise and subsequent reprints would be rebranded under the \"Star Wars Legends\" label, with downloadable content for the massively multiplayer online game ' the only \"Legends\" material to still be produced. The \"Star Wars\" canon was subsequently restructured to only include the existing six feature films, the animated film ' (2008), and its companion animated series. All future projects and creative developments across all types of media would be overseen and coordinated by the story group, announced as a division of Lucasfilm created to maintain continuity and a cohesive vision on the storytelling of the franchise. Multiple comics series from Marvel and novels published by Del Rey were produced after the announcement. Since the new canon has been introduced, there has been a multitude of pieces of Expanded Universe continuity that have become a part of canon.\nPrint media.\n\"Star Wars\" in print predates the release of the first film, with the November 1976 novelization of \"Star Wars\", initially subtitled \"\". Credited to Lucas, it was ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster. The first \"Expanded Universe\" story appeared in Marvel Comics' \"Star Wars\" #7 in January 1978 (the first six issues being an adaptation of the film), followed by Foster's sequel novel \"Splinter of the Mind's Eye\" the following month.\nNovels.\nAfter penning the novelization of the original film, Foster followed it with the sequel \"Splinter of the Mind's Eye\" (1978). The novelizations of \"The Empire Strikes Back\" (1980) by Donald F. Glut and \"Return of the Jedi\" (1983) by James Kahn followed, as well as \"The Han Solo Adventures\" trilogy (1979\u20131980) by Brian Daley, and \"The Adventures of Lando Calrissian\" trilogy (1983) by L. Neil Smith.\nTimothy Zahn's bestselling \"Thrawn\" trilogy (1991\u20131993) reignited interest in the franchise and introduced the popular characters Grand Admiral Thrawn, Mara Jade, Talon Karrde, and Gilad Pellaeon. The first novel, \"Heir to the Empire\", reached #1 on the \"New York Times\" Best Seller list, and the series finds Luke, Leia, and Han facing off against tactical genius Thrawn, who is plotting to retake the galaxy for the Empire. In \"The Courtship of Princess Leia\" (1994) by Dave Wolverton, set immediately before the \"Thrawn\" trilogy, Leia considers an advantageous political marriage to Prince Isolder of the planet Hapes, but she and Han ultimately marry. Steve Perry's ' (1996), set between \"The Empire Strikes Back\" and \"Return of the Jedi\", was part of a multimedia campaign that included a comic book series and video game. The novel introduced the crime lord Prince Xizor, another popular character who would appear in multiple other works. Other notable series from Bantam include the \"Jedi Academy\" trilogy (1994) by Kevin J. Anderson, the 14-book \"Young Jedi Knights\" series (1995\u20131998) by Anderson and Rebecca Moesta, and the ' series (1996\u20132012) by Michael A. Stackpole and Aaron Allston.\nDel Rey took over \"Star Wars\" book publishing in 1999, releasing what would become a 19-installment novel series called \"The New Jedi Order\" (1999\u20132003). Written by multiple authors, the series was set 25 to 30 years after the original films and introduced the Yuuzhan Vong, a powerful alien race attempting to invade and conquer the entire galaxy. The bestselling multi-author series \"Legacy of the Force\" (2006\u20132008) chronicles the crossover of Han and Leia's son Jacen Solo to the dark side of the Force; among his evil deeds, he kills Luke's wife Mara Jade as a sacrifice to join the Sith. Although no longer canon, the story is paralleled in \"The Force Awakens\" with Han and Leia's son Ben Solo, who becomes the evil Kylo Ren.\nThree series set in the prequel era were published by Scholastic for younger audiences: the 18-book ' (1999\u20132002) chronicles the adventures of Obi-Wan Kenobi and his master Qui-Gon Jinn in the years before \"The Phantom Menace\"; the 11-book \"Jedi Quest\" (2001\u20132004) follows Obi-Wan and his own apprentice, Anakin Skywalker in between \"The Phantom Menace\" and \"Attack of the Clones\"; and the 10-book ' (2005\u20132008), set almost immediately after \"Revenge of the Sith\", features Obi-Wan and the last few surviving Jedi. In 2019, a new prequel era novel, starring Qui-Gon and the young Obi-Wan, was published by Del Rey under the title \"Star Wars: Master and Apprentice\".\nAlthough Thrawn had been designated a \"Legends\" character in 2014, he was reintroduced into the canon in 2016 for the third season of the \"Rebels\" animated series, with Zahn returning to write more novels based on the character and set in the new canon.\nComics.\nMarvel Comics published a \"Star Wars\" comic book series from 1977 to 1986. Original \"Star Wars\" comics were serialized in the Marvel magazine \"Pizzazz\" between 1977 and 1979. The 1977 installments were the first original \"Star Wars\" stories not directly adapted from the films to appear in print form, as they preceded those of the \"Star Wars\" comic series. From 1985 to 1987, the animated children's series ' and ' inspired comic series from Marvel's Star Comics line. According to Marvel Comics former Editor-In-Chief Jim Shooter, the strong sales of \"Star Wars\" comics saved Marvel financially in 1977 and 1978. Marvel's \"Star Wars\" series was one of the industry's top selling titles in 1979 and 1980. The only downside for Marvel was that the 100,000 copy sales quota was surpassed quickly, allowing Lippincott to renegotiate the royalty arrangements from a position of strength.\nIn the late 1980s, Marvel dropped a new \"Star Wars\" comic it had in development, which was picked up by Dark Horse Comics and published as the popular \"Dark Empire\" series (1991\u20131995). Dark Horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after the original film trilogy, including \"Tales of the Jedi\" (1993\u20131998), ' (1995\u20131998), ' (1998\u20132006), \"Star Wars Tales\" (1999\u20132005), ' (2002\u20132006), and ' (2006\u20132010).\nAfter Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, it was announced in January 2014 that in 2015 the \"Star Wars\" comics license would return to Marvel Comics, whose parent company, Marvel Entertainment, Disney had purchased in 2009. Launched in 2015, the first three publications were titled \"Star Wars\", ', and the miniseries '.\nFirst announced as \"Project Luminous\" at Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, the \"\" publishing initiative was revealed in a press conference in February 2020. Involving the majority of the then current officially licensed publishers, a new era set 200 years before the Skywalker Saga was explored in various books and comics. Including ongoing titles by Marvel and IDW Publishing, written by Cavan Scott and Daniel Jos\u00e9 Older respectively.\nMarvel Comics will publish a one-shot comic book on September 4, 2024, that bridges the gap between the High Republic publishing initiative and the events of \"The Acolyte\". Titled \"Star Wars: The Acolyte \u2013 Kelnacca\", the one-shot was written by High Republic writer Cavan Scott with art by Marika Cresta. It focuses on Kelnacca, the Wookiee Jedi introduced in \"The Acolyte\".\nAudio.\nSoundtracks and singles.\nJohn Williams composed the soundtracks for the nine episodic films. He stated he would retire from the franchise with \"The Rise of Skywalker\", but he composed a theme for Obi-Wan Kenobi for the miniseries and Han Solo's theme for \"Solo: A Star Wars Story\". Williams also created the main theme for \"\".\nSeveral other composers worked on other soundtracks, including John Powell (\"Obi-Wan Kenobi\"), Michael Giacchino (\"Rogue One\"), and Ludwig G\u00f6ransson (\"The Mandalorian\").\nAudio novels.\nThe first \"Star Wars\" audio work is \"The Story of Star Wars\", an LP using audio samples from the original film and a new narration to retell the story, released in 1977. Most later printed novels were adapted into audio novels, usually released on cassette tape and re-released on CD. As of 2019, audio-only novels have been released not directly based on printed media.\nRadio.\nRadio adaptations of the films were also produced. Lucas, a fan of the NPR-affiliated campus radio station of his alma mater the University of Southern California, licensed the \"Star Wars\" radio rights to KUSC-FM for US$. The production used John Williams's original film score, along with Ben Burtt's sound effects.\nThe first was written by science-fiction author Brian Daley and directed by John Madden. It was broadcast on National Public Radio in 1981, adapting the original 1977 film into 13 episodes. Mark Hamill and Anthony Daniels reprised their film roles.\nThe overwhelming success, led to a 10-episode adaptation of \"The Empire Strikes Back\" debuted in 1983. Billy Dee Williams joined the other two stars, reprising his role as Lando Calrissian.\nIn 1983, Buena Vista Records released an original, 30-minute \"Star Wars\" audio drama titled \"Rebel Mission to Ord Mantell\", written by Daley. In the 1990s, Time Warner Audio Publishing adapted several \"Star Wars\" series from Dark Horse Comics into audio dramas: the three-part \"Dark Empire\" saga, \"Tales of the Jedi\", \"\", the \"Dark Forces\" trilogy, and \"Crimson Empire\" (1998). \"Return of the Jedi\" was adapted into 6-episodes in 1996, featuring Daniels.\nVideo games.\nThe \"Star Wars\" franchise has spawned over one hundred computer, video, and board games, dating back to some of the earliest home consoles. Some are based directly on the movie material, while others rely heavily on the non-canonical Expanded Universe (rebranded as \"Star Wars Legends\" and removed from the canon in 2014). \"Star Wars\" games have gone through three significant development eras, marked by a change in leadership among the developers: the early licensed games, those developed after the creation of LucasArts, and those created after the closure of the Lucasfilm division by Disney and the transfer of the license to Electronic Arts.\nEarly licensed games (1979\u20131993).\nThe first officially licensed electronic \"Star Wars\" game was Kenner's 1979 table-top \"Star Wars Electronic Battle Command\". In 1982, Parker Brothers published the first \"Star Wars\" video game for the Atari 2600, ', followed soon the year later by ', the first video game to depict lightsaber combat. They were followed in 1983 by Atari's rail shooter arcade game \"Star Wars\", with vector graphics to replicate the Death Star trench run scene from the 1977 film. The next game, ' (1984), has more traditional raster graphics, while the following ' (1985) has vector graphics.\nPlatform games were made for the Nintendo Entertainment System, including the Japan-exclusive \"Star Wars\" (1987), an international \"Star Wars\" (1991), and \"\" (1992). \"Super Star Wars\" (1992) was released for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, with two sequels over the next two years.\nLucasArts and modern self-published games (1993\u20132014).\nLucasfilm founded its own video game company in 1982, becoming best known for adventure games and World War II flight combat games, but as George Lucas took more interest in the increasing success of the video game market, he wanted to have more creative control over the games and founded his own development company, LucasArts. Improved graphics allowed games to tell complex narratives, which allowed for the retelling of the films, and eventually original narratives set in the same continuity, with voice-overs and CGI cutscenes. In 1993, LucasArts released \"\", the first self-published \"Star Wars\" video game and the first space flight simulator based on the franchise. It was one of the bestselling video games of 1993 and established its own . The was released between 1998 and 2003, also focusing on space battles set during the films.\n\"\" (1995), a hybrid adventure game incorporating puzzles and strategy, was the first \"Star Wars\" first-person shooter. It featured gameplay and graphical features not then common in other games, made possible by LucasArts' custom-designed game engine, the Jedi. The game was well received, and it was followed by . The series introduced Kyle Katarn, who would appear in multiple games, novels, and comics. Katarn is a former stormtrooper who joins the Rebellion and becomes a Jedi, a plot arc similar to that of Finn in the sequel trilogy films. A massively multiplayer online role-playing game, \"Star Wars Galaxies\", was in operation from 2003 until 2011. After Disney bought Lucasfilm, LucasArts ceased its role as a developer in 2013, although it still operates as a licensor.\n\"EA Star Wars\" (2014\u2013present).\nFollowing its acquisition of the franchise, Disney reassigned video game rights to Electronic Arts. Games made during this era are considered canonical, and feature more influence from the \"Star Wars\" filmmakers. Disney partnered with Lenovo to create the augmented reality video game \"Jedi Challenges\", released in November 2017. In August 2018, it was announced that Zynga would publish free-to-play \"Star Wars\" mobile games. The \"Battlefront\" games received a canonical reboot with \"Star Wars: Battlefront\" in November 2015, which was followed by a sequel, \"Battlefront II\", in November 2017. A single-player action-adventure game, ', with an original story and cast of characters, was released in November 2019. A space combat game titled ', which builds upon the space battles from \"Battlefront\", was released in October 2020.\nTheme park attractions.\nIn addition to the Disneyland ride Star Tours (1987) and its successor, (2011), many live attractions have been held at Disney parks, including the traveling exhibition , the Space Mountain spin-off Hyperspace Mountain, a walkthrough Launch Bay, and the night-time \"\". An immersive themed area called (2019) opened at Disneyland and opened at Walt Disney World in mid-2019. A themed hotel, , operated from 2022 to 2023 at Walt Disney World.\nMultimedia projects.\nA multimedia project involves works released across multiple types of media. ' (1996) was a multimedia project set between \"The Empire Strikes Back\" and \"Return of the Jedi\" that included a novel by Steve Perry, a comic book series, , and action figures. ' (2008\u20132010) was a similar project set between \"Revenge of the Sith\" and \"A New Hope\" that included a novel, a and its , a graphic novel, a role-playing game supplement, and toys.\nMerchandising.\nThe success of the \"Star Wars\" films led the franchise to become one of the most merchandised franchises in the world. While filming the original 1977 film, George Lucas decided to take a $500,000 pay cut to his salary as director in exchange for full ownership of the franchise's merchandising rights. By 1987, the first three films have made US$billion in merchandising revenue. By 2012, the first six films produced approximately US$billion in merchandising revenue.\nKenner Products made the first \"Star Wars\" action figures to coincide with the release of the original film, and today the original figures are highly valuable. Since the 1990s, Hasbro holds the rights to create action figures based on the saga. Pez dispensers began to be produced in 1997. \"Star Wars\" was the first intellectual property to be licensed in Lego history. Lego has produced animated parody short films and mini-series to promote their \"Star Wars\" sets. The Lego \"Star Wars\" video games are critically acclaimed bestsellers.\nIn 1977, the board game \"Star Wars: Escape from the Death Star\" was released. A \"Star Wars Monopoly\" and themed versions of \"Trivial Pursuit\" and Battleship were released in 1997, with updated versions released in subsequent years. The board game \"Risk\" has been adapted in two editions by Hasbro: ' (2005) and the ' (2006). Three \"Star Wars\" tabletop role-playing games have been developed: in the 1980s and 1990s, one by Wizards of the Coast in the 2000s, and one by Fantasy Flight Games in the 2010s.\n\"Star Wars\" Trading Cards have been published since the first \"blue\" series, by Topps, in 1977. Dozens of series have been produced, with Topps being the licensed creator in the United States. Each card series are of film stills or original art. Many of the cards have become highly collectible with some very rare \"promos\", such as the 1993 Galaxy Series II \"floating Yoda\" P3 card often commanding US$1,000 or more. While most \"base\" or \"common card\" sets are plentiful, many \"insert\" or \"chase cards\" are very rare. From 1995 until 2001, Decipher, Inc. had the license for, created, and produced the \"Star Wars Customizable Card Game\".\nThemes.\n\"Star Wars\" features elements such as knighthood, chivalry, and Jungian archetypes such as \"the shadow\".\nThere are also many references to Christianity, such as in the appearance of Darth Maul, whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the devil. Anakin was conceived of a virgin birth, and is assumed to be the \"Chosen One\", a messianic individual. However, unlike Jesus, Anakin falls from grace, remaining evil as Darth Vader until \"Return of the Jedi\". According to Adam Driver, sequel trilogy villain Kylo Ren, who idolizes Vader, believes he is \"doing what he thinks is right\". George Lucas has said that the theme of the saga is redemption.\nThe saga draws heavily from the hero's journey, an archetypical template developed by comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell. Each character\u2014primarily Anakin, Luke, and Rey\u2014follows the steps of the cycle or undergoes its reversal, becoming the villain. A defining step of the journey is \"Atonement with the Father\". Obi-Wan's loss of a father figure could have impacted his relationship with Anakin, whom both Obi-Wan and Palpatine are fatherlike mentors to. Luke's discovery that Vader is his father has strong repercussions on the saga and is regarded as one of the most influential plot twists in cinema. Supreme Leader Snoke encourages Kylo Ren to kill his father, Han Solo. Kylo uses the fact that Rey is an orphan to tempt her into joining the dark side. According to \"Inverse\", the final scene in \"The Last Jedi\", which depicts servant children playing with a toy of Luke and one boy using the Force, symbolizes that \"the Force can be found in people with humble beginnings.\"\nHistorical influences.\nPolitical science has been an important element of \"Star Wars\" since the franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a struggle between democracy and dictatorship. Battles featuring the Ewoks and Gungans against the Empire and Trade Federation, respectively, represent the clash between a primitive society and a more advanced one, similar to the Vietnam-American War. Darth Vader's design was initially inspired by Samurai armor, and also incorporated a German military helmet. Originally, Lucas conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way the \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS) served Adolf Hitler, but this was condensed into one character in the form of Vader. Stormtroopers borrow the name of World War I German \"shock\" troopers. Imperial officers wear uniforms resembling those of German forces during World War II, and political and security officers resemble the black-clad SS down to the stylized silver death's head on their caps. World War\u00a0II terms were used for names in the films; \"e.g.\" the planets Kessel (a term that refers to a group of encircled forces) and Hoth (after a German general who served on the snow-laden Eastern Front). Shots of the commanders looking through AT-AT walker viewscreens in \"The Empire Strikes Back\" resemble tank interiors, and space battles in the original film were based on World War\u00a0I and World War\u00a0II dogfights.\nPalpatine being a chancellor before becoming the Emperor in the prequel trilogy alludes to Hitler's role before appointing himself \"F\u00fchrer\". Lucas has also drawn parallels to historical dictators such as Julius Caesar, Napoleon Bonaparte, and politicians like Richard Nixon. The Great Jedi Purge mirrors the events of the Night of the Long Knives. The corruption of the Galactic Republic is modeled after the fall of the democratic Roman Republic and the formation of an empire.\nOn the inspiration for the First Order formed \"from the ashes of the Empire\", \"The Force Awakens\" director J.\u00a0J. Abrams spoke of conversations the writers had about how the Nazis could have escaped to Argentina after WWII and \"started working together again.\"\nCultural impact.\nThe \"Star Wars\" saga has had a significant impact on popular culture, with references to its fictional universe deeply embedded in everyday life. Phrases like \"evil empire\" and \"May the Force be with you\" have become part of the popular lexicon. The first \"Star Wars\" film in 1977 was a cultural unifier, enjoyed by a wide spectrum of people. The film can be said to have helped launch the science-fiction boom of the late 1970s and early 1980s, making science-fiction films a mainstream genre. The widespread impact made it a prime target for parody works and homages, with popular examples including \"Hardware Wars\", \"Spaceballs\", ' and '.\nIn 1989, the Library of Congress selected the original \"Star Wars\" film for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry, as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\" \"The Empire Strikes Back\" was selected in 2010, and \"Return of the Jedi\" was selected in 2021. 35\u00a0mm reels of the 1997 Special Editions were the versions initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possesses a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical releases.\nIndustry.\nThe original \"Star Wars\" film was a huge success for 20th Century Fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the company. Within three weeks of the film's release, the studio's stock price doubled to a record high. Prior to 1977, 20th Century Fox's greatest annual profits were $37\u00a0million, while in 1977, the company broke that record by posting a profit of $79\u00a0million. The franchise helped Fox to change from an almost bankrupt production company to a thriving media conglomerate. With over $10.3 billion in worldwide box office receipts, \"Star Wars\" is the second-highest-grossing film franchise of all time.\n\"Star Wars\" fundamentally changed the aesthetics and narratives of Hollywood films, switching the focus of Hollywood-made films from deep, meaningful stories based on dramatic conflict, themes and irony to sprawling special-effects-laden blockbusters, as well as changing the Hollywood film industry in fundamental ways. Before \"Star Wars\", special effects in films had not appreciably advanced since the 1950s. The commercial success of \"Star Wars\" created a boom in state-of-the-art special effects in the late 1970s. Along with \"Jaws\", \"Star Wars\" started the tradition of the summer blockbuster film in the entertainment industry, where films open on many screens at the same time and profitable franchises are important. It created the model for the major film trilogy and showed that merchandising rights on a film could generate more money than the film itself did.\nFilm critic Roger Ebert wrote in his book \"The Great Movies\", \"Like \"The Birth of a Nation\" and \"Citizen Kane\", \"Star Wars\" was a technical watershed that influenced many of the movies that came after.\" It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures. The film was one of the first films to link genres together to invent a new, high-concept genre for filmmakers to build upon. Finally, along with Steven Spielberg's \"Jaws\", it shifted the film industry's focus away from personal filmmaking of the 1970s and towards fast-paced, big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.\nSome critics have blamed \"Star Wars\" and \"Jaws\" for \"ruining\" Hollywood by shifting its focus from \"sophisticated\" films such as \"The Godfather\", \"Taxi Driver\", and \"Annie Hall\" to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy, and for the industry shift from stand-alone, one and done films, towards blockbuster franchises with multiple sequels and prequels. One such critic, Peter Biskind, complained, \"When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies... They marched backward through the looking-glass.\" In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through \"Star Wars\" and \"Jaws\", Lucas and Spielberg \"didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect\", which was \"a kind of rebirth\".\nThe original \"Star Wars\" trilogy is widely considered one of the best film trilogies in history. Numerous filmmakers have been influenced by \"Star Wars\", including Damon Lindelof, Dean Devlin, Roland Emmerich, John Lasseter, David Fincher, Joss Whedon, John Singleton, Kevin Smith, and later \"Star Wars\" directors J.\u00a0J. Abrams and Gareth Edwards. Lucas's concept of a \"used universe\" particularly influenced Ridley Scott's \"Blade Runner\" (1982) and \"Alien\" (1979), James Cameron's \"Aliens\" (1986) as well as \"The Terminator\" (1984), George Miller's \"Mad Max 2\" (1981), and Peter Jackson's \"The Lord of the Rings\" trilogy (2001\u20132003). Christopher Nolan cited \"Star Wars\" as an influence when making the 2010 blockbuster film \"Inception\".\nFan works.\nThe \"Star Wars\" saga has inspired many fans to create their own non-canon material set in the \"Star Wars\" galaxy. In recent years, this has ranged from writing fan fiction to creating fan films. In 2002, Lucasfilm sponsored the first annual Official \"Star Wars\" Fan Film Awards, officially recognizing filmmakers and the genre. Because of concerns over potential copyright and trademark issues, however, the contest was initially open only to parodies, mockumentaries, and documentaries. Fan fiction films set in the \"Star Wars\" universe were originally ineligible, but in 2007, Lucasfilm changed the submission standards to allow in-universe fiction entries. Lucasfilm has allowed but not endorsed the creation of fan fiction, as long as it does not attempt to make a profit.\nAcademia.\nAs the characters and the storyline of the original trilogy are so well known, educators have used the films in the classroom as a learning resource. For example, a project in Western Australia honed elementary school students storytelling skills by role-playing action scenes from the movies and later creating props and audio/visual scenery to enhance their performance. Others have used the films to encourage second-level students to integrate technology in the science classroom by making prototype lightsabers. Similarly, psychiatrists in New Zealand and the U.S. have advocated their use in the university classroom to explain different types of psychopathology.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26679", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26679", "title": "Symmetric Algorithms", "text": ""}
{"id": "26680", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26680", "title": "StatisticalAssumptions", "text": ""}
{"id": "26681", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26681", "title": "StatisticalModel", "text": ""}
{"id": "26682", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26682", "title": "StatisticalUnit", "text": ""}
{"id": "26683", "revid": "14419815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26683", "title": "Stanley Kubrick", "text": "American filmmaker and photographer (1928\u20131999)\nStanley Kubrick ( ; July 26, 1928 \u2013 March 7, 1999) was an American filmmaker and photographer. A major figure of the post-war film industry, Kubrick is widely regarded as one of the greatest and most influential filmmakers in the history of cinema. His films were nearly all adaptations of novels or short stories, spanning a number of genres and gaining recognition for their intense attention to detail, innovative cinematography, extensive set design, and dark humor.\nBorn in New York City, Kubrick taught himself film producing and directing after graduating from high school. After working as a photographer for \"Look\" magazine in the late 1940s and early 1950s, he began making low-budget short films and made his first major Hollywood film, \"The Killing\", for United Artists in 1956. This was followed by two collaborations with Kirk Douglas: the anti-war film \"Paths of Glory\" (1957) and the historical epic film \"Spartacus\" (1960). In 1961, Kubrick left the United States and settled in England. In 1978, he made his home at Childwickbury Manor with his wife Christiane, and it became his workplace where he centralized the writing, research, editing, and management of his productions. This permitted him almost complete artistic control over his films, with the rare advantage of financial support from major Hollywood studios. His first productions in England were two films with Peter Sellers: the comedy-drama \"Lolita\" (1962) and the Cold War satire \"Dr. Strangelove\" (1964).\nA perfectionist who assumed direct control over most aspects of his filmmaking, Kubrick cultivated an expertise in writing, editing, color grading, promotion, and exhibition. He was famous for the painstaking care taken in researching his films and staging scenes. He frequently asked for several dozen retakes of the same shot in a film, often confusing and frustrating his actors. Despite the notoriety this provoked, many of Kubrick's films broke new cinematic ground and are now considered landmarks. The scientific realism and innovative special effects in his science fiction epic \"\" (1968) were a first in cinema history; the film earned him his only Academy Award (for Best Visual Effects) and is regarded as one of the greatest films ever made.\nWhile many of Kubrick's films were controversial and initially received mixed reviews upon release\u2014particularly the brutal \"A Clockwork Orange\" (1971), which Kubrick withdrew from circulation in the UK following a media frenzy\u2014most were nominated for Academy Awards, Golden Globes, or BAFTA Awards, and underwent critical re-evaluations. For the 18th-century period film \"Barry Lyndon\" (1975), Kubrick obtained lenses developed by Carl Zeiss for NASA to film scenes by candlelight. With the horror film \"The Shining\" (1980), he became one of the first directors to make use of a Steadicam for stabilized and fluid tracking shots, a technology vital to his Vietnam War film \"Full Metal Jacket\" (1987). A few days after hosting a screening for his family and the stars of his final film, the erotic drama \"Eyes Wide Shut\" (1999), he died at the age of 70.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nKubrick was born to a Jewish family in the Lying-In Hospital in New York City's Manhattan borough on July 26, 1928. He was the first of two children of Jacob Leonard Kubrick, known as Jack or Jacques, and his wife Sadie Gertrude Kubrick (n\u00e9e Perveler), known as Gert. His sister Barbara Mary Kubrick was born in May 1934. Jack, of Polish-Jewish and Romanian-Jewish origin, was a homeopathic doctor, graduating from the New York Homeopathic Medical College in 1927, the same year he married Kubrick's mother, who was the child of Austrian-Jewish immigrants. On December 27, 1899, Kubrick's great-grandfather Hersh Kubrick arrived at Ellis Island via Liverpool by ship at the age of 47, leaving behind his wife and two grown children (one of whom was Stanley's grandfather Elias) to start a new life with a younger woman. Elias followed in 1902. At Stanley's birth, the Kubricks lived in the Bronx. His parents married in a Jewish ceremony, but Kubrick was not raised religious. His father was a physician and, by the standards of the West Bronx, the family was fairly wealthy.\nSoon after his sister's birth, Kubrick began attending Public School 3 in the Bronx and moved to Public School 90 in June 1938. His IQ was above average but his attendance was poor. He displayed an interest in literature from a young age and began reading Greek and Roman myths and the fables of the Brothers Grimm, which \"instilled in him a lifelong affinity with Europe\". He spent most Saturdays during the summer watching the New York Yankees and later photographed two boys watching the game in an assignment for \"Look\" magazine to emulate his own childhood excitement with baseball. When Kubrick was 12, his father Jack taught him chess. The game remained a lifelong interest of Kubrick's, appearing in many of his films. Kubrick, who later became a member of the United States Chess Federation, explained that chess helped him develop \"patience and discipline\" in making decisions. When Kubrick was 13, his father bought him a Graflex camera, triggering a fascination with still photography. He befriended a neighbor, Marvin Traub, who shared his passion for photography. Traub had his own darkroom where he and the young Kubrick would spend many hours perusing photographs and watching the chemicals \"magically make images on photographic paper\". The two indulged in numerous photographic projects for which they roamed the streets looking for interesting subjects to capture and spent time in local cinemas studying films. Freelance photographer Weegee (Arthur Fellig) had a considerable influence on Kubrick's development as a photographer; Kubrick later hired Fellig as the special stills photographer for \"Dr. Strangelove\" (1964). As a teenager, Kubrick was also interested in jazz and briefly attempted a career as a drummer.\nKubrick attended William Howard Taft High School from 1941 to 1945. He joined the school's photography club, which permitted him to photograph the school's events in their magazine. He was a mediocre student, with a 67/D+ grade average. Introverted and shy, Kubrick had a low attendance record and often skipped school to watch double-feature films. He graduated in 1945 but his poor grades, combined with the demand for college admissions from soldiers returning from World War II, eliminated any hope of higher education. Later in life Kubrick spoke disdainfully of his education and of American schooling as a whole, maintaining that schools were ineffective in stimulating critical thinking and student interest. His father was disappointed in his son's failure to achieve the excellence in school of which he knew Stanley was fully capable. Jack also encouraged Stanley to read from the family library at home, while permitting Stanley to take up photography as a serious hobby.\nPhotographic career.\nWhile in high school, Kubrick was chosen as an official school photographer. In the mid-1940s, since he was unable to gain admission to day session classes at colleges, he briefly attended evening classes at the City College of New York, which had open admissions. Eventually, he sold a photographic series to \"Look\" magazine, which was printed on June 26, 1945. Kubrick supplemented his income by playing chess \"for quarters\" in Washington Square Park and various Manhattan chess clubs.\nIn 1946, he became an apprentice photographer for \"Look\" and later a full-time staff photographer. G. Warren Schloat Jr., another new photographer for the magazine at the time, recalled that he thought Kubrick lacked the personality to make it as a director in Hollywood, remarking, \"Stanley was a quiet fellow. He didn't say much. He was thin, skinny, and kind of poor\u2014like we all were.\" Kubrick quickly became known for his story-telling in photographs. His first, published on April 16, 1946, was titled \"A Short Story from a Movie Balcony\" and staged a fracas between a man and a woman, during which the man is slapped in the face, caught genuinely by surprise. In another assignment, Kubrick took 18 pictures of various people waiting in a dental office. It has been said retrospectively that this project demonstrated an early interest of Kubrick in capturing individuals and their feelings in mundane environments. In 1948, he was sent to Portugal to document a travel piece, and later that year covered the Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus in Sarasota, Florida.\nA boxing enthusiast, Kubrick eventually began photographing boxing matches for the magazine. His earliest, \"Prizefighter\", was published on January 18, 1949, and captured a boxing match and the events leading up to it, featuring American middleweight Walter Cartier. On April 2, 1949, he published photo essay \"Chicago-City of Extremes\" in \"Look\", which displayed his talent early on for creating atmosphere with imagery. The following year, in July 1950, the magazine published his photo essay, \"Working Debutante \u2013 Betsy von Furstenberg\", which featured a Pablo Picasso portrait of Angel F. de Soto in the background. Kubrick was also assigned to photograph numerous jazz musicians, from Frank Sinatra and Erroll Garner to George Lewis, Eddie Condon, Phil Napoleon, Papa Celestin, Alphonse Picou, Muggsy Spanier, Sharkey Bonano, and others.\nKubrick married his high-school sweetheart Toba Metz on May 28, 1948. They lived together in a small apartment at 36 West 16th Street, off Sixth Avenue just north of Greenwich Village. During this time, Kubrick began frequenting film screenings at the Museum of Modern Art and New York City cinemas. He was inspired by the complex, fluid camerawork of French director Max Oph\u00fcls, whose films influenced Kubrick's visual style, and by director Elia Kazan, whom he described as America's \"best director\" at that time, with his ability of \"performing miracles\" with his actors. Friends began to notice Kubrick had become obsessed with the art of filmmaking\u2014one friend, David Vaughan, observed that Kubrick would scrutinize the film at the cinema when it went silent, and would go back to reading his paper when people started talking. He spent many hours reading books on film theory and writing notes. He was particularly inspired by Sergei Eisenstein and Arthur Rothstein, the photographic technical director of \"Look\" magazine.\nFilm career.\nShort films (1951\u20131953).\nKubrick shared a love of film with his school friend Alexander Singer, who after graduating from high school had the intention of directing a film version of Homer's \"Iliad\". Through Singer, who worked in the offices of the newsreel production company, \"The March of Time\", Kubrick learned it could cost $40,000 to make a proper short film, a sum he could not afford. He had $1500 in savings and produced a few short documentaries fueled by encouragement from Singer. He began learning all he could about filmmaking on his own, calling film suppliers, laboratories, and equipment rental houses.\nKubrick decided to make a short film documentary about boxer Walter Cartier, whom he had photographed and written about for \"Look\" magazine a year earlier. He rented a camera and produced a 16-minute black-and-white documentary, \"Day of the Fight\". Kubrick found the money independently to finance it. He had considered asking Montgomery Clift to narrate it, whom he had met during a photographic session for \"Look\", but settled on CBS news veteran Douglas Edwards. According to Paul Duncan the film was \"remarkably accomplished for a first film\", and used a backward tracking shot to film a scene in which Cartier and his brother walk towards the camera, a device which later became one of Kubrick's characteristic camera movements. Vincent Cartier, Walter's brother and manager, later reflected on his observations of Kubrick during the filming. He said, \"Stanley was a very stoic, impassive but imaginative type person with strong, imaginative thoughts. He commanded respect in a quiet, shy way. Whatever he wanted, you complied, he just captivated you. Anybody who worked with Stanley did just what Stanley wanted\". After a score was added by Singer's friend Gerald Fried, Kubrick had spent $3900 in making it, and sold it to RKO-Path\u00e9 for $4000, which was the most the company had ever paid for a short film at the time. Kubrick described his first effort at filmmaking as having been valuable since he believed himself to have been forced to do most of the work, and he later declared that the \"best education in film is to make one\".\nInspired by this early success, Kubrick quit his job at \"Look\" and visited professional filmmakers in New York City, asking many detailed questions about the technical aspects of filmmaking. He stated that he was given the confidence during this period to become a filmmaker because of the number of bad films he had seen, remarking, \"I don't know a goddamn thing about movies, but I know I can make a better film than that\". He began making \"Flying Padre\" (1951), a film which documents Reverend Fred Stadtmueller, who travels some 4,000 miles to visit his 11 churches. The film was originally going to be called \"Sky Pilot\", a pun on the slang term for a priest. During the course of the film, the priest performs a burial service, confronts a boy bullying a girl, and makes an emergency flight to aid a sick mother and baby into an ambulance. Several of the views from and of the plane in \"Flying Padre\" are later echoed in \"\" (1968) with the footage of the spacecraft, and a series of close-ups on the faces of people attending the funeral were most likely inspired by Sergei Eisenstein's \"Battleship Potemkin\" (1925) and \"Ivan the Terrible\" (1944/1958).\n\"Flying Padre\" was followed by \"The Seafarers\" (1953), Kubrick's first color film, which was shot for the Seafarers International Union in June 1953. It depicted the logistics of a democratic union and focused more on the amenities of seafaring other than the act. For the cafeteria scene in the film, Kubrick chose a dolly shot to establish the life of the seafarer's community; this kind of shot would later become a signature technique. The sequence of Paul Hall, secretary-treasurer of the SIU Atlantic and gulf district, speaking to members of the union echoes scenes from Eisenstein's \"Strike\" (1925) and \"\" (1928). \"Day of the Fight\", \"Flying Padre\" and \"The Seafarers\" constitute Kubrick's only surviving documentary works; some historians believe he made others.\nEarly feature work (1953\u20131955).\nAfter raising $1000 showing his short films to friends and family, Kubrick found the finances to begin making his first feature film, \"Fear and Desire\" (1953), originally running with the title \"The Trap\", written by his friend Howard Sackler. Kubrick's uncle, Martin Perveler, a Los Angeles pharmacy owner, invested a further $9000 on condition that he be credited as executive producer of the film. Kubrick assembled several actors and a small crew totaling fourteen people (five actors, five crewmen, and four others to help transport the equipment) and flew to the San Gabriel Mountains in California for a five-week, low-budget shoot. Later renamed \"The Shape of Fear\" before finally being named \"Fear and Desire\", it is a fictional allegory about a team of soldiers who survive a plane crash and are caught behind enemy lines in a war. During the course of the film, one of the soldiers becomes infatuated with an attractive girl in the woods and binds her to a tree. This scene and others are noted for their rapid close-ups on the faces of the cast. Kubrick had intended for \"Fear and Desire\" to be a silent picture in order to ensure low production costs; the added sounds, effects, and music ultimately brought production costs to around $53,000, exceeding the budget. He was bailed out by producer Richard de Rochemont on the condition that he help in de Rochemont's production of a five-part television series about Abraham Lincoln on location in Hodgenville, Kentucky.\n\"Fear and Desire\" was a commercial failure, but garnered several positive reviews upon release. Critics such as the reviewer from \"The New York Times\" believed that Kubrick's professionalism as a photographer shone through in the picture, and that he \"artistically caught glimpses of the grotesque attitudes of death, the wolfishness of hungry men, as well as their bestiality, and in one scene, the wracking effect of lust on a pitifully juvenile soldier and the pinioned girl he is guarding\". Columbia University scholar Mark Van Doren was highly impressed by the scenes with the girl bound to the tree, remarking that it would live on as a \"beautiful, terrifying and weird\" sequence which illustrated Kubrick's immense talent and guaranteed his future success. Kubrick himself later expressed embarrassment with \"Fear and Desire\", and attempted over the years to disown it, keeping prints of the film out of circulation. During the production of the film, Kubrick accidentally almost killed his cast with poisonous gasses.\nFollowing \"Fear and Desire\", Kubrick began working on ideas for a new boxing film. Due to the commercial failure of his first feature, Kubrick avoided asking for further investments, but commenced a film noir script with Howard O. Sackler. Originally under the title \"Kiss Me, Kill Me\", and then \"The Nymph and the Maniac\", \"Killer's Kiss\" (1955) is a 67-minute film noir about a young heavyweight boxer's involvement with a woman being abused by her criminal boss. Like \"Fear and Desire\", it was privately funded by Kubrick's family and friends, with some $40,000 put forward from Bronx pharmacist Morris Bousse. Kubrick began shooting footage in Times Square, and frequently explored during the filming process, experimenting with cinematography and considering the use of unconventional angles and imagery. He initially chose to record the sound on location, but encountered difficulties with shadows from the microphone booms, restricting camera movement. His decision to drop the sound in favor of imagery was a costly one; after 12\u201314 weeks shooting the picture, he spent some seven months and $35,000 working on the sound.\nAlfred Hitchcock's \"Blackmail\" (1929) directly influenced the film with the painting laughing at a character, and Martin Scorsese has, in turn, cited Kubrick's innovative shooting angles and atmospheric shots in \"Killer's Kiss\" as an influence on \"Raging Bull\" (1980). Actress Irene Kane, the star of \"Killer's Kiss\", observed: \"Stanley's a fascinating character. He thinks movies should move, with a minimum of dialogue, and he's all for sex and sadism\". \"Killer's Kiss\" met with limited commercial success and made very little money in comparison with its production budget of $75,000. Critics have praised the film's camerawork, but its acting and story are generally considered mediocre.\nHollywood success and beyond (1955\u20131962).\nWhile playing chess in Washington Square, Kubrick met producer James B. Harris, who considered Kubrick \"the most intelligent, most creative person I have ever come in contact with.\" The two formed the Harris-Kubrick Pictures Corporation in 1955. Harris purchased the rights to Lionel White's novel \"Clean Break\" for $10,000 and Kubrick wrote the script, but at Kubrick's suggestion, they hired film noir novelist Jim Thompson to write the dialog for the film\u2014which became \"The Killing\" (1956)\u2014about a meticulously planned racetrack robbery gone wrong. The film starred Sterling Hayden, who had impressed Kubrick with his performance in \"The Asphalt Jungle\" (1950).\nKubrick and Harris moved to Los Angeles and signed with the Jaffe Agency to shoot the picture, which became Kubrick's first full-length feature film shot with a professional cast and crew. The Union in Hollywood stated that Kubrick would not be permitted to be both the director and the cinematographer, resulting in the hiring of veteran cinematographer Lucien Ballard. Kubrick agreed to waive his fee for the production, which was shot in 24 days on a budget of $330,000. He clashed with Ballard during the shooting, and on one occasion Kubrick threatened to fire Ballard following a camera dispute, despite being aged only 27 and 20 years Ballard's junior. Hayden recalled Kubrick was \"cold and detached. Very mechanical, always confident. I've worked with few directors who are that good\".\n\"The Killing\" failed to secure a proper release across the United States; the film made little money, and was promoted only at the last minute, as a second feature to the Western \"Bandido!\" (1956). Several contemporary critics lauded the film, with a reviewer for \"Time\" comparing its camerawork to that of Orson Welles. Today, critics generally consider \"The Killing\" to be among the best films of Kubrick's early career; its nonlinear narrative and clinical execution also had a major influence on later directors of crime films, including Quentin Tarantino. Dore Schary of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) was highly impressed as well, and offered Kubrick and Harris $75,000 to write, direct, and produce a film, which ultimately became \"Paths of Glory\" (1957).\n\"Paths of Glory\", set during World War I, is based on Humphrey Cobb's 1935 antiwar novel of the same name. Schary was familiar with the novel, but stated that MGM would not finance another war picture, given their backing of the anti-war film \"The Red Badge of Courage\" (1951). After Schary was fired by MGM in a major shake-up, Kubrick and Harris managed to interest Kirk Douglas in playing Colonel Dax. Douglas, in turn, signed Harris-Kubrick Pictures to a three-picture co-production deal with his film production company, Bryna Productions, which secured a financing and distribution deal for \"Paths of Glory\" and two subsequent films with United Artists. The film, shot in Munich, from March 1957, follows a French army unit ordered on an impossible mission, and follows with a war trial of three soldiers, arbitrarily chosen, for misconduct. Dax is assigned to defend the men at Court Martial. For the battle scene, Kubrick meticulously lined up six cameras one after the other along the boundary of no-man's land, with each camera capturing a specific field and numbered, and gave each of the hundreds of extras a number for the zone in which they would die. Kubrick operated an Arriflex camera for the battle, zooming in on Douglas. \"Paths of Glory\" became Kubrick's first significant commercial success, and established him as an up-and-coming young filmmaker. Critics praised the film's unsentimental, spare, and unvarnished combat scenes and its raw, black-and-white cinematography. Despite the praise, the Christmas release date was criticized, and the subject was controversial in Europe. The film was banned in France until 1974 for its \"unflattering\" depiction of the French military, and was censored by the Swiss Army until 1970.\nIn October 1957, after \"Paths of Glory\" had its world premiere in Germany, Bryna Productions optioned Canadian church minister-turned-master-safecracker Herbert Emerson Wilsons's autobiography, \"I Stole $16,000,000\", especially for Stanley Kubrick and James B. Harris. The picture was to be the second in the co-production deal between Bryna Productions and Harris-Kubrick Pictures, which Kubrick was to write and direct, Harris to co-produce and Douglas to co-produce and star. In November 1957, Gavin Lambert was signed as story editor for \"I Stole $16,000,000\", and with Kubrick, finished a script titled \"God Fearing Man\", but the picture was never filmed.\nMarlon Brando contacted Kubrick, asking him to direct a film adaptation of the Charles Neider western novel, \"The Authentic Death of Hendry Jones\", featuring Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid. Brando was impressed, saying \"Stanley is unusually perceptive, and delicately attuned to people. He has an adroit intellect, and is a creative thinker\u2014not a repeater, not a fact-gatherer. He digests what he learns and brings to a new project an original point of view and a reserved passion\". The two worked on a script for six months, begun by a then unknown Sam Peckinpah. Many disputes broke out over the project, and in the end, Kubrick distanced himself from what would become \"One-Eyed Jacks\" (1961).\nIn February 1959, Kubrick received a phone call from Kirk Douglas asking him to direct \"Spartacus\" (1960), based on the historical Spartacus and the Third Servile War. Douglas had acquired the rights to the novel by Howard Fast and blacklisted screenwriter Dalton Trumbo began penning the script. It was produced by Douglas, who also starred as Spartacus, and cast Laurence Olivier as his foe, the Roman general and politician Marcus Licinius Crassus. Douglas hired Kubrick for a reported $150,000 fee to take over direction soon after he fired director Anthony Mann. Kubrick had, at 31, already directed four feature films, and this became his largest by far, with a cast of over 10,000 and a budget of $6 million. At the time, this was the most expensive film ever made in America, and Kubrick became the youngest director in Hollywood history to make an epic. It was the first time that Kubrick filmed using the anamorphic 35\u00a0mm horizontal Super Technirama process to achieve ultra-high definition, which allowed him to capture large panoramic scenes, including one with 8,000 trained soldiers from Spain representing the Roman army.\nDisputes broke out during the filming of \"Spartacus\". Kubrick complained about not having full creative control over the artistic aspects, insisting on improvising extensively during the production. Kubrick and Douglas were also at odds over the script, with Kubrick angering Douglas when he cut all but two of his lines from the opening 30 minutes. Despite the on-set troubles, \"Spartacus\" took $14.6 million at the box office in its first run. The film established Kubrick as a major director, receiving six Academy Award nominations and winning four; it ultimately convinced him that if so much could be made of such a problematic production, he could achieve anything. \"Spartacus\" also marked the end of the working relationship between Kubrick and Douglas.\nCollaboration with Peter Sellers (1962\u20131964).\n\"Lolita\".\nKubrick and Harris decided to start production of Kubrick's next film \"Lolita\" (1962) in England, due to clauses placed on the contract by producers Warner Bros. that gave them complete control over the film, and the fact that the Eady plan permitted producers to write off the costs if 80% of the crew were British. Instead, they signed a $1 million deal with Eliot Hyman's Associated Artists Productions, and a clause which gave them the artistic freedom that they desired. \"Lolita\", Kubrick's first attempt at black comedy, was an adaptation of the novel of the same name by Vladimir Nabokov, the story of a middle-aged college professor becoming infatuated with a 12-year-old girl. Stylistically, \"Lolita\", starring Peter Sellers, James Mason, Shelley Winters, and Sue Lyon, was a transitional film for Kubrick, \"marking the turning point from a naturalistic cinema\u00a0... to the surrealism of the later films\", according to film critic Gene Youngblood. Kubrick was impressed by the range of actor Peter Sellers and gave him one of his first opportunities to improvise wildly during shooting, while filming him with three cameras.\nKubrick shot \"Lolita\" over 88 days on a $2 million budget at Elstree Studios, between October 1960 and March 1961. Kubrick often clashed with Shelley Winters, whom he found \"very difficult\" and demanding, and nearly fired at one point. Because of its provocative story, \"Lolita\" was Kubrick's first film to generate controversy; he was ultimately forced to comply with censors and remove much of the erotic element of the relationship between Mason's Humbert and Lyon's Lolita which had been evident in Nabokov's novel. The film was not a major critical or commercial success, earning $3.7 million at the box office on its opening run. \"Lolita\" has since become critically acclaimed.\n\"Dr. Strangelove\".\nKubrick's next project was \"\" (1964), another satirical black comedy. Kubrick became preoccupied with the issue of nuclear war as the Cold War unfolded in the 1950s, and even considered moving to Australia because he feared that New York City might be a likely target for the Russians. He studied over 40 military and political research books on the subject and eventually reached the conclusion that \"nobody really knew anything and the whole situation was absurd\".\nAfter buying the rights to the novel \"Red Alert\", Kubrick collaborated with its author, Peter George, on the script. It was originally written as a serious political thriller, but Kubrick decided that a \"serious treatment\" of the subject would not be believable, and thought that some of its most salient points would be fodder for comedy. Kubrick's longtime producer and friend, James B. Harris, thought the film should be serious, and the two parted ways, amicably, over this disagreement\u2014Harris going on to produce and direct the serious cold-war thriller \"The Bedford Incident.\" Kubrick and \"Red Alert\" author George then reworked the script as a satire (provisionally titled \"The Delicate Balance of Terror\") in which the plot of \"Red Alert\" was situated as a film-within-a-film made by an alien intelligence, but this idea was also abandoned, and Kubrick decided to make the film as \"an outrageous black comedy\".\nJust before filming began, Kubrick hired noted journalist and satirical author Terry Southern to transform the script into its final form, a black comedy, loaded with sexual innuendo, becoming a film which showed Kubrick's talents as a \"unique kind of absurdist\" according to the film scholar Abrams. Southern made major contributions to the final script, and was co-credited (above Peter George) in the film's opening titles; his perceived role in the writing later led to a public rift between Kubrick and Peter George, who subsequently complained in a letter to \"Life\" magazine that Southern's intense but relatively brief (November 16 to December 28, 1962) involvement with the project was being given undue prominence in the media, while his own role as the author of the film's source novel, and his ten-month stint as the script's co-writer, were being downplayed \u2013 a perception Kubrick evidently did little to address.\nKubrick found that \"Dr. Strangelove\", a $2 million production which employed what became the \"first important visual effects crew in the world\", would be impossible to make in the U.S. for various technical and political reasons, forcing him to move production to England. It was shot in 15 weeks, ending in April 1963, after which Kubrick spent eight months editing it. Peter Sellers again agreed to work with Kubrick, and ended up playing three different roles in the film.\nUpon release, the film stirred up much controversy and mixed opinions. \"The New York Times\" film critic Bosley Crowther worried that it was a \"discredit and even contempt for our whole defense establishment\u00a0... the most shattering sick joke I've ever come across\", while Robert Brustein of \"Out of This World\" in a February 1970 article called it a \"juvenalian satire\". Kubrick responded to the criticism, stating: \"A satirist is someone who has a very skeptical view of human nature, but who still has the optimism to make some sort of a joke out of it. However brutal that joke might be\". Today, the film is considered to be one of the sharpest comedy films ever made, and holds a near-perfect 98% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 91 reviews as of \u00a02020[ [update]]. It was named the 39th-greatest American film and third-greatest American comedy film of all time by the American Film Institute, and in 2010, it was named the sixth-best comedy film of all time by \"The Guardian\".\nScience fiction (1965\u20131971).\n\"2001: A Space Odyssey\".\nKubrick spent five years developing his next film, ' (1968), having been highly impressed with science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke's novel \"Childhood's End\", about a superior alien race who assist mankind in eliminating their old selves. After meeting Clarke in New York City in April 1964, Kubrick made the suggestion to work on his 1948 short story \"The Sentinel\", in which a monolith found on the Moon alerts aliens of mankind. That year, Clarke began writing the novel ' and collaborated with Kubrick on a screenplay. The film's theme, the birthing of one intelligence by another, is developed in two parallel intersecting stories on two different time scales. One depicts evolutionary transitions between various stages of man, from ape to \"star child\", as man is reborn into a new existence, each step shepherded by an enigmatic alien intelligence seen only in its artifacts: a series of seemingly indestructible eons-old black monoliths. In space, the enemy is a supercomputer known as HAL who runs the spaceship, a character which novelist Clancy Sigal described as being \"far, far more human, more humorous and conceivably decent than anything else that may emerge from this far-seeing enterprise\".\nKubrick intensively researched for the film, paying particular attention to accuracy and detail in what the future might look like. He was granted permission by NASA to observe the spacecraft being used in the Ranger 9 mission for accuracy. Filming commenced on December 29, 1965, with the excavation of the monolith on the moon, and footage was shot in Namib Desert in early 1967, with the ape scenes completed later that year. The special effects team continued working until the end of the year to complete the film, taking the cost to $10.5 million. \"2001: A Space Odyssey\" was conceived as a Cinerama spectacle and was photographed in Super Panavision 70, giving the viewer a \"dazzling mix of imagination and science\" through ground-breaking effects, which earned Kubrick his only personal Oscar, an Academy Award for Visual Effects. Kubrick said of the concept of the film in an interview with \"Rolling Stone\": \"On the deepest psychological level, the film's plot symbolized the search for God, and finally postulates what is little less than a scientific definition of God. The film revolves around this metaphysical conception, and the realistic hardware and the documentary feelings about everything were necessary in order to undermine your built-in resistance to the poetical concept\".\nUpon release in 1968, \"2001: A Space Odyssey\" was not an immediate hit among critics, who faulted its lack of dialog, slow pacing, and seemingly impenetrable storyline. The film appeared to defy genre convention, much unlike any science-fiction movie before it, and clearly different from any of Kubrick's earlier works. Kubrick was particularly outraged by a scathing review from Pauline Kael, who called it \"the biggest amateur movie of them all\", with Kubrick doing \"really every dumb thing he ever wanted to do\". Despite mixed contemporary critical reviews, \"2001\" gradually gained popularity and earned $31 million worldwide by the end of 1972. Today, it is widely considered to be one of the greatest and most influential films ever made and is a staple on All Time Top 10 lists. Baxter describes the film as \"one of the most admired and discussed creations in the history of cinema\", and Steven Spielberg has referred to it as \"the big bang of his film making generation\". For biographer Vincent LoBrutto it \"positioned Stanley Kubrick as a pure artist ranked among the masters of cinema\". The film marked Kubrick's first use of classical music. Roger Ebert writes: \"Although Kubrick originally commissioned an original score from Alex North, he used classical recordings as a temporary track while editing the film, and they worked so well that he kept them. This was a crucial decision. North's score, which is available on a recording, is a good job of film composition, but would have been wrong for \"2001\" because, like all scores, it attempts to underline the action -- to give us emotional cues. The classical music chosen by Kubrick exists outside the action. It uplifts. It wants to be sublime; it brings a seriousness and transcendence to the visuals\", citing Kubrick's use of Johann Strauss II's \"The Blue Danube\" and Richard Strauss's \"Also sprach Zarathustra\".\n\"A Clockwork Orange\".\nAfter completing \"2001: A Space Odyssey\", Kubrick searched for a project that he could film quickly on a more modest budget. He settled on \"A Clockwork Orange\" (1971) at the end of 1969, an exploration of violence and experimental rehabilitation by law enforcement authorities, based around the character of Alex (portrayed by Malcolm McDowell). Kubrick had received a copy of Anthony Burgess's novel of the same name from Terry Southern while they were working on \"Dr. Strangelove\", but had rejected it on the grounds that Nadsat, a street language for young teenagers, was too difficult to comprehend. The decision to make a film about the degeneration of youth reflected contemporary concerns in 1969; the New Hollywood movement was creating a great number of films that depicted the sexuality and rebelliousness of young people. \"A Clockwork Orange\" was shot over 1970\u20131971 on a budget of \u00a32 million. Kubrick abandoned his use of CinemaScope in filming, deciding that the 1.66:1 widescreen format was, in the words of Baxter, an \"acceptable compromise between spectacle and intimacy\", and favored his \"rigorously symmetrical framing\", which \"increased the beauty of his compositions\". The film heavily features \"pop erotica\" of the period, including a large white plastic set of male genitals, decor which Kubrick had intended to give it a \"slightly futuristic\" look. McDowell's role in Lindsay Anderson's \"if...\" (1968) was crucial to his casting as Alex, and Kubrick professed that he probably would not have made the film if McDowell had been unavailable. The film marked Kubrick's first collaboration with Wendy Carlos, who provided electronic renditions of Henry Purcell's \"Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary\" and Beethoven's \"Ode to Joy\".\nBecause of its depiction of teenage violence, \"A Clockwork Orange\" became one of the most controversial films of its time, and part of an ongoing debate about violence and its glorification in cinema. It received an X rating, or certificate, in both the UK and US, on its release just before Christmas 1971, though many critics saw much of the violence depicted in the film as satirical, and less violent than \"Straw Dogs\", which had been released a month earlier. Kubrick personally pulled the film from release in the United Kingdom after receiving death threats following a series of copycat crimes based on the film; it was thus completely unavailable legally in the UK until after Kubrick's death, and not re-released until 2000. John Trevelyan, the censor of the film, personally considered \"A Clockwork Orange\" to be \"perhaps the most brilliant piece of cinematic art I've ever seen,\" and believed it to present an \"intellectual argument rather than a sadistic spectacle\" in its depiction of violence, but acknowledged that many would not agree. Negative media hype over the film notwithstanding, \"A Clockwork Orange\" received four Academy Award nominations, for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Screenplay and Best Editing, and was named by the New York Film Critics Circle as the Best Film of 1971. After William Friedkin won Best Director for \"The French Connection\" that year, he told the press: \"Speaking personally, I think Stanley Kubrick is the best American film-maker of the year. In fact, not just this year, but the best, period.\"\nPeriod and horror filming (1972\u20131980).\n\"Barry Lyndon\".\n\"Barry Lyndon\" (1975) is an adaptation of William Makepeace Thackeray's \"The Luck of Barry Lyndon\", a picaresque novel about the adventures of an 18th-century Irish rogue and social climber. John Calley of Warner Bros. agreed in 1972 to invest $2.5 million into the film, on condition that Kubrick approach major Hollywood stars, to ensure success. Like previous films, Kubrick and his art department conducted an enormous amount of research on the 18th century. Extensive photographs were taken of locations and artwork in particular, and paintings were meticulously replicated from works of the great masters of the period in the film. The film was shot on location in Ireland, beginning in the autumn of 1973, at a cost of $11 million with a cast and crew of 170. The decision to shoot in Ireland stemmed from the fact that it still retained many buildings from the 18th century period which England lacked. The production was problematic from the start, plagued with heavy rain and political strife involving Northern Ireland at the time. After Kubrick received death threats from the IRA in 1974 due to the shooting scenes with English soldiers, he fled Ireland with his family on a ferry from D\u00fan Laoghaire under an assumed identity and resumed filming in England.\nBaxter notes that \"Barry Lyndon\" was the film which made Kubrick notorious for paying scrupulous attention to detail, often demanding twenty or thirty retakes of the same scene to perfect his art. Often considered to be his most authentic-looking picture, the cinematography and lighting techniques that Kubrick and cinematographer John Alcott used in \"Barry Lyndon\" were highly innovative. Interior scenes were shot with a specially adapted high-speed f/0.7 Zeiss camera lens originally developed for NASA to be used in satellite photography. The lenses allowed many scenes to be lit only with candlelight, creating two-dimensional, diffused-light images reminiscent of 18th-century paintings. Cinematographer Allen Daviau states that the method gives the audience a way of seeing the characters and scenes as they would have been seen by people at the time. Many of the fight scenes were shot with a hand-held camera to produce a \"sense of documentary realism and immediacy\".\n\"Barry Lyndon\" found a great audience in France, but was a box office failure, grossing just $9.5 million in the American market, not even close to the $30 million Warner Bros. needed to generate a profit. The pace and length of \"Barry Lyndon\" at three hours put off many American critics and audiences, but the film was nominated for seven Academy Awards and won four, including Best Art Direction, Best Cinematography, Best Costume Design, and Best Musical Score, more than any other Kubrick film. As with most of Kubrick's films, \"Barry Lyndon\"'s reputation has grown through the years and it is now considered to be one of his best, particularly among filmmakers and critics. Numerous polls, such as \"The Village Voice\" (1999), \"Sight &amp; Sound\" (2002), and \"Time\" (2005), have rated it as one of the greatest films ever made. As of \u00a02019[ [update]], it has a 94% rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 64 reviews. Ebert referred to it as \"one of the most beautiful films ever made\u00a0... certainly in every frame a Kubrick film: technically awesome, emotionally distant, remorseless in its doubt of human goodness\".\n\"The Shining\".\n\"The Shining\", released in 1980, was adapted from the novel of the same name by Stephen King. The film stars Jack Nicholson as a writer who takes a job as a winter caretaker of an isolated hotel in the Rocky Mountains. He spends the winter there with his wife, played by Shelley Duvall, and their young son, who displays paranormal abilities. During their stay, they confront both Jack's descent into madness and apparent supernatural horrors lurking in the hotel. Kubrick gave his actors freedom to extend the script and even improvise on occasion, and as a result, Nicholson was responsible for the 'Here's Johnny!' line and the scene in which he's sitting at the typewriter and unleashes his anger upon his wife. Kubrick often demanded up to 70 or 80 retakes of the same scene. Duvall, whom Kubrick intentionally isolated and argued with, was forced to perform the exhausting baseball bat scene 127 times. The bar scene with the ghostly bartender was shot 36 times, while the kitchen scene between the characters of Danny (Danny Lloyd) and Halloran (Scatman Crothers) ran to 148 takes. The aerial shots of the Overlook Hotel were shot at Timberline Lodge on Mount Hood in Oregon, while the interiors of the hotel were shot at Elstree Studios in England between May 1978 and April 1979. Cardboard models were made of all of the sets of the film, and the lighting of them was a massive undertaking, which took four months of electrical wiring. Kubrick made extensive use of the newly invented Steadicam, a weight-balanced camera support, which allowed for smooth hand-held camera movement in scenes where a conventional camera track was impractical. According to Garrett Brown, Steadicam's inventor, it was the first picture to use its full potential. \"The Shining\" was not the only horror film to which Kubrick had been linked; he had turned down the directing of both \"The Exorcist\" (1973) and \"\" (1977), despite once saying in 1966 to a friend that he had long desired to \"make the world's scariest movie, involving a series of episodes that would play upon the nightmare fears of the audience\". Kubrick worked again with Carlos, who provided an electronic version of the \"Dies Irae\" segment from Hector Berlioz's \"Symphonie fantastique\".\nFive days after release on May 23, 1980, Kubrick ordered the deletion of a final scene, in which the hotel manager Ullman (Barry Nelson) visits Wendy (Shelley Duvall) in hospital, believing it unnecessary after witnessing the audience excitement in cinemas at the film's climax. \"The Shining\" opened to strong box office takings, earning $1 million on the first weekend and earning $30.9 million in America by the end of the year. The original critical response was mixed, and King detested the film and disliked Kubrick. \"The Shining\" is now considered to be a horror classic, and the American Film Institute ranked it as the 29th greatest thriller film of all time in 2001.\nLater work and final years (1981\u20131999).\n\"Full Metal Jacket\".\nKubrick met author Michael Herr through mutual friend David Cornwell (novelist John le Carr\u00e9) in 1980, and became interested in his book \"Dispatches\", about the Vietnam War. Herr had recently written Martin Sheen's narration for \"Apocalypse Now\" (1979). Kubrick was also intrigued by Gustav Hasford's Vietnam War novel \"The Short-Timers.\" With the vision in mind to shoot what would become \"Full Metal Jacket\" (1987), Kubrick began working with both Herr and Hasford separately on a script. He eventually found Hasford's novel to be \"brutally honest\" and decided to shoot a film which closely follows the novel. All of the film was shot at a cost of $17 million within a 30-mile radius of his house between August 1985 and September 1986, later than scheduled as Kubrick shut down production for five months following a near-fatal accident with a jeep involving Lee Ermey. A derelict gasworks in Beckton in the London Docklands area posed as the ruined city of Hu\u1ebf, which makes the film visually very different from other Vietnam War films. Around 200 palm trees were imported via 40-foot trailers by road from North Africa, at a cost of \u00a31000 a tree, and thousands of plastic plants were ordered from Hong Kong to provide foliage for the film. Kubrick explained he made the film look realistic by using natural light, and achieved a \"newsreel effect\" by making the Steadicam shots less steady, which reviewers and commentators thought contributed to the bleakness and seriousness of the film.\nAccording to critic Michel Ciment, the film contained some of Kubrick's trademark characteristics, such as his selection of ironic music, portrayals of men being dehumanized, and attention to extreme detail to achieve realism. In a later scene, United States Marines patrol the ruins of an abandoned and destroyed city singing the theme song to the Mickey Mouse Club as a sardonic counterpoint. The film opened strongly in June 1987, taking over $30 million in the first 50 days alone, but critically it was overshadowed by the success of Oliver Stone's \"Platoon\", released a year earlier. Co-star Matthew Modine stated one of Kubrick's favorite reviews read: \"The first half of \"FMJ\" is brilliant. Then the film degenerates into a masterpiece.\" Ebert was not particularly impressed with it, awarding it a mediocre 2.5 out of 4. He concluded: \"Stanley Kubrick's \"Full Metal Jacket\" is more like a book of short stories than a novel\", a \"strangely shapeless film from the man whose work usually imposes a ferociously consistent vision on his material\".\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\".\nKubrick's final film was \"Eyes Wide Shut\" (1999), starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman as a Manhattan couple on a sexual odyssey. Tom Cruise portrays a doctor who witnesses a bizarre masked quasireligious orgiastic ritual at a country mansion, a discovery which later threatens his life. The story is based on Arthur Schnitzler's 1926 Freudian novella \"Traumnovelle\" (\"Dream Story\" in English), which Kubrick relocated from turn-of-the-century Vienna to New York City in the 1990s. Kubrick said of the novel: \"A difficult book to describe\u2014what good book isn't. It explores the sexual ambivalence of a happy marriage and tries to equate the importance of sexual dreams and might-have-beens with reality. All of Schnitzler's work is psychologically brilliant\". Kubrick was almost 70, but worked relentlessly for 15 months to get the film out by its planned release date of July 16, 1999. He commenced a script with Frederic Raphael, and worked 18 hours a day, while maintaining complete confidentiality about the film.\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\", like \"Lolita\" and \"A Clockwork Orange\" before it, faced censorship before release. Kubrick sent an unfinished preview copy to the stars and producers a few months before release, but his sudden death on March 7, 1999, came a few days after he finished editing. He never saw the final version released to the public, but he did see the preview of the film with Warner Bros., Cruise, and Kidman, and had reportedly told Warner executive Julian Senior that it was his \"best film ever\". At the time, critical opinion of the film was mixed, and it was viewed less favorably than most of Kubrick's films. Ebert awarded it 3.5 out of 4 stars, comparing the structure to a thriller and writing that it is \"like an erotic daydream about chances missed and opportunities avoided\", and thought that Kubrick's use of lighting at Christmas made the film \"all a little garish, like an urban sideshow\". Stephen Hunter of \"The Washington Post\" disliked the film, writing that it \"is actually sad, rather than bad. It feels creaky, ancient, hopelessly out of touch, infatuated with the hot taboos of his youth and unable to connect with that twisty thing contemporary sexuality has become.\"\nUnfinished and unrealized projects.\n\"A.I. Artificial Intelligence\".\nThroughout the 1980s and early 1990s, Kubrick collaborated with Brian Aldiss on expanding his short story \"Supertoys Last All Summer Long\" into a three-act film. It was a futuristic fairy tale about a robot that resembles and behaves as a child, and his efforts to become a 'real boy' in a manner similar to Pinocchio. Kubrick approached Steven Spielberg in 1995 with the AI script with the possibility of Steven Spielberg directing it and Kubrick producing it. Kubrick reportedly held long telephone discussions with Spielberg regarding the film, and, according to Spielberg, at one point stated that the subject matter was closer to Spielberg's sensibilities than his.\nFollowing Kubrick's sudden death in 1999, Spielberg took the drafts and notes left by Kubrick and his writers and composed a new screenplay based on an earlier 90-page story treatment by Ian Watson written under Kubrick's supervision and specifications. In association with what remained of Kubrick's production unit, he directed the film \"A.I. Artificial Intelligence\" (2001) which was produced by Kubrick's longtime producer (and brother-in-law) Jan Harlan. Sets, costumes, and art direction were based on the works of conceptual artist Chris Baker, who had also done much of his work under Kubrick's supervision.\nSpielberg was able to function autonomously in Kubrick's absence, but said he felt \"inhibited to honor him\", and followed Kubrick's visual schema with as much fidelity as he could. Spielberg, who once referred to Kubrick as \"the greatest master I ever served\", now with production underway, admitted, \"I felt like I was being coached by a ghost.\" The film was released in June 2001. It contains a posthumous production credit for Stanley Kubrick at the beginning and the brief dedication \"For Stanley Kubrick\" at the end. John Williams's score contains many allusions to pieces heard in other Kubrick films.\n\"Napoleon\".\nFollowing \"2001: A Space Odyssey\", Kubrick planned to make a film about the life of Napoleon. Fascinated by the French leader's life and \"self-destruction\", Kubrick spent a great deal of time planning the film's development and conducted about two years of research into Napoleon's life, reading several hundred books and gaining access to his personal memoirs and commentaries. He tried to see every film about Napoleon and found none of them appealing, including Abel Gance's 1927 film which is generally considered to be a masterpiece, but for Kubrick, a \"really terrible\" movie. LoBrutto states that Napoleon was an ideal subject for Kubrick, embracing Kubrick's \"passion for control, power, obsession, strategy, and the military\", while Napoleon's psychological intensity and depth, logistical genius and war, sex, and the evil nature of man were all ingredients which deeply appealed to Kubrick.\nKubrick drafted a screenplay in 1961, and envisaged making a \"grandiose\" epic, with up to 40,000 infantry and 10,000 cavalry. He intended hiring the armed forces of an entire country to make the film, as he considered Napoleonic battles to be \"so beautiful, like vast lethal ballets\", with an \"aesthetic brilliance that doesn't require a military mind to appreciate\". He wanted them replicated as authentically as possible on screen. Kubrick sent research teams to scout for locations across Europe, and commissioned screenwriter and director Andrew Birkin, one of his young assistants on \"2001\", to the Isle of Elba, Austerlitz, and Waterloo, taking thousands of pictures for his later perusal. Kubrick approached numerous stars to play leading roles, including Audrey Hepburn for Empress Josephine, a part which she could not accept due to semiretirement.\nBritish actors David Hemmings and Ian Holm were considered for the lead role of Napoleon, before Jack Nicholson was cast. The film was well into preproduction and ready to begin filming in 1969 when MGM canceled the project. Numerous reasons have been cited for the abandonment of the project, including its projected cost, a change of ownership at MGM, and the poor reception that the 1970 Soviet film about Napoleon, \"Waterloo\", received. In 2011, Taschen published the book \"Stanley Kubrick's Napoleon: The Greatest Movie Never Made\", a large volume compilation of literature and source documents from Kubrick, such as scene photo ideas and copies of letters Kubrick wrote and received. In March 2013, Steven Spielberg, who previously collaborated with Kubrick on \"A.I. Artificial Intelligence\" and is a passionate admirer of his work, announced that he would be developing \"Napoleon\" as a TV miniseries based on Kubrick's original screenplay.\nOther projects.\nIn the 1950s, Kubrick and Harris developed a sitcom starring Ernie Kovacs and a film adaption of the book \"I Stole $16,000,000\", but nothing came of them. Tony Frewin, an assistant who worked with the director for a long period of time, revealed in a 2013 \"Atlantic\" article: \"[Kubrick] was limitlessly interested in anything to do with Nazis and desperately wanted to make a film on the subject.\" Kubrick had intended to make a film about Dietrich Schulz-K\u00f6hn, a Nazi officer who used the pen name \"Dr. Jazz\" to write reviews of German music scenes during the Nazi era. Kubrick had been given a copy of the Mike Zwerin book \"Swing Under the Nazis\" after he had finished production on \"Full Metal Jacket\", the front cover of which featured a photograph of Schulz-K\u00f6hn. A screenplay was never completed and Kubrick's adaptation was never initiated. The unfinished \"Aryan Papers\", based on Louis Begley's debut novel \"Wartime Lies\", was a factor in the abandonment of the project. Work on \"Aryan Papers\" depressed Kubrick enormously, and he eventually decided that Steven Spielberg's \"Schindler's List\" (1993) covered much of the same material.\nAccording to biographer John Baxter, Kubrick had shown an interest in directing a pornographic film based on a satirical novel written by Terry Southern, titled \"Blue Movie\", about a director who makes Hollywood's first big-budget porn film. Baxter claims that Kubrick concluded he did not have the patience or temperament to become involved in the porn industry, and Southern stated that Kubrick was \"too ultra conservative\" towards sexuality to have gone ahead with it, but liked the idea. Kubrick was unable to direct a film of Umberto Eco's \"Foucault's Pendulum\" as Eco had given his publisher instructions to never sell the film rights to any of his books after his dissatisfaction with the film version of \"The Name of the Rose\". Also, when the film rights to Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\" were sold to United Artists, the Beatles approached Kubrick to direct them in a film adaptation, but Kubrick was unwilling to produce a film based on a very popular book.\nCareer influences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anyone who has ever been privileged to direct a film knows that, although it can be like trying to write \"War and Peace\" in a bumper car at an amusement park, when you finally get it right, there are not many joys in life that can equal the feeling.\u2014\u200a\nAs a young man, Kubrick was fascinated by the films of Soviet filmmakers such as Sergei Eisenstein and Vsevolod Pudovkin. Kubrick read Pudovkin's seminal theoretical work, \"Film Technique,\" which argues that editing makes film a unique art form, and it needs to be employed to manipulate the medium to its fullest. Kubrick recommended this work to others for many years. Thomas Nelson describes this book as \"the greatest influence of any single written work on the evolution of [Kubrick's] private aesthetics\". Kubrick also found the ideas of Konstantin Stanislavski to be essential to his understanding the basics of directing, and gave himself a crash course to learn his methods.\nKubrick's family and many critics felt that his Jewish ancestry may have contributed to his worldview and aspects of his films. After his death, both his daughter and wife stated that he was not religious, but \"did not deny his Jewishness, not at all\". His daughter noted that he wanted to make a film about the Holocaust, the \"Aryan Papers\", having spent years researching the subject. Most of Kubrick's friends and early photography and film collaborators were Jewish, and his first two marriages were to daughters of recent Jewish immigrants from Europe. British screenwriter Frederic Raphael, who worked closely with Kubrick in his final years, believes that the originality of Kubrick's films was partly because he \"had a (Jewish?) respect for scholars\". He declared that it was \"absurd to try to understand Stanley Kubrick without reckoning on Jewishness as a fundamental aspect of his mentality\".\nWalker notes that Kubrick was influenced by the tracking and \"fluid camera\" styles of director Max Oph\u00fcls, and used them in many of his films, including \"Paths of Glory\" and \"2001: A Space Odyssey\". Kubrick noted how in Oph\u00fcls' films \"the camera went through every wall and every floor\". He once named Oph\u00fcls' \"Le Plaisir\" (1952) as his favorite film. According to film historian John Wakeman, Oph\u00fcls himself learned the technique from director Anatole Litvak in the 1930s, when he was his assistant, and whose work was \"replete with the camera trackings, pans and swoops which later became the trademark of Max Oph\u00fcls\". Geoffrey Cocks believes that Kubrick was also influenced by Oph\u00fcls' stories of thwarted love and a preoccupation with predatory men, while Herr notes that Kubrick was deeply inspired by G. W. Pabst, who earlier tried, but was unable to adapt Schnitzler's \"Traumnovelle\", the basis of \"Eyes Wide Shut\". Film historian/critic Robert Kolker sees the influence of Orson Welles' moving camera shots on Kubrick's style. LoBrutto notes that Kubrick identified with Welles and that this influenced the making of \"The Killing\", with its \"multiple points of view, extreme angles, and deep focus\".\nKubrick admired the work of Ingmar Bergman and expressed it in personal letter: \"Your vision of life has moved me deeply, much more deeply than I have ever been moved by any films. I believe you are the greatest film-maker at work today [...], unsurpassed by anyone in the creation of mood and atmosphere, the subtlety of performance, the avoidance of the obvious, the truthfulness and completeness of characterization. To this one must also add everything else that goes into the making of a film; [...] and I shall look forward with eagerness to each of your films.\"\nWhen the American magazine \"Cinema\" asked Kubrick in 1963 to name his favorite films, he listed Federico Fellini's \"I Vitelloni\" as number one in his Top 10 list.\nDirecting techniques.\nPhilosophy.\nKubrick's films typically involve expressions of an inner struggle, examined from different perspectives.\nHe was very careful not to present his own views of the meaning of his films and to leave them open to interpretation. He explained in a 1960 interview with Robert Emmett Ginna:\nOne of the things I always find extremely difficult, when a picture's finished, is when a writer or a film reviewer asks, 'Now, what is it that you were trying to say in that picture?' And without being thought too presumptuous for using this analogy, I like to remember what T. S. Eliot said to someone who had asked him\u2014I believe it was \"The Waste Land\"\u2014what he meant by the poem. He replied, 'I meant what I said.' If I could have said it any differently, I would have.\nKubrick likened the understanding of his films to popular music, in that whatever the background or intellect of the individual, a Beatles record, for instance, can be appreciated both by the Alabama truck driver and the young Cambridge intellectual, because their \"emotions and subconscious are far more similar than their intellects\". He believed that the subconscious emotional reaction experienced by audiences was far more powerful in the film medium than in any other traditional verbal form, and this was one of the reasons why he often relied on long periods in his films without dialogue, placing emphasis on images and sound. In a 1975 \"Time\" magazine interview, Kubrick further stated: \"The essence of a dramatic form is to let an idea come over people without it being plainly stated. When you say something directly, it is simply not as potent as it is when you allow people to discover it for themselves.\" He also said: \"Realism is probably the best way to dramatize argument and ideas. Fantasy may deal best with themes which lie primarily in the unconscious\".\nDiane Johnson, who co-wrote the screenplay for \"The Shining\" with Kubrick, notes that he \"always said that it was better to adapt a book rather than write an original screenplay, and that you should choose a work that isn't a masterpiece so you can improve on it. Which is what he's always done, except with \"Lolita\"\". When deciding on a subject for a film, there were many aspects that he looked for, and he always made films which would \"appeal to every sort of viewer, whatever their expectation of film\". According to his co-producer Jan Harlan, Kubrick mostly \"wanted to make films about things that mattered, that not only had form, but substance\". Kubrick believed that audiences quite often were attracted to \"enigmas and allegories\" and did not like films in which everything was spelled out clearly.\nSexuality in Kubrick's films is usually depicted outside matrimonial relationships in hostile situations. Baxter states that Kubrick explores the \"furtive and violent side alleys of the sexual experience: voyeurism, domination, bondage and rape\" in his films. He further points out that films like \"A Clockwork Orange\" are \"powerfully homoerotic\", from Alex walking about his parents' flat in his Y-fronts, one eye being \"made up with doll-like false eyelashes\", to his innocent acceptance of the sexual advances of his post-corrective adviser Deltroid (Aubrey Morris).\nIndeed, the film is thought to have been strongly influenced by Kubrick's many viewings of Matsumoto Toshio's 1969 landmark in , \"Funeral Parade of Roses\". Film critic Adrian Turner notes that Kubrick's films appear to be \"preoccupied with questions of universal and inherited evil\", and Malcolm McDowell referred to his humor as \"black as coal\", questioning his outlook on humanity. A few of his pictures were obvious satires and black comedies, such as \"Lolita\" and \"Dr. Strangelove\"; many of his other films also contained less visible elements of satire or irony. His films are unpredictable, examining \"the duality and contradictions that exist in all of us\". Ciment notes how Kubrick often tried to confound audience expectations by establishing radically different moods from one film to the next, remarking that he was almost \"obsessed with contradicting himself, with making each work a critique of the previous one\".\nKubrick stated that \"there is no deliberate pattern to the stories that I have chosen to make into films. About the only factor at work each time is that I try not to repeat myself\". As a result, Kubrick was often misunderstood by critics, and only once did he have unanimously positive reviews upon the release of a film\u2014for \"Paths of Glory\".\nWriting and staging scenes.\nFilm author Patrick Webster considers Kubrick's methods of writing and developing scenes to fit with the classical auteur theory of directing, allowing collaboration and improvisation with the actors during filming. Malcolm McDowell recalled Kubrick's collaborative emphasis during their discussions and his willingness to allow him to improvise a scene, stating that \"there was a script and we followed it, but when it didn't work he knew it, and we had to keep rehearsing endlessly until we were bored with it\".\nOnce Kubrick was confident in the overall staging of a scene, and felt the actors were prepared, he would then develop the visual aspects, including camera and lighting placement. Walker believes that Kubrick was one of \"very few film directors competent to instruct their lighting photographers in the precise effect they want\". Baxter believes that Kubrick was heavily influenced by his ancestry and always possessed a European perspective to filmmaking, particularly the Austro-Hungarian empire and his admiration for Max Ophuls and Richard Strauss.\nGilbert Adair, writing in a review for \"Full Metal Jacket\", commented that \"Kubrick's approach to language has always been of a reductive and uncompromisingly deterministic nature. He appears to view it as the exclusive product of environmental conditioning, only very marginally influenced by concepts of subjectivity and interiority, by all whims, shades and modulations of personal expression\". Johnson notes that although Kubrick was a \"visual filmmaker\", he also loved words and was like a writer in his approach, very sensitive to the story itself, which he found unique. Before shooting began, Kubrick tried to have the script as complete as possible, but still allowed himself enough space to make changes during the filming, finding it \"more profitable to avoid locking up any ideas about staging or camera or even dialogue prior to rehearsals\" as he put it. Kubrick told Robert Emmett Ginna: \"I think you have to view the entire problem of putting the story you want to tell up there on that light square. It begins with the selection of the property; it continues through the creation of the story, the sets, the costumes, the photography and the acting. And when the picture is shot, it's only partially finished. I think the cutting is just a continuation of directing a movie. I think the use of music effects, opticals and finally main titles are all part of telling the story. And I think the fragmentation of these jobs, by different people, is a very bad thing\". Kubrick also said: \"I think that the best plot is no apparent plot. I like a slow start, the start that gets under the audience's skin and involves them so that they can appreciate grace notes and soft tones and don't have to be pounded over the head with plot points and suspense tools.\"\nIn terms of Kubrick's screenwriting and narratives, posthumous analysis of his films often highlight a pervasive \"misanthropy\", an unsentimental style, and being less interested in the specific emotions or personality traits of his characters. Filmmaker Quentin Tarantino describes the manner in which Kubrick writes characters and films as \"cold\" and detached.\nDirecting style.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThey work with Stanley and go through hells that nothing in their careers could have prepared them for, they think they must have been mad to get involved, they think that they'd die before they would ever work with him again, that fixated maniac; and when it's all behind them and the profound fatigue of so much intensity has worn off, they'd do anything in the world to work for him again. For the rest of their professional lives they long to work with someone who cared the way Stanley did, someone they could learn from. They look for someone to respect the way they'd come to respect him, but they can never find anybody\u00a0... I've heard this story so many times.\nMichael Herr, screenwriter for \"Full Metal Jacket\" on actors working with Kubrick.\nMultiple takes.\nKubrick was notorious for filming far more takes than is common during feature production and his relentless approach often placed large demands on his actors. Jack Nicholson remarked that Kubrick would frequently require up to fifty takes of a scene before the director felt justice had been done to the material. Nicole Kidman explained that the dozens of takes he often required had the effect of suppressing an actor's conscious thoughts about technique, diffusing the concentration Kubrick said he could see in the eyes of an actor who was not yet performing at the peak of their ability and helping them to enter a \"deeper place\". Kubrick echoed this sentiment, saying, \"[a]ctors are essentially emotion-producing instruments, and some are always tuned and ready while others will reach a fantastic pitch on one take and never equal it again, no matter how hard they try\".\nWhile Kubrick's high take ratio was considered by some critics to be irrational, he firmly believed that actors were at their best during filming, as opposed to in rehearsals, saying, \"[w]hen you make a movie, it takes a few days just to get used to the crew, because it is like getting undressed in front of fifty people. Once you're accustomed to them, the presence of even one other person on set is discordant and tends to produce self-consciousness in the actors, and certainly in itself\".\nIn 1987, when Kubrick was asked about his reputation for excessive takes by \"Rolling Stone\", he replied that it was exaggerated but that when it was true, \"[i]t happens when actors are unprepared. You cannot act without knowing dialogue. If actors have to think about the words, they can't work on the emotion. So you end up doing thirty takes of something. And still you can see the concentration in their eyes; they don't know their lines. So you just shoot it and shoot it and hope you can get something out of it in pieces.\" He likewise told biographer Michel Ciment that, \"[a]n actor can only do one thing at a time, and when he learned his lines only well enough to say them while he's thinking about them, he will always have trouble as soon as he has to work on the emotions of the scene or find camera marks. In a strong emotional scene, it is always best to be able to shoot in complete takes to allow the actor a continuity of emotion, and it is rare for most actors to reach their peak more than once or twice. There are, occasionally, scenes which benefit from extra takes, but even then, I'm not sure that the early takes aren't just glorified rehearsals with the adding adrenaline of film running through the camera.\"\nMatthew Modine, who played Joker in \"Full Metal Jacket,\" echoes these assessments of even a world-renowned actor's delivery on a Kubrick film. In an oral history gathered by Peter Bogdanovich after the director's death Modine recalled that, \"I once asked [Kubrick] why he so often did a lot of takes. [...] And he talked about Jack Nicholson [saying] \"Jack would come in during the blocking and he kind of fumbled through the lines. He'd be learning them while he was there. And then you'd start shooting and after take 3 or take 4 or take 5 you'd get the Jack Nicholson that everybody knows and most directors would be happy with. And then you'd go up to 10 or 15 and he'd be really awful and then he'd start to understand what the lines were, what the lines meant, and then he'd become unconscious about what he was saying. So by take 30 or take 40 the lines became something else.\"\nBy contrast, during the filming of \"Full Metal Jacket\" the former Marine Corps drill instructor R. Lee Ermey often satisfied Kubrick in as few as two or three takes. The director praised Ermey as an excellent performer, later saying to \"Rolling Stone\" that Ermey's intense familiarity with the role had perfected his delivery and fluency of improvisation to a level he could not have hoped to discover in a professional actor, no matter how many takes they were given. Kubrick repeated his praise to the \"Washington Post\", saying he had, \"always found that some people can act and some can't, whether or not they've had training. And I suspect that being a drill instructor is, in a sense, being an actor. Because they're saying the same things every eight weeks, to new guys, like they're saying it for the first time \u2013 and that's acting.\"\nDiscussions with actors.\nOn set, Kubrick would devote his personal breaks to lengthy discussions with his actors. Among those who valued his attention was Tony Curtis, star of \"Spartacus\", who said Kubrick was his favorite director, adding, \"his greatest effectiveness was his one-on-one relationship with actors.\" He further added, \"Kubrick had his own approach to film-making. He wanted to see the actor's faces. He didn't want cameras always in a wide shot twenty-five feet away, he wanted close-ups, he wanted to keep the camera moving. That was his style.\" Similarly, Malcolm McDowell recalls the long discussions he had with Kubrick to help him develop his character in \"A Clockwork Orange\", noting that on set he felt entirely uninhibited and free, which is what made Kubrick \"such a great director\". Kubrick also allowed actors at times to improvise and to \"break the rules\", particularly with Peter Sellers in \"Lolita\", which became a turning point in his career as it allowed him to work creatively during the shooting, as opposed to the preproduction stage.\nDuring an interview, Ryan O'Neal recalled Kubrick's directing style: \"God, he works you hard. He moves you, pushes you, helps you, gets cross with you, but above all he teaches you the value of a good director. Stanley brought out aspects of my personality and acting instincts that had been dormant\u00a0... My strong suspicion [was] that I was involved in something great\". He further added that working with Kubrick was \"a stunning experience\" and that he never recovered from working with somebody of such magnificence.\nCinematography.\nKubrick credited the ease with which he filmed scenes to his early years as a photographer. He rarely added camera instructions in the script, preferring to handle that after a scene is created, as the visual part of film-making came easiest to him. Even when deciding which props and settings would be used, Kubrick paid meticulous attention to detail and tried to collect as much background material as possible, activities the director likened to being \"a detective\". Cinematographer John Alcott, who worked closely with Kubrick on four of his films, and won an Oscar for Best Cinematography on \"Barry Lyndon\", remarked that Kubrick \"questions everything\", and was involved in the technical aspects of film-making including camera placement, scene composition, choice of lens, and even operating the camera which would usually be left to the cinematographer. Alcott considered Kubrick to be the \"nearest thing to genius I've ever worked with, with all the problems of a genius\".\nAmong Kubrick's innovations in cinematography are his use of special effects, as in \"2001\", where he used both slit-scan photography and front-screen projection, which won Kubrick his only Oscar for special effects. Some reviewers have described and illustrated with video clips Kubrick's use of \"one-point perspective\", which leads the viewer's eye towards a central vanishing point. The technique relies on creating a complex visual symmetry using parallel lines in a scene which all converge on that single point, leading away from the viewer. Combined with camera motion it could produce an effect that one writer describes as \"hypnotic and thrilling\". \"The Shining\" was among the first half-dozen features to use the then-revolutionary Steadicam (after the 1976 films \"Bound for Glory\", \"Marathon Man\" and \"Rocky\"). Kubrick used it to its fullest potential, which gave the audience smooth, stabilized, motion-tracking by the camera. Kubrick described Steadicam as being like a \"magic carpet\", allowing \"fast, flowing, camera movements\" in the maze in \"The Shining\" which otherwise would have been impossible.\nKubrick was among the first directors to use video assist during filming. At the time he began using it in 1966, it was considered cutting-edge technology, requiring him to build his own system. Having it in place during the filming of \"2001\", he was able to view a video of a take immediately after it was filmed. On some films, such as \"Barry Lyndon\", he used custom made zoom lenses, which allowed him to start a scene with a close-up and slowly zoom out to capture the full panorama of scenery and to film long takes under changing outdoor lighting conditions by making aperture adjustments while the cameras rolled. LoBrutto notes that Kubrick's technical knowledge about lenses \"dazzled the manufacturer's engineers, who found him to be unprecedented among contemporary filmmakers\". For \"Barry Lyndon\" he also used a specially adapted high-speed (f/0.7) Zeiss camera lens, originally developed for NASA, to shoot numerous scenes lit only with candlelight. Actor Steven Berkoff recalls that Kubrick wanted scenes to be shot using \"pure candlelight\", and in doing so Kubrick \"made a unique contribution to the art of filmmaking going back to painting\u00a0... You almost posed like for portraits.\" LoBrutto notes that cinematographers all over the world wanted to know about Kubrick's \"magic lens\" and that he became a \"legend\" among cameramen around the world.\nEditing and music.\nKubrick spent extensive hours editing, often working seven days a week, and more hours a day as he got closer to deadlines. For Kubrick, written dialogue was one element to be put in balance with mise en sc\u00e8ne (set arrangements), music, and especially, editing. Inspired by Pudovkin's treatise on film editing, Kubrick realized that one could create a performance in the editing room and often \"re-direct\" a film, and he remarked: \"I love editing. I think I like it more than any other phase of filmmaking\u00a0... Editing is the only unique aspect of filmmaking which does not resemble any other art form\u2014a point so important it cannot be overstressed\u00a0... It can make or break a film\". Biographer John Baxter stated that \"Instead of finding the intellectual spine of a film in the script before starting work, Kubrick felt his way towards the final version of a film by shooting each scene from many angles and demanding scores of takes on each line. Then over months\u00a0... he arranged and rearranged the tens of thousands of scraps of film to fit a vision that really only began to emerge during editing\".\nKubrick's attention to music was an aspect of what many referred to as his \"perfectionism\" and extreme attention to minute details, which his wife Christiane attributed to an addiction to music. In his last six films, Kubrick usually chose music from existing sources, especially classical compositions. He preferred selecting recorded music over having it composed for a film, believing that no hired composer could do as well as the public domain classical composers. He also felt that building scenes from great music often created the \"most memorable scenes\" in the best films. In one instance, for a scene in \"Barry Lyndon\" which was written into the screenplay as merely, \"Barry duels with Lord Bullingdon\", he spent forty-two working days in the editing phase. During that period, he listened to what LoBrutto describes as \"every available recording of seventeenth-and eighteenth- century music, acquiring thousands of records to find Handel's sarabande used to score the scene\". Nicholson likewise observed his attention to music, stating that Kubrick \"listened constantly to music until he discovered something he felt was right or that excited him\".\nKubrick is credited with introducing Hungarian composer Gy\u00f6rgy Ligeti to a broad Western audience by including his music in \"2001\", \"The Shining\" and \"Eyes Wide Shut\". According to Baxter, the music in \"2001\" was \"at the forefront of Kubrick's mind\" when he conceived the film. During earlier screening he played music by Mendelssohn and Vaughan Williams, and Kubrick and writer Clarke had listened to Carl Orff's transcription of \"Carmina Burana\", consisting of 13th century sacred and secular songs. Ligeti's music employed the new style of micropolyphony, which used sustained dissonant chords that shift slowly over time, a style he originated. Its inclusion in the film became a \"boon for the relatively unknown composer\" partly because it was introduced alongside background by Johann Strauss and Richard Strauss.\nIn addition to Ligeti, Kubrick enjoyed a collaboration with composer Wendy Carlos, whose 1968 album \"Switched-On Bach\"\u2014which re-interpreted baroque music through the use of a Moog synthesizer\u2014caught his attention. In 1971, Carlos composed and recorded music for the soundtrack of \"A Clockwork Orange\". Additional music not used in the film was released in 1972 as \"Wendy Carlos's Clockwork Orange\". Kubrick later collaborated with Carlos on \"The Shining\" (1980). The opening of the film employs Carlos' rendering of \"Dies Irae\" (Day of Wrath) from Hector Berlioz's \"Symphonie Fantastique\".\nPersonal life.\nKubrick married his high-school sweetheart Toba Metz, a caricaturist, on May 29, 1948, when he was 19 years old. The couple lived together in Greenwich Village and divorced three years later in 1951. He met his second wife, the Austrian-born dancer and theatrical designer Ruth Sobotka, in 1952. They lived together in New York City's East Village beginning in 1952, married in January 1955 and moved to Hollywood in July 1955, where she played a brief part as a ballet dancer in Kubrick's film \"Killer's Kiss\" (1955). The following year, she was art director for his film \"The Killing\" (1956). They divorced in 1957.\nDuring the production of \"Paths of Glory\" in Munich in early 1957, Kubrick met and romanced the German actress Christiane Harlan, who played a small though memorable role in the film. Kubrick married Harlan in 1958 and the couple remained together for 40 years, until his death in 1999. Besides his stepdaughter, they had two daughters together: Anya Renata (April 6, 1959 \u2013 July 7, 2009) and Vivian Vanessa (born August 5, 1960). In 1959, they settled into a home at 316 South Camden Drive in Beverly Hills with Harlan's daughter, Katherina, aged six. They also lived in New York City, during which time Christiane studied art at the Art Students League of New York, later becoming an independent artist. The couple moved to the United Kingdom in 1961 to make \"Lolita\", and Kubrick hired Peter Sellers to star in his next film, \"Dr. Strangelove\". Sellers was unable to leave the UK, so Kubrick made Britain his permanent home thereafter. The move was quite convenient to Kubrick, since he shunned the Hollywood system and its publicity machine and he and Christiane had become alarmed with the increase in violence in New York City.\nIn 1965, the Kubricks bought Abbots Mead on Barnet Lane, just south-west of the Elstree/Borehamwood studio complex in England. Kubrick worked almost exclusively from this home for 14 years, where he researched, invented special effects techniques, designed ultra-low light lenses for specially modified cameras, pre-produced, edited, post-produced, advertised, distributed and carefully managed all aspects of four of his films. In 1978, Kubrick moved into Childwickbury Manor in Hertfordshire, a mainly 18th-century stately home, which was once owned by a wealthy racehorse owner, about north of London and a 10-minute drive from his previous home at Abbotts Mead. His new home became a workplace for Kubrick and his wife, \"a perfect family factory\" as Christiane called it, and Kubrick converted the stables into extra production rooms besides ones within the home that he used for editing and storage.\nA workaholic, Kubrick rarely took a vacation or left England during the forty years before his death. LoBrutto notes that Kubrick's confined way of living and desire for privacy has led to spurious stories about his reclusiveness, similar to those of Greta Garbo, Howard Hughes and J. D. Salinger. Michael Herr, Kubrick's co-screenwriter on \"Full Metal Jacket\", who knew him well, considers his \"reclusiveness\" to be myth: \"[He] was in fact a complete failure as a recluse, unless you believe that a recluse is simply someone who seldom leaves his house. Stanley saw a lot of people\u00a0... he was one of the most gregarious men I ever knew and it didn't change anything that most of this conviviality went on over the phone.\" LoBrutto states that one of the reasons Kubrick acquired a reputation as a recluse was that he insisted on remaining near his home; Kubrick believed there were only three places on Earth where he could make high-quality films with the necessary technical expertise and equipment: Los Angeles, New York City and London. He disliked living in Los Angeles and thought London a superior film production center to New York City.\nAs a person, Kubrick was described by Norman Lloyd as \"a very dark, sort of a glowering type who was very serious\". Marisa Berenson, who starred in \"Barry Lyndon\", fondly recalled: \"There was great tenderness in him and he was passionate about his work. What was striking was his enormous intelligence but he also had a great sense of humor. He was a very shy person and self-protective but he was filled with the thing that drove him twenty-four hours of the day.\" Kubrick was particularly fond of machines and technical equipment, to the point that his wife Christiane once stated that \"Stanley would be happy with eight tape recorders and one pair of pants\". Kubrick had obtained a pilot's license in August 1947 and some have claimed that he later developed a fear of flying, stemming from an incident in the early 1950s when a colleague was killed in a plane crash. Kubrick had been sent the charred remains of his camera and notebooks which, according to Paul Duncan, traumatized him for life. Kubrick also had a strong mistrust of doctors and medicine.\nDeath.\nOn March 7, 1999, six days after screening a final cut of \"Eyes Wide Shut\" for his family and the film's stars, Kubrick unexpectedly died of a heart attack in his sleep at the age of 70. His funeral was held five days later at Childwickbury Manor, with only close friends and family in attendance, totaling about 100 people. The media were kept a mile away outside the entrance gate. Alexander Walker, who attended the funeral, described it as a \"family farewell,\u00a0... almost like an English picnic\" with cellists, clarinetists, and singers providing music from many of Kubrick's favorite classical compositions. \"Kaddish\", the Jewish prayer typically said by mourners and in other contexts, was recited. A few of his obituaries mentioned his Jewish background. Among those who gave eulogies were his brother-in-law Jan Harlan, Terry Semel, Steven Spielberg, Nicole Kidman, and Tom Cruise. He was buried next to his favorite tree on the estate. In her book dedicated to him, his wife Christiane included one of his favorite quotations of Oscar Wilde: \"The tragedy of old age is not that one is old but that one is young.\"\nLegacy.\nCultural impact.\nPart of the New Hollywood film-making wave, Kubrick's films are considered by film historian Michel Ciment to be \"among the most important contributions to world cinema in the twentieth century\", and he is frequently cited as one of the greatest and most influential directors in the history of cinema. According to film historian and Kubrick scholar Robert Kolker, Kubrick's films were \"more intellectually rigorous than the work of any other American filmmaker.\" Leading directors, including Martin Scorsese, Steven Spielberg, Wes Anderson, George Lucas, James Cameron, Terry Gilliam, the Coen brothers, Ridley Scott, and George A. Romero, have cited Kubrick as a source of inspiration, and additionally in the case of Spielberg and Scott, collaboration. On the DVD of \"Eyes Wide Shut\", Steven Spielberg comments that the way Kubrick \"tells a story is antithetical to the way we are accustomed to receiving stories\" and that \"nobody could shoot a picture better in history\". Orson Welles, one of Kubrick's greatest personal influences and favorite directors, said that: \"Among those whom I would call 'younger generation', Kubrick appears to me to be a giant.\"\nKubrick continues to be cited as a major influence by many directors, including Christopher Nolan, Todd Field, David Fincher, Guillermo del Toro, David Lynch, Lars von Trier, Tim Burton, Michael Mann, and Gaspar No\u00e9. Many filmmakers imitate Kubrick's inventive and unique use of camera movement and framing, as well as his use of music, including Frank Darabont.\nArtists in fields other than film have also expressed admiration for Kubrick. English musician and poet PJ Harvey, in an interview about her 2011 album \"Let England Shake\", argued that \"something about [...] what is not said in his films...there's so much space, so many things that are silent \u2013 and somehow, in that space and silence everything becomes clear. With every film, he seems to capture the essence of life itself, particularly in films like \"Paths of Glory\", \"2001: A Space Odyssey\", \"Barry Lyndon\"...those are some of my favorites.\" The music video for Kanye West's 2010 song \"Runaway\" was inspired by \"Eyes Wide Shut\". Pop singer Lady Gaga's concert shows have included the use of dialogue, costumes, and music from \"A Clockwork Orange\".\nTributes.\nIn 2000, BAFTA renamed their Britannia lifetime achievement award the \"Stanley Kubrick Britannia Award\", joining the likes of D. W. Griffith, Laurence Olivier, Cecil B. DeMille, and Irving Thalberg, all of whom have annual awards named after them. Kubrick won this award in 1999, and subsequent recipients have included George Lucas, Warren Beatty, Tom Cruise, Robert De Niro, Clint Eastwood, and Daniel Day-Lewis. Many people who worked with Kubrick on his films created the 2001 documentary \"\", produced and directed by Kubrick's brother-in-law, Jan Harlan, who had executive produced Kubrick's last four films.\nThe first public exhibition of material from Kubrick's personal archives was presented jointly in 2004 by the Deutsches Filmmuseum and Deutsches Architekturmuseum in Frankfurt, Germany, in cooperation with Christiane Kubrick and Jan Harlan / The Stanley Kubrick Estate. In 2009, an exhibition of paintings and photos inspired by Kubrick's films was held in Dublin, Ireland, entitled \"Stanley Kubrick: Taming Light\". On October 30, 2012, an exhibition devoted to Kubrick opened at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA) and concluded in June 2013. Exhibits include a wide collection of documents, photographs and on-set material assembled from 800 boxes of personal archives that were stored in Kubrick's home-workplace in the UK. Many celebrities attended and spoke at the museum's pre-opening gala, including Steven Spielberg, Tom Hanks and Jack Nicholson, while Kubrick's widow, Christiane, appeared at the pre-gala press review. In October 2013, the Brazil S\u00e3o Paulo International Film Festival paid tribute to Kubrick, staging an exhibit of his work and a retrospective of his films. The exhibit opened at the Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) in late 2014 and ended in January 2015.\nKubrick is widely referenced in popular culture; for example, the TV series \"The Simpsons\" is said to contain more references to Kubrick films than any other pop culture phenomenon. When the Directors Guild of Great Britain gave Kubrick a lifetime achievement award, they included a cut-together sequence of all the homages from the show. Several works have been created that related to Kubrick's life, including the made-for-TV mockumentary \"Dark Side of the Moon\" (2002), which is a parody of the pervasive conspiracy theory that Kubrick had been involved with the faked footage of the NASA Moon landings during the filming of \"2001: A Space Odyssey\". \"Colour Me Kubrick\" (2005) was authorized by Kubrick's family and starred John Malkovich as Alan Conway, a con artist who had assumed Kubrick's identity in the 1990s. In the 2004 film \"The Life and Death of Peter Sellers\", Kubrick was portrayed by Stanley Tucci; the film documents the filming of \"Dr. Strangelove\".\nIn April 2018, the month that marked the 50th anniversary of \"2001: A Space Odyssey\", the International Astronomical Union named the largest mountain of Pluto's moon Charon after Kubrick.\nFrom October 2019 to March 2020, the Skirball Cultural Center hosted an exhibition called \"Through a Different Lens: Stanley Kubrick Photographs\", a show focusing on Kubrick's early career.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "26684", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26684", "title": "Stephen Spielberg", "text": ""}
{"id": "26685", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26685", "title": "Statistics", "text": "Study of collection and analysis of data\nStatistics (from German: \"Statistik\", orig. \"description of a state, a country\") is the discipline that concerns the collection, organization, analysis, interpretation, and presentation of data. In applying statistics to a scientific, industrial, or social problem, it is conventional to begin with a statistical population or a statistical model to be studied. Populations can be diverse groups of people or objects such as \"all people living in a country\" or \"every atom composing a crystal\". Statistics deals with every aspect of data, including the planning of data collection in terms of the design of surveys and experiments.\nWhen census data (comprising every member of the target population) cannot be collected, statisticians collect data by developing specific experiment designs and survey samples. Representative sampling assures that inferences and conclusions can reasonably extend from the sample to the population as a whole. An experimental study involves taking measurements of the system under study, manipulating the system, and then taking additional measurements using the same procedure to determine if the manipulation has modified the values of the measurements. In contrast, an observational study does not involve experimental manipulation.\nTwo main statistical methods are used in data analysis: descriptive statistics, which summarize data from a sample using indexes such as the mean or standard deviation, and inferential statistics, which draw conclusions from data that are subject to random variation (e.g., observational errors, sampling variation). Descriptive statistics are most often concerned with two sets of properties of a \"distribution\" (sample or population): \"central tendency\" (or \"location\") seeks to characterize the distribution's central or typical value, while \"dispersion\" (or \"variability\") characterizes the extent to which members of the distribution depart from its center and each other. Inferences made using mathematical statistics employ the framework of probability theory, which deals with the analysis of random phenomena.\nA standard statistical procedure involves the collection of data leading to a test of the relationship between two statistical data sets, or a data set and synthetic data drawn from an idealized model. A hypothesis is proposed for the statistical relationship between the two data sets, an alternative to an idealized null hypothesis of no relationship between two data sets. Rejecting or disproving the null hypothesis is done using statistical tests that quantify the sense in which the null can be proven false, given the data that are used in the test. Working from a null hypothesis, two basic forms of error are recognized: Type I errors (null hypothesis is rejected when it is in fact true, giving a \"false positive\") and Type II errors (null hypothesis fails to be rejected when it is in fact false, giving a \"false negative\"). Multiple problems have come to be associated with this framework, ranging from obtaining a sufficient sample size to specifying an adequate null hypothesis.\nStatistical measurement processes are also prone to error in regards to the data that they generate. Many of these errors are classified as random (noise) or systematic (bias), but other types of errors (e.g., blunder, such as when an analyst reports incorrect units) can also occur. The presence of missing data or censoring may result in biased estimates and specific techniques have been developed to address these problems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIntroduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Statistics is the discipline that deals with data, facts and figures with which meaningful information is inferred. Data may represent a numerical value, in form of quantitative data, or a label, as with qualitative data. Data may be collected, presented and summarised, in one of two methods called descriptive statistics. Two elementary summaries of data, singularly called a statistic, are the mean and dispersion. Whereas inferential statistics interprets data from a population sample to induce statements and predictions about a population.\nStatistics is regarded as a body of science or a branch of mathematics. It is based on probability, a branch of mathematics that studies random events. Statistics is considered the science of uncertainty. This arises from the ways to cope with measurement and sampling error as well as dealing with uncertanties in modelling. Although probability and statistics were once paired together as a single subject, they are conceptually distinct from one another. The former is based on deducing answers to specific situations from a general theory of probability, meanwhile statistics induces statements about a population based on a data set. Statistics serves to bridge the gap between probability and applied mathematical fields.\nSome consider statistics to be a distinct mathematical science rather than a branch of mathematics. While many scientific investigations make use of data, statistics is generally concerned with the use of data in the context of uncertainty and decision-making in the face of uncertainty. Statistics is indexed at 62, a subclass of probability theory and stochastic processes, in the Mathematics Subject Classification. Mathematical statistics is covered in the range 276-280 of subclass QA (science &gt; mathematics) in the Library of Congress Classification.\nThe word statistics ultimately comes from the Latin word Status, meaning \"situation\" or \"condition\" in society, which in late Latin adopted the meaning \"state\". Derived from this, political scientist Gottfried Achenwall, coined the German word statistik (a summary of how things stand). In 1770, the term entered the English language through German and referred to the study of political arrangements. The term gained its modern meaning in the 1790s in John Sinclair's works. In modern German, the term statistik is synonymous with mathematical statistics. The term statistic, in singular form, is used to describe a function that returns its value of the same name.\nStatistical data.\nData collection.\nSampling.\nWhen full census data cannot be collected, statisticians collect sample data by developing specific experiment designs and survey samples. Statistics itself also provides tools for prediction and forecasting through statistical models.\nTo use a sample as a guide to an entire population, it is important that it truly represents the overall population. Representative sampling assures that inferences and conclusions can safely extend from the sample to the population as a whole. A major problem lies in determining the extent that the sample chosen is actually representative. Statistics offers methods to estimate and correct for any bias within the sample and data collection procedures. There are also methods of experimental design that can lessen these issues at the outset of a study, strengthening its capability to discern truths about the population.\nSampling theory is part of the mathematical discipline of probability theory. Probability is used in mathematical statistics to study the sampling distributions of sample statistics and, more generally, the properties of statistical procedures. The use of any statistical method is valid when the system or population under consideration satisfies the assumptions of the method. The difference in point of view between classic probability theory and sampling theory is, roughly, that probability theory starts from the given parameters of a total population to deduce probabilities that pertain to samples. Statistical inference, however, moves in the opposite direction\u2014inductively inferring from samples to the parameters of a larger or total population.\nExperimental and observational studies.\nA common goal for a statistical research project is to investigate causality, and in particular to draw a conclusion on the effect of changes in the values of predictors or independent variables on dependent variables. There are two major types of causal statistical studies: experimental studies and observational studies. In both types of studies, the effect of differences of an independent variable (or variables) on the behavior of the dependent variable are observed. The difference between the two types lies in how the study is actually conducted. Each can be very effective. An experimental study involves taking measurements of the system under study, manipulating the system, and then taking additional measurements with different levels using the same procedure to determine if the manipulation has modified the values of the measurements. In contrast, an observational study does not involve experimental manipulation. Instead, data are gathered and correlations between predictors and response are investigated. While the tools of data analysis work best on data from randomized studies, they are also applied to other kinds of data\u2014like natural experiments and observational studies\u2014for which a statistician would use a modified, more structured estimation method (e.g., difference in differences estimation and instrumental variables, among many others) that produce consistent estimators.\nExperiments.\nThe basic steps of a statistical experiment are:\nExperiments on human behavior have special concerns. The famous Hawthorne study examined changes to the working environment at the Hawthorne plant of the Western Electric Company. The researchers were interested in determining whether increased illumination would increase the productivity of the assembly line workers. The researchers first measured the productivity in the plant, then modified the illumination in an area of the plant and checked if the changes in illumination affected productivity. It turned out that productivity indeed improved (under the experimental conditions). However, the study is heavily criticized today for errors in experimental procedures, specifically for the lack of a control group and blindness. The Hawthorne effect refers to finding that an outcome (in this case, worker productivity) changed due to observation itself. Those in the Hawthorne study became more productive not because the lighting was changed but because they were being observed.\nObservational study.\nAn example of an observational study is one that explores the association between smoking and lung cancer. This type of study typically uses a survey to collect observations about the area of interest and then performs statistical analysis. In this case, the researchers would collect observations of both smokers and non-smokers, perhaps through a cohort study, and then look for the number of cases of lung cancer in each group. A case-control study is another type of observational study in which people with and without the outcome of interest (e.g. lung cancer) are invited to participate and their exposure histories are collected.\nTypes of data.\nVarious attempts have been made to produce a taxonomy of levels of measurement. The psychophysicist Stanley Smith Stevens defined nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio scales. Nominal measurements do not have meaningful rank order among values, and permit any one-to-one (injective) transformation. Ordinal measurements have imprecise differences between consecutive values, but have a meaningful order to those values, and permit any order-preserving transformation. Interval measurements have meaningful distances between measurements defined, but the zero value is arbitrary (as in the case with longitude and temperature measurements in Celsius or Fahrenheit), and permit any linear transformation. Ratio measurements have both a meaningful zero value and the distances between different measurements defined, and permit any rescaling transformation.\nBecause variables conforming only to nominal or ordinal measurements cannot be reasonably measured numerically, sometimes they are grouped together as categorical variables, whereas ratio and interval measurements are grouped together as quantitative variables, which can be either discrete or continuous, due to their numerical nature. Such distinctions can often be loosely correlated with data type in computer science, in that dichotomous categorical variables may be represented with the Boolean data type, polytomous categorical variables with arbitrarily assigned integers in the integral data type, and continuous variables with the real data type involving floating-point arithmetic. But the mapping of computer science data types to statistical data types depends on which categorization of the latter is being implemented.\nOther categorizations have been proposed. For example, Mosteller and Tukey (1977) distinguished grades, ranks, counted fractions, counts, amounts, and balances. Nelder (1990) described continuous counts, continuous ratios, count ratios, and categorical modes of data. (See also: Chrisman (1998), van den Berg (1991).)\nThe issue of whether or not it is appropriate to apply different kinds of statistical methods to data obtained from different kinds of measurement procedures is complicated by issues concerning the transformation of variables and the precise interpretation of research questions. \"The relationship between the data and what they describe merely reflects the fact that certain kinds of statistical statements may have truth values which are not invariant under some transformations. Whether or not a transformation is sensible to contemplate depends on the question one is trying to answer.\"\nMethods.\nDescriptive statistics.\nA descriptive statistic (in the count noun sense) is a summary statistic that quantitatively describes or summarizes features of a collection of information, while descriptive statistics in the mass noun sense is the process of using and analyzing those statistics. Descriptive statistics is distinguished from inferential statistics (or inductive statistics), in that descriptive statistics aims to summarize a sample, rather than use the data to learn about the population that the sample of data is thought to represent.\nInferential statistics.\nStatistical inference is the process of using data analysis to deduce properties of an underlying probability distribution. Inferential statistical analysis infers properties of a population, for example by testing hypotheses and deriving estimates. It is assumed that the observed data set is sampled from a larger population. Inferential statistics can be contrasted with descriptive statistics. Descriptive statistics is solely concerned with properties of the observed data, and it does not rest on the assumption that the data come from a larger population.\nTerminology and theory of inferential statistics.\nStatistics, estimators and pivotal quantities.\nConsider independent identically distributed (IID) random variables with a given probability distribution: standard statistical inference and estimation theory defines a random sample as the random vector given by the column vector of these IID variables. The population being examined is described by a probability distribution that may have unknown parameters.\nA statistic is a random variable that is a function of the random sample, but not a function of unknown parameters. The probability distribution of the statistic, though, may have unknown parameters. Consider now a function of the unknown parameter: an estimator is a statistic used to estimate such function. Commonly used estimators include sample mean, unbiased sample variance and sample covariance.\nA random variable that is a function of the random sample and of the unknown parameter, but whose probability distribution \"does not depend on the unknown parameter\" is called a pivotal quantity or pivot. Widely used pivots include the z-score, the chi square statistic and Student's t-value.\nBetween two estimators of a given parameter, the one with lower mean squared error is said to be more efficient. Furthermore, an estimator is said to be unbiased if its expected value is equal to the true value of the unknown parameter being estimated, and asymptotically unbiased if its expected value converges at the limit to the true value of such parameter.\nOther desirable properties for estimators include: UMVUE estimators that have the lowest variance for all possible values of the parameter to be estimated (this is usually an easier property to verify than efficiency) and consistent estimators which converges in probability to the true value of such parameter.\nThis still leaves the question of how to obtain estimators in a given situation and carry the computation, several methods have been proposed: the method of moments, the maximum likelihood method, the least squares method and the more recent method of estimating equations.\nNull hypothesis and alternative hypothesis.\nInterpretation of statistical information can often involve the development of a null hypothesis which is usually (but not necessarily) that no relationship exists among variables or that no change occurred over time. The alternative hypothesis is the name of the hypothesis that contradicts the null hypothesis.\nThe best illustration for a novice is the predicament encountered by a criminal trial. The null hypothesis, H0, asserts that the defendant is innocent, whereas the alternative hypothesis, H1, asserts that the defendant is guilty. The indictment comes because of suspicion of the guilt. The H0 (the status quo) stands in opposition to H1 and is maintained unless H1 is supported by evidence \"beyond a reasonable doubt\". However, \"failure to reject H0\" in this case does not imply innocence, but merely that the evidence was insufficient to convict. So the jury does not necessarily accept H0 but fails to reject H0. While one can not \"prove\" a null hypothesis, one can test how close it is to being true with a power test, which tests for type II errors.\nError.\nWorking from a null hypothesis, two broad categories of error are recognized:\nStandard deviation refers to the extent to which individual observations in a sample differ from a central value, such as the sample or population mean, while Standard error refers to an estimate of difference between sample mean and population mean.\nA statistical error is the amount by which an observation differs from its expected value. A residual is the amount an observation differs from the value the estimator of the expected value assumes on a given sample (also called prediction).\nMean squared error is used for obtaining efficient estimators, a widely used class of estimators. Root mean square error is simply the square root of mean squared error.\nMany statistical methods seek to minimize the residual sum of squares, and these are called \"methods of least squares\" in contrast to Least absolute deviations. The latter gives equal weight to small and big errors, while the former gives more weight to large errors. Residual sum of squares is also differentiable, which provides a handy property for doing regression. Least squares applied to linear regression is called ordinary least squares method and least squares applied to nonlinear regression is called non-linear least squares. Also in a linear regression model the non deterministic part of the model is called error term, disturbance or more simply noise. Both linear regression and non-linear regression are addressed in polynomial least squares, which also describes the variance in a prediction of the dependent variable (y axis) as a function of the independent variable (x axis) and the deviations (errors, noise, disturbances) from the estimated (fitted) curve.\nMeasurement processes that generate statistical data are also subject to error. Many of these errors are classified as random (noise) or systematic (bias), but other types of errors (e.g., blunder, such as when an analyst reports incorrect units) can also be important. The presence of missing data or censoring may result in biased estimates and specific techniques have been developed to address these problems.\nInterval estimation.\nMost studies only sample part of a population, so results do not fully represent the whole population. Any estimates obtained from the sample only approximate the population value. Confidence intervals allow statisticians to express how closely the sample estimate matches the true value in the whole population. Often they are expressed as 95% confidence intervals. Formally, a 95% confidence interval for a value is a range where, if the sampling and analysis were repeated under the same conditions (yielding a different dataset), the interval would include the true (population) value in 95% of all possible cases. This does \"not\" imply that the probability that the true value is in the confidence interval is 95%. From the frequentist perspective, such a claim does not even make sense, as the true value is not a random variable. Either the true value is or is not within the given interval. However, it is true that, before any data are sampled and given a plan for how to construct the confidence interval, the probability is 95% that the yet-to-be-calculated interval will cover the true value: at this point, the limits of the interval are yet-to-be-observed random variables. One approach that does yield an interval that can be interpreted as having a given probability of containing the true value is to use a credible interval from Bayesian statistics: this approach depends on a different way of interpreting what is meant by \"probability\", that is as a Bayesian probability.\nIn principle confidence intervals can be symmetrical or asymmetrical. An interval can be asymmetrical because it works as lower or upper bound for a parameter (left-sided interval or right sided interval), but it can also be asymmetrical because the two sided interval is built violating symmetry around the estimate. Sometimes the bounds for a confidence interval are reached asymptotically and these are used to approximate the true bounds.\nSignificance.\nStatistics rarely give a simple Yes/No type answer to the question under analysis. Interpretation often comes down to the level of statistical significance applied to the numbers and often refers to the probability of a value accurately rejecting the null hypothesis (sometimes referred to as the p-value).\nThe standard approach is to test a null hypothesis against an alternative hypothesis. A critical region is the set of values of the estimator that leads to refuting the null hypothesis. The probability of type I error is therefore the probability that the estimator belongs to the critical region given that null hypothesis is true (statistical significance) and the probability of type II error is the probability that the estimator does not belong to the critical region given that the alternative hypothesis is true. The statistical power of a test is the probability that it correctly rejects the null hypothesis when the null hypothesis is false.\nReferring to statistical significance does not necessarily mean that the overall result is significant in real world terms. For example, in a large study of a drug it may be shown that the drug has a statistically significant but very small beneficial effect, such that the drug is unlikely to help the patient noticeably.\nAlthough in principle the acceptable level of statistical significance may be subject to debate, the significance level is the largest p-value that allows the test to reject the null hypothesis. This test is logically equivalent to saying that the p-value is the probability, assuming the null hypothesis is true, of observing a result at least as extreme as the test statistic. Therefore, the smaller the significance level, the lower the probability of committing type I error.\nSome problems are usually associated with this framework (See criticism of hypothesis testing):\nExamples.\nSome well-known statistical tests and procedures are:\nBayesian statistics.\nAn alternative paradigm to the popular frequentist paradigm is to use Bayes' theorem to update the prior probability of the hypotheses in consideration based on the relative likelihood of the evidence gathered to obtain a posterior probability. Bayesian methods have been aided by the increase in available computing power to compute the posterior probability using numerical approximation techniques like Markov Chain Monte Carlo.\nFor statistically modelling purposes, Bayesian models tend to be hierarchical, for example, one could model each YouTube channel as having video views distributed as a normal distribution with channel dependent mean and variance formula_1, while modeling the channel means as themselves coming from a normal distribution representing the distribution of average video view counts per channel, and the variances as coming from another distribution.\nThe concept of using likelihood ratio can also be prominently seen in medical diagnostic testing.\nExploratory data analysis.\nExploratory data analysis (EDA) is an approach to analyzing data sets to summarize their main characteristics, often with visual methods. A statistical model can be used or not, but primarily EDA is for seeing what the data can tell us beyond the formal modeling or hypothesis testing task.\nMathematical statistics.\nMathematical statistics is the application of mathematics to statistics. Mathematical techniques used for this include mathematical analysis, linear algebra, stochastic analysis, differential equations, and measure-theoretic probability theory. All statistical analyses make use of at least some mathematics, and mathematical statistics can therefore be regarded as a fundamental component of general statistics.\nHistory.\nFormal discussions on inference date back to the mathematicians and cryptographers of the Islamic Golden Age between the 8th and 13th centuries. Al-Khalil (717\u2013786) wrote the \"Book of Cryptographic Messages\", which contains one of the first uses of permutations and combinations, to list all possible Arabic words with and without vowels. Al-Kindi's \"Manuscript on Deciphering Cryptographic Messages\" gave a detailed description of how to use frequency analysis to decipher encrypted messages, providing an early example of statistical inference for decoding. Ibn Adlan (1187\u20131268) later made an important contribution on the use of sample size in frequency analysis.\nAlthough the term \"statistic\" was introduced by the Italian scholar Girolamo Ghilini in 1589 with reference to a collection of facts and information about a state, it was the German Gottfried Achenwall in 1749 who started using the term as a collection of quantitative information, in the modern use for this science. The earliest writing containing statistics in Europe dates back to 1663, with the publication of \"Natural and Political Observations upon the Bills of Mortality\" by John Graunt. Early applications of statistical thinking revolved around the needs of states to base policy on demographic and economic data, hence its \"stat-\" etymology. The scope of the discipline of statistics broadened in the early 19th century to include the collection and analysis of data in general. Today, statistics is widely employed in government, business, and natural and social sciences.\nThe mathematical foundations of statistics developed from discussions concerning games of chance among mathematicians such as Gerolamo Cardano, Blaise Pascal, Pierre de Fermat, and Christiaan Huygens. Although the idea of probability was already examined in ancient and medieval law and philosophy (such as the work of Juan Caramuel), probability theory as a mathematical discipline only took shape at the very end of the 17th century, particularly in Jacob Bernoulli's posthumous work \"\". This was the first book where the realm of games of chance and the realm of the probable (which concerned opinion, evidence, and argument) were combined and submitted to mathematical analysis. The method of least squares was first described by Adrien-Marie Legendre in 1805, though Carl Friedrich Gauss presumably made use of it a decade earlier in 1795.\nThe modern field of statistics emerged in the late 19th and early 20th century in three stages. The first wave, at the turn of the century, was led by the work of Francis Galton and Karl Pearson, who transformed statistics into a rigorous mathematical discipline used for analysis, not just in science, but in industry and politics as well. Galton's contributions included introducing the concepts of standard deviation, correlation, regression analysis and the application of these methods to the study of the variety of human characteristics\u2014height, weight and eyelash length among others. Pearson developed the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient, defined as a product-moment, the method of moments for the fitting of distributions to samples and the Pearson distribution, among many other things. Galton and Pearson founded \"Biometrika\" as the first journal of mathematical statistics and biostatistics (then called \"biometry\"), and the latter founded the world's first university statistics department at University College London.\nThe second wave of the 1910s and 20s was initiated by William Sealy Gosset, and reached its culmination in the insights of Ronald Fisher, who wrote the textbooks that were to define the academic discipline in universities around the world. Fisher's most important publications were his 1918 seminal paper \"The Correlation between Relatives on the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance\" (which was the first to use the statistical term, variance), his classic 1925 work \"Statistical Methods for Research Workers\" and his 1935 \"The Design of Experiments\", where he developed rigorous design of experiments models. He originated the concepts of sufficiency, ancillary statistics, Fisher's linear discriminator and Fisher information. He also coined the term null hypothesis during the Lady tasting tea experiment, which \"is never proved or established, but is possibly disproved, in the course of experimentation\". In his 1930 book \"The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection\", he applied statistics to various biological concepts such as Fisher's principle (which A. W. F. Edwards called \"probably the most celebrated argument in evolutionary biology\") and Fisherian runaway, a concept in sexual selection about a positive feedback runaway effect found in evolution.\nThe final wave, which mainly saw the refinement and expansion of earlier developments, emerged from the collaborative work between Egon Pearson and Jerzy Neyman in the 1930s. They introduced the concepts of \"Type II\" error, power of a test and confidence intervals. Jerzy Neyman in 1934 showed that stratified random sampling was in general a better method of estimation than purposive (quota) sampling.\nAmong the early attempts to measure national economic activity were those of William Petty in the 17th century. In the 20th century the uniform System of National Accounts was developed.\nToday, statistical methods are applied in all fields that involve decision making, for making accurate inferences from a collated body of data and for making decisions in the face of uncertainty based on statistical methodology. The use of modern computers has expedited large-scale statistical computations and has also made possible new methods that are impractical to perform manually. Statistics continues to be an area of active research, for example on the problem of how to analyze big data.\nApplications.\nApplied statistics, theoretical statistics and mathematical statistics.\n\"Applied statistics,\" sometimes referred to as \"Statistical science,\" comprises descriptive statistics and the application of inferential statistics. \"Theoretical statistics\" concerns the logical arguments underlying justification of approaches to statistical inference, as well as encompassing \"mathematical statistics\". Mathematical statistics includes not only the manipulation of probability distributions necessary for deriving results related to methods of estimation and inference, but also various aspects of computational statistics and the design of experiments.\nStatistical consultants can help organizations and companies that do not have in-house expertise relevant to their particular questions.\nMachine learning and data mining.\nMachine learning models are statistical and probabilistic models that capture patterns in the data through use of computational algorithms.\nStatistics in academia.\nStatistics is applicable to a wide variety of academic disciplines, including natural and social sciences, government, and business. Business statistics applies statistical methods in econometrics, auditing and production and operations, including services improvement and marketing research. A study of two journals in tropical biology found that the 12 most frequent statistical tests are: analysis of variance (ANOVA), chi-squared test, Student's t-test, linear regression, Pearson's correlation coefficient, Mann-Whitney U test, Kruskal-Wallis test, Shannon's diversity index, Tukey's range test, cluster analysis, Spearman's rank correlation coefficient and principal component analysis.\nA typical statistics course covers descriptive statistics, probability, binomial and normal distributions, test of hypotheses and confidence intervals, linear regression, and correlation. Modern fundamental statistical courses for undergraduate students focus on correct test selection, results interpretation, and use of free statistics software.\nStatistical computing.\nThe rapid and sustained increases in computing power starting from the second half of the 20th century have had a substantial impact on the practice of statistical science. Early statistical models were almost always from the class of linear models, but powerful computers, coupled with suitable numerical algorithms, caused an increased interest in nonlinear models (such as neural networks) as well as the creation of new types, such as generalized linear models and multilevel models.\nIncreased computing power has also led to the growing popularity of computationally intensive methods based on resampling, such as permutation tests and the bootstrap, while techniques such as Gibbs sampling have made use of Bayesian models more feasible. The computer revolution has implications for the future of statistics with a new emphasis on \"experimental\" and \"empirical\" statistics. A large number of both general and special purpose statistical software are now available. Examples of available software capable of complex statistical computation include programs such as Mathematica, SAS, SPSS, and R.\nBusiness statistics.\nIn business, \"statistics\" is a widely used management- and decision support tool. It is particularly applied in financial management, marketing management, and production, services and operations management. Statistics is also heavily used in management accounting and auditing. The discipline of Management Science formalizes the use of statistics, and other mathematics, in business. (Econometrics is the application of statistical methods to economic data in order to give empirical content to economic relationships.)\nA typical \"Business Statistics\" course is intended for business majors, and covers descriptive statistics (collection, description, analysis, and summary of data), probability (typically the binomial and normal distributions), test of hypotheses and confidence intervals, linear regression, and correlation; (follow-on) courses may include forecasting, time series, decision trees, multiple linear regression, and other topics from business analytics more generally. Professional certification programs, such as the CFA, often include topics in statistics.\nSpecialized disciplines.\nStatistical techniques are used in a wide range of types of scientific and social research, including: biostatistics, computational biology, computational sociology, network biology, social science, sociology and social research. Some fields of inquiry use applied statistics so extensively that they have specialized terminology. These disciplines include:\nIn addition, there are particular types of statistical analysis that have also developed their own specialised terminology and methodology:\nStatistics form a key basis tool in business and manufacturing as well. It is used to understand measurement systems variability, control processes (as in statistical process control or SPC), for summarizing data, and to make data-driven decisions.\nMisuse.\nMisuse of statistics can produce subtle but serious errors in description and interpretation\u2014subtle in the sense that even experienced professionals make such errors, and serious in the sense that they can lead to devastating decision errors. For instance, social policy, medical practice, and the reliability of structures like bridges all rely on the proper use of statistics.\nEven when statistical techniques are correctly applied, the results can be difficult to interpret for those lacking expertise. The statistical significance of a trend in the data\u2014which measures the extent to which a trend could be caused by random variation in the sample\u2014may or may not agree with an intuitive sense of its significance. The set of basic statistical skills (and skepticism) that people need to deal with information in their everyday lives properly is referred to as statistical literacy.\nThere is a general perception that statistical knowledge is all-too-frequently intentionally misused by finding ways to interpret only the data that are favorable to the presenter. A mistrust and misunderstanding of statistics is associated with the quotation, \"There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies, and statistics\". Misuse of statistics can be both inadvertent and intentional, and the book \"How to Lie with Statistics\", by Darrell Huff, outlines a range of considerations. In an attempt to shed light on the use and misuse of statistics, reviews of statistical techniques used in particular fields are conducted (e.g. Warne, Lazo, Ramos, and Ritter (2012)).\nWays to avoid misuse of statistics include using proper diagrams and avoiding bias. Misuse can occur when conclusions are overgeneralized and claimed to be representative of more than they really are, often by either deliberately or unconsciously overlooking sampling bias. Bar graphs are arguably the easiest diagrams to use and understand, and they can be made either by hand or with simple computer programs. Most people do not look for bias or errors, so they are not noticed. Thus, people may often believe that something is true even if it is not well represented. To make data gathered from statistics believable and accurate, the sample taken must be representative of the whole. According to Huff, \"The dependability of a sample can be destroyed by [bias]... allow yourself some degree of skepticism.\"\nTo assist in the understanding of statistics Huff proposed a series of questions to be asked in each case:\nMisinterpretation: correlation.\nThe concept of correlation is particularly noteworthy for the potential confusion it can cause. Statistical analysis of a data set often reveals that two variables (properties) of the population under consideration tend to vary together, as if they were connected. For example, a study of annual income that also looks at age of death, might find that poor people tend to have shorter lives than affluent people. The two variables are said to be correlated; however, they may or may not be the cause of one another. The correlation phenomena could be caused by a third, previously unconsidered phenomenon, called a lurking variable or confounding variable. For this reason, there is no way to immediately infer the existence of a causal relationship between the two variables.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26686", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26686", "title": "Statistical Theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "26687", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26687", "title": "Science Fiction", "text": ""}
