{"id": "28506", "revid": "37017796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28506", "title": "Spacecraft propulsion", "text": "Method used to accelerate spacecraft\nSpacecraft propulsion is any method used to accelerate spacecraft and artificial satellites. In-space propulsion exclusively deals with propulsion systems used in the vacuum of space and should not be confused with space launch or atmospheric entry.\nSeveral methods of pragmatic spacecraft propulsion have been developed, each having its own drawbacks and advantages. Most satellites have simple reliable chemical thrusters (often monopropellant rockets) or resistojet rockets for orbital station-keeping, while a few use momentum wheels for attitude control. Russian and antecedent Soviet bloc satellites have used electric propulsion for decades, and newer Western geo-orbiting spacecraft are starting to use them for north\u2013south station-keeping and orbit raising. Interplanetary vehicles mostly use chemical rockets as well, although a few have used electric propulsion such as ion thrusters and Hall-effect thrusters. Various technologies need to support everything from small satellites and robotic deep space exploration to space stations and human missions to Mars.\nHypothetical in-space propulsion technologies describe propulsion technologies that could meet future space science and exploration needs. These propulsion technologies are intended to provide effective exploration of the Solar System and may permit mission designers to plan missions to \"fly anytime, anywhere, and complete a host of science objectives at the destinations\" and with greater reliability and safety. With a wide range of possible missions and candidate propulsion technologies, the question of which technologies are \"best\" for future missions is a difficult one; expert opinion now holds that a portfolio of propulsion technologies should be developed to provide optimum solutions for a diverse set of missions and destinations.\nPurpose and function.\nThe primary goals of Space exploration are to reach the destination safely, quickly, with a large quantity of payload mass, and relatively inexpensively. The act of reaching the destination requires an in-space propulsion system, and the other metrics are modifiers to this fundamental action. Propulsion technologies can significantly improve a number of critical aspects of the mission.\nWhen launching a spacecraft from Earth, a propulsion method must overcome a higher gravitational pull to provide a positive net acceleration. When in space, the purpose of a propulsion system is to change the velocity, or \"v\", of a spacecraft, in order to establish the desired trajectory.\nIn-space propulsion begins where the upper stage of the launch vehicle leaves off, performing the functions of primary propulsion, reaction control, station keeping, precision pointing, and orbital maneuvering. The main engines used in space provide the primary propulsive force for orbit transfer, planetary trajectories, and extra planetary landing and ascent. The reaction control and orbital maneuvering systems provide the propulsive force for orbit maintenance, position control, station keeping, and spacecraft attitude control.\nIn orbit, any additional impulse, even tiny, will result in a change in the orbit path, in two ways:\nEarth's surface is situated fairly deep in a gravity well; the escape velocity required to leave its orbit is 11.2 kilometers/second. Thus for destinations beyond, propulsion systems need enough propellant and to be of high enough efficiency. The same is true for other planets and moons, albeit some have lower gravity wells.\nAs human beings evolved in a gravitational field of \"one \"g\"\" (9.81m/s\u00b2), it would be most comfortable for a human spaceflight propulsion system to provide that acceleration continuously, (though human bodies can tolerate much larger accelerations over short periods). The occupants of a rocket or spaceship having such a propulsion system would be free from the ill effects of free fall, such as nausea, muscular weakness, reduced sense of taste, or leaching of calcium from their bones.\nTheory.\nThe Tsiolkovsky rocket equation shows, using the law of conservation of momentum, that for a rocket engine propulsion method to change the momentum of a spacecraft, it must change the momentum of something else in the opposite direction. In other words, the rocket must exhaust mass opposite the spacecraft's acceleration direction, with such exhausted mass called propellant or reaction mass.Sec 1.2.1 For this to happen, both reaction mass and energy are needed. The impulse provided by launching a particle of reaction mass with mass \"m\" at velocity \"v\" is \"mv\". But this particle has kinetic energy \"mv\"\u00b2/2, which must come from somewhere. In a conventional solid, liquid, or hybrid rocket, fuel is burned, providing the energy, and the reaction products are allowed to flow out of the engine nozzle, providing the reaction mass. In an ion thruster, electricity is used to accelerate ions behind the spacecraft. Here other sources must provide the electrical energy (e.g. a solar panel or a nuclear reactor), whereas the ions provide the reaction mass.\nThe rate of change of velocity is called acceleration and the rate of change of momentum is called force. To reach a given velocity, one can apply a small acceleration over a long period of time, or a large acceleration over a short time; similarly, one can achieve a given impulse with a large force over a short time or a small force over a long time. This means that for maneuvering in space, a propulsion method that produces tiny accelerations for a long time can often produce the same impulse as another which produces large accelerations for a short time. However, when launching from a planet, tiny accelerations cannot overcome the planet's gravitational pull and so cannot be used.\nSome designs however, operate without internal reaction mass by taking advantage of magnetic fields or light pressure to change the spacecraft's momentum.\nEfficiency.\nWhen discussing the efficiency of a propulsion system, designers often focus on the effective use of the reaction mass, which must be carried along with the rocket and is irretrievably consumed when used. Spacecraft performance can be quantified in \"amount of change in momentum per unit of propellant consumed,\" also called specific impulse. This is a measure of the amount of impulse that can be obtained from a fixed amount of reaction mass. The higher the specific impulse, the better the efficiency. Ion propulsion engines have high specific impulse (~3000 s) and low thrust whereas chemical rockets like monopropellant or bipropellant rocket engines have a low specific impulse (~300 s) but high thrust.\nThe impulse per unit weight-on-Earth (typically designated by formula_1) has units of seconds. Because the weight on Earth of the reaction mass is often unimportant when discussing vehicles in space, specific impulse can also be discussed in terms of impulse per unit mass, with the same units as velocity (e.g., meters per second). This measure is equivalent to the effective exhaust velocity of the engine, and is typically designated formula_2. Either the change in momentum per unit of propellant used by a spacecraft, or the velocity of the propellant exiting the spacecraft, can be used to measure its \"specific impulse.\" The two values differ by a factor of the standard acceleration due to gravity, \"g\"n, 9.80665\u00a0m/s\u00b2 (formula_3).\nIn contrast to chemical rockets, electrodynamic rockets use\nelectric or magnetic fields to accelerate a charged propellant. The benefit of this method is that it can achieve exhaust velocities, and therefore formula_1, more than 10 times greater than those of a chemical engine, producing steady thrust with far less fuel. With a conventional chemical propulsion system, 2% of a rocket's total mass might make it to the destination, with the other 98% having been consumed as fuel. With an electric propulsion system, 70% of what's aboard in low Earth orbit can make it to a deep-space destination.\nHowever, there is a trade-off. Chemical rockets transform propellants into most of the energy needed to propel them, but their electromagnetic equivalents must carry or produce the power required to create and accelerate propellants. Because there are currently practical limits on the amount of power available on a spacecraft, these engines are not suitable for launch vehicles or when a spacecraft needs a quick, large\nimpulse, such as when it brakes to enter a capture orbit. Even so, because\nelectrodynamic rockets offer very high formula_1, mission planners are\nincreasingly willing to sacrifice power and thrust (and the extra time it will\ntake to get a spacecraft where it needs to go) in order to save large amounts\nof propellant mass.\nOperating domains.\nSpacecraft operate in many areas of space. These include orbital maneuvering, interplanetary travel, and interstellar travel.\nOrbital.\nArtificial satellites are first launched into the desired altitude by conventional liquid/solid propelled rockets, after which the satellite may use onboard propulsion systems for orbital stationkeeping. Once in the desired orbit, they often need some form of attitude control so that they are correctly pointed with respect to the Earth, the Sun, and possibly some astronomical object of interest. They are also subject to drag from the thin atmosphere, so that to stay in orbit for a long period of time some form of propulsion is occasionally necessary to make small corrections (orbital station-keeping). Many satellites need to be moved from one orbit to another from time to time, and this also requires propulsion. A satellite's useful life is usually over once it has exhausted its ability to adjust its orbit.\nInterplanetary.\nFor interplanetary travel, a spacecraft can use its engines to leave Earth's orbit. It is not explicitly necessary as the initial boost given by the rocket, gravity slingshot, monopropellant/bipropellent attitude control propulsion system are enough for the exploration of the solar system (see New Horizons). Once it has done so, it must make its way to its destination. Current interplanetary spacecraft do this with a series of short-term trajectory adjustments. In between these adjustments, the spacecraft typically moves along its trajectory without accelerating. The most fuel-efficient means to move from one circular orbit to another is with a Hohmann transfer orbit: the spacecraft begins in a roughly circular orbit around the Sun. A short period of thrust in the direction of motion accelerates or decelerates the spacecraft into an elliptical orbit around the Sun which is tangential to its previous orbit and also to the orbit of its destination. The spacecraft falls freely along this elliptical orbit until it reaches its destination, where another short period of thrust accelerates or decelerates it to match the orbit of its destination. Special methods such as aerobraking or aerocapture are sometimes used for this final orbital adjustment.\nSome spacecraft propulsion methods such as solar sails provide very low but inexhaustible thrust; an interplanetary vehicle using one of these methods would follow a rather different trajectory, either constantly thrusting against its direction of motion in order to decrease its distance from the Sun, or constantly thrusting along its direction of motion to increase its distance from the Sun. The concept has been successfully tested by the Japanese IKAROS solar sail spacecraft.\nInterstellar.\nBecause interstellar distances are great, a tremendous velocity is needed to get a spacecraft to its destination in a reasonable amount of time. Acquiring such a velocity on launch and getting rid of it on arrival remains a formidable challenge for spacecraft designers. No spacecraft capable of short duration (compared to human lifetime) interstellar travel has yet been built, but many hypothetical designs have been discussed. \nPropulsion technology.\nSpacecraft propulsion technology can be of several types, such as chemical, electric or nuclear. They are distinguished based on the physics of the propulsion system and how thrust is generated. Other experimental and more theoretical types are also included, depending on their technical maturity. Additionally, there may be credible meritorious in-space propulsion concepts not foreseen or reviewed at the time of publication, and which may be shown to be beneficial to future mission applications.\nAlmost all types are reaction engines, which produce thrust by expelling reaction mass, in accordance with Newton's third law of motion. Examples include jet engines, rocket engines, pump-jet, and more uncommon variations such as Hall\u2013effect thrusters, ion drives, mass drivers, and nuclear pulse propulsion.\nChemical propulsion.\nA large fraction of rocket engines in use today are chemical rockets; that is, they obtain the energy needed to generate thrust by chemical reactions to create a hot gas that is expanded to produce thrust. Many different propellant combinations are used to obtain these chemical reactions, including, for example, hydrazine, liquid oxygen, liquid hydrogen, nitrous oxide, and hydrogen peroxide. They can be used as a monopropellant or in bi-propellant configurations.\nRocket engines provide essentially the highest specific powers and high specific thrusts of any engine used for spacecraft propulsion. Most rocket engines are internal combustion heat engines (although non-combusting forms exist). Rocket engines generally produce a high-temperature reaction mass, as a hot gas, which is achieved by combusting a solid, liquid or gaseous fuel with an oxidiser within a combustion chamber. The extremely hot gas is then allowed to escape through a high-expansion ratio bell-shaped nozzle, a feature that gives a rocket engine its characteristic shape. The effect of the nozzle is to accelerate the mass, converting most of the thermal energy into kinetic energy, where exhaust speeds reaching as high as 10 times the speed of sound at sea level are common.\nGreen chemical propulsion.\nThe dominant form of chemical propulsion for satellites has historically been hydrazine, however, this fuel is highly toxic and at risk of being banned across Europe. Non-toxic 'green' alternatives are now being developed to replace hydrazine. Nitrous oxide-based alternatives are garnering traction and government support, with development being led by commercial companies Dawn Aerospace, Impulse Space, and Launcher. The first nitrous oxide-based system flown in space was by D-Orbit onboard their ION Satellite Carrier (space tug) in 2021, using six Dawn Aerospace B20 thrusters, launched upon a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket.\nElectric propulsion.\nRather than relying on high temperature and fluid dynamics to accelerate the reaction mass to high speeds, there are a variety of methods that use electrostatic or electromagnetic forces to accelerate the reaction mass directly, where the reaction mass is usually a stream of ions.\nIon propulsion rockets typically heat a plasma or charged gas inside a magnetic bottle and release it via a magnetic nozzle so that no solid matter needs to come in contact with the plasma. Such an engine uses electric power, first to ionize atoms, and then to create a voltage gradient to accelerate the ions to high exhaust velocities. For these drives, at the highest exhaust speeds, energetic efficiency and thrust are all inversely proportional to exhaust velocity. Their very high exhaust velocity means they require huge amounts of energy and thus with practical power sources provide low thrust, but use hardly any fuel.\nElectric propulsion is commonly used for station keeping on commercial communications satellites and for prime propulsion on some scientific space missions because of their high specific impulse. However, they generally have very small values of thrust and therefore must be operated for long durations to provide the total impulse required by a mission.\nThe idea of electric propulsion dates to 1906, when Robert Goddard considered the possibility in his personal notebook. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky published the idea in 1911.\nElectric propulsion methods include:\nPower sources.\nFor some missions, particularly reasonably close to the Sun, solar energy may be sufficient, and has often been used, but for others further out or at higher power, nuclear energy is necessary; engines drawing their power from a nuclear source are called nuclear electric rockets.\nCurrent nuclear power generators are approximately half the weight of solar panels per watt of energy supplied, at terrestrial distances from the Sun. Chemical power generators are not used due to the far lower total available energy. Beamed power to the spacecraft is considered to have potential, according to NASA and the University of Colorado Boulder.\nWith any current source of electrical power, chemical, nuclear or solar, the maximum amount of power that can be generated limits the amount of thrust that can be produced to a small value. Power generation adds significant mass to the spacecraft, and ultimately the weight of the power source limits the performance of the vehicle.\nNuclear propulsion.\nNuclear fuels typically have very high specific energy, much higher than chemical fuels, which means that they can generate large amounts of energy per unit mass. This makes them valuable in spaceflight, as it can enable high specific impulses, sometimes even at high thrusts. The machinery to do this is complex, but research has developed methods for their use in propulsion systems, and some have been tested in a laboratory.\nHere, nuclear propulsion moreso refers to the source of propulsion being nuclear, instead of a nuclear electric rocket where a nuclear reactor would provide power (instead of solar panels) for other types of electrical propulsion.\nNuclear propulsion methods include:\nField propulsion without internal reaction mass.\nThere are several different space drives that need little or no reaction mass to function. Field propulsion refers to propulsion systems in which thrust arises from interactions with external fields or ambient media, rather than from the sustained expulsion of onboard reaction mass or reliance on solid chemical fuels.\nSolar and magnetic sails.\nThe concept of solar sails rely on radiation pressure from electromagnetic energy, but they require a large collection surface to function effectively. E-sails propose to use very thin and lightweight wires holding an electric charge to deflect particles, which may have more controllable directionality.\nMagnetic sails deflect charged particles from the solar wind with a magnetic field, thereby imparting momentum to the spacecraft. For instance, the so-called Magsail is a large superconducting loop proposed for acceleration/deceleration in the solar wind and deceleration in the Interstellar medium. A variant is the mini-magnetospheric plasma propulsion system and its successor, the magnetoplasma sail, which inject plasma at a low rate to enhance the magnetic field to more effectively deflect charged particles in a plasma wind.\nJapan launched a solar sail-powered spacecraft, IKAROS in May 2010, which successfully demonstrated propulsion and guidance (and is still active as of this date). As further proof of the solar sail concept, NanoSail-D became the first such powered satellite to orbit Earth. As of August 2017, NASA confirmed the Sunjammer solar sail project was concluded in 2014 with lessons learned for future space sail projects. The U.K. Cubesail programme will be the first mission to demonstrate solar sailing in low Earth orbit, and the first mission to demonstrate full three-axis attitude control of a solar sail.\nOther.\nThe concept of a gravitational slingshot is a form of propulsion to carry a space probe onward to other destinations without the expense of reaction mass; harnessing the gravitational energy of other celestial objects allows the spacecraft to gain kinetic energy. However, more energy can be obtained from the gravity assist if rockets are used via the Oberth effect.\nA tether propulsion system employs a long cable with a high tensile strength to change a spacecraft's orbit, such as by interaction with a planet's magnetic field or through momentum exchange with another object.\nBeam-powered propulsion is another method of propulsion without reaction mass, and includes sails pushed by laser, microwave, or particle beams.\nOther propulsion types.\nMany spacecraft use reaction wheels or control moment gyroscopes to control orientation in space. A satellite or other space vehicle is subject to the law of conservation of angular momentum, which constrains a body from a net change in angular velocity. Thus, for a vehicle to change its relative orientation without expending reaction mass, another part of the vehicle may rotate in the opposite direction. Non-conservative external forces, primarily gravitational and atmospheric, can contribute up to several degrees per day to angular momentum, so such systems are designed to \"bleed off\" undesired rotational energies built up over time.\nAdvanced propulsion technology.\nAdvanced, and in some cases theoretical, propulsion technologies may use chemical or nonchemical physics to produce thrust but are generally considered to be of lower technical maturity with challenges that have not been overcome. For both human and robotic exploration, traversing the solar system is a struggle against time and distance. The most distant planets are 4.5\u20136 billion kilometers from the Sun and to reach them in any reasonable time requires much more capable propulsion systems than conventional chemical rockets. Rapid inner solar system missions with flexible launch dates are difficult, requiring propulsion systems that are beyond today's current state of the art. The logistics, and therefore the total system mass required to support sustained human exploration beyond Earth to destinations such as the Moon, Mars, or near-Earth objects, are daunting unless more efficient in-space propulsion technologies are developed and fielded.\nA variety of hypothetical propulsion techniques have been considered that require a deeper understanding of the properties of space, particularly inertial frames and the vacuum state. Such methods are highly speculative and include:\nA NASA assessment of its Breakthrough Propulsion Physics Program divides such proposals into those that are non-viable for propulsion purposes, those that are of uncertain potential, and those that are not impossible according to current theories.\nTable of methods.\nBelow is a summary of some of the more popular, proven technologies, followed by increasingly speculative methods. Four numbers are shown. The first is the effective exhaust velocity: the equivalent speed which the propellant leaves the vehicle. This is not necessarily the most important characteristic of the propulsion method; thrust and power consumption and other factors can be. However,\nThe second and third are the typical amounts of thrust and the typical burn times of the method; outside a gravitational potential, small amounts of thrust applied over a long period will give the same effect as large amounts of thrust over a short period, if the object is not significantly influenced by gravity. The fourth is the maximum delta-v the technique can give without staging. For rocket-like propulsion systems, this is a function of mass fraction and exhaust velocity; mass fraction for rocket-like systems is usually limited by propulsion system weight and tankage weight. For a system to achieve this limit, the payload may need to be a negligible percentage of the vehicle, and so the practical limit on some systems can be much lower.\nTable Notes&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlanetary and atmospheric propulsion.\nLaunch-assist mechanisms.\nThere have been many ideas proposed for launch-assist mechanisms that have the potential of substantially reducing the cost of getting to orbit. Proposed non-rocket spacelaunch launch-assist mechanisms include:\nAir-breathing engines.\nStudies generally show that conventional air-breathing engines, such as ramjets or turbojets are basically too heavy (have too low a thrust/weight ratio) to give significant performance improvement when installed on a launch vehicle. However, launch vehicles can be air launched from separate lift vehicles (e.g. B-29, Pegasus Rocket and White Knight) which do use such propulsion systems. Jet engines mounted on a launch rail could also be so used.\nOn the other hand, very lightweight or very high-speed engines have been proposed that take advantage of the air during ascent:\nNormal rocket launch vehicles fly almost vertically before rolling over at an altitude of some tens of kilometers before burning sideways for orbit; this initial vertical climb wastes propellant but is optimal as it greatly reduces airdrag. Airbreathing engines burn propellant much more efficiently and this would permit a far flatter launch trajectory. The vehicles would typically fly approximately tangentially to Earth's surface until leaving the atmosphere then perform a rocket burn to bridge the final delta-v to orbital velocity.\nFor spacecraft already in very low-orbit, air-breathing electric propulsion could use residual gases in the upper atmosphere as a propellant. Air-breathing electric propulsion could make a new class of long-lived, low-orbiting missions feasible on Earth, Mars or Venus.\nPlanetary arrival and landing.\nWhen a vehicle is to enter orbit around its destination planet, or when it is to land, it must adjust its velocity. This can be done using any of the methods listed above (provided they can generate a high enough thrust), but there are methods that can take advantage of planetary atmospheres and/or surfaces.\nResearch.\nDevelopment of technologies will result in technical solutions that improve thrust levels, specific impulse, power, specific mass, (or specific power), volume, system mass, system complexity, operational complexity, commonality with other spacecraft systems, manufacturability, durability, and cost. These types of improvements will yield decreased transit times, increased payload mass, safer spacecraft, and decreased costs. In some instances, the development of technologies within this technology area will result in mission-enabling breakthroughs that will revolutionize space exploration. There is no single propulsion technology that will benefit all missions or mission types; the requirements for in-space propulsion vary widely according to their intended application.\nOne institution focused on developing primary propulsion technologies aimed at benefitting near- and mid-term science missions by reducing cost, mass, and/or travel times is the Glenn Research Center (GRC). Electric propulsion architectures are of particular interest to the GRC, including ion and Hall thrusters. One system combines solar sails, a form of propellantless propulsion which relies on naturally occurring starlight for propulsion energy, and Hall thrusters. Other propulsion technologies being developed include advanced chemical propulsion and aerocapture.\nSustainable Propulsion technologies, such as solar cells and electric propulsion systems powered by renewable energy, are gaining attention for their potential to provide solutions for space travel, whilst aiming for more efficient energy sources and lesser harmful emissions. However, those technologies may be limited in terms of thrust and scalability.\nIn 2023, Boeing and Airbus are the leading research companies in Sustainable Propulsion for space applications in terms of patent family publications, but mostly focus on hydrogen/fuel cells and sustainable fuels. The most important area in terms of patent family publications is electric propulsion. The number of patent family publications in electric propulsion systems has increased from only 70 in 2000 to 293 in 2023, with the top inventors being from China. \nDefining technologies.\nThe term \"mission pull\" defines a technology or a performance characteristic necessary to meet a planned NASA mission requirement. Any other relationship between a technology and a mission (an alternate propulsion system, for example) is categorized as \"technology push.\" Also, a space demonstration refers to the spaceflight of a scaled version of a particular technology or of a critical technology subsystem. On the other hand, a space validation would serve as a qualification flight for future mission implementation. A successful validation flight would not require any additional space testing of a particular technology before it can be adopted for a science or exploration mission.\nTesting.\nSpacecraft propulsion systems are often first statically tested on Earth's surface, within the atmosphere but many systems require a vacuum chamber to test fully. Rockets are usually tested at a rocket engine test facility well away from habitation and other buildings for safety reasons. Ion drives are far less dangerous and require much less stringent safety, usually only a moderately large vacuum chamber is needed. Static firing of engines are done at ground test facilities, and systems which cannot be adequately tested on the ground and require launches may be employed at a launch site.\nIn fiction.\nIn science fiction, space ships use various means to travel, some of them scientifically plausible (like solar sails or ramjets), others, mostly or entirely fictitious (like anti-gravity, warp drive, spindizzy or hyperspace travel).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28510", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28510", "title": "Second-order predicate", "text": "Aspect of mathematical logic\nIn mathematical logic, a second-order predicate is a predicate that takes a first-order predicate as an argument. Compare higher-order predicate.\nThe idea of second order predication was introduced by the German mathematician and philosopher Frege. It is based on his idea that a predicate such as \"is a philosopher\" designates a concept, rather than an object. Sometimes a concept can itself be the subject of a proposition, such as in \"There are no Bosnian philosophers\". In this case, we are not saying anything of any Bosnian philosophers, but of the concept \"is a Bosnian philosopher\" that it is not satisfied. Thus the predicate \"is not satisfied\" attributes something to the concept \"is a Bosnian philosopher\", and is thus a second-level predicate.\nThis idea is the basis of Frege's theory of number.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28512", "revid": "1315007747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28512", "title": "Beer in Sweden", "text": "Beer in Sweden has a history that can be traced to the late Iron Age.\nHistory.\nAle-brewing history in Sweden predates written records. Through old writings, such as H\u00e1vam\u00e1l, the Norse culture produced ale and mead. Mead was preferred, and ale was the most common. The Scandinavians also had access to wine and beer. Modern reproductions of Norse brews have been known to produce ale as strong as 9 percent ABV. Up until the 19th century, brewing was mostly a matter of production for household needs. The beer was usually weak in alcoholic content. For celebrations and feasts, stronger \"feast-beer\" and potent mead were brewed. With the advent of the Industrial Revolution, the Swedish brewing industry arose.\nIn the mid-19th century, a multitude of small breweries grew into existence in the larger cities of Sweden. In the beginning of the 20th century, a trend of consolidation with mergers and buyouts began, which culminated in the late 1970s and the beginning of 1980. This led to the formation of three large brewery conglomerates; Pripps, Spendrups and Falcon, which pushed the smaller breweries. This led to a stereotype of the Swedish beers available as easily drinkable lagers, lacking in taste and character.\nIn the late 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s, a new generation of small breweries spearheaded by the likes of Stockholm's Nils Oscar Brewery began to grow alongside the large companies. These companies offer customers many choices, and many of the beers are produced in Sweden with cultivated brewing yeasts (often imported from Germany, Belgium or Britain).\nClassification.\nSwedish law defines two alcohol thresholds that govern where and to whom a given type of beer may be sold. \"L\u00e4tt\u00f6l\", i.e., beer below the lower threshold (2.25% ABV), is considered a \"l\u00e4ttdryck\" (light beverage) and may be sold anywhere with no age restriction. For \"stark\u00f6l\", beer above the upper threshold (3.5% ABV) may only be sold in Systembolaget stores to people aged 20 or above and in pubs to people aged 18 or above. \"Folk\u00f6l\" (people's beer), beer between the two thresholds, may be sold in grocery stores, but only to people aged 18 or older.\nSince the 3.5% threshold is close to the alcohol content of an international lager beer, many international brands such as Heineken, Carlsberg and Pilsner Urquell are sold in two versions in Sweden \u2013 the internationally renowned product as a \"stark\u00f6l\" at Systembolaget and a slightly watered-down version as a \"folk\u00f6l\" in the grocery stores.\nThe modern trend is toward consumers increasingly choosing stronger beer than the 3.5% ABV brands, which are generally sold at grocery stores. Any stronger beer is sold exclusively at the government-owned retail monopoly, Systembolaget.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28518", "revid": "4082870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28518", "title": "Saint Augustine", "text": ""}
{"id": "28521", "revid": "50885341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28521", "title": "Shining Path", "text": "Maoist communist party in Peru\nThe Shining Path (, SL), officially the Communist Party of Peru (, abbr. PCP), is a terrorist organization and far-left political party and guerrilla group in Peru, following Marxism\u2013Leninism\u2013Maoism and Gonzalo Thought. Academics often refer to the group as the Communist Party of Peru \u2013 Shining Path (, abbr. PCP-SL) to distinguish it from other communist parties in Peru.\nWhen it first launched its \"people's war\" in 1980, the Shining Path's goal was to overthrow the government through guerrilla warfare and replace it with a New Democracy. The Shining Path believed that by establishing a dictatorship of the proletariat, inducing a cultural revolution, and eventually sparking a world revolution, they could arrive at full communism. Their representatives stated that the then-existing socialist countries were revisionist, and the Shining Path was the vanguard of the world communist movement. The Shining Path's ideology and tactics have influenced other Maoist insurgent groups, such as the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) and other Revolutionary Internationalist Movement-affiliated organizations.\nThe Shining Path has been widely condemned for its excessive brutality, including violence deployed against peasants, such as the Lucanamarca massacre, as well as for its violence towards trade union organizers, competing Marxist groups, elected officials, and the general public. The Shining Path is regarded as a terrorist organization by the government of Peru, along with Japan, the United States, the European Union, and Canada, all of whom consequently prohibit funding and other financial support to the group.\nSince the capture of Shining Path founder Abimael Guzm\u00e1n in 1992 and of his successors \u00d3scar Ram\u00edrez (\"Comrade Feliciano\") in 1999 and Eleuterio Flores (\"Comrade Artemio\") in 2012, the Shining Path has declined in activity. The main remaining faction of the Shining Path, the Militarized Communist Party of Peru (MPCP), is active in the VRAEM region of Peru, and it has since distanced itself from the Shining Path's legacy in 2018 in order to maintain the support of peasants previously persecuted by the Shining Path. In addition to the MPCP, the Communist Party of Peru \u2013 Red Mantaro Base Committee (PCP-CBMR) has been operating in the Mantaro Valley since 2001, while the Communist Party of Peru \u2013 Huallaga Regional Committee (PCP-CRH) was active at the Huallaga region from 2004 until Comrade Artemio's capture in 2012.\nName.\nThe group's official name is the \"Communist Party of Peru\" (PCP), a name seen in all of its self-produced documents, periodicals, and other materials. The acronym \"PCP-SL\" is unofficially used by organizations, such as the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, to distinguish the group from other groups who claim the original name and acronym.\nThe group's common name, \"Shining Path\", distinguishes it from several other Peruvian communist parties with similar names. The name is derived from a maxim of Jos\u00e9 Carlos Mari\u00e1tegui, the founder of the original Peruvian Communist Party (from which the rest of communist parties split; now commonly known as the \"PCP-Unidad\") in the 1920s: \"\" (\"Marxism\u2013Leninism will open the shining path to revolution\"). This maxim was featured on the masthead of the newspaper of a Shining Path front group. The followers of this group are generally called \"senderistas\".\nStructure.\nOrganization.\nThe Shining Path's remnants currently operate in the VRAEM region and primarily comprises two groups and their sub-branches; a paramilitary wing and a political wing. It was originally organised using a \"concentric construction\" model of structure with Communist Party organs as the complete center, followed by the paramilitary wing surrounding it, and lastly the political wing in the outermost circle. This ensured the political party retained control of both its armed and social branches, contrasting itself with the more frequent \"foquismo\" model that swept through Latin American insurgencies after the Cuban Revolution.\nThe capture of Shining Path leader Abimael Guzm\u00e1n in 1992 led to the eventual splintering of the group into several factions, referred to by the Peruvian government as Shining Path remnants (). Of these, the Militarized Communist Party of Peru (MPCP) is considered the group's main successor, founded in 1999 by brothers V\u00edctor and Jorge Quispe Palomino after the collapse of \"Sendero Rojo\", the faction that had rejected Guzm\u00e1n's peace treaty. Also active is a faction in the Mantaro Valley since 2001. The group's remnants reportedly obtain their revenue from cocaine trafficking, and of these, the MPCP has attempted to recharacterise and distance itself from the original group that had attacked rural communities in the area, describing Guzm\u00e1n as a \"traitor\".\nParamilitary wing.\nThe People's Guerrilla Army (, EGP) was officially created on 3 December 1982 for the purposes of combat, mobilisation and producing an income for the group. After 1992, it continued to operate under \"Sendero Rojo\", the group's armed successor until 1999, and later under the Huallaga faction that existed from 2004 to 2012. Since 2001, it has been operated by the Mantaro faction under the name of People's Liberation Army (, EPL).\nThe EGP's structure is as follows:\nIn 2009, then president Alan Garc\u00eda accused the group of using child soldiers to execute wounded army personnel. The following year, the \"Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos\" presented a report to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (CIDH) detailing this practice by both the group and the Peruvian Armed Forces.\nUnder the leadership of V\u00edctor Quispe Palomino, it was reorganised as the Popular Revolutionary Army (; ERP) until the MPCP's formal establishment and distancing from Guzm\u00e1n's original Shining Path in June 2018, after which it has claimed the name of Revolutionary Armed Forces of Peru (). In 2020, it was reported to have made money from selling cigarettes, clothes, candy, raffles and other methods.\nPolitical wing.\nThe United Front () serves as the political and bureaucratic arm of the Shining Path that uses \"generated organisms\" (), or civil organisations that support the group. It has two main branches, MOVADEF (2009\u20132024) and FUDEPP, as well as a number of multiple smaller organisations, usually specified to a particular purpose or issue. Examples of these include:\nIdeology.\nAs its power grew, the Shining Path changed its official ideology from \"Marxism\u2013Leninism\u2013Mao Zedong thought\" to \"Marxism\u2013Leninism\u2013Maoism\u2013Gonzalo thought\" \u2013 according to some authors, a cult of personality grew around Guzm\u00e1n.\nIdeologically Maoist, the Shining Path is unique because it did not completely accept orthodox Marxist doctrine, instead, it considered the teachings of Guzm\u00e1n to supersede the teachings of Marx, Lenin, Stalin and Mao. Guzm\u00e1n's philosophy combined Marxism\u2013Leninism, Maoism and indigenous Indian traditionalism, championing the liberation of Peru's Quechua-speaking Incans and mestizos. The party's name was also coined by Guzm\u00e1n, who infused his communist rhetoric with Inca mythology, he described his form of Marxist-Maoist thought as a \"shining path\" towards the liberation of Peru's natives. Because of this, the Shining Path also featured elements of Incan particularism, and it also rejected outside influences, especially non-indigenous influences.\nThe Shining Path declared that it was a feminist organization and in accordance with this declaration, many women acquired leadership positions. In the organisation, 40% of the fighters and 50% of the members of its Central Committee were women.\nPeople's Republic.\nThe Shining Path sought to replace the Republic of Peru with a \"People's Republic which would adhere to the doctrine of New Democracy\" (, RPND), also known by its proposed name of \"People's Republic of Peru\" (). The RPND was first named at the third session of the first central committee, held in 1983, with its establishment meaning that the armed branch of the group would become a \"People's Liberation Army,\" as per the group's so-called grand plan. Additionally, the term \"People's Republic\" was also suggested as a possible name for the upcoming state.\nUse of violence.\nAlthough the reliability of reports regarding the Shining Path's actions remains a matter of controversy in Peru, the organization's use of violence is well documented. According to InSight Crime, Shining Path would kill their opponents \"with assassinations, bombings, beheadings and massacres\" as well as \"stoning victims to death.\nThe Shining Path rejected the concept of human rights; a Shining Path document stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We start by not ascribing to either the Universal Declaration of Human Rights or the Costa Rica Convention on Human Rights, but we have used their legal devices to unmask and denounce the old Peruvian state... For us, human rights are contradictory to the rights of the people, because we base rights in man as a social product, not man as an abstract with innate rights. \"Human rights\" do not exist except for the bourgeois man, a position that was at the forefront of feudalism, like liberty, equality, and fraternity were advanced for the bourgeoisie of the past. But today, since the appearance of the proletariat as an organized class in the Communist Party, with the experience of triumphant revolutions, with the construction of socialism, new democracy and the dictatorship of the proletariat, it has been proven that human rights serve the oppressor class and the exploiters who run the imperialist and landowner-bureaucratic states. Bourgeois states in general... Our position is very clear. We reject and condemn human rights because they are bourgeois, reactionary, counterrevolutionary rights, and are today a weapon of revisionists and imperialists, principally Yankee imperialists.\u2014\u200a\nAfter the collapse of the Fujimori government, interim President Valent\u00edn Paniagua established a Truth and Reconciliation Commission to investigate the conflict. The Commission found in its 2003 \"Final Report\" that 69,280 people died or disappeared between 1980 and 2000 as a result of the armed conflict. The Shining Path was found to be responsible for about 54% of the deaths and disappearances reported to the commission. A statistical analysis of the available data led the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to estimate that the Shining Path was responsible for the death or disappearance of 31,331 people, 46% of the total deaths and disappearances. According to a summary of the report by Human Rights Watch, \"Shining Path... killed about half the victims, and roughly one-third died at the hands of government security forces... The commission attributed some of the other slayings to a smaller guerrilla group and local militias. The rest remain unattributed.\" The MRTA was held responsible for 1.5% of the deaths. A 2019 study disputed the casualty figures from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, estimating instead \"a total of 48,000 killings, substantially lower than the TRC estimate\", and concluding that \"the Peruvian State accounts for a significantly larger share than the Shining Path.\" The TRC later came out to respond to these statements.\nAllegations of violence against LGBT people.\nThe Shining Path has been accused of violence against LGBT people. Between 1989 and 1992, the Shining Path and the MRTA killed up to 500 \"non-heterosexual\" people. According to one woman who was kidnapped by the Shining Path in 1981, a homosexual man's penis was cut into pieces before he was murdered. The Peruvian government did not reveal the name of the victim. The Shining Path defended its actions by saying that LGBT individuals were not killed because of their sexual identity, instead, they were killed because of their \"collaboration with the police.\"\nThe Shining Path has denied such allegations, stating, \"It is probable that the PCP has executed a homosexual, but rest assured that it was not done because of their sexual orientation but because of their position against the revolution... Our view is that homosexual orientation is not an ideological matter but one of individual preference... Party membership is open to all those who support the cause of communist revolution and the principles of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thought, regardless of what their sexual preferences may be.\"\nWomen in the Shining Path.\nThe number of women involved in the armed struggle remained high throughout the war, participating at almost all logistical, military and strategic levels as militants, guerrilla commanders and top party leaders of the organisation. The high proportion of women was a given and desired from the outset; the success of the internal Peruvian revolution was explicitly made dependent on the participation of women. Up to forty per cent of the guerrillas were women, and there were countless \"ladies of death\" who led military commandos. In 1992, at least eight of the nineteen members of the Central Committee were women, including three of the five members of the Politburo, and in 1980 more than a third of the women arrested had a degree. In criminal proceedings against senderista in 1987, the majority were women. The Shining Path was the first guerrilla organisation to incorporate women on a completely equal military footing with its male members, actively recruiting women on a large scale and appointing them to leading positions.\nThe Movimiento Femenino Popular (MFP) group was officially formed in 1974 from the merger of two groups, the Centro Femenino Popular and the Frente Femenino Universitario. The \"MFP Manifiesto\" traces the origins of the group back to the mid-1960s, when female students and academics began to organise their own groups and factions in other student organisations and to reflect on revolution and \"the thesis of the great Lenin on the participation of women and the success of a revolution\" from 1968 onwards. During these years, more and more women were studying and trying to enter the labour market. The percentage of women at university in Ayacucho was particularly high: in 1968, 30% of students were women, mainly in the departments of obstetrics and social and educational services. The unequal access to work and education exacerbated the differences between classes and between rural and urban populations, especially within the female population. Women became increasingly involved and organised in various movements as an expression of their protest and frustration. So much so, that by the year 1990, women held eight of the nineteen Central Committee positions. This was more involvement from women than any of the other leftist movements in Peru. Women in Peru even acknowledge the Shining Path movement as a step-away from the male-dominated societies that are renowned in many parts of Latin America. This was far different than what has been seen before the Peruvian Truth was revealed. Many women were joining the armed forces to obtain basic rights and securities. Despite many arrests and incarcerations of women, this time period revolutionized women's rights in Peru.\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nThe Shining Path was founded in 1969 by Abimael Guzm\u00e1n, a former university philosophy professor (his followers referred to him by his nom de guerre Presidente Gonzalo), and a group of 11 others. Guzm\u00e1n was heavily influenced by a trip to China and admired the teachings of Mao Zedong. His teachings created the foundation of its militant Maoist doctrine. It was an offshoot of the Peruvian Communist Party \u2013 Red Flag, which itself split from the original Peruvian Communist Party founded by Jos\u00e9 Carlos Mari\u00e1tegui in 1928.\nAntonio D\u00edaz Mart\u00ednez, an agronomist who became a leader of the Shining Path, made several important contributions to the group's ideology. In his books \"Ayacucho, Hambre y Esperanza\" (1969) and \"China, La Revoluci\u00f3n Agraria\" (1978), he expressed his own conviction of the necessity that revolutionary activity in Peru follow strictly the teachings of Mao Zedong.\nFrom 1970 to 1977, Shining Path built a student organization and regional-committee based party in Lima and the central sierra.137 The Shining Path first established a foothold at San Crist\u00f3bal of Huamanga University, in Ayacucho, where Guzm\u00e1n taught philosophy. The university had recently reopened after being closed for about half a century. Between 1973 and 1975, the Shining Path members gained control of the student councils at the Universities of Huancayo and La Cantuta, and they also developed a significant presence at the National University of Engineering in Lima and the National University of San Marcos. Sometime later, it lost many student elections in the universities, including Guzm\u00e1n's San Crist\u00f3bal of Huamanga.\nGuzm\u00e1n believed that communism required a \"popular war\" and distanced himself from organizing workers. The Shining Path opposed large national strikes in 1977 and 1978 because it viewed some of the participants as revisionists or tools of \"socio-imperialism\".40\nFrom 1977 to 1980, the Shining Path focused on preparing for revolution, including building training camps in Ayacucho, developing a political and military organization, and recruiting more radical members of other Marxist groups.137 Beginning on 17 March 1980, the Shining Path held a series of clandestine meetings in Ayacucho, known as the Central Committee's second plenary. It formed a \"Revolutionary Directorate\" that was political and military in nature and ordered its militias to transfer to strategic areas in the provinces to start the \"armed struggle\". The group also held its \"First Military School\", where members were instructed in military tactics and the use of weapons. They also engaged in criticism and self-criticism, a Maoist practice intended to purge bad habits and avoid the repetition of mistakes. During the existence of the First Military School, members of the Central Committee came under heavy criticism. Guzm\u00e1n did not, and he emerged from the First Military School as the clear leader of the Shining Path. By May 1980, the central committee concluded the party and its military structure had been sufficiently developed to begin revolution.137\nA timeline of the Peruvian Communist Party (PCP)'s splinter groups is as follows:\nArmed conflict (1980\u20131993).\nBy 1980, Shining Path had about 500 members. When Peru's military government allowed elections for the first time in twelve years in 1980, the Shining Path was one of the few leftist political groups that declined to take part. It chose instead to begin a guerrilla war in the highlands of the Ayacucho Region. On 17 May 1980, on the eve of the presidential elections, it burned ballot boxes in the town of Chuschi. It was the first \"act of war\" by the Shining Path. The perpetrators were quickly caught, and additional ballots were shipped to Chuschi. The elections proceeded without further problems, and the incident received little attention in the Peruvian press.\nThroughout the 1980s, the Shining Path grew both in terms of the territory it controlled and in the number of militants in its organization, particularly in the Andean highlands. It gained support from local peasants by filling the political void left by the central government and providing what they called \"popular justice\", public trials that disregard any legal and human rights that deliver swift and brutal sentences including public executions. This caused the peasantry of some Peruvian villages to express some sympathy for the Shining Path, especially in the impoverished and neglected regions of Ayacucho, Apur\u00edmac, and Huancavelica. At times, the civilian population of small, neglected towns participated in popular trials, especially when the victims of the trials were widely disliked.\nThe Shining Path's credibility benefited from the government's initially tepid response to the insurgency. For over a year, the government refused to declare a state of emergency in the region where the Shining Path was operating. The Interior Minister, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda de la Jara, believed the group could be easily defeated through police actions. Additionally, the president, Fernando Bela\u00fande Terry, who returned to power in 1980, was reluctant to cede authority to the armed forces since his first government had ended in a military coup.\nOn 29 December 1981, the government declared an \"emergency zone\" in the three Andean regions of Ayacucho, Huancavelica, and Apur\u00edmac and granted the military the power to arbitrarily detain any suspicious person. The military abused this power, arresting scores of innocent people, at times subjecting them to torture during interrogation as well as rape. Members of the Peruvian Armed Forces began to wear black ski-masks to hide their identities, in order to protect themselves and their families.\nIn some areas, the military trained peasants and organized them into anti-rebel militias, called \"rondas\". They were generally poorly equipped, despite being provided arms by the state. The rondas would attack the Shining Path guerrillas, with the first such reported attack occurring in January 1983, near Huata. \"Ronderos\" would later kill 13 guerrilla fighters in February 1983, in Sacsamarca. In March 1983, \"ronderos\" brutally killed Olegario Curitomay, one of the commanders of the town of Lucanamarca. They took him to the town square, stoned him, stabbed him, set him on fire, and finally shot him. The Shining Path's retaliation to this was one of the worst attacks in the entire conflict, with a group of guerrilla members entering the town and going house by house, killing dozens of villagers, including babies, with guns, hatchets, and axes. This action has come to be known as the Lucanamarca massacre. Additional massacres of civilians by the Shining Path would occur throughout the conflict.\nThe Shining Path's attacks were not limited to the countryside. It executed several attacks against the infrastructure in Lima, killing civilians in the process. In 1983, it sabotaged several electrical transmission towers, causing a citywide blackout, and set fire and destroyed the Bayer industrial plant. That same year, it set off a powerful bomb in the offices of the governing party, Popular Action. Escalating its activities in Lima, in June 1985, it blew up electricity transmission towers in Lima, producing a blackout, and detonated car bombs near the government palace and the justice palace. It was believed to be responsible for bombing a shopping mall. At the time, President Fernando Bela\u00fande Terry was receiving the Argentine president Ra\u00fal Alfons\u00edn.\nDuring this period, the Shining Path assassinated specific individuals, notably leaders of other leftist groups, local political parties, labor unions, and peasant organizations, some of whom were anti-Shining Path Marxists. On 24 April 1985, in the midst of presidential elections, it tried to assassinate Domingo Garc\u00eda Rada, the president of the Peruvian National Electoral Council, severely injuring him and mortally wounding his driver. In 1988, Constantin (Gus) Gregory, an American citizen working for the United States Agency for International Development, was assassinated. Two French aid workers were killed on 4 December that same year.\nLevel of support.\nBy 1990, the Shining Path had about 3,000 armed members at its greatest extent. The group had gained control of much of the countryside of the center and south of Peru and had a large presence in the outskirts of Lima. The Shining Path began to fight against Peru's other major guerrilla group, the T\u00fapac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA), as well as \"campesino\" self-defense groups organized by the Peruvian armed forces.\nThe Shining Path quickly seized control of large areas of Peru. The group had significant support among peasant communities, and it had the support of some slum dwellers in the capital and elsewhere. The Shining Path's interpretation of Maoism did not have the support of many city dwellers. According to opinion polls, only 15 percent of the population considered subversion to be justifiable in June 1988, while only 17 percent considered it justifiable in 1991. In June 1991, \"the total sample disapproved of the Shining Path by an 83 to 7 percent margin, with 10 percent not answering the question. Among the poorest, however, only 58 percent stated disapproval of the Shining Path; 11 percent said they had a favorable opinion of the Shining Path, and some 31 percent would not answer the question.\" A September 1991 poll found that 21 percent of those polled in Lima believed that the Shining Path did not torture and kill innocent people. The same poll found that 13 percent believed that society would be more just if the Shining Path won the war and 22 percent believed society would be equally just under the Shining Path as it was under the government. Polls have never been completely accurate since Peru has several anti-terrorism laws, including \"apologia for terrorism\", that makes it a punishable offense for anyone who does not condemn the Shining Path. In effect, the laws make it illegal to support the group in any way.\nMany peasants were unhappy with the Shining Path's rule for a variety of reasons, such as its disrespect for indigenous culture and institutions. However, they had also made agreements and alliances with some indigenous tribes. Some did not like the brutality of its \"popular trials\" that sometimes included \"slitting throats, strangulation, stoning, and burning.\" Peasants were offended by the rebels' injunction against burying the bodies of Shining Path victims.\nThe Shining Path followed Mao Zedong's dictum that guerrilla warfare should start in the countryside and gradually choke off the cities.\nAccording to multiple sources, the Shining Path received support from Gaddafi's Libya.\nFujimori government.\nWhen President Alberto Fujimori took office in 1990, he responded to Shining Path with repressive force. His government issued a law in 1991 that gave the \"rondas\" a legal status, and from that time, they were officially called \"Comit\u00e9s de auto defensa\" (\"Committees of Self-Defense\"). They were officially armed, usually with 12-gauge shotguns, and trained by the Peruvian Army. According to the government, there were approximately 7,226 \"comit\u00e9s de auto defensa\" as of 2005; almost 4,000 are located in the central region of Peru, the stronghold of the Shining Path.\nThe Peruvian government also cracked down on the Shining Path in other ways. Military personnel were dispatched to areas dominated by the Shining Path, especially Ayacucho, to fight the rebels. Ayacucho, Huancavelica, Apur\u00edmac and Hu\u00e1nuco were declared emergency zones, allowing for some constitutional rights to be suspended in those areas.\nInitial government efforts to fight the Shining Path were not very effective or promising. Military units engaged in many human rights violations, which caused the Shining Path to appear in the eyes of many as the lesser of two evils. They used excessive force, tortured individuals accused of being sympathizers and killed many innocent civilians. Government forces destroyed villages and killed \"campesinos\" suspected of supporting the Shining Path. They eventually lessened the pace at which the armed forces committed atrocities such as massacres. Additionally, the state began the widespread use of intelligence agencies in its fight against the Shining Path. However, atrocities were committed by the National Intelligence Service and the Army Intelligence Service, notably the La Cantuta massacre, the Santa massacre and the Barrios Altos massacre, which were committed by Grupo Colina.\nIn one of its last attacks in Lima, on 16 July 1992, the Shining Path detonated a powerful bomb on Tarata Street in the Miraflores District, full of civilian adults and children, killing 25 people and injuring an additional 155.\nCapture of Guzm\u00e1n and collapse (1992\u20131993).\nOn 12 September 1992, the Special Intelligence Group (GEIN) captured Guzm\u00e1n and several Shining Path leaders in an apartment above a dance studio in the Surquillo district of Lima. GEIN had been monitoring the apartment since a number of suspected Shining Path militants had visited it. An inspection of the garbage of the apartment produced empty tubes of a skin cream used to treat psoriasis, a condition that Guzm\u00e1n was known to have. Shortly after the raid that captured Guzm\u00e1n, most of the remaining Shining Path leadership fell as well.\nThe capture of Guzm\u00e1n left a huge leadership vacuum for the Shining Path. \"There is no No. 2. There is only Presidente Gonzalo and then the party,\" a Shining Path political officer said at a birthday celebration for Guzm\u00e1n in Lurigancho prison in December 1990. \"Without President Gonzalo, we would have nothing.\"\nAt the same time, the Shining Path suffered embarrassing military defeats to self-defense organizations of rural \"campesinos\" \u2013 supposedly its social base. When Guzm\u00e1n called for peace talks with the Peruvian government, the organization fractured into splinter groups, with some Shining Path members in favor of such talks and others opposed.\nRemnants (1993\u2013present).\nGuzm\u00e1n's role as the leader of the Shining Path was taken over by \u00d3scar Ram\u00edrez (\"Comrade Feliciano\"), who established \"Sendero Rojo\" (or PCP Pro-Seguir), aiming to reorganise the party and to continue the armed struggle while breaking with Guzm\u00e1n, but not with his ideology. Together with Ram\u00edrez, Florindo Eleuterio Flores Hala, who controlled the Huallaga area, formed the initial leadership of the party. Sendero Rojo was disbanded after \"Comrade Feliciano's capture in 1999. After Ram\u00edrez's capture, the group further splintered, guerrilla activity diminished sharply, and peace returned to the areas where the Shining Path had been active.\nThe three remaining splinter groups based themselves in the VRAEM area:\nTemporary resurgence (2001\u20132009).\nAlthough the organization's numbers had lessened by 2003, a militant faction of the Shining Path called \"Proseguir\" (\"Onward\") continued to be active. The group had allegedly made an alliance with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) in the early 2000s, learning how to use rockets against aircraft.\nOn Tuesday, August 9, 2001, an armed shootout between Peruvian policemen and Shining Path guerrillas took place in Satipo province. Police forces had broken through a primary line of defence as part of a special operation while underestimating the group's numbers, who had coincidentally reunited and thus increased their numbers. This led to a shootout that lasted five hours and took the lives of four policemen and 12 \"senderistas\".\nOn 20 March 2002, a car bomb exploded outside the US embassy in Lima just before a visit by President George W. Bush. Nine people were killed, and 30 were injured; the attack was suspected to be the work of the Shining Path.\nOn 9 June 2003, a Shining Path group attacked a camp in Ayacucho and took 68 employees of the Argentinian company Techint and three police guards as hostages. They had been working on the Camisea gas pipeline project that would take natural gas from Cusco to Lima. According to sources from Peru's Interior Ministry, the rebels asked for a sizable ransom to free the hostages. Two days later, after a rapid military response which involved a signals intelligence aircraft from the Brazilian Air Force, the rebels abandoned the hostages; according to government sources, no ransom was paid. However, there were rumors that US$200,000 was paid to the rebels.\nGovernment forces have captured three leading Shining Path members. In April 2000, Commander Jos\u00e9 Arcela Chiroque, called \"Orme\u00f1o\", was captured, followed by another leader, Florentino Cerr\u00f3n Cardozo, called \"Marcelo\", in July 2003. In November of the same year, Jaime Zu\u00f1iga, called \"Cirilo\" or \"Dalton\", was arrested after a clash in which four guerrillas were killed and an officer was wounded. Officials said he took part in planning the kidnapping of the Techint pipeline workers. He was also thought to have led an ambush against an army helicopter in 1999 in which five soldiers died.\nIn 2003, the Peruvian National Police broke up several Shining Path training camps and captured many members and leaders. By late October 2003, there were 96 attacks in Peru, projecting a 15% decrease from the 134 kidnappings and armed attacks in 2002. Also for the year, eight or nine people were killed by the Shining Path, and 6 \"senderistas\" were killed and 209 were captured.\nIn January 2004, a man known as Comrade Artemio and identifying himself as one of the Shining Path's leaders, said in a media interview that the group would resume violent operations unless the Peruvian government granted amnesty to other top Shining Path leaders within 60 days. Peru's Interior Minister, Fernando Rospigliosi, said that the government would respond \"drastically and swiftly\" to any violent action. In September that same year, a comprehensive sweep by police in five cities found 17 suspected members of a \"Huallaga Regional Committee\" (; CRH). According to the interior minister, eight of the arrested were school teachers and high-level school administrators.\nDespite these arrests, the Shining Path continued to exist in Peru. On 22 December 2005, the Shining Path ambushed a police patrol in the Hu\u00e1nuco region, killing eight. Later that day, they wounded an additional two police officers. In response, then President Alejandro Toledo declared a state of emergency in Hu\u00e1nuco and gave the police the power to search houses and arrest suspects without a warrant. On 19 February 2006, the Peruvian police killed H\u00e9ctor Aponte, believed to be the commander responsible for the ambush. In December 2006, Peruvian troops were sent to counter renewed guerrilla activity, and according to high-level government officials, the Shining Path's strength has reached an estimated 300 members. In November 2007, police said they killed Artemio's second-in-command, a guerrilla known as JL.\nIn September 2008, government forces announced the killing of five rebels in the Vizcatan region. This claim was subsequently challenged by the APRODEH, a Peruvian human rights group, which believed that those who were killed were in fact local farmers and not rebels. That same month, Artemio gave his first recorded interview since 2006. In it, he stated that the Shining Path would continue to fight despite escalating military pressure. In October 2008, in Huancavelica Region, the guerrillas engaged a military convoy with explosives and firearms, demonstrating their continued ability to strike and inflict casualties on military targets. The conflict resulted in the death of 12 soldiers and two to seven civilians. It came one day after a clash in the Vizcatan region, which left five rebels and one soldier dead.\nIn November 2008, the rebels utilized hand grenades and automatic weapons in an assault that claimed the lives of 4 police officers. In April 2009, the Shining Path ambushed and killed 13 government soldiers in Ayacucho. Grenades and dynamite were used in the attack. The dead included eleven soldiers and one captain, and two soldiers were also injured, with one reported missing. Poor communications were said to have made relay of the news difficult. The country's Defense Minister, Antero Flores Ar\u00e1oz, said many soldiers \"plunged over a cliff\". His prime minister, Yehude Simon, said these attacks were \"desperate responses by the Shining Path in the face of advances by the armed forces\" and expressed his belief that the area would soon be freed of \"leftover terrorists\". In the aftermath, a Sendero leader called this \"the strongest [anti-government] blow... in quite a while\". In November 2009, Defense Minister Rafael Rey announced that Shining Path militants had attacked a military outpost in southern Ayacucho province. One soldier was killed and three others wounded in the assault.\nContinued downfall.\nOn 28 April 2010, Shining Path rebels in Peru ambushed and killed a police officer and two civilians who were destroying coca plantations of Aucayacu, in the central region of Haunuco, Peru. The victims were gunned down by sniper fire coming from the thick forest as more than 200 workers were destroying coca plants. Following the attack, the Shining Path faction, based in the Upper Huallaga Valley of Peru and headed by Florindo Eleuterio Flores Hala, alias Comrade Artemio, was operating in survival mode and lost 9 of their top 10 leaders to Peruvian National Police-led capture operations. Two of the eight leaders were killed by PNP personnel during the attempted captures. The nine arrested or killed Shining Path (Upper Huallaga Valley faction) leaders include Mono (Aug. 2009), Rub\u00e9n (May 2010), Izula (Oct. 2010), Sergio (Dec. 2010), Yoli/Miguel/Jorge (Jun. 2011), Gato Larry (Jun. 2011), Oscar Tigre (Aug. 2011), Vicente Roger (Aug. 2011), and Dante/Delta (Jan. 2012). This loss of leadership, coupled with a sweep of Shining Path (Upper Huallaga Valley) supporters executed by the PNP in November 2010, prompted Comrade Artemio to declare in December 2011 to several international journalists that the guerrilla war against the Peruvian Government has been lost and that his only hope was to negotiate an amnesty agreement with the Government of Peru.\nOn 12 February 2012, Comrade Artemio was found badly wounded after a clash with troops in a remote jungle region of Peru. President Ollanta Humala said the capture of Artemio, nicknamed \"Operation Crep\u00fasculo\", marked the defeat of the Huallaga faction, located in a central area of cocaine production. President Humala has stated that he would now step up the fight against the remaining bands of Shining Path rebels in the Ene-Apur\u00edmac valley. Walter Diaz, the lead candidate to succeed Artemio, was captured on 3 March, further ensuring the disintegration of the Alto Huallaga valley faction. On 3 April 2012, Jaime Arenas Caviedes, a senior leader in the group's remnants in Alto Huallaga Valley who was also regarded to be the leading candidate to succeed Artemio following Diaz's arrest, was captured. After Caviedes, alias \"Braulio\", was captured, Humala declared that the Shining Path was now unable to operate in the Alto Huallaga Valley. Shining Path rebels carried out an attack on three helicopters being used by an international gas pipeline consortium on 7 October, in the central region of Cusco. According to the military Joint Command spokesman, Col. Alejandro Lujan, no one was kidnapped or injured during the attack. The capture of Artemio effectively ended the war between Shining Path and the Government of Peru.\nComrade Artemio was convicted of terrorism, drug trafficking, and money laundering on 7 June 2013. He was sentenced to life in prison and a fine of $183\u00a0million. On 11 August 2013, Comrade Alipio, the Shining Path's leader in the Ene-Apur\u00edmac Valley, was killed in a battle with government forces in Llochegua.\nOn 9 April 2016, on the eve of the country's presidential elections, the Peruvian government blamed remnants of the Shining Path for a guerrilla attack that killed eight soldiers and two civilians. Shining Path snipers killed three police officers in the Ene Apurimac Valley on 18 March 2017.\nIn a document 400 pages in length recovered from a mid-level Shining Path commander and analyzed by the Counter-Terrorism Directorate (DIRCOTE) of the National Police, the Shining Path planned to initiate operations against the Government of Peru that included killings and surprise attacks beginning in 2021, the bicentennial of Peru's independence. Objectives were created to first attack public officials, then regain lost territory and then finally overthrow the government.\nVRAEM stronghold.\nInto the 2020s, Shining Path has existed in remaining splinter groups. The main remaining group, called the Militarized Communist Party of Peru (MPCP) of about 450 individuals remained in the Valle de los R\u00edos Apur\u00edmac, Ene y Mantaro (VRAEM) region, reportedly making revenue by escorting cocaine traffickers and are reportedly led by two brothers; V\u00edctor and Jorge Quispe Palomino. The MPCP has attempted to recharacterize themselves to distance itself from the original Shining Path groups that had attacked rural communities in the area, describing Guzm\u00e1n as a traitor. According to InSight Crime, Shining Path's stronghold in the VRAEM, headquartered in Vizcat\u00e1n, is a similar strategy as the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.\nAnother notable splinter group called the Communist Party of Peru \u2013 Red Mantaro Base Committee (PCP-CBMR), which remains loyal to Abimael Guzman, also operates in the VRAEM region. According to the human rights organization Waynakuna Peru, the PCP-CBMR has infiltrated schools in the area setting up \"Popular Schools\" to spread the group's propaganda. The group has in the past signed documents with the Communist Party of Ecuador \u2013 Red Sun.\nFollowing a five-year intelligence operation that began in 2015 and was codenamed Operation Olimpo, 71 alleged members of the Shining Path's United Front and People's Guerrilla Army were arrested on 2 December 2020. Alfredo Crespo, the secretary general of MOVADEF and Guzm\u00e1n's former lawyer, was included among those arrested. Operation Olimpo included 752 military personnel and 98 government prosecutors that utilized evidence obtained through wiretapping, undercover agents and surveillance. Those arrested were charged with operating shell operations to initiate terrorist activities in Callao and Lima.\nIn popular culture.\nAmerican hard rock band Guns N' Roses quotes a speech by a Shining Path officer in their 1990 song \"Civil War\", as saying \"We practice selective annihilation of mayors and government officials, for example, to create a vacuum, then we fill that vacuum. As popular war advances, peace is closer.\"\nAmerican rock band Rage Against the Machine released a music video for their 1993 song \"Bombtrack\" as a response to the arrest of Abimael Guzman the previous year. The video expresses support for Guzman and the Shining Path, featuring various clips of the organization's activities, as well as showing the band in a cage to mimic Guzman's imprisonment.\nIn 2024, Peruvian-born filmmaker Alex Fischman C\u00e1rdenas directed \"Ovejas y Lobos\" (\"Sheep and Wolves\"), a live action short film about Rosa Pumuahuanca, a single mother who searches for her son, F\u00e9lix, when he mysteriously vanishes during the Shining Path's reign of terror. Fischman C\u00e1rdenas dedicates \"Ovejas y Lobos\" to the Shining Path's disappeared victims and their families.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28523", "revid": "11009441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28523", "title": "St Albans", "text": "City in southern Hertfordshire, England\nSt Albans () is a cathedral city in Hertfordshire, England, east of Hemel Hempstead and west of Hatfield, north-west of London, south-west of Welwyn Garden City and south-east of Luton. St Albans was the first major town on the old Roman road of Watling Street for travellers heading north and became the city of Verulamium. It has a population of 82,146.\nName.\nSt Albans takes its name from the first British saint, Alban. The most elaborate version of his story, in Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\", relates that he lived in Verulamium, sometime during the 3rd or 4th century, when Christians were suffering persecution. Alban met a Christian priest fleeing from his persecutors and sheltered him in his house, where he became so impressed with the priest's piety that he converted to Christianity. When the authorities searched Alban's house, he put on the priest's cloak and presented himself in place of his guest. Consequently, he was sentenced to endure the punishments that were to be inflicted upon the priest, unless he renounced Christianity. Alban refused and was taken for execution. In later legends, his head rolled downhill after execution and a well sprang up where it stopped.\nHistory.\nIron Age.\nThere was an Iron Age settlement known as Verlamion, or Verlamio, near the site of the present city, the centre of Tasciovanus' power and a major centre of the Catuvellauni from about 20 BC until shortly after the Roman invasion of AD 43. The name \"Verlamion\" is Celtic, meaning \"settlement over or by the marsh\". The town was on Prae Hill, to the west of modern St Albans, now covered by the village of St Michael's, Verulamium Park and the Gorhambury Estate. Although excavations done in 1996 produced finds which include silver coins from the Roman Republic era dating from 90/80 BC. There was evidence of trade with the republic and that a settlement already existed on the site 50 years before Julius Caesar attempted to invade Britain. However, it is believed that the tribal capital was moved to the site by Tasciovanus (around 25 to 5\u00a0BC). Cunobelinus may have constructed Beech Bottom Dyke, a defensive earthwork near the settlement whose significance is uncertain.\nRoman.\nThe Roman city of Verulamium, the second-largest town in Roman Britain after Londinium, developed from the Iron Age settlement and was granted the rank of \"municipium\" around AD\u00a050, meaning that its citizens had what were known as \"Latin Rights\", a lesser citizenship status than a possessed. It grew to a significant town, and as such received the attentions of Boudica of the Iceni in 61, when Verulamium was sacked and burnt on her orders. Excavations preceding the museum's new entrance done in 1996\u201397 within the centre of the Roman town gave archaeologists the chance to date a black ash layer to 60\u201365 AD, thus confirming the Roman written record. It grew steadily; by the early 3rd century, it covered an area of about , behind a deep ditch and wall. Verulamium contained a forum, basilica and a theatre, much of which were damaged during two fires, one in 155 and the other in around 250. These were repaired and continued in use in the 4th century. The theatre was disused by the end of the 4th century. One of the few extant Roman inscriptions in Britain is found on the remnants of the forum (see Verulamium Forum inscription). The town was rebuilt in stone rather than timber at least twice over the next 150 years. Roman occupation ended between 400 and 450 AD.\nThe body of St Alban was probably buried outside the city walls in a Roman cemetery near the present cathedral. His hillside grave became a place of pilgrimage. Recent investigation has uncovered a basilica there, indicating the oldest continuous site of Christian worship in Great Britain. In 429 Germanus of Auxerre visited the church and subsequently promoted the cult of St Alban.\nA few traces of the Roman city remain visible, such as parts of the city walls, a hypocaust \u2013 still \"in situ\" under a mosaic floor, and the theatre, which is on land belonging to the Earl of Verulam, as well as items in the museum. Further remains beneath nearby agricultural land have only had a few exploratory trenches, which have never been fully excavated and were seriously threatened by deep ploughing, which ceased in 2005 after compensation was agreed. Test trenches in 2003 confirmed that serious damage had occurred to buildings on the northern side of Old Watling Street by deep ploughing. Permission needs to be granted to enable the full extent of the damage to the western half of Verulamium to be investigated.\nAnglo-Saxon.\nAfter the Roman withdrawal the town became the centre of the territory or \"regio\" of the Anglo-Saxon \"Waeclingas\" tribe.\nSt Albans Abbey and the associated Anglo-Saxon settlement were founded on the hill outside the Roman city where it was believed St Alban was buried. An archaeological excavation in 1978, directed by Martin Biddle, failed to find Roman remains on the site of the medieval chapter house. As late as the eighth century the Saxon inhabitants of St Albans nearby were aware of their ancient neighbour, which they knew alternatively as Verulamac\u00e6stir or, under what H. R. Loyn terms \"their own hybrid\", Vaeclingsc\u00e6stir, \"the fortress of the followers of W\u00e6cla\", possibly a pocket of British-speakers remaining separate in an increasingly Saxonised area.\nMedieval.\nThe medieval town grew on the hill to the east of W\u00e6clingacaester where the Benedictine Abbey of St Albans was founded by Ulsinus in 793. There is some evidence that the original site was higher up the hill than the present building, which was begun in 1077. St Albans Abbey was the principal medieval abbey in England. The scribe Matthew Vickers lived there and the first draft of Magna Carta was drawn up there. It became a parish church after the dissolution of the Benedictine abbey in 1539 and was made a cathedral in 1877.\nSt Albans School was founded in AD 948. Matthew Paris was educated there and until 2025 it was the only school in the English-speaking world to have educated a Pope (Adrian IV). Now a public school it has, since 1871, occupied a site to the west of the Abbey and includes the 14th-century Abbey Gateway. One of its buildings was a hat factory, a link with the city's industrial past.\nOn Abbey Mill Lane, the road between the Abbey and the school, are the palaces of the Bishops of St Albans and Hertford and Ye Olde Fighting Cocks, claimed to be the oldest pub in England.\nBetween 1403 and 1412 Thomas Wolvey was engaged to build a clock tower in the Market Place. It is the only extant medieval town belfry in England. The original bell, named for the Archangel Gabriel sounds F-natural and weighs one ton. Gabriel sounded at 4 am for the Angelus and at 8 or 9 pm for the curfew. The ground floor of the tower was a shop until the 20th century. The first- and second-floor rooms were designed as living chambers. The shop and the first floor were connected by a flight of spiral stairs. Another flight rises the whole height of the tower by 93 narrow steps and gave access to the living chamber, the clock and the bell without disturbing the tenant of the shop.\nTwo battles of the Wars of the Roses took place in or near the town. The First Battle of St Albans was fought on 22 May 1455 within the town, and the Second Battle of St Albans was fought on 17 February 1461, just to the north.\nA street market on Wednesdays and Saturdays, founded by Abbot Ulsinus, still flourishes. In 1553, Henry's son Edward VI sold the right to hold the market to a group of local merchants and landowners via letters patent which also incorporated St Albans as a borough. The old market hall, which dated from around 1596, was replaced by the Corn Exchange in 1857.\nModern.\nBefore the 20th century St Albans was a rural market town, a Christian pilgrimage site, and the first coaching stop of the route to and from London, accounting for its numerous old inns. Victorian St Albans was small and had little industry. Its population grew more slowly than London, 8\u20139% per decade between 1801 and 1861, compared to the 31% per decade growth of London in the same period. The railway arrived in 1858. In 1869 the extension of the city boundaries was opposed by the Earl of Verulam and many of the townsfolk, but there was rapid expansion and much building at the end of the century, and between 1891 and 1901 the population grew by 37%.\nIn 1877, in response to a public petition, Queen Victoria issued the second royal charter, which granted city status to the borough and Cathedral status to the former Abbey Church. The new diocese was established in the same year, in the main from parts of the large Diocese of Rochester.\nIn the inter-war years it became a centre for the electronics industry. In the post-World War II years it expanded rapidly as part of the post-War redistribution of population out of Greater London. It is now a popular tourist destination.\nGovernance.\nSt Albans has two tiers of local government, at district and county level: St Albans City and District Council and Hertfordshire County Council. The main part of the urban area of St Albans (the pre-1974 borough) is an unparished area, directly administered by the city/district and county councils.\nPast.\nThe early administrative history of the town of St Albans is closely tied to St Albans Abbey. The town was effectively controlled by the abbey through the Middle Ages, but there were frequent disputes between the abbot and townspeople about the extent of the abbey's powers in the town. Following the dissolution of the abbey in 1539, the rights previously held by it passed to the crown. On 12 May 1553 the town was granted a charter by Edward VI, incorporating it as a borough with a mayor.\nThe borough consisted of the ancient parish of St Albans (also known as the Abbey parish) and parts of the parishes of St Michael and St Peter. The borough was reformed by the Municipal Corporations Act 1835 to become a municipal borough, and the boundary was adjusted to additionally include part of the parish of St Stephen. On 28 August 1877 the borough gained city status, following the elevation of St Albans Abbey to become a cathedral. The boundary was also adjusted in 1877 to include part of the parish of Sandridge.\nThe Local Government Act 1894 divided parishes that were partly within municipal boroughs. The parts of St Michael, St Peter and Sandridge within the borough became the new parishes of St Michael Urban, St Peter Urban and Sandridge Urban. The part of St Stephen within the borough was absorbed by the parish of St Albans. The parishes that were formed outside the borough, that is St Michael Rural, St Peter Rural, Sandridge Rural and the reduced St Stephen, became part of St Albans Rural District on 28 December 1894.\nSt Albans Town Hall was built between 1829 and 1831 and served as the council's meeting place until the 1960s, when the council moved to new premises at the City Hall and adjoining buildings.\nIn 1898 the parish of St Albans absorbed St Michael Urban, St Peter Urban and Sandridge Urban so the parish and borough occupied the same area. In 1901 the population of the borough was 16,019, growing to 18,133 in 1911. St Albans expanded in 1913 by gaining parts of Sandridge Rural (241 acres), St Michael Rural (138 acres), St Peter Rural (992 acres) and St Stephen (335 acres). In 1921 the population of the enlarged borough was 25,593, growing to 28,624 in 1931. It expanded again in 1935 as part of a county review order gaining more of St Michael Rural (890 acres), St Peter Rural (436 acres) and St Stephen (712 acres). The population of the borough was 44,098 in 1951 and 50,293 in 1961.\nPresent.\nThe borough was abolished on 1 April 1974 and St Albans became part of the new, larger St Albans City and District. City status was transferred to the entire district by letters patent dated 9 July 1974. Local government services are now provided by Hertfordshire County Council (strategic services) and St Albans City and District Council. Eight local parish councils (limited local services) cover the parts of St Albans City and District that were previously in St Albans Rural District and Harpenden Urban District, but the area that was St Albans Borough prior to 1974 is an unparished area. Within this area, (the Ashley, Batchwood, Clarence, Cunningham, Marshalswick South, St Peters, Sopwell and Verulam wards) a City Neighbourhood Committee of the district council was set up in June 2013 with comparable responsibilities to parish councils for small parks, playgrounds, open spaces, war memorials, allotments and public conveniences. The City and District Council built a new civic centre in 1989 adjoining the 1960s City Hall complex, which became known instead as the Alban Arena.\nParliamentary representation.\nSt Albans is part of the homonymous parliamentary constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Established in 1885, it is a county constituency in Hertfordshire, and elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nSt Albans has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfb\") similar to most of the United Kingdom.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nSt Albans is north-east of the intersection between the M1 and M25 motorways. On the M1, its northern, central and southern junctions are 9, 7 and 6, respectively; on the M25, its western and eastern junctions are 21A and 22 respectively.\nNotable A-roads serving the city include:\nRailway.\nTwo railway stations serve the city:\nBuses.\nSt Albans is well served by local buses, with frequent services to local villages and major towns including Watford, Harpenden and Luton. Routes are operated predominantly run by Arriva Herts &amp; Essex, Uno, Red Eagle and Sullivan Buses. Buses in Hertfordshire are run under the Intalink Partnership https://\nCulture and media.\nSt Albans has a cultural life, with regular concerts and theatre productions held at venues including Trestle Arts Base, St Albans Abbey, The Horn, The Pioneer Club, Maltings Arts Theatre, the Alban Arena, the Abbey Theatre, St Peter's Church and St Saviour's Church, given by organisations including St Albans Bach Choir, St Albans Cathedral Choir, St Albans Cathedral Girls' Choir, St Albans Symphony Orchestra, St Albans Chamber Choir, St Albans Chamber Opera, The Company of Ten, St Albans Choral Society, and St Albans Organ Theatre. St Albans is also home to Trestle Theatre Company, who have been creating professional, physical storytelling theatre since 1981. Originally known for their work with masks, Trestle collaborates with UK and international artists to unify movement, music and text into a theatrical experience. The Sandpit Theatre is a theatre attached to Sandringham School which hosts plays throughout the year, mainly performances put on by the pupils of Sandringham School. The school also hosts Best Theatre Arts, a part-time theatre school for children aged 4 to 16. Furthermore, St Albans is home to many music acts such as Enter Shikari, Friendly Fires, Maximum Love, The Zombies, Trash Boat, G.I. Orange, and Your Demise.\nThe Odyssey Cinema (formerly the Odeon) on London Road is an independent, arthouse cinema that was restored and re-opened in 2014. Originally opened in 1931, it stands on the site of the Alpha Picture House, Hertfordshire's first cinema, which was opened in 1908 by film-making pioneer Arthur Melbourne-Cooper.\nThe Watercress nature reserve is by the River Ver and is run by the Watercress Wildlife Association.\nSt Albans Museums runs two museums: Verulamium Museum, which tells the story of everyday life in Roman Britain using objects from the excavations of the important Roman Town; and, the St Albans Museum + Gallery, located in the old St Albans Town Hall, which focuses on the history of the town and of Saint Alban.\nBecause of its proximity to London, television signals are received from the Crystal Palace TV transmitter, placing St Albans in the BBC London and ITV London areas.\nThe local radio stations are served by BBC Three Counties Radio on 92.1 FM, Heart Hertfordshire on 96.6 FM and Mix 92.6 on 92.6FM, a community radio station.\nThe leading local newspaper in the city and district is The Herts Advertiser.\nFilming location.\nThe mixed character of St Albans and its proximity to London have made it a popular filming location. The Abbey and Fishpool Street areas were used for the pilot episode of the 1960s ecclesiastical TV comedy \"All Gas and Gaiters\". The area of Romeland, directly north of the Abbey Gateway and the walls of the Abbey and school grounds, can be seen masquerading as part of an Oxford college in some episodes of \"Inspector Morse\" (and several local pubs also appear). Fishpool Street, running from Romeland to St Michael's village, stood in for Hastings in some episodes of \"Foyle's War\". \"Life Begins\" was filmed largely in and around St Albans. The Lady Chapel in the Abbey itself was used as a location for at least one scene in Sean Connery's 1995 film \"First Knight\", whilst the nave of the Abbey was used during a coronation scene as a substitute for Westminster Abbey in \"Johnny English\" starring Rowan Atkinson. The 19th-century gatehouse of the former prison near the mainline station appeared in the title sequence of the TV series \"Porridge\", starring Ronnie Barker. The 2001 film \"Birthday Girl\" starring Ben Chaplin and Nicole Kidman was also partly filmed in St Albans.\nMore recently, several scenes from the film \"Incendiary\", starring Michelle Williams, Ewan McGregor and Matthew Macfadyen, were filmed in St Albans, focusing in particular on the Abbey and the Abbey Gateway. In 2018, a Gucci advert featuring Harry Styles was filmed at a Fish and Chips shop in Fleetville, St Albans. It has also been used in the setting for the fictional town \"Waltringham\", in the TV show \"Humans\". In early 2022 Verulamium Park was used as a filming location for \"Wonka\" starring Timoth\u00e9e Chalamet.\nSport.\nIn December 2007, Sport England published a survey which revealed that residents of St Albans were the 10th most active in England in sports and other fitness activities. 30.8% of the population participate at least 3 times a week for 90 minutes.\nCricket.\nClarence Park plays host to St Albans Cricket Club. The club currently runs four Saturday sides, playing in the Saracens Hertfordshire Cricket League and also two Sunday sides in the Chess Valley Cricket League. In 2008 the club's 1st XI won the Hertfordshire League Title. In the previous two seasons, the first XI came 5th (2011) and 4th (2012) in division one.\nFootball.\nThe local football team is St Albans City FC: its stadium is on the edge of Clarence Park and the team won promotion from the Conference South League in 2005\u201306. It played in the Nationwide Conference Division of the Football Conference for the 2006\u201307 season, but finished at the bottom of the table and was relegated.\nGymnastics.\nSt Albans Gymnastics Club, founded in 2005, provides the St Albans area with recreational classes as well as a professionally managed competitive squad.\nHockey.\nSt Albans is also home to St Albans Hockey Club, based in Oaklands, St Albans. The club is represented at National league level by both women's and men's teams, as well as other local league competitions. The club's nickname is \"The Tangerines\".\nRugby league.\nSt Albans Centurions Rugby league Club have their ground at Toulmin Drive, St Albans. They play in the London Premier League. In 2007 and again in 2010 'The Cents', as they are known, won 'the triple' \u2013 topping the league, and becoming the Regional and National Champions of the Rugby League Conference Premier Divisions.\nRugby union.\nOld Albanian RFC is a rugby union club that plays at the Old Albanian sports complex. They play in National League 1 the third tier of the English rugby union system. Saracens A team and OA Saints Women's Rugby team also play here. This complex hosts the offices of the Premiership Rugby club Saracens (and have recently moved their home ground to Barnet).\nSt Albans RFC play at Boggymead Spring in Smallford.\nVerulamians RFC (formerly Old Verulamians) play at Cotlandswick in London Colney.\nSkateboarding.\nSt Albans is home to one of the country's oldest indoor skateparks, the Pioneer Skatepark in Heathlands Drive, next to the former fire station. Its ramps are available to all skateboarders and inliners. A new outside mini ramp was built in March 2005. A second outdoor mini ramp was opened at Easter 2009.\nLinks with other sports.\nSt Albans is additionally home to a community of traceurs from around Hertfordshire.\nSt Albans was once home to the then most prestigious steeplechase in England. The Great St Albans chase attracted the best horses and riders from across Britain and Ireland in the 1830s and was held in such high esteem that when it clashed with the 1837 Grand National the top horses and riders chose to bypass Aintree. Without warning the race was discontinued in 1839 and was quickly forgotten.\nSt Albans was once home to Samuel Ryder, the founder of the Ryder Cup. He ran a very successful packet seeds business in the 1890s which at one time he ran from a packing warehouse on Holywell Hill (became Caf\u00e9 Rouge until closure in 2023). His interest in golf and sponsorship led to his donation of the now famous Ryder Cup. He is buried in Hatfield Road Cemetery, where in July 2012 the Olympic Torch Relay passed by to honour him.\nEducation.\nSt Albans has many state primary and secondary schools, and a number of independent schools.\nThe law school of the University of Hertfordshire used to be based in Hatfield Road in St Albans until it moved to the university's De Havilland campus in Hatfield in 2011. Hertfordshire County Council purchased the site. The interior of the former law school building has since been refurbished and now forms part of Alban City School, a state-funded Free School for primary aged children, which started taking reception class children in September 2012.\nA campus of Oaklands College, a further education college, is also located in Smallford in St Albans.\nInternational relations.\nSt Albans is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28524", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28524", "title": "RNA splicing", "text": "Process in molecular biology\nRNA splicing is a process in molecular biology where a newly-made precursor messenger RNA (pre-mRNA) transcript is transformed into a mature messenger RNA (mRNA). It works by removing all the introns (non-coding regions of RNA) and \"splicing\" back together exons (coding regions). For nuclear-encoded genes, splicing occurs in the nucleus either during or immediately after transcription. For those eukaryotic genes that contain introns, splicing is usually needed to create an mRNA molecule that can be translated into protein. For many eukaryotic introns, splicing occurs in a series of reactions which are catalyzed by the spliceosome, a complex of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs). There exist self-splicing introns, that is, ribozymes that can catalyze their own excision from their parent RNA molecule. The process of transcription, splicing and translation is called gene expression, the central dogma of molecular biology.\nSplicing pathways.\nSeveral methods of RNA splicing occur in nature; the type of splicing depends on the structure of the spliced intron and the catalysts required for splicing to occur.\nSpliceosomal complex.\nIntrons.\nThe word \"intron\" is derived from the terms \"intragenic region\", and \"intracistron\", that is, a segment of DNA that is located between two exons of a gene. The term intron refers to both the DNA sequence within a gene and the corresponding sequence in the unprocessed RNA transcript. As part of the RNA processing pathway, introns are removed by RNA splicing either shortly after or concurrent with transcription. Introns are found in the genes of most organisms and many viruses. They can be located in a wide range of genes, including those that generate proteins, ribosomal RNA (rRNA), and transfer RNA (tRNA).\nWithin introns, a donor site (5' end of the intron), a branch site (near the 3' end of the intron) and an acceptor site (3' end of the intron) are required for splicing. The splice donor site includes an almost invariant sequence GU at the 5' end of the intron, within a larger, less highly conserved region. The splice acceptor site at the 3' end of the intron terminates the intron with an almost invariant AG sequence. Upstream (5'-ward) from the AG there is a region high in pyrimidines (C and U), or polypyrimidine tract. Further upstream from the polypyrimidine tract is the branchpoint, which includes an adenine nucleotide involved in lariat formation. The consensus sequence for an intron (in IUPAC nucleic acid notation) is: G-G-[cut]-G-U-R-A-G-U (donor site) ... intron sequence ... Y-U-R-A-C (branch sequence 20-50 nucleotides upstream of acceptor site) ... Y-rich-N-C-A-G-[cut]-G (acceptor site). However, it is noted that the specific sequence of intronic splicing elements and the number of nucleotides between the branchpoint and the nearest 3' acceptor site affect splice site selection. Also, point mutations in the underlying DNA or errors during transcription can activate a \"cryptic splice site\" in part of the transcript that usually is not spliced. This results in a mature messenger RNA with a missing section of an exon. In this way, a point mutation, which might otherwise affect only a single amino acid, can manifest as a deletion or truncation in the final protein.\nFormation and activity.\nSplicing is catalyzed by the spliceosome, a large RNA-protein complex composed of five small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs). Assembly and activity of the spliceosome occurs during transcription of the pre-mRNA. The RNA components of snRNPs interact with the intron and are involved in catalysis. Two types of spliceosomes have been identified (major and minor) which contain different snRNPs.\n*Complex E\n**The U1 snRNP binds to the GU sequence at the 5' splice site of an intron;\n**Splicing factor 1 binds to the intron branch point sequence;\n**U2AF1 binds at the 3' splice site of the intron;\n**U2AF2 binds to the polypyrimidine tract;\n*Complex A (pre-spliceosome)\n**The U2 snRNP displaces SF1 and binds to the branch point sequence and ATP is hydrolyzed;\n*Complex B (pre-catalytic spliceosome)\n**The U5/U4/U6 snRNP trimer binds, and the U5 snRNP binds exons at the 5' site, with U6 binding to U2;\n*Complex B*\n**The U1 snRNP is released, U5 shifts from exon to intron, and the U6 binds at the 5' splice site;\n*Complex C (catalytic spliceosome)\n**U4 is released, U6/U2 catalyzes transesterification, making the 5'-end of the intron ligate to the A on intron and form a lariat, U5 binds exon at 3' splice site, and the 5' site is cleaved, resulting in the formation of the lariat;\n*Complex C* (post-spliceosomal complex)\n**U2/U5/U6 remain bound to the lariat, and the 3' site is cleaved and exons are ligated using ATP hydrolysis. The spliced RNA is released, the lariat is released and degraded, and the snRNPs are recycled.\nThis type of splicing is termed \"canonical splicing\" or termed the \"lariat pathway\", which accounts for more than 99% of splicing. By contrast, when the intronic flanking sequences do not follow the GU-AG rule, \"noncanonical splicing\" is said to occur (see \"minor spliceosome\" below).\nRecursive splicing.\nIn most cases, splicing removes introns as single units from precursor mRNA transcripts. However, in some cases, especially in mRNAs with very long introns, splicing happens in steps, with part of an intron removed and then the remaining intron is spliced out in a following step. This has been found first in the \"Ultrabithorax\" (\"Ubx\") gene of the fruit fly, \"Drosophila melanogaster\", and a few other \"Drosophila\" genes, but cases in humans have been reported as well.\nTrans-splicing.\nTrans-splicing is a form of splicing that removes introns or outrons, and joins two exons that are not within the same RNA transcript. Trans-splicing can occur between two different endogenous pre-mRNAs or between an endogenous and an exogenous (such as from viruses) or artificial RNAs.\nSelf-splicing.\nSelf-splicing occurs for rare introns that form a ribozyme, performing the functions of the spliceosome by RNA alone. There are three kinds of self-splicing introns, \"Group I\", \"Group II\" and \"Group III\". Group I and II introns perform splicing similar to the spliceosome without requiring any protein. This similarity suggests that Group I and II introns may be evolutionarily related to the spliceosome. Self-splicing may also be very ancient, and may have existed in an RNA world present before protein.\nTwo transesterifications characterize the mechanism in which group I introns are spliced:\nThe mechanism in which group II introns are spliced (two transesterification reactions) is as follows:\nBoth group I and II introns utilize two magnesium ions in the catalytic core to catalyze the splicing reaction, the same catalytic mechanism used by the spliceosome. Detailed structural characterization reveals that group II intron bears significant similarities to the spliceosome in terms of branchpoint adenosine recognition and structural dynamics during the two steps of transesterification.\ntRNA splicing.\ntRNA (also tRNA-like) splicing is another rare form of splicing that usually occurs in tRNA. The splicing reaction involves a different biochemistry than the spliceosomal and self-splicing pathways.\nIn the yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\", a yeast tRNA splicing endonuclease heterotetramer, composed of TSEN54, TSEN2, TSEN34, and TSEN15, cleaves pre-tRNA at two sites in the acceptor loop to form a 5'-half tRNA, terminating at a 2',3'-cyclic phosphodiester group, and a 3'-half tRNA, terminating at a 5'-hydroxyl group, along with a discarded intron. Yeast tRNA kinase then phosphorylates the 5'-hydroxyl group using adenosine triphosphate. Yeast tRNA cyclic phosphodiesterase cleaves the cyclic phosphodiester group to form a 2'-phosphorylated 3' end. Yeast tRNA ligase adds an adenosine monophosphate group to the 5' end of the 3'-half and joins the two halves together. NAD-dependent 2'-phosphotransferase then removes the 2'-phosphate group.\nEvolution.\nSplicing occurs in all three domains of life, however, the extent and types of splicing can be very different between the major divisions. Eukaryotes splice many protein-coding messenger RNAs and some non-coding RNAs. Prokaryotes, on the other hand, splice non-coding RNAs. Another important difference between these two groups of organisms is that prokaryotes completely lack the spliceosomal pathway.\nBecause spliceosomal introns are not conserved in all species, there is debate concerning when spliceosomal splicing evolved. Two models have been proposed: the intron late and intron early models (see intron evolution).\nBiochemical mechanism.\nSpliceosomal splicing and self-splicing involve a two-step biochemical process. Both steps involve transesterification reactions that occur between RNA nucleotides. tRNA splicing, however, is an exception and does not occur by transesterification.\nSpliceosomal and self-splicing transesterification reactions occur via two sequential transesterification reactions. First, the 2'OH of a specific \"branchpoint\" nucleotide within the intron, defined during spliceosome assembly, performs a nucleophilic attack on the first nucleotide of the intron at the 5' splice site, forming the \"lariat intermediate\". Second, the 3'OH of the released 5' exon then performs a nucleophilic attack at the first nucleotide following the last nucleotide of the intron at the 3' splice site, thus joining the exons and releasing the intron lariat.\nAlternative splicing.\nIn many cases, the splicing process can create a range of unique proteins by varying the exon composition of the same mRNA. This phenomenon is then called alternative splicing. Alternative splicing can occur in many ways. Exons can be extended or skipped, or introns can be retained. It is estimated that 95% of transcripts from multiexon genes undergo alternative splicing, some instances of which occur in a tissue-specific manner and/or under specific cellular conditions. Development of high throughput mRNA sequencing technology can help quantify the expression levels of alternatively spliced isoforms. Differential expression levels across tissues and cell lineages allowed computational approaches to be developed to predict the functions of these isoforms.\nGiven this complexity, alternative splicing of pre-mRNA transcripts is regulated by a system of trans-acting proteins (activators and repressors) that bind to cis-acting sites or \"elements\" (enhancers and silencers) on the pre-mRNA transcript itself. These proteins and their respective binding elements promote or reduce the usage of a particular splice site. The binding specificity comes from the sequence and structure of the cis-elements, e.g. in HIV-1 there are many donor and acceptor splice sites. Among the various splice sites, ssA7, which is 3' acceptor site, folds into three stem loop structures, i.e. Intronic splicing silencer (ISS), Exonic splicing enhancer (ESE), and Exonic splicing silencer (ESSE3). Solution structure of Intronic splicing silencer and its interaction to host protein hnRNPA1 give insight into specific recognition. However, adding to the complexity of alternative splicing, it is noted that the effects of regulatory factors are many times position-dependent. For example, a splicing factor that serves as a splicing activator when bound to an intronic enhancer element may serve as a repressor when bound to its splicing element in the context of an exon, and vice versa. In addition to the position-dependent effects of enhancer and silencer elements, the location of the branchpoint (i.e., distance upstream of the nearest 3' acceptor site) also affects splicing. The secondary structure of the pre-mRNA transcript also plays a role in regulating splicing, such as by bringing together splicing elements or by masking a sequence that would otherwise serve as a binding element for a splicing factor.\nRole of nuclear speckles in RNA splicing.\nThe location of pre-mRNA splicing is throughout the nucleus, and once mature mRNA is generated, it is transported to the cytoplasm for translation. In both plant and animal cells, nuclear speckles are regions with high concentrations of splicing factors. These speckles were once thought to be mere storage centers for splicing factors. However, it is now understood that nuclear speckles help concentrate splicing factors near genes that are physically located close to them. Genes located farther from speckles can still be transcribed and spliced, but their splicing is less efficient compared to those closer to speckles. Cells can vary their genomic positions of genes relative to nuclear speckles as a mechanism to modulate the expression of genes via splicing.\nRole of splicing/alternative splicing in HIV-integration.\nThe process of splicing is linked with HIV integration, as HIV-1 targets highly spliced genes.\nSplicing response to DNA damage.\nDNA damage affects splicing factors by altering their post-translational modification, localization, expression and activity. Furthermore, DNA damage often disrupts splicing by interfering with its coupling to transcription. DNA damage also has an impact on the splicing and alternative splicing of genes intimately associated with DNA repair. For instance, DNA damages modulate the alternative splicing of the DNA repair genes \"Brca1\" and \"Ercc1\".\nExperimental manipulation of splicing.\nSplicing events can be experimentally altered by binding steric-blocking antisense oligos, such as Morpholinos or Peptide nucleic acids to snRNP binding sites, to the branchpoint nucleotide that closes the lariat, or to splice-regulatory element binding sites.\nThe use of antisense oligonucleotides to modulate splicing has shown great promise as a therapeutic strategy for a variety of genetic diseases caused by splicing defects.\nRecent studies have shown that RNA splicing can be regulated by a variety of epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation and histone modifications.\nSplicing errors and variation.\nIt has been suggested that one third of all disease-causing mutations impact on splicing. Common errors include:\nAlthough many splicing errors are safeguarded by a cellular quality control mechanism termed nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), a number of splicing-related diseases also exist, as suggested above.\nAllelic differences in mRNA splicing are likely to be a common and important source of phenotypic diversity at the molecular level, in addition to their contribution to genetic disease susceptibility. Indeed, genome-wide studies in humans have identified a range of genes that are subject to allele-specific splicing.\nIn plants, variation for flooding stress tolerance correlated with stress-induced alternative splicing of transcripts associated with gluconeogenesis and other processes.\nProtein splicing.\nIn addition to RNA, proteins can undergo splicing. Although the biomolecular mechanisms are different, the principle is the same: parts of the protein, called inteins instead of introns, are removed. The remaining parts, called exteins instead of exons, are fused together.\nProtein splicing has been observed in a wide range of organisms, including bacteria, archaea, plants, yeast and humans.\nSplicing and genesis of circRNAs.\nThe existence of backsplicing was first suggested in 2012. This backsplicing explains the genesis of circular RNAs resulting from the exact junction between the 3' boundary of an exon with the 5' boundary of an exon located upstream. In these exonic circular RNAs, the junction is a classic 3'-5'link.\nThe exclusion of intronic sequences during splicing can also leave traces, in the form of circular RNAs. In some cases, the intronic lariat is not destroyed and the circular part remains as a lariat-derived circRNA.In these lariat-derived circular RNAs, the junction is a 2'-5'link.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28525", "revid": "39317213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28525", "title": "Simon Fraser University", "text": "Public university in British Columbia, Canada\nSimon Fraser University (SFU) is a public research university in British Columbia, Canada. It maintains three campuses in Greater Vancouver, respectively located in Burnaby (main campus), Surrey, and Vancouver. The main Burnaby campus on Burnaby Mountain, located from downtown Vancouver, was established in 1965 and comprises more than 37,000 students and 200,000 alumni. The university was created in an effort to expand higher education across Canada.\nSimon Fraser University is a member of multiple national and international higher education associations, including the Association of Commonwealth Universities, International Association of Universities, and Universities Canada. SFU has also partnered with other universities and agencies to operate joint research facilities such as the TRIUMF, Canada's national laboratory for particle and nuclear physics, which houses the world's largest cyclotron, and Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre, a major centre for teaching and research in marine biology.\nUndergraduate and graduate programs at SFU operate on a year-round, three-semester schedule. In 2015, SFU became the second Canadian university to receive accreditation from the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities.\nHistory.\nSimon Fraser University was founded upon the recommendation of a 1962 report entitled \"Higher Education in British Columbia and a Plan for the Future\" by John B. Macdonald. He recommended the creation of a new university in the Lower Mainland and the British Columbia Legislature gave formal assent on March 1, 1963, for the establishment of the university in Burnaby. The university was named after Simon Fraser, a North West Company fur trader and explorer. In May of the same year, Gordon M. Shrum was appointed as the university's first chancellor. From a variety of sites that were offered, Shrum recommended to the provincial government that the summit of Burnaby Mountain, 365 meters above sea level, be chosen for the new university. Architects Arthur Erickson and Geoffrey Massey won a competition to design the university, and construction began in the spring of 1964. The campus faces northwest over Burrard Inlet. Eighteen months later, on September 9, 1965, the university began its first semester with 2,500 students.\nThe campus was noted in the 1960s and early 1970s as a hotbed of political activism, culminating in a crisis in the Department of Political Science, Sociology, and Anthropology in a dispute involving ideological differences among faculty. The resolution to the crisis included the dismantling of the department into today's separate departments. During this time, Thelma Finlayson became the university's first female faculty member in the Department of Biological Sciences. She would later become their first professor emerita upon her retirement in 1979.\n21st century.\nIn 2007, the university began offering dual and double degree programs by partnering with international universities, such as a dual computing-science degree through partnership with Zhejiang University in China and a double Bachelor of Arts degree in conjunction with Australia's Monash University. It has also partnered with India's Premiere \"Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay\".\nIn 2009, SFU became the first Canadian university to be accepted into the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). Starting in the 2011\u20132012 season, SFU competed in the NCAA's Division II Great Northwest Athletic Conference (GNAC) and has now transitioned all 19 Simon Fraser teams into the NCAA.\nOn September 9, 2015, SFU celebrated its 50th anniversary. Over its 50 years, the university educated over 130,000 graduates.\nA breach of SFU's systems in February 2020 exposed the records of 250,000 students. A second attack in February 2021 resulted in the exposure of 200,000 records. A class action lawsuit was filed against SFU in March 2021.\nIn early 2022, Burnaby City Council announced they would officially support the SFU Gondola as part of the TransLink expansion project. This is included in the Mayors' Council's approval of the Transport 2050 regional transportation strategy announcement.\nIn early 2025, SFU's School of Interactive Arts and Technology debuted their Virtual Ambassador Program, hailed as \"the world's first official university VTubers\".\nCampuses.\nSimon Fraser University has three campuses, each located in different parts of Greater Vancouver. SFU's original campus is located in Burnaby, atop Burnaby Mountain. The Vancouver campus consists of multiple buildings in downtown Vancouver and the Surrey campus is located inside Central City.\nThe downtown campus has expanded to include several other buildings in recent years, including the Segal Graduate School of Business. In September 2010, SFU Contemporary Arts moved into the Woodward's redevelopment, known as the Goldcorp Centre for the Arts.\nSFU's three campuses are all accessible by public transit. The Vancouver campus is a block away from the Waterfront SkyTrain station while the Surrey campus is adjacent to the Surrey Central SkyTrain station. The Burnaby campus is linked to the Production Way\u2013University, Burquitlam, and Sperling\u2013Burnaby Lake SkyTrain stations by frequent shuttle bus service.\nBurnaby campus.\nThe main campus is located atop Burnaby Mountain, on Traditional Coast Salish Lands, including the Tsleil-Waututh (s\u0259l\u0313ilw\u0313\u0259ta\u026c), Kwikwetlem (k\u02b7ik\u02b7\u0259\u019b\u0313\u0259m), Squamish (S\u1e35wx\u0331w\u00fa7mesh \u00daxwumixw) and Musqueam (x\u02b7m\u0259\u03b8k\u02b7\u0259y\u0313\u0259m) Nations. The campus is at an elevation of 365 metres, overlooking the Burrard inlet to the north. All major departments in the university are housed at the Burnaby campus. The library on the main campus is called the W. A. C. Bennett Library, named after the Social Credit Premier of B.C. who established it. The campus also has two gym complexes, named the Lorne-Davies Complex and Chancellor's Gym. An international-sized swimming pool is located within the Lorne-Davies Complex. Since the School of Contemporary Arts relocation to the Woodward's location, the Burnaby campus production theatre has been vacant. Located within the heart of the campus are the Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology and three art galleries. The campus has been awarded numerous architectural awards over the years, including the gold medal for Lieutenant-Governor 2009 Awards in Architecture and the 2007 Royal Architectural Institute of Canada's Prix du XXe si\u00e8cle.\nThe Burnaby campus is composed of a vast complex of interconnected buildings spanning across of land on Burnaby Mountain, from the eastern end of the campus to the western side, where the UniverCity urban village is located. The campus consists of the following buildings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDue to the contemporary Brutalist architecture of the Burnaby Mountain campus, many buildings, including the WAC Bennett Library and Academic Quadrangle have been used for location shots in various films and television programmes over the years.\nLibrary, archives, museums and galleries.\nEach campus has its own library, the largest of which is the W.A.C. Bennett Library based on the SFU Burnaby campus, which holds over 2.7 million print and microform volumes.\nSFU also has a Museum of Archeology and Ethnology, which holds many exhibits created by students as part of the museum studies courses offered in the Department of Archaeology. Archaeological collections arising from excavations and other research by faculty, staff and students are housed in the museum. Several large wooden sculptures ('totem') poles from the Royal British Columbia Museum in Victoria represent the major art traditions of the indigenous coastal peoples of British Columbia. The museum holds an extensive collection of Indonesian wayang kulit shadow puppets and ethnographic objects from around the world. The museum's image collection holds over 120,000 35\u00a0mm slides and digital images of archaeological and ethnographic interest.\nThe SFU Library's Digital Collections provide internet access to digitized documents from a number of archival collections, such as Harrison Brown's Xi'an Incident collection, and the history of British Columbia and Western Canada in general, including documents from the Doukhobor migration from the Russian Empire to Saskatchewan and then to British Columbia assembled for donation to the university by John Keenlyside. Other highlights of the collection include The Vancouver Punk Collection, which includes more than 1200 posters as well as photographs, zines, and ephemera, the British Columbia Postcards Collection, and more than 9800 editorial cartoons from Canadian newspapers.\nSimon Fraser University's art galleries include: SFU Gallery on the Burnaby campus (established 1970), Audain Gallery at the Goldcorp Centre for the Arts in Vancouver (established 2010), and Teck Gallery at Harbour Centre in Vancouver (established 1989). SFU Galleries stewards the Simon Fraser University Art Collection, which includes, in its holdings of over 5,500 works, significant regional and national artworks spanning the last century.\nThe Bill Reid Centre for Northwest Coast Art Studies at SFU houses a collection of 50,000 objects, primarily digital images and digitized textual documents, which document the art, culture and history of different First Nations cultures of the Northwest Coast. The collection includes explorers' drawings, sketches, paintings and original photography.\nResidences.\nThe SFU Burnaby campus provides residence to 1766 SFU and FIC students in six different areas, all located on the western side of the campus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUniverCity.\nUniverCity is an urban community located on top of Burnaby Mountain, adjacent to Simon Fraser University. It has won several awards for sustainable planning and development. Envisioned in 1963 by Arthur Erickson and Geoffrey Massey, the area adjacent to the university was not officially rezoned for development until 30 years later. Development of the community began in early 2000, when Simon Fraser University commenced construction on a new residential and commercial area occupying approximately adjacent to the campus. As of \u00a02011[ [update]], approximately 3000 people live in UniverCity. The main commercial district on University High Street now houses restaurants, stores, and a 20,000 square foot Nester's Market. A new elementary school, University Highlands Elementary, opened on September 1, 2010. Several new residential developments are currently in progress, including the construction of a 12-storey high rise in the heart of UniverCity.\nSurrey campus.\nThe Surrey campus consists of two buildings located in Whalley / City Centre, Surrey. The main building is part of Central City, an architectural complex adjacent to the Surrey Central SkyTrain station. It was established in 2002 to absorb the students and programs of the former Technical University of British Columbia, which was closed by the provincial government. It has since expanded to house the Surrey operations of other SFU programs. The Central City complex that houses the campus was designed by architect Bing Thom and opened in 2006. The Fraser Library, a branch of the SFU Library, is located at the second floor on this campus and is the only branch with a games room, where arcade games and console games are available. It also loans equipment to students in the School of Interactive Arts and Technology (SIAT), also located on the Surrey Campus. SIAT facilities include a prototyping lab, editing suites, and a motion capture studio, the latter of which became the facility from which the Virtual Ambassador program is run.\nA separate five-floor building opened on April 25, 2019, across the street from the existing Central City complex. The building is LEED Gold certified and mainly houses the Sustainability Energy Engineering (SEE) program and supports 440 full-time students with engineering labs, computer labs, classrooms, lecture halls and office spaces.\nVancouver campus.\nThe Vancouver campus was launched in the 1980s with a storefront classroom. It was the first urban university classroom in British Columbia. A significant portion of funding for the building of the campus came from the private sector. The Vancouver campus has eight buildings spread across the downtown core: SFU Harbour Centre, the Morris J. Wosk Centre for Dialogue, the Segal Graduate School of Business, SFU Contemporary Arts at the restored Woodward's Building, SFU Charles Chang Innovation Centre, SFU Vancity Office of Community Engagement at 312 Main, SFU VentureLabs, SFU Collection at Bill Reid Gallery of Northwest Coast Art, and SFU Contemporary Arts at 611 Alexander Visual Arts Studio. The original campus building at Harbour Centre, a rebuilt heritage department store, officially opened on May 5, 1989. Today, the entire campus serves more than 70,000 people annually. Approximately 10,000 are graduate and undergraduate students enrolled in courses and degree programs based downtown. The Belzberg Library is based at the Vancouver campus. \nIn September 2010, SFU Contemporary Arts relocated to the historic Woodward's district in downtown Vancouver known as the Goldcorp Centre for the Arts. The SFU facility is part of the Woodward's revitalization project. The new facility accommodates the increasing enrolment of students in the programme and new cultural facilities, including the Fei and Milton Wong Experimental theatre, screening rooms, sound studios, and art galleries.\nGovernance.\nThe university is governed in accordance with the British Columbia \"University Act\".\nConvocation.\nThe convocation is composed of all faculty members, senators, and graduates (degree holders, including honorary alumni) of the university. Its main function is to elect the 4 convocation senators. Convocation ceremonies are held twice annually to confer degrees (including honorary degrees) as well as award diplomas and certificates.\nBoard of governors.\nThe board is composed of the chancellor, the president, two student members, two faculty members, one staff member, and eight individuals appointed by the British Columbia government. Conventionally, the board is chaired by one of the government appointees. The board is responsible for the general management and governance of the university.\nBoard members as of \u00a05, 2025[ [update]]:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSenate.\nThe senate is composed of the chancellor, the president, vice-president, academic, vice-president, research, deans of faculties, dean of graduate studies, dean of continuing studies, associate vice-president, academic, university librarian, registrar (as senate secretary), 14 student members, 28 faculty members, and 4 convocation members (who are not faculty members). The senate is chaired by the president. The academic governance of the university is vested in the senate.\nChancellor.\nThe chancellor is appointed by the board of governors on nomination by the alumni association and after consultation with the senate for a three-year term, which can be renewed once. The main responsibilities of the chancellor are to confer degrees and represent the university in formal functions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPresident and vice-chancellor.\nThe board of governors appoints the president and vice-chancellor based on a selection process jointly established by the board of governors and the university's senate. As the chief executive officer and chair of the senate, the president is responsible for the day-to-day administration of the university.\nThe last president that was appointed was Joy Johnson, who began her term on September 1, 2020. Johnson succeeded Andrew Petter, who held a decade-long post as president from 2010 to 2020. Johnson's term ends on September 1, 2025, after which she may choose to seek another five-year term.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAcademics.\nThere are ten faculties at Simon Fraser University:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUndergraduate.\nIn the Fall 2021 semester, SFU had 25,595 undergraduates, with 12,812 of them being full-time and 12,783 part-time. International students made up 21% of the undergraduate student body, of which over 85% came from Asia, the highest proportion being from China at 43%. SFU's undergraduate student union is known as the Simon Fraser Student Society (SFSS).\nGraduate.\nThe university enrolled 4,701 graduate students in the Fall 2021 semester, with international students constituting 32% of the graduate student population. A Graduate Student Society supports and advocates for graduate students at the university.\nContinuing education.\nSFU also offers non-credit programs and courses to adult students. As of 2016[ [update]], SFU Continuing Studies offers more than 300 courses and 27 certificate and diploma programs, mostly delivered either online or part-time from SFU's downtown Vancouver or Surrey campus. Continuing Studies also manages a part-time degree completion program, called SFU NOW: Nights or Weekends, for working adults pursuing a bachelor's degree.\nStaff unions.\nTeaching assistants, tutor markers, sessional instructors, language instructors, Graduate Facilitators and Research Assistants at SFU are unionized. The union, the Teaching Support Staff Union (TSSU), is independent. Faculty and lecturers are members of the Faculty Association. Staff are members of the Canadian Union of Public Employees (CUPE), the Administrative and Professional Staff Association (APSA), or Polyparty. A few positions at the university, such as some in Human Resources and senior administrative positions, fall outside the five associations or unions above.\nUnder the previous president, Andrew Petter, SFU's administration has incurred a number of grievances and bad faith bargaining judgments. During their most recent rounds of bargaining, both the TSSU and CUPE local 3338 resorted to job action, and the BC Labour Relations Board found SFU's administration to be bargaining in bad faith with the CUPE local. Conflicts since then include unpaid wages (in Fall 2013, 18% of TSSU members reported that they were not paid on the first payday; by the term's third payday, some members still had not received their wages), and a health plan, redundant with the provincial health plan available to all international students after their first three months in-province and costing double a prior plan's cost, in which international students are automatically enrolled.\nRankings and reputation.\nSimon Fraser University has placed in various international post-secondary school rankings. In the 2022 \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" rankings, the university ranked 301\u2013400 in the world and 13\u201317 in Canada. The 2024 \"QS World University Rankings\" ranked the university 318th in the world and thirteenth in Canada. The 2023 \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" placed Simon Fraser 251\u2013300 in the world, and 11\u201313 in Canada. In \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" 2022\u201323 global university rankings, the university placed 317th in the world, and 12th in Canada. In \"Maclean's\" 2023 rankings, the university placed first in their comprehensive university category. The university also placed ninth in \"Maclean's\" reputation category. Simon Fraser University was ranked despite having opted out from participation in Maclean's graduate survey since 2006.\nIn the World's Universities for Real Impact (https://) 2022 rankings, SFU ranked 18th in the world, and 1st in Canada. In \"QS's\" 2022 graduate employability ranking, the university ranked 301\u2013500 in the world, and 10\u201317 in Canada.\nResearch.\nIn 2020, Simon Fraser University received a sponsored research income (external sources of research funds) of C$167.256 million, the 17th highest in Canada. In the same year, the university's faculty averaged a sponsored research income of $188,600, while graduates averaged $34,000.\nSimon Fraser's research performance has been noted by several bibliometric university rankings, which uses citation analysis to evaluates the impact a university has on academic publications. In 2019, the Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities ranked Simon Fraser 378th in the world, and 16th in Canada. In University Ranking by Academic Performance's 2018\u201319 rankings, the university placed 362nd in the world, and 15th in Canada.\nSFU also works with other universities and agencies to operate joint research facilities. These include Bamfield Marine Station, a major centre for teaching and research in marine biology; TRIUMF, a powerful cyclotron used in subatomic physics and chemistry research. SFU is also a partner institution in Great Northern Way Campus Ltd in Vancouver. In March 2006, SFU approved an affiliation agreement with a private college for international students to be housed adjacent to its Burnaby campus. This new college named Fraser International College, which was in the Multi Tenant Facility (now renamed as \"Discovery 2 Building\") located in Discovery Parks Trust SFU site, is now moved into \"Discovery 1 Building\" after Discovery Parks Trust returned the building to Simon Fraser University. The MODAL Research Group, based at Simon Fraser, partners with multiple Canadian universities and arts organizations to carry out multi-disciplinary research in the arts with an emphasis on the study of artistic learning and engagement.\nIn 2008, SFU has the highest publication impact among Canadian comprehensive universities and the highest success rates per faculty member in competitions for federal research council funding from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC).\nIn 2017, Simon Fraser University entered into an agreement with Huawei to receive cloud computing equipment.\nIn 2022, Simon Fraser University announced the creation of the cross-disciplinary Institute of Neuroscience and Neurotechnology (INN) research hub to empower neuroscience-related research and collaboration across the university.\nStudent life.\nThe student newspaper \"The Peak\" was established shortly after the university opened and is circulated throughout the university. CJSF 90.1 FM has been SFU's campus community radio station since the early 1970s. The Simon Fraser Student Society provides funding for over 300 campus clubs. Various campus events include the annual Terry Fox Run, Gung Haggis Fat Choy, Clubs Week, and other multi-cultural events.\nThe Tau chapter of Phrateres, a non-exclusive, non-profit social-service club, was installed here in 1966. Between 1924 and 1967, 23 chapters of Phrateres were installed in universities across North America, including the Theta chapter nearby at the University of British Columbia.\nGreek organizations.\nSix Greek organizations have formed SFU arms, although none are recognized by the university pursuant to a policy enacted in 1966: \nFraternities:\nSororities:\nCo-ed Professional Fraternities:\nAthletics.\nThe university's varsity sports teams are called the Simon Fraser Red Leafs, and the mascot is a Scottish Terrier named McFogg the Dog. In sports and other competitions, there tends to be a strong rivalry between SFU and The University of British Columbia.\nThe team is the first and currently the only athletic program from outside of the United States that competes in the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). Before joining the NCAA, the team used to compete in both the Canadian Interuniversity Sports (CIS, now U Sports) and the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA). In total, SFU has 15 varsity sport teams and 300 athletes. All varsity teams compete for their respective NCAA national championships, except for the Women's Wrestling team which competes for the National Collegiate Women's Wrestling Championship (http://).\nBeside the varsity teams, SFU also houses various competitive club teams, including Men's Lacrosse, who currently competes in the Men's Collegiate Lacrosse Association, and Men's Hockey, who currently competes in the British Columbia Intercollegiate Hockey League. Other club teams include rugby, cheerleading, rowing, quidditch, and field hockey.\nSFU has won the NAIA NACDA Director's Cup five times, among others. On Friday, July 10, 2009, the NCAA announced that it had accepted SFU as a Division II member and would begin after a two-year transition period. SFU later competed in the Great Northwest Athletic Conference. It is the first Canadian university to be accepted as a member of the NCAA at any level. In 2012, the team was accepted as the first international full member of the NCAA.\nMany former team athletes later represented Canada during the Olympic Games, including gold medalists Carol Huynh and Daniel Igali, and Olympic medalists Sue Holloway and Hugh Fisher. Other team alumni include: Jay Triano, Chris Rinke, wrestler Ari Taub, and Carolyn Murray.\nVirtual Ambassadors.\nIn August 2024, the university's School of Interactive Arts and Technology (SIAT) announced an initiative in partnership with Sawmill Studios to create its first-ever \"Virtual Ambassadors\" in order to represent and engage with the SFU community. These Virtual Ambassadors, both livestreamers, would be functionally identical to VTubers. Auditions for the talent opened that September. Composed of two virtual mascots, Mo Ayato (\u64cd\u6597\u30e2\u30a9) and Faye Ayato (\u64cd\u6597\u30d5\u30a7\u30a4), the duo debuted on March 1, 2025, livestreaming both separately and together on the SIAT YouTube channel. Their primary activities involved giving feedback to student work from the SIAT program, as well as promoting the SFU's values, courses, and facilities. The initiative was billed as grant-funded research, employing motion capture technology to create full 3D models of the Virtual Ambassadors and a chance for students to work in a professional motion capture studio environment.\nIn promotional material, the university has referred to the duo as \"Canada's first university Vtubers\", or alternatively, \"The world's first university Vtubers\". The characters were said to have come from a magical fantasy world to SFU in order to study at SIAT. Mo Ayato was characterised as \"formerly a magical red panda-esque beast known as a Cappu, is now a carefree and silly human(?).\" On the other hand, Faye Ayato was said to be \"a graduate studies student before he leapt through the portal, unfortunately, his course credits did not follow him to Earth.\" An animated trailer would expand on this backstory, showing Faye opening a portal to Earth and the two fleeing their homeland, where they suffered discrimination from a system that favoured those with magic powers over those without. Arriving inside of SFU Surrey's motion capture studio, Studio SIAT, the trailer shows Mo transforming from her Cappu form into her human one, after which the two would take on the name \"Ayato\" from the pronunciation of the \"IAT\" in \"Studi\"o\" S\"IAT\"\".\nPromotional campaign.\nOn January 24, 2025, an Alternate Reality Game launched on the SIAT website, with a video being embedded to the page in which the yet-to-be-revealed Faye Ayato encourages viewers to help him \"open a portal connecting your world to mine\". Posters with QR codes linking to further videos would be shared online through Discord communities such as the SFU, UBC, and ECUAD Anime Clubs, as well as in-person, with QR codes on pawprint-shaped cutouts being posted around SFU's Surrey Campus. Posters that were shared online would also feature an illustration of the tops of the Virtual Ambassador's heads, giving the world its first look at the new mascots.\nOn February 23, 2025, a teaser trailer was released on the Studio SIAT YouTube channel, revealing full-body images of Mo and Faye Ayato for the first time. An \"Animated Lore Trailer\" was released on YouTube and promoted on SFU's website two days later, on February 25, 2025. The trailer was a collaboration between both SIAT students and university students from across Canada, with J Tseng and Trisha Wong, both staff at SFU SIAT and Narratic Labs, producing and directing respectively. Tseng stated in a Reddit post how the team comprised mostly junior animators, with Wong adding that the main inspiration for the trailer was the work of Makoto Shinkai. Simultaneously, the SFU website was updated with a section to prominently feature the virtual ambassadors, introducing Mo and Faye Ayato with a series of illustrations showing them interacting with various SIAT facilities. The illustrations were also created entirely by Canadian university students. Alongside the two Virtual Ambassadors, a third red panda-like character called a Cappu, representing the audience, was also introduced. On February 27, a third video was released on the Studio SIAT YouTube Channel, revealing key art for the characters and employing motion graphics featuring the pre-existing illustrations of Mo and Faye, introducing more of their personalities.\nReception.\nThe Virtual Ambassadors debuted to much fanfare, according to City News Vancouver. Reactions to the Virtual Ambassadors were mostly positive, with commenters on the Animated Lore Trailer praising the fluidity of the animation and background illustration, and affirming the comparison to Shinkai. Enthusiasm was also expressed about the personalities of the Virtual Ambassadors. SFU's official news page praised the trailer, calling it \"stunning\". Other reactions were mixed, with some commenters remarking that they believed the Virtual Ambassador Program was a waste of tuition money. Art director Trisha Wong corrected some of these claims, stating that the project was \"funded by external grants specifically for giving student artists the opportunity to work on professional client work and entrepreneurial experience\".\nNotable alumni.\nAs of 2023, the university's alumni network included over 180,000 graduates from over 140 countries. Alumni have received a number of academic awards. As of 2011, four SFU graduates have been named Rhodes Scholars, including Joel Bakan.\nSFU faculty and alumni have won 43 fellowships to the Royal Society of Canada, three Rhodes Scholarships and one Pulitzer Prize. Among the list of alumni includes three premiers of British Columbia (Glen Clark, Gordon Campbell and Ujjal Dosanjh), Vancouver Canucks owner Francesco Aquilini, Prime Minister of Lesotho Pakalitha Mosisili, and Max Planck Institute director Robert Turner.\nAnother notable alumni was humanitarian and cancer research activist Terry Fox, an athlete and an alumnus of SFU who embarked on the run across Canada to raise money and awareness for Cancer research. Fox's Marathon of Hope had a lasting legacy, with the Terry Fox Run being held around the world in commemoration of his efforts. In 2001, SFU conferred an honorary degree to Betty Fox, mother of Terry Fox and honorary chair of the Terry Fox Foundation.\nOther notable alumni from the university include:\nHonorary alumni.\nAt each convocation, SFU awards honorary degrees to various people from around the world for their activities and pursuits. In 1967, SFU awarded an honorary LL.D. (doctor of laws) to Marshall McLuhan, the first honorary degree awarded by the university. Ida Halpern, an ethnomusicologist whose professional papers are held in part by SFU, was similarly awarded an honorary LL.D. in 1978. On April 20, 2004, SFU conferred honorary degrees upon three Nobel Peace Prize recipients: the 14th Dalai Lama, Bishop Desmond Tutu, and human rights activist Shirin Ebadi. Other honorary alumni include award-winning filmmaker Costa-Gavras, skier Nancy Greene Raine, Milton Wong, Doris Shadbolt, economist Jeffrey Sachs, Peter Gzowski, Douglas Coupland, Lui Passaglia, Romeo Dallaire, Canadian businessman Stephen Jarislowsky, Iain Baxter, American agriculturalist Cary Fowler, experimental psychologist Steven Pinker, primatologist and environmentalist Jane Goodall, Martha Piper, Sarah McLachlan, Rick Hansen, Kim Campbell, Ray Hyman, Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam (rocket scientist and former President of India) and Bill Nye.\nArms.\nThe school's original coat of arms was used from the university's inception until 2006, at which point the Board of Governors voted to adapt the old coat of arms and thereby register a second coat of arms. The adaptation replaced two crosslets with books after some in the university asserted the crosses had misled prospective international students into believing SFU was a private, religious institution rather than a public, secular one. In 2007, the university decided to register both the old coat of arms and the revised coat of arms featuring the books. In 2007, a new marketing logo was unveiled, consisting of white letters on block red.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28526", "revid": "41998662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28526", "title": "Sk\u00edrnir", "text": "Norse mythological character\nIn Norse mythology, Sk\u00edrnir (Old Norse\" ; \"bright one\") is the god Freyr's messenger and vassal. He appears in both the Poetic and Prose Eddas.\nAttestations.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nIn the Eddic poem \"Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l\", Sk\u00edrnir is sent as a messenger to J\u00f6tunheimr to conduct lovesick Freyr's wooing of the j\u00f6tunn woman Ger\u00f0r on condition of being given Freyr's powerful sword as a reward. Sk\u00edrnir begins by offering Ger\u00f0r 11 golden apples (or apples of eternal life, in a common emendation), which Ger\u00f0r rejects, adding that she and Freyr will never be together as long as they live. He next offers Ger\u00f0r a ring that produces eight more gold rings every ninth night. Ger\u00f0r responds that she is not interested in the ring for she shares her father Gymir's property, and he has no lack of gold.\nSk\u00edrnir then turns to a series of threats. He first threatens to cut Ger\u00f0r's head from her neck and then threatens her father's life. He next tells Ger\u00f0r that she will sit on an eagle's mound, looking outward to the world, facing Hel, and that food will become hateful to her. He then says he will turn her into a spectacle, that she will experience madness, and become overwhelmed with unbearable desire. She will weep rather than feel joy, and she will live the rest of her life in misery with a three-headed thurs or otherwise be without a man altogether.\nSk\u00edrnir tells Ger\u00f0r that he has been to a wood to get a \"gambanteinn\", which he wields and declares that the gods Odin and Thor are angry with Ger\u00f0r, and that Freyr will hate her. He tells her that the thurs's name who will own her below the gates of N\u00e1grind is Hr\u00edmgr\u00edmnir and that there, at the roots of the world, the finest thing Ger\u00f0r will be given to drink is goat urine. He carves a series of runes perhaps symbolizing sickness, lewdness, frenzy, and unbearable desire, and comments that if he wishes he can rub them off just as he has carved them.\nGer\u00f0r responds by telling to Sk\u00edrnir to take a crystal cup containing ancient mead, noting that she thought she would never love one of the Vanir, which indicates her intention to go with him. Sk\u00edrnir asks her when she will meet with Freyr. She says that they will meet at a tranquil location called Barri, and that after nine nights she will there grant Freyr her love.\nSk\u00edrnir rides back to \u00c1sgar\u00f0r. Standing outside, Freyr immediately greets Sk\u00edrnir and asks for news. Sk\u00edrnir tells him that Ger\u00f0r will meet him at Barri. Freyr, impatient, comments that one night is long, as is two nights, and questions how he will bear three.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nIn the \"Prose Edda\"'s \"Gylfaginning\", Sk\u00edrnir also performs favors for O\u00f0inn, father of the gods. After the vicious wolf Fenrir evades capture, Skirnir visits the mountain dwarves, known for their mining and smithing. Together they forge the magical restraint Gleipnir for the purpose of binding the wolf. Such undertakings mark Skirnir as a crafty servant. \"Gylfaginning\" also retells the narrative of \"Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l\" in prose, quoting from the poem and placing great emphasis on Freyr giving his sword to Sk\u00edrnir. Later in the text, the narrator explains that Freyr's death at Ragnar\u00f6k is the result of having lost his sword.\nModern influence.\nSk\u00edrnir appears in several works of modern literature inspired by the Eddic poem \"Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l\". This includes a major part of the Danish poet Adam Gottlob Oehlenschl\u00e4ger's \"Nordens Guder\" (1819) as well as Icelandic poet Ger\u00f0ur Kristn\u00fd's \"Bl\u00f3\u00f0h\u00f3fnir\" (2010), a feminist retelling of \"Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l\" that won the 2010 Icelandic Literary Prize for fiction.\nThe Skirnir Mountains, a group of nunataks along the King Frederick VI Coast in the Sermersooq municipality of southeast Greenland also take their name from Sk\u00edrnir.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28527", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28527", "title": "Saint Marys University", "text": ""}
{"id": "28528", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28528", "title": "Supr\u00eame sauce", "text": "Classic French sauce\n\"Supr\u00eame\" sauce () is a classic and popular \"daughter sauce\" of French cuisine. It consists of velout\u00e9, a \"mother sauce\", thickened with cream and strained.\nRecipes.\nAccording the \"Larousse Gastronomique\", a seminal work of French \"haute cuisine\", first published in 1938, \"supr\u00eame\" sauce is made from the mother \"sauce velout\u00e9\" (white stock thickened with a white roux\u2014in the case of \"supr\u00eame\" sauce, chicken stock is usually preferred), reduced with heavy cream or \"cr\u00e8me fra\u00eeche\", and then strained through a fine sieve.\nA light squeeze of lemon juice is commonly added. In many cases, chefs also choose to add finely chopped and lightly saut\u00e9ed mushrooms to the dish, although this was not specifically mentioned in \"Larousse Gastronomique\" or by Auguste Escoffier, the \"Emperor of the World's Kitchens\", who was an arbiter of classic French cuisine.\n\"The Cook's Decameron\" suggests the following recipe: the sauce is made by placing three-quarters of a pint (350ml) of white sauce into a saucepan, and when it is nearly boiling, adding half a cup (120 ml) of concentrated fowl stock. It should then be reduced until the sauce is quite thick, passed through a \"chinois\" strainer into a \"bain-marie\" and have added two tablespoons (30 ml) of cream.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28532", "revid": "44920675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28532", "title": "Zuppa alla modenese", "text": "Italian soup\nZuppa alla modenese is an Italian soup.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; at the Wikibooks Cookbook subproject\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28535", "revid": "44920675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28535", "title": "Zuppa del canavese", "text": "Italian soup\nZuppa del canavese is an Italian baked dish from the Canavese region of Piedmont. It consists of layers of sliced bread baked with cabbage, cheese, and broth.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28538", "revid": "15816808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28538", "title": "Solar wind", "text": "Stream of charged particles from the Sun\nThe solar wind is a stream of charged particles released from the Sun's outermost atmospheric layer, the corona. This plasma mostly consists of electrons, protons and alpha particles with kinetic energy between . The composition of the solar wind plasma also includes a mixture of particle species found in the solar plasma: trace amounts of heavy ions and atomic nuclei of elements such as carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, neon, magnesium, silicon, sulfur, and iron. There are also rarer traces of some other nuclei and isotopes such as phosphorus, titanium, chromium, and nickel's isotopes 58Ni, 60Ni, and 62Ni. Superimposed with the solar-wind plasma is the interplanetary magnetic field. The solar wind varies in density, temperature and speed over time and over solar latitude and longitude. Its particles can escape the Sun's gravity because of their high energy resulting from the high temperature of the corona, which in turn is a result of the coronal magnetic field. The boundary separating the corona from the solar wind is called the Alfv\u00e9n surface.\nAt a distance of more than a few solar radii from the Sun, the solar wind reaches speeds of and is supersonic, meaning it moves faster than the speed of fast magnetosonic waves. The flow of the solar wind is no longer supersonic at the termination shock. Other related phenomena include the aurora (northern and southern lights), comet tails that always point away from the Sun, and geomagnetic storms that can change the direction of magnetic field lines.\nHistory.\nObservations from Earth.\nThe existence of particles flowing outward from the Sun to the Earth was first suggested by British astronomer Richard C. Carrington. In 1859, Carrington and Richard Hodgson independently made the first observations of what would later be called a solar flare. This is a sudden, localised increase in brightness on the solar disc, which is now known to often occur in conjunction with an episodic ejection of material and magnetic flux from the Sun's atmosphere, known as a coronal mass ejection. The following day, a powerful geomagnetic storm was observed, and Carrington suspected that there might be a connection; the geomagnetic storm is now attributed to the arrival of the coronal mass ejection in near-Earth space and its subsequent interaction with the Earth's magnetosphere. Irish academic George FitzGerald later suggested that matter was being regularly accelerated away from the Sun, reaching the Earth after several days.\nIn 1910, British astrophysicist Arthur Eddington essentially suggested the existence of the solar wind, without naming it, in a footnote to an article on Comet Morehouse. Eddington's proposition was never fully embraced, even though he had also made a similar suggestion at a Royal Institution address the previous year, in which he had postulated that the ejected material consisted of electrons, whereas in his study of Comet Morehouse he had supposed them to be ions.\nThe idea that the ejected material consisted of both ions and electrons was first suggested by Norwegian scientist Kristian Birkeland. His geomagnetic surveys showed that auroral activity was almost uninterrupted. As these displays and other geomagnetic activity were being produced by particles from the Sun, he concluded that the Earth was being continually bombarded by \"rays of electric corpuscles emitted by the Sun\". He proposed in 1916 that, \"From a physical point of view it is most probable that solar rays are neither exclusively negative nor positive rays, but of both kinds\"; in other words, the solar wind consists of both negative electrons and positive ions. Three years later, in 1919, British physicist Frederick Lindemann also suggested that the Sun ejects particles of both polarities: protons as well as electrons.\nAround the 1930s, scientists had concluded that the temperature of the solar corona must be a million degrees Celsius because of the way it extended into space (as seen during a total solar eclipse). Later spectroscopic work confirmed this extraordinary temperature to be the case. In the mid-1950s, British mathematician Sydney Chapman calculated the properties of a gas at such a temperature and determined that the corona being such a superb conductor of heat, it must extend way out into space, beyond the orbit of Earth. Also in the 1950s, German astronomer Ludwig Biermann became interested in the fact that the tail of a comet always points away from the Sun, regardless of the direction in which the comet is travelling. Biermann postulated that this happens because the Sun emits a steady stream of particles that pushes the comet's tail away. German astronomer Paul Ahnert is credited (by Wilfried Schr\u00f6der) as being the first to relate solar wind to the direction of a comet's tail based on observations of the comet Whipple\u2013Fedke (1942g).\nAmerican astrophysicist Eugene Parker realised that heat flowing from the Sun in Chapman's model, and the comet tail blowing away from the Sun in Biermann's hypothesis, had to be the result of the same phenomenon which he termed the \"solar wind\". In 1957, Parker showed that although the Sun's corona is strongly attracted by solar gravity, it is such a good conductor of heat that it is still very hot at large distances from the Sun. As solar gravity weakens with increasing distance from the Sun, the outer coronal atmosphere is able to escape supersonically into interstellar space. Parker was also the first person to notice that the weakening influence of the Sun's gravity has the same effect on hydrodynamic flow as a de Laval nozzle, inciting a transition from subsonic to supersonic flow. There was strong opposition to Parker's hypothesis on the solar wind; the paper he submitted to \"The Astrophysical Journal\" in 1958 was rejected by two reviewers, before being accepted by the editor Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar.\nObservations from space.\nIn January 1959, the Soviet spacecraft \"Luna 1\" first directly observed the solar wind and measured its strength, using hemispherical ion traps. The discovery, made by Konstantin Gringauz, was verified by \"Luna\u00a02\", \"Luna\u00a03\", and the more distant measurements of \"Venera\u00a01\". Three years later, a similar measurement was performed by American geophysicist Marcia Neugebauer and collaborators using the \"Mariner\u00a02\" spacecraft.\nThe first numerical simulation of the solar wind in the solar corona, including closed and open field lines, was performed by Pneuman and Kopp in 1971. The magnetohydrodynamics equations in steady state were solved iteratively starting with an initial dipolar configuration.\nIn 1990, the \"Ulysses\" probe was launched to study the solar wind from high solar latitudes. All prior observations had been made at or near the Solar System's ecliptic plane.\nIn the late 1990s, the Ultraviolet Coronal Spectrometer (UVCS) instrument on board the SOHO spacecraft observed the acceleration region of the fast solar wind emanating from the poles of the Sun and found that the wind accelerates much faster than can be accounted for by thermodynamic expansion alone. Parker's model predicted that the wind should make the transition to supersonic flow at an altitude of about four solar radii (approx. 3,000,000\u00a0km) from the photosphere (surface); but the transition (or \"sonic point\") now appears to be much lower, perhaps only one solar radius (approx. 700,000\u00a0km) above the photosphere, suggesting that some additional mechanism accelerates the solar wind away from the Sun. The acceleration of the fast wind is still not understood and cannot be fully explained by Parker's theory. However, the gravitational and electromagnetic explanation for this acceleration is detailed in an earlier paper by 1970 Nobel laureate in Physics, Hannes Alfv\u00e9n.\nFrom May 10 to May 12, 1999, NASA's Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE) and WIND spacecraft observed a 98% decrease of solar wind density. This allowed energetic electrons from the Sun to flow to Earth in narrow beams known as \"strahl\", which caused a highly unusual \"polar rain\" event, in which a visible aurora appeared over the North Pole. In addition, Earth's magnetosphere increased to between 5 and 6 times its normal size.\nThe STEREO mission was launched in 2006 to study coronal mass ejections and the solar corona, using stereoscopy from two widely separated imaging systems. Each STEREO spacecraft carried two heliospheric imagers: highly sensitive wide-field cameras capable of imaging the solar wind itself, via Thomson scattering of sunlight off of free electrons. Movies from STEREO revealed the solar wind near the ecliptic, as a large-scale turbulent flow.\nOn December 13, 2010, \"Voyager 1\" determined that the velocity of the solar wind, at its location from Earth had slowed to zero. \"We have gotten to the point where the wind from the Sun, which until now has always had an outward motion, is no longer moving outward; it is only moving sideways so that it can end up going down the tail of the heliosphere, which is a comet-shaped-like object\", said Voyager project scientist Edward Stone.\nIn 2018, NASA launched the \"Parker Solar Probe\", named in honor of American astrophysicist Eugene Parker, on a mission to study the structure and dynamics of the solar corona, in an attempt to understand the mechanisms that cause particles to be heated and accelerated as solar wind. During its seven-year mission, the probe will make twenty-four orbits of the Sun, passing further into the corona with each orbit's perihelion, ultimately passing within 0.04 astronomical units of the Sun's surface. It is the first NASA spacecraft named for a living person, and Parker, at age 91, was on hand to observe the launch.\nAcceleration mechanism.\nWhile early models of the solar wind relied primarily on thermal energy to accelerate the material, by the 1960s it was clear that thermal acceleration alone cannot account for the high speed of solar wind. An additional unknown acceleration mechanism is required and likely relates to magnetic fields in the solar atmosphere.\nThe Sun's corona, or extended outer layer, is a region of plasma that is heated to over a megakelvin. As a result of thermal collisions, the particles within the inner corona have a range and distribution of speeds described by a Maxwellian distribution. The mean velocity of these particles is about , which is well below the solar escape velocity of . However, a few of the particles achieve energies sufficient to reach the terminal velocity of , which allows them to feed the solar wind. At the same temperature, electrons, due to their much smaller mass, reach escape velocity and build up an electric field that further accelerates ions away from the Sun.\nThe total number of particles carried away from the Sun by the solar wind is about per second. Thus, the total mass loss each year is about solar masses, or about 1.3\u20131.9 million tonnes per second. This is equivalent to losing a mass equal to the Earth every 150\u00a0million years. However, since the Sun's formation, only about 0.01% of its initial mass has been lost through the solar wind. Other stars have much stronger stellar winds that result in significantly higher mass-loss rates.\nJetlets.\nIn March 2023 solar extreme ultraviolet observations have shown that small-scale magnetic reconnection could be a driver of the solar wind as a swarm of nanoflares in the form omnipresent jetting activity a.k.a. jetlets producing short-lived streams of hot plasma and Alfv\u00e9n waves at the base of the solar corona. This activity could also be connected to the magnetic switchback phenomenon of the solar wind.\nProperties and structure.\nFast and slow solar wind.\nThe solar wind is observed to exist in two fundamental states, termed the slow solar wind and the fast solar wind, though their differences extend well beyond their speeds. In near-Earth space, the slow solar wind is observed to have a velocity of , a temperature of ~ and a composition that is a close match to the corona. By contrast, the fast solar wind has a typical velocity of , a temperature of and it nearly matches the composition of the Sun's photosphere. The slow solar wind is twice as dense and more variable in nature than the fast solar wind.\nThe slow solar wind appears to originate from a region around the Sun's equatorial belt that is known as the \"streamer belt\", where coronal streamers are produced by magnetic flux open to the heliosphere draping over closed magnetic loops. The exact coronal structures involved in slow solar wind formation and the method by which the material is released is still under debate. Observations of the Sun between 1996 and 2001 showed that emission of the slow solar wind occurred at latitudes up to 30\u201335\u00b0 during the solar minimum (the period of lowest solar activity), then expanded toward the poles as the solar cycle approached maximum. At solar maximum, the poles were also emitting a slow solar wind.\nThe fast solar wind originates from coronal holes, which are funnel-like regions of open field lines in the Sun's magnetic field. Such open lines are particularly prevalent around the Sun's magnetic poles. The plasma source is small magnetic fields created by convection cells in the solar atmosphere. These fields confine the plasma and transport it into the narrow necks of the coronal funnels, which are located only 20,000\u00a0km above the photosphere. The plasma is released into the funnel when these magnetic field lines reconnect.\nVelocity and density.\nNear the Earth's orbit at 1 astronomical unit (AU) the plasma flows at speeds ranging from 250 to 750\u00a0km/s with a density ranging between 3 and 10 particles per cubic centimeter and temperature ranging from 104 to 106 kelvin.\nOn average, the plasma density decreases with the square of the distance from the Sun,Sect. 2.4 while the velocity decreases and flattens out at 1\u00a0AU.Fig. 5\nVoyager 1 and Voyager 2 reported plasma density \"n\" between 0.001 and 0.005\u00a0particles/cm3 at distances of 80 to 120\u00a0AU, increasing rapidly beyond 120\u00a0AU at heliopause to between 0.05 and 0.2\u00a0particles/cm3.\nPressure.\nAt , the wind exerts a pressure typically in the range of (), although it can readily vary outside that range.\nThe ram pressure is a function of wind speed and density. The formula is\nformula_1\nwhere \"m\"p is the proton mass, pressure \"P\" is in Pa (pascals), \"n\" is the density in particles/cm3 and \"V\" is the speed in km/s of the solar wind.\nCoronal mass ejection.\nBoth the fast and slow solar wind can be interrupted by large, fast-moving bursts of plasma called coronal mass ejections, or CMEs. CMEs are caused by a release of magnetic energy at the Sun. CMEs are often called \"solar storms\" or \"space storms\" in the popular media. They are sometimes, but not always, associated with solar flares, which are another manifestation of magnetic energy release at the Sun. CMEs cause shock waves in the thin plasma of the heliosphere, launching electromagnetic waves and accelerating particles (mostly protons and electrons) to form showers of ionizing radiation that precede the CME.\nWhen a CME impacts the Earth's magnetosphere, it temporarily deforms the Earth's magnetic field, changing the direction of compass needles and inducing large electrical ground currents in Earth itself; this is called a geomagnetic storm and it is a global phenomenon. CME impacts can induce magnetic reconnection in Earth's magnetotail (the midnight side of the magnetosphere); this launches protons and electrons downward toward Earth's atmosphere, where they form the aurora.\nCMEs are not the only cause of space weather. Different patches on the Sun are known to give rise to slightly different speeds and densities of wind depending on local conditions. In isolation, each of these different wind streams would form a spiral with a slightly different angle, with fast-moving streams moving out more directly and slow-moving streams wrapping more around the Sun. Fast-moving streams tend to overtake slower streams that originate westward of them on the Sun, forming turbulent co-rotating interaction regions that give rise to wave motions and accelerated particles, and that affect Earth's magnetosphere in the same way as, but more gently than, CMEs. \nCMEs have a complex internal structure, with a highly turbulent region of hot and compressed plasma (known as sheath) preceding an arrival of relatively cold and strongly magnetized plasma region (known as magnetic cloud or ejecta). Sheath and ejecta have very different impact on the Earth's magnetosphere and on various space weather phenomena, such as the behavior of Van Allen radiation belts.\nMagnetic switchbacks.\nMagnetic switchbacks are sudden reversals in the magnetic field of the solar wind. They can also be described as traveling disturbances in the solar wind that caused the magnetic field to bend back on itself. They were first observed by the NASA\u2013ESA mission \"Ulysses\", the first spacecraft to fly over the Sun's poles. Parker Solar Probe observed first switchbacks in 2018.\nSolar System effects.\nOver the Sun's lifetime, the interaction of its surface layers with the escaping solar wind has significantly decreased its surface rotation rate. The wind is considered responsible for comets' tails, along with the Sun's radiation. The solar wind contributes to fluctuations in celestial radio waves observed on the Earth, through an effect called interplanetary scintillation.\nMagnetospheres.\nWhere the solar wind intersects with a planet that has a well-developed magnetic field (such as Earth, Jupiter or Saturn), the particles are deflected by the Lorentz force. This region, known as the magnetosphere, causes the particles to travel around the planet rather than bombarding the atmosphere or surface. The magnetosphere is roughly shaped like a hemisphere on the side facing the Sun, then is drawn out in a long wake on the opposite side. The boundary of this region is called the magnetopause, and some of the particles are able to penetrate the magnetosphere through this region by partial reconnection of the magnetic field lines.\nThe solar wind is responsible for the overall shape of Earth's magnetosphere. Fluctuations in its speed, density, direction, and entrained magnetic field strongly affect Earth's local space environment. For example, the levels of ionizing radiation and radio interference can vary by factors of hundreds to thousands; and the shape and location of the magnetopause and bow shock wave upstream of it can change by several Earth radii, exposing geosynchronous satellites to the direct solar wind. These phenomena are collectively called space weather.\nFrom the European Space Agency's Cluster mission, a new study has taken place that proposes that it is easier for the solar wind to infiltrate the magnetosphere than previously believed. A group of scientists directly observed the existence of certain waves in the solar wind that were not expected. A recent study shows that these waves enable incoming charged particles of solar wind to breach the magnetopause. This suggests that the magnetic bubble forms more as a filter than a continuous barrier. This latest discovery occurred through the distinctive arrangement of the four identical Cluster spacecraft, which fly in a controlled configuration through near-Earth space. As they sweep from the magnetosphere into interplanetary space and back again, the fleet provides exceptional three-dimensional insights on the phenomena that connect the sun to Earth.\nThe research characterised variances in formation of the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) largely influenced by Kelvin\u2013Helmholtz instability (which occur at the interface of two fluids) as a result of differences in thickness and numerous other characteristics of the boundary layer. Experts believe that this was the first occasion that the appearance of Kelvin\u2013Helmholtz waves at the magnetopause had been displayed at high latitude downward orientation of the IMF. These waves are being seen in unforeseen places under solar wind conditions that were formerly believed to be undesired for their generation. These discoveries show how Earth's magnetosphere can be penetrated by solar particles under specific IMF circumstances. The findings are also relevant to studies of magnetospheric progressions around other planetary bodies. This study suggests that Kelvin\u2013Helmholtz waves can be a somewhat common, and possibly constant, instrument for the entrance of solar wind into terrestrial magnetospheres under various IMF orientations.\nAtmospheres.\nThe solar wind affects other incoming cosmic rays interacting with planetary atmospheres. Moreover, planets with a weak or non-existent magnetosphere are subject to atmospheric stripping by the solar wind.\nVenus, the nearest and most similar planet to Earth, has 100 times denser atmosphere, with little or no geo-magnetic field. Space probes discovered a comet-like tail that extends to Earth's orbit.\nEarth itself is largely protected from the solar wind by its magnetic field, which deflects most of the charged particles; however, some of the charged particles are trapped in the Van Allen radiation belt. A smaller number of particles from the solar wind manage to travel, as though on an electromagnetic energy transmission line, to the Earth's upper atmosphere and ionosphere in the auroral zones. The only time the solar wind is observable on the Earth is when it is strong enough to produce phenomena such as the aurora and geomagnetic storms. Bright auroras strongly heat the ionosphere, causing its plasma to expand into the magnetosphere, increasing the size of the plasma geosphere and injecting atmospheric matter into the solar wind. Geomagnetic storms result when the pressure of plasmas contained inside the magnetosphere is sufficiently large to inflate and thereby distort the geomagnetic field.\nAlthough Mars is larger than Mercury and four times farther from the Sun, it is thought that the solar wind has stripped away up to a third of its original atmosphere, leaving a layer 1/100 as dense as the Earth's. It is believed the mechanism for this atmospheric stripping is gas caught in bubbles of the magnetic field, which are ripped off by the solar wind. In 2015 the NASA Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution (MAVEN) mission measured the rate of atmospheric stripping caused by the magnetic field carried by the solar wind as it flows past Mars, which generates an electric field, much as a turbine on Earth can be used to generate electricity. This electric field accelerates electrically charged gas atoms, called ions, in Mars's upper atmosphere and shoots them into space. The MAVEN mission measured the rate of atmospheric stripping at about 100 grams (\u22481/4\u00a0lb) per second.\nMoons and planetary surfaces.\nMercury, the nearest planet to the Sun, bears the full brunt of the solar wind, and since its atmosphere is vestigial and transient, its surface is bathed in radiation.\nMercury has an intrinsic magnetic field, so under normal solar wind conditions, the solar wind cannot penetrate its magnetosphere and particles only reach the surface in the cusp regions. During coronal mass ejections, however, the magnetopause may get pressed into the surface of the planet, and under these conditions, the solar wind may interact freely with the planetary surface.\nThe Earth's Moon has no atmosphere or intrinsic magnetic field, and consequently its surface is bombarded with the full solar wind. The Project Apollo missions deployed passive aluminum collectors in an attempt to sample the solar wind, and lunar soil returned for study confirmed that the lunar regolith is enriched in atomic nuclei deposited from the solar wind. These elements may prove useful resources for future lunar expeditions.\nLimits.\nAlfv\u00e9n surface.\nThe Alfv\u00e9n surface is the boundary separating the corona from the solar wind defined as where the coronal plasma's Alfv\u00e9n speed and the large-scale solar wind speed are equal.\nResearchers were unsure exactly where the Alfv\u00e9n critical surface of the Sun lay. Based on remote images of the corona, estimates had put it somewhere between 10 and 20 solar radii from the surface of the Sun. On April 28, 2021, during its eighth flyby of the Sun, NASA's Parker Solar Probe encountered the specific magnetic and particle conditions at 18.8 solar radii that indicated that it penetrated the Alfv\u00e9n surface.\nOuter limits.\nThe solar wind \"blows a bubble\" in the interstellar medium (the rarefied hydrogen and helium gas that permeates the galaxy). The point where the solar wind's strength is no longer great enough to push back the interstellar medium is known as the heliopause and is often considered to be the outer border of the Solar System. The distance to the heliopause is not precisely known and probably depends on the current velocity of the solar wind and the local density of the interstellar medium, but it is far outside Pluto's orbit. Scientists hope to gain perspective on the heliopause from data acquired through the Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) mission, launched in October 2008.\nThe heliopause is noted as one of the ways of defining the extent of the Solar System, along with the Kuiper Belt and the radius at which the Sun's gravitational influence is matched by other stars. The maximum extent of that influence has been estimated at between 50,000 AU and 2 light-years, compared to the heliopause (the outer boundary of the heliosphere), which has been detected at about 120 AU by the \"Voyager 1\" spacecraft.\nThe \"Voyager 2\" spacecraft crossed the termination shock more than five times between August 30 and December 10, 2007. \"Voyager 2\" crossed the shock about a Tm closer to the Sun than the 13.5 Tm distance where \"Voyager 1\" came upon the termination shock. The spacecraft moved outward through the termination shock into the heliosheath and onward toward the interstellar medium.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28542", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28542", "title": "Specific heat", "text": ""}
{"id": "28543", "revid": "1480343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28543", "title": "Spoonerism", "text": "Humorous muddled words\nA spoonerism is an occurrence of speech in which corresponding consonants, vowels, or morphemes are switched (see metathesis) between two words of a phrase. These are named after the Oxford don and priest William Archibald Spooner, who reportedly commonly spoke in this way.\nExamples include saying \"blushing crow\" instead of \"crushing blow\", or \"runny babbit\" instead of \"bunny rabbit\". While spoonerisms are commonly heard as slips of the tongue, they can also be used intentionally as a word play.\nThe first known spoonerisms were published by the 16th-century author Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais and termed . In his novel \"Pantagruel\", he wrote (\"insane woman at Mass, woman with flabby buttocks\").\nEtymology.\nSpoonerisms are named for the Reverend William Archibald Spooner (1844\u20131930), Warden from 1903 to 1924 of New College, Oxford, who was allegedly susceptible to this mistake.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" records the word \"spoonerism\" as early as 1900.\nThe term was well-established by 1921. An article in \"The Times\" from that year reports that:\nThe boys of Aldro School, Eastbourne, ... have been set the following task for the holidays: Discover and write down something about: The Old Lady of Threadneedle-street, a Spoonerism, a Busman's Holiday...\nAn article in the \"Daily Herald\" in 1928 reported spoonerisms to be a \"legend\". In that piece, Robert Seton, once a student of Spooner's, claimed that Spooner:\n...made, to my knowledge, only one \"Spoonerism\" in his life, in 1879, when he stood in the pulpit and announced the hymn: 'Kinkering Kongs their Titles Take' [\"Conquering Kings their Titles Take\"]...Later, a friend and myself brought out a book of \"spoonerisms\".\nIn 1937, \"The Times\" quoted a detective describing a man as \"a bricklabourer's layer\" and used \"Police Court Spoonerism\" as the headline.\nA spoonerism is also known as a \"marrowsky\" or \"morowski\", purportedly after an 18th-century Polish count who suffered from the same impediment.\nExamples.\nMost of the quotations attributed to Spooner are apocryphal; \"The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations\" (3rd edition, 1979) lists only one substantiated spoonerism: \"The weight of rages will press hard upon the employer\" (instead of \"rate of wages\"). Spooner himself claimed that \"The Kinquering Congs Their Titles Take\" (in reference to a hymn) was his sole spoonerism. Most spoonerisms were probably never uttered by William Spooner himself but rather invented by colleagues and students as a pastime. Richard Lederer, calling \"Kinkering Kongs their Titles Take\" (with an alternative spelling) one of the \"few\" authenticated spoonerisms, dates it to 1879, and he gives nine examples \"attributed to Spooner, most of them spuriously\". They are as follows:\nUsage.\nIn modern terms, \"spoonerism\" generally refers to any changing of sounds in this manner.\nComedy.\nWriting in tribute for the inaugural Ronnie Barker Talk, Ben Elton wrote:\nWhat an honour. I grew up loving Ronnie Barker and can only hope the news that I am to give a talk in his name doesn't leave him spitting spiritedly splenetic spoonerisms in comedy heaven.\nLiterature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCrosswords.\nSpoonerisms are used in cryptic crossword clues and use a play on words, in which the initial sounds or syllables of two words are switched to provide a solution. The clue type is generally indicated by a direct reference to 'Spooner', although more tricky examples might refer to him only as 'Rev', or use such phrases as 'in a manner of speaking', or 'slip of the tongue'. Uniquely, in cryptic crosswords the words used to create the Spoonerism might only be hinted at, not explicitly stated.\nExample: \"Spooner's criminal with nurse finding hiding places.\" (4,3,6)\nSolution: NOOK AND CRANNY (Spoonerism of CROOK AND NANNY).\nRadio.\nOn the 3 December 1950 episode of \"The Jack Benny Program,\" Jack mentions that he ran into his butler Rochester while in his car that was on a grease rack. Mary Livingston was supposed to say \"How could you run into him on a grease rack?\" but flubbed her line with \"How could you run into him on a grass reek?\" The audience laughed so much that Jack was unable to reply as the show ran out of time.\nFalse etymology.\nSpoonerisms are used sometimes in false etymologies. For example, according to linguist Ghil'ad Zuckermann, some wrongly believe that the English word \"butterfly\" derives from flutter by.\nKniferisms and forkerisms.\nAs complements to \"spoonerism\", Douglas Hofstadter used the nonce words \"kniferism\" and \"forkerism\" to refer to changing, respectively, the vowels or the final consonants of two syllables, giving them a new meaning. Examples of so-called kniferisms include a British television newsreader once referring to the police at a crime scene removing a \"hypodeemic nerdle\"; a television announcer once saying that \"All the world was thrilled by the marriage of the Duck and Doochess of Windsor\"; and during a live radio broadcast in 1931, radio presenter Harry von Zell accidentally mispronouncing U.S. President Herbert Hoover's name as \"Hoobert Heever\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28544", "revid": "1313936632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28544", "title": "September 9", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearSeptember 9 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28545", "revid": "47127436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28545", "title": "Self-reference", "text": "Sentence, idea or formula that refers to itself\nSelf-reference is a concept that involves referring to oneself or one's own attributes, characteristics, or actions. It can occur in language, logic, mathematics, philosophy, and other fields.\nIn natural or formal languages, self-reference occurs when a sentence, idea or formula refers to itself. The reference may be expressed either directly\u2014through some intermediate sentence or formula\u2014or by means of some encoding.\nIn philosophy, self-reference also refers to the ability of a subject to speak of or refer to itself, that is, to have the kind of thought expressed by the first person nominative singular pronoun \"I\" in English.\nSelf-reference is studied and has applications in mathematics, philosophy, computer programming, second-order cybernetics, and linguistics, as well as in humor. Self-referential statements are sometimes paradoxical, and can also be considered recursive.\nIn logic, mathematics and computing.\nIn classical philosophy, paradoxes were created by self-referential concepts such as the omnipotence paradox of asking if it was possible for a being to exist so powerful that it could create a stone that it could not lift. The Epimenides paradox, 'All Cretans are liars' when uttered by an ancient Greek Cretan was one of the first recorded versions. Contemporary philosophy sometimes employs the same technique to demonstrate that a supposed concept is meaningless or ill-defined.\nIn mathematics and computability theory, self-reference (also known as impredicativity) is the key concept in proving limitations of many systems. G\u00f6del's theorem uses it to show that no formal consistent system of mathematics can ever contain all possible mathematical truths, because it cannot prove some truths about its own structure. The halting problem equivalent, in computation theory, shows that there is always some task that a computer cannot perform, namely reasoning about itself. These proofs relate to a long tradition of mathematical paradoxes such as Russell's paradox and Berry's paradox, and ultimately to classical philosophical paradoxes.\nIn game theory, undefined behaviors can occur where two players must model each other's mental states and behaviors, leading to infinite regress.\nIn computer programming, self-reference occurs in reflection, where a program can read or modify its own instructions like any other data. Numerous programming languages support reflection to some extent with varying degrees of expressiveness. Additionally, self-reference is seen in recursion (related to the mathematical recurrence relation) in functional programming, where a code structure refers back to itself during computation. 'Taming' self-reference from potentially paradoxical concepts into well-behaved recursions has been one of the great successes of computer science, and is now used routinely in, for example, writing compilers using the 'meta-language' ML. Using a compiler to compile itself is known as bootstrapping. Self-modifying code is possible to write (programs which operate on themselves), both with assembler and with functional languages such as Lisp, but is generally discouraged in real-world programming. Computing hardware makes fundamental use of self-reference in flip-flops, the basic units of digital memory, which convert potentially paradoxical logical self-relations into memory by expanding their terms over time. Thinking in terms of self-reference is a pervasive part of programmer culture, with many programs and acronyms named self-referentially as a form of humor, such as GNU ('GNU's not Unix') and PINE ('Pine is not Elm'). The GNU Hurd is named for a pair of mutually self-referential acronyms.\nTupper's self-referential formula is a mathematical curiosity which plots an image of its own formula.\nIn art.\nSelf-reference occurs in literature and film when an author refers to his or her own work in the context of the work itself. Examples include Miguel de Cervantes' \"Don Quixote\", Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", \"The Tempest\" and \"Twelfth Night\", Denis Diderot's \"Jacques le fataliste et son ma\u00eetre\", Italo Calvino's \"If on a winter's night a traveler\", many stories by Nikolai Gogol, \"Lost in the Funhouse\" by John Barth, Luigi Pirandello's \"Six Characters in Search of an Author\", Federico Fellini's \"8\u00bd\" and Bryan Forbes's \"The L-Shaped Room\". Speculative fiction writer Samuel R. Delany makes use of this in his novels \"Nova\" and \"Dhalgren\". In the former, Katin (a space-faring novelist) is wary of a long-standing curse wherein a novelist dies before completing any given work. \"Nova\" ends mid-sentence, thus lending credence to the curse and the realization that the novelist is the author of the story; likewise, throughout \"Dhalgren\", Delany has a protagonist simply named The Kid (or Kidd, in some sections), whose life and work are mirror images of themselves and of the novel itself. In the sci-fi spoof film \"Spaceballs\", Director Mel Brooks includes a scene wherein the evil characters are viewing a VHS copy of their own story, which shows them watching themselves \"watching themselves\", ad infinitum. Perhaps the earliest example is in Homer's \"Iliad\", where Helen of Troy laments: \"for generations still unborn/we will live in song\" (appearing in the song itself).\nSelf-reference in art is closely related to the concepts of breaking the fourth wall and meta-reference, which often involve self-reference. The short stories of Jorge Luis Borges play with self-reference and related paradoxes in many ways. Samuel Beckett's \"Krapp's Last Tape\" consists entirely of the protagonist listening to and making recordings of himself, mostly about other recordings. During the 1990s and 2000s filmic self-reference was a popular part of the rubber reality movement, notably in Charlie Kaufman's films \"Being John Malkovich\" and \"Adaptation\", the latter pushing the concept arguably to its breaking point as it attempts to portray its own creation, in a dramatized version of the Droste effect.\nVarious creation myths invoke self-reference to solve the problem of what created the creator. For example, the Egyptian creation myth has a god swallowing his own semen to create himself. The Ouroboros is a mythical dragon which eats itself.\nThe Quran includes numerous instances of self-referentiality.\nThe surrealist painter Ren\u00e9 Magritte is famous for his self-referential works. His painting \"The Treachery of Images\", includes the words \"this is not a pipe\", the truth of which depends entirely on whether the word \"ceci\" (in English, \"this\") refers to the pipe depicted\u2014or to the painting or the word or sentence itself. M.C. Escher's art also contains many self-referential concepts such as hands drawing themselves.\nIn language.\nA word that describes itself is called an \"autological word\" (or \"autonym\"). This generally applies to adjectives, for example sesquipedalian (i.e. \"sesquipedalian\" is a sesquipedalian word), but can also apply to other parts of speech, such as TLA, as a three-letter abbreviation for \"three-letter abbreviation\".\nA sentence which inventories its own letters and punctuation marks is called an autogram.\nThere is a special case of meta-sentence in which the content of the sentence in the metalanguage and the content of the sentence in the object language are the same. Such a sentence is referring to itself. However some meta-sentences of this type can lead to paradoxes. \"This is a sentence.\" can be considered to be a self-referential meta-sentence which is obviously true. However \"This sentence is false\" is a meta-sentence which leads to a self-referential paradox. Such sentences can lead to problems, for example, in law, where statements bringing laws into existence can contradict one another or themselves. Kurt G\u00f6del claimed to have found such a loophole in the United States Constitution at his citizenship ceremony.\nSelf-reference occasionally occurs in the media when it is required to write about itself, for example the BBC reporting on job cuts at the BBC. Notable encyclopedias may be required to feature articles about themselves, such as Wikipedia's article on Wikipedia.\nFumblerules are a list of rules of good grammar and writing, demonstrated through sentences that violate those very rules, such as \"Avoid cliches like the plague\" and \"Don't use no double negatives\". The term was coined in a published list of such rules by William Safire.\nCircular definition is a type of self-reference in which the definition of a term or concept includes the term or concept itself, either explicitly or implicitly. Circular definitions are considered fallacious because they only define a term in terms of itself. This type of self-reference may be useful in argumentation, but can result in a lack of clarity in communication.\nThe adverb \"hereby\" is used in a self-referential way, for example in the statement \"I hereby declare you husband and wife.\"\nIn law.\nSeveral constitutions contain self-referential clauses defining how the constitution itself may be amended. An example is Article Five of the United States Constitution.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28547", "revid": "47285530", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28547", "title": "Sokal affair", "text": "1996 scholarly publishing sting accepted by an academic journal\nThe Sokal affair, also known as the Sokal hoax, was a demonstrative scholarly hoax performed by Alan Sokal, a physics professor at New York University and University College London. In 1996, Sokal submitted an article to \"Social Text\", an academic journal of cultural studies. The submission was an experiment to test the journal's intellectual rigor, specifically to investigate whether \"a leading North American journal of cultural studies\u2014whose editorial collective includes such luminaries as Fredric Jameson and Andrew Ross\u2014[would] publish an article liberally salted with nonsense if (a) it sounded good and (b) it flattered the editors' ideological preconceptions.\"\nThe article, \"Transgressing the Boundaries: Towards a Transformative Hermeneutics of Quantum Gravity\", was published in the journal's Spring/Summer 1996 \"Science Wars\" issue. It proposed that quantum gravity is a social and linguistic construct. The journal did not practice academic peer review at the time, so it did not submit the article for outside expert review by a physicist. Three weeks after its publication in May 1996, Sokal revealed in the magazine \"Lingua Franca\" that the article was a hoax.\nThe hoax caused controversy about the scholarly merit of commentary on the physical sciences by those in the humanities; the influence of postmodern philosophy on social disciplines in general; and academic ethics, including whether Sokal was wrong to deceive the editors or readers of \"Social Text\"; and whether \"Social Text\" had abided by proper scientific ethics.\nIn 2008, Sokal published \"Beyond the Hoax\", which revisited the history of the hoax and discussed its lasting implications.\nBackground.\nIn an interview on the U.S. radio program \"All Things Considered\", Sokal said he was inspired to submit the bogus article after reading \"Higher Superstition\" (1994), in which authors Paul R. Gross and Norman Levitt claim that some humanities journals will publish anything as long as it has \"the proper leftist thought\" and quoted (or was written by) well-known leftist thinkers.\nGross and Levitt had been defenders of the philosophy of scientific realism, opposing postmodernist academics who questioned scientific objectivity. They asserted that anti-intellectual sentiment in liberal arts departments (especially English departments) caused the increase of deconstructionist thought, which eventually resulted in a deconstructionist critique of science. They saw the critique as a \"repertoire of rationalizations\" for avoiding the study of science.\nArticle.\nSokal reasoned that if the presumption of editorial laziness was correct, the nonsensical content of his article would be irrelevant to whether the editors would publish it. What would matter would be ideological obsequiousness, fawning references to deconstructionist writers, and sufficient quantities of the appropriate jargon. After the article was published and the hoax revealed, he wrote:\nThe results of my little experiment demonstrate, at the very least, that some fashionable sectors of the American academic Left have been getting intellectually lazy. The editors of \"Social Text\" liked my article because they liked its conclusion: that \"the content and methodology of postmodern science provide powerful intellectual support for the progressive political project\" [sec. 6]. They apparently felt no need to analyze the quality of the evidence, the cogency of the arguments, or even the relevance of the arguments to the purported conclusion.\nContent of the article.\n\"Transgressing the Boundaries: Towards a Transformative Hermeneutics of Quantum Gravity\" proposed that quantum gravity has progressive political implications, and that the \"morphogenetic field\" could be a valid theory of quantum gravity. (A morphogenetic field is a concept adapted by Rupert Sheldrake in a way that Sokal characterized in the affair's aftermath as \"a bizarre New Age idea\".) Sokal wrote that the concept of \"an external world whose properties are independent of any individual human being\" was \"dogma imposed by the long post-Enlightenment hegemony over the Western intellectual outlook\".\nAfter referring skeptically to the \"so-called scientific method\", the article declared that \"it is becoming increasingly apparent that physical 'reality'\" is fundamentally \"a social and linguistic construct.\" It went on to state that because scientific research is \"inherently theory-laden and self-referential\", it \"cannot assert a privileged epistemological status with respect to counterhegemonic narratives emanating from dissident or marginalized communities\", and that therefore a \"liberatory science\" and an \"emancipatory mathematics\", spurning \"the elite caste canon of 'high science'\", needed to be established for a \"postmodern science [that] provide[s] powerful intellectual support for the progressive political project.\"\nMoreover, the article's footnotes conflate academic terms with sociopolitical rhetoric, e.g.:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Just as liberal feminists are frequently content with a minimal agenda of legal and social equality for women and \"pro-choice\", so liberal (and even some socialist) mathematicians are often content to work within the hegemonic Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel framework (which, reflecting its nineteenth-century liberal origins, already incorporates the axiom of equality) supplemented only by the axiom of choice.\nPublication.\nSokal submitted the article to \"Social Text\", whose editors were collecting articles for the \"Science Wars\" issue. \"Transgressing the Boundaries\" was notable as an article by a natural scientist; biologist Ruth Hubbard also had an article in the issue. Later, after Sokal revealed the hoax in \"Lingua Franca\", \"Social Text\"'s editors wrote that they had requested editorial changes that Sokal refused to make, and had had concerns about the quality of the writing: \"We requested him (a)\u00a0to excise a good deal of the philosophical speculation and (b)\u00a0to excise most of his footnotes.\" Still, despite calling Sokal a \"difficult, uncooperative author\", and noting that such writers were \"well known to journal editors\", based on Sokal's credentials \"Social Text\" published the article in the May 1996 Spring/Summer \"Science Wars\" issue. The editors did not seek peer review of the article by physicists or otherwise; they later defended this decision on the basis that \"Social Text\" was a journal of open intellectual inquiry and the article was not offered as a contribution to physics.\nResponses.\nFollow-up between Sokal and the editors.\nIn the article \"A Physicist Experiments With Cultural Studies\" in the May 1996 issue of \"Lingua Franca\", Sokal revealed that \"Transgressing the Boundaries\" was a hoax and concluded that \"Social Text\" \"felt comfortable publishing an article on quantum physics without bothering to consult anyone knowledgeable in the subject\" because of its ideological proclivities and editorial bias.\nIn their defense, \"Social Text\"'s editors said they believed that Sokal's essay \"was the earnest attempt of a professional scientist to seek some kind of affirmation from postmodern philosophy for developments in his field\" and that \"its status as parody does not alter, substantially, our interest in the piece, itself, as a symptomatic document.\" Besides criticizing his writing style, \"Social Text\"'s editors accused Sokal of behaving unethically in deceiving them.\nSokal said the editors' response demonstrated the problem that he sought to identify. \"Social Text\", as an academic journal, published the article not because it was faithful, true, and accurate to its subject, but because an \"academic authority\" had written it and because of the appearance of the obscure writing. The editors said they considered it poorly written but published it because they felt Sokal was an academic seeking their intellectual affirmation. Sokal remarked:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My goal isn't to defend science from the barbarian hordes of lit crit (we'll survive just fine, thank you), but to defend the Left from a trendy segment of itself.\u00a0... There are hundreds of important political and economic issues surrounding science and technology. Sociology of science, at its best, has done much to clarify these issues. But sloppy sociology, like sloppy science, is useless, or even counterproductive.\nHe claimed that \"Social Text\"'s response revealed that none of the editors had suspected his piece was a parody. Instead, they speculated his admission \"represented a change of heart, or a folding of his intellectual resolve\". Sokal found further humor in the idea that the article's absurdity was hard to spot:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the second paragraph I declare without the slightest evidence or argument, that \"physical 'reality' (note the scare quotes)\u00a0... is at bottom a social and linguistic construct.\" Not our theories of physical reality, mind you, but the reality itself. Fair enough. Anyone who believes that the laws of physics are mere social conventions is invited to try transgressing those conventions from the windows of my apartment. I live on the twenty-first floor.\nBook by Sokal and Bricmont.\nIn 1997, Sokal and Jean Bricmont co-wrote \"Impostures intellectuelles\" (published in the US as \"Fashionable Nonsense: Postmodern Intellectuals' Abuse of Science\" and in the UK as \"Intellectual Impostures\", 1998). The book featured analysis of extracts from established intellectuals' writings that Sokal and Bricmont claimed misused scientific terminology. It closed with a critical summary of postmodernism and criticism of the strong programme of social constructionism in the sociology of scientific knowledge.\nIn 2008, Sokal published a followup book, \"Beyond the Hoax\", which revisited the history of the hoax and discussed its lasting implications.\nJacques Derrida.\nThe French philosopher Jacques Derrida, whose 1966 statement about Einstein's theory of relativity was quoted in Sokal's paper, was singled out for criticism, particularly in U.S. newspaper coverage of the hoax. One weekly magazine used two images of him, a photo and a caricature, to illustrate a \"dossier\" on Sokal's paper. Arkady Plotnitsky commented: Even given Derrida's status as an icon of intellectual controversy on the Anglo-American cultural scene, it is remarkable that out of thousands of pages of Derrida's published works, a single extemporaneous remark on relativity made in 1966 (before Derrida was \"the Derrida\" and, in a certain sense, even before \"deconstruction\")\u00a0... is made to stand for nearly all of deconstructive or even postmodernist (not a term easily, if at all, applicable to Derrida) treatments of science.\nDerrida later responded to the hoax in \"\" (\"Sokal and Bricmont Aren't Serious\"), first published on November 20, 1997, in . He called Sokal's action \"sad\" for having trivialized Sokal's mathematical work and \"ruining the chance to carefully examine controversies\" about scientific objectivity. Derrida then faulted him and Bricmont for what he considered \"an act of intellectual bad faith\" in their follow-up book, ': they had published two articles almost simultaneously, one in English in \"The Times Literary Supplement\" on October 17, 1997 and one in French in ' on October 18\u201319, 1997, but while the two articles were almost identical, they differed in how they treated Derrida.\nThe English-language article had a list of French intellectuals who were not included in Sokal's and Bricmont's book: \"Such well-known thinkers as Althusser, Barthes, and Foucault\u2014who, as readers of the TLS will be well aware, have always had their supporters and detractors on both sides of the Channel\u2014appear in our book only in a minor role, as cheerleaders for the texts we criticize.\" The French-language list, however, included Derrida: \"\" (\"Famous thinkers such as Althusser, Barthes, Derrida and Foucault are essentially absent from our book\").\nAccording to Brian Reilly, Derrida may also have been sensitive to another difference between the French and English versions of \"Impostures intellectuelles\". In the French, his citation from the original hoax article is said to be an \"isolated\" instance of abuse, whereas the English text adds a parenthetical remark that Derrida's work contained \"no systematic misuse (or indeed attention to) science\".\nSokal and Bricmont insisted that the difference between the articles was \"banal\". Nevertheless, Derrida concluded that Sokal was not serious in his method, but had used the spectacle of a \"quick practical joke\" to displace the scholarship Derrida believed the public deserved.\nCriticism of social sciences.\nSociologist Stephen Hilgartner, chairman of Cornell University's science and technology studies department, wrote \"The Sokal Affair in Context\" (1997), comparing Sokal's hoax to \"Confirmational Response: Bias Among Social Work Journals\" (1990), an article by William M. Epstein published in \"Science, Technology, &amp; Human Values\". Epstein used a similar method to Sokal's, submitting fictitious articles to real academic journals to measure their response. Though much more systematic than Sokal's work, it received scant media attention. Hilgartner argued that the \"asymmetric\" effect of the successful Sokal hoax compared with Epstein's experiment cannot be attributed to its quality, but that \"[t]hrough a mechanism that resembles confirmatory bias, audiences may apply less stringent standards of evidence and ethics to attacks on targets that they are predisposed to regard unfavorably.\" As a result, according to Hilgartner, though competent in terms of method, Epstein's experiment was largely muted by the more socially accepted social work discipline he critiqued, while Sokal's attack on cultural studies, despite lacking experimental rigor, was accepted. Hilgartner also argued that Sokal's hoax reinforced the views of well-known pundits such as George Will and Rush Limbaugh, so that his opinions were amplified by media outlets predisposed to agree with his argument.\nThe Sokal Affair extended from academia to the public press. Anthropologist Bruno Latour, who was criticized in \"Fashionable Nonsense\", described the scandal as a \"tempest in a teacup\". Retired Northeastern University mathematician-turned social scientist Gabriel Stolzenberg wrote essays criticizing the statements of Sokal and his allies, arguing that they insufficiently grasped the philosophy they criticized, rendering their criticism meaningless. In \"Social Studies of Science\", Bricmont and Sokal responded to Stolzenberg, denouncing his representations of their work and criticizing his commentary about the \"strong programme\" of the sociology of science. Stolzenberg replied in the same issue that their critique and allegations of misrepresentation were based on misreadings. He advised readers to slowly and skeptically examine the arguments of each party, bearing in mind that \"the obvious is sometimes the enemy of the true\". In her 1998 article \"The Sokal Hoax: At Whom Are We Laughing?\", philosopher of science Mara Beller compared the \"awe\" physicists feel for Bohr's obscurity to their \"contempt\" for Derrida's density.\nInfluence.\nSociological follow-up study.\nIn 2009, Cornell sociologist Robb Willer performed an experiment in which undergraduate students read Sokal's paper and were told either that it was written by another student or that it was by a famous academic. He found that students who believed the paper's author was a high-status intellectual rated it better in quality and intelligibility.\nSokal III.\nIn October 2021, the scholarly journal \"Higher Education Quarterly\" published a bogus article \"authored\" by \"Sage Owens\" and \"Kal Avers-Lynde III\". The initials stand for \"Sokal III\". The \"Quarterly\" retracted the article.\n\"Love, Theoretically\".\nIn 2024, Ali Hazelwood published the book \"Love, Theoretically\", whose plot revolves around a character who performs a similar hoax, which Hazelwood said was inspired by Sokal's. The character is a physicist and submits his hoax article to a theoretical physics journal.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28550", "revid": "195596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28550", "title": "Senate Minority Leader", "text": ""}
{"id": "28551", "revid": "20381871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28551", "title": "Sweet tea", "text": "Style of iced tea\nSweet tea, also known as sweet iced tea, is a popular style of iced tea commonly consumed in the United States (especially the South) and Indonesia. Sweet tea is most commonly made by adding sugar or simple syrup to black tea while the tea is either brewing or still hot, although artificial sweeteners are also frequently used. Sweet tea is almost always served ice cold. It may sometimes be flavored, most commonly with lemon but also with peach, raspberry, or mint. The drink is sometimes tempered with baking soda to reduce its acidity. Although sweet tea may be brewed with a lower sugar and calorie content than most fruit juices and sodas, it is not unusual to find sweet tea with a sugar level as high as 22 degrees Brix, or per of liquid, a level twice that of Coca-Cola.\nSweet tea is regarded as an important regional staple in the cuisine of the Southern United States and Indonesia. The availability of sweet tea in restaurants and other establishments is popularly used as an indicator to gauge whether an area can be considered part of the South.\nHistory.\nUnited States.\nSweet tea began as an item of luxury due to the expensive nature of its basic ingredients: tea, ice, and sugar. Ice was possibly the most valued of the ingredients since it had to be shipped from afar at a time when access to cool drinking water was already a relative luxury. In modern times, sweet tea can be made in large quantities quickly and inexpensively.\nThe oldest known recipe for sweet tea was published in a community cookbook called \"Housekeeping in Old Virginia\" (copyright 1878) by Marion Cabell Tyree. The recipe called for green tea, since most sweet tea consumed during this period was green tea. However, during World War II, the major sources of green tea were cut off from the United States due to the Japanese invasion and occupation of green tea\u2013producing regions. As an alternative, green tea was replaced with black tea from British India. By the end of World War II, black tea had become the tea most drunk by Americans. \nIn 2003, supposedly as an April Fool's joke, the Georgia State House of Representatives introduced a bill making it a \"...misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature\" to sell iced tea in a restaurant that did not also offer sweet iced tea on the menu. The bill never went to a vote.\nIndonesia.\nTea drinking in Indonesia began during the Dutch colonial rule. In the 17th century, the Dutch brought tea plants to Batavia via Sukabumi Beach. Tea plants were subsequently planted in Indonesia which were suitable to West Java. At the same time, in Central Java, sugar cane cultivation was successfully introduced. The ready availability of the two ingredients led to development of sweet tea, which remains the most popular beverage in the country.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28553", "revid": "50629898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28553", "title": "Cuisine of the Southern United States", "text": "Regional cuisine of the United States\nThe cuisine of the Southern United States encompasses diverse food traditions of several subregions, including the cuisines of Southeastern Native American tribes, Tidewater, Appalachian, Ozarks, Lowcountry, Cajun, Creole, African American cuisine and Floribbean, Spanish, French, British, Ulster-Scots, German and Middle Eastern cuisine. Elements of Southern cuisine have spread to other parts of the United States, influencing other types of American cuisine.\nMany elements of Southern cooking\u2014tomatoes, squash, corn (and its derivatives, such as hominy and grits), and deep-pit barbecuing\u2014are borrowings from Indigenous peoples of the region (e.g., Cherokee, Caddo, Choctaw, and Seminole). From the Old World, European colonists introduced sugar, flour, milk, eggs, and livestock, along with a number of vegetables; meanwhile, enslaved West Africans trafficked to the North American colonies through the Atlantic slave trade introduced black-eyed peas, okra, eggplant, sesame, sorghum, melons, and various spices. Rice also became prominent in many dishes in the Lowcountry region of South Carolina because the enslaved people who settled the region (now known as the Gullah people) were already quite familiar with the crop.\nMany Southern foodways are local adaptations of Old World traditions. In Appalachia, many Southern dishes are of Scottish or British Border origin. For instance, the South's fondness for a full breakfast derives from the British full breakfast or fry-up. Pork, once considered informally taboo in Scotland, has taken the place of lamb and mutton. Instead of chopped oats, Southerners have traditionally eaten grits, a porridge normally made from coarsely ground, nixtamalized maize, also known as hominy.\nCertain regions have been infused with different Old World traditions. Louisiana Creole cuisine draws upon vernacular French cuisine, West African cuisine, and Spanish cuisine; Floribbean cuisine is Spanish-based with obvious Caribbean influences; and Tex-Mex has considerable Mexican and Indigenous influences with its abundant use of New World vegetables (such as corn, tomatoes, squash, and peppers) and barbecued meat. In southern Louisiana, West African influences have persisted in dishes such as gumbo, jambalaya, and red beans and rice.\nHistory.\nIndigenous cuisine before colonization.\nNative Americans utilized a number of cooking methods in early American cuisine that have been blended with the methods of early Europeans to form the basis of what is now Southern cuisine. Prior to the 1600s, native peoples lived off the land in very diverse bioregions and had done so for thousands of years, often living a nomadic life where their diet changed with the season.\nMany practiced a form of agriculture revolving around the Three Sisters, the rotation of beans, maize, and squash as staples of their diet. Wild game was equally a staple of nearly every tribe: generally, deer, elk, and bison were staples, as were rabbits and hare. The Cherokee of the Southern Appalachians used blowguns made of an indigenous type of bamboo to hunt squirrels.\nNative Americans introduced the first non-Native American Southerners to many other vegetables still familiar on southern tables. Squash, pumpkin, many types of beans, many types of peppers, and sassafras all came to the settlers via Indigenous peoples. The Virginia Algonquian word \"pawcohiccora\" means hickory-nut meat or a nut milk drink made from it.\nMany fruits are available in this region. Muscadines, blackberries, raspberries, and many other wild berries were part of Southern Native Americans' diet.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To a far greater degree than anyone realizes, several of the most important food dishes of the Southeastern Indians live on today in the \"soul food\" eaten by both black and white Southerners. Hominy, for example, is still eaten ... Sofkee lives on as grits ... cornbread [is] used by Southern cooks ... Indian fritters ... variously known as \"hoe cake\", ... or \"Johnny cake.\" ... Indians boiled cornbread is present in Southern cuisine as \"corn meal dumplings\", ... and as \"hush puppies\", ... Southerns cook their beans and field peas by boiling them, as did the Indians ... like the Indians they cure their meat and smoke it over hickory coals.\u2014\u200a\nColonial era 1513 to 1776 and Antebellum era 1776 to 1861.\nSouthern food has influences from Native American, European, and West African cuisines and foods. From corn Southeastern Native American tribes made grits, cornmeal mush, corn chowder, hush puppies, and cornbread that were adapted by European settlers and enslaved Africans cuisine called soul food. Another Native American influence in Southern cuisine is fried green tomatoes. Squash was (and continues to be cooked) by Native Americans and has a long shelf life when not cooked, and because of its long shelf-life African Americans and European Americans placed it in their kitchens. An additional Native American influence in Southern cuisine is the use of maple syrup. Settlers used honey and Indigenous people used maple syrup to sweeten and add flavor to dishes; this influenced the foodways of enslaved Africans and European settlers as they used maple syrup to sweeten their dishes and poured syrup over pancakes and other breakfast foods.\nOther Indigenous influences are dried meats, smoked fish, and preparing meals with deer, rabbit, turtle, catfish, and eating local strawberries, blueberries, blackberries, raspberries, and cranberries. Foods cultivated by Indigenous people in the Western Hemisphere influenced Southern and global cuisine.\nThe first European nation to colonize the mainland portion of North America was Spain in the early 16th century in the year 1513 under Juan Ponce de Le\u00f3n. In the year 1565, Spanish explorer Pedro Men\u00e9ndez de Avil\u00e9s established a settlement in St. Augustine, Florida and was accompanied by free and enslaved Africans. Two Spanish expeditions encountered the Apalachee in the first half of the 16th century. The expedition of P\u00e1nfilo de Narv\u00e1ez entered the Apalachee domain in 1528, and arrived at a village, which Narv\u00e1ez believed was the main settlement in Apalachee. The Apalachee Indigenous people influenced the foodways of Spanish colonists in Florida. Apalachee people prepared meals with hunted animals such as deer, rabbit, raccoon, and turkey (a bird indigenous to North America). They grew in their gardens corn, beans, squash, and sunflowers, and foraged for wild berries and nuts. From these food sources the Apalachee made stews and sweet flavored dishes. Spanish colonists enjoyed Native American cacina tea and turkey.\nNew Spain was in the present-day southern states of Florida and Louisiana. An article from the Florida Department of State explains the influence of the Spaniards in Southern cuisine: \"The Spanish brought many foods to Florida (and the Americas) that are commonly eaten today. One major change to the landscape of Florida was the Spanish introduction of domesticated animals to provide favored meats, like beef, pork, and chicken! Olive oil and wine (brought over to the colonies in large earthenware jars) were essential staples for any Spanish kitchen. Fruits (like peaches, figs, and watermelons), nuts and beans (like almonds, field peas, and garbanzo beans) and spices (like saffron, cinnamon, and different types of peppers) were brought to Florida from all over the world.\"\nThe British established a permanent settlement in Jamestown, Virginia in 1607. They brought their food traditions from London that influenced Southern cuisine. British cuisine has cured and aged ham and English bread. These foods were augmented in colonial Jamestown with North American ingredients. For example, the ham dishes in Britain became Virginia hams, and English breads became hot breads and other sweets. However, the predominant cooks in Virginia's kitchens were enslaved African Americans. Enslaved cooks in white plantation homes combined food traditions from West Africa with Native American and European cooking methods and prepared new dishes that influenced Southern cuisine, such as fried okra.\nThe origin of fried chicken in the southern states of America has been traced to precedents in Scottish and West African cuisine. Scottish fried chicken was battered with seasonings and cooked in lard, later West African fried chicken added different seasonings, and was battered and cooked in palm oil. Scottish frying and seasoning techniques and African seasoning techniques were used in the American South by enslaved Africans. At Monticello in Virginia, President Thomas Jefferson noted how the enslaved prepared meals with the African crop sesame seeds. Enslaved people ate sesame raw, toasted, or boiled and prepared stews, baked breads, boiled their greens with sesame seeds, and made sesame pudding. European colonists used sesame seeds to make baked breads.\nIn the 17th and 18th centuries, English colonists in Virginia came into contact with Powhatan Indigenous people and adapted corn into their cuisine and Johnny cakes, corn pone, and fry bread became a part of their diet. English settlers at Jamestown were not prepared on how to survive in Virginia's wilderness. Settlers experienced the \"starving time\" in the winter of 1609 to 1610. Powhatan people taught the English how to hunt, fish and grow corn to survive. The food and survival skills English settlers learned from Natives became a part of their diet and cuisine. However, most Jamestown's residents did not survive that winter because of dwindling food supplies. \nColonial Williamsburg, Virginia was founded in 1632 by the English. Historians at Colonial Williamsburg researched colonial records and found what colonists in Williamsburg ate. The dishes colonial cooks prepared for Williamsburg's upper class were roast pigeon, fried ox tongue, mince pies, made meat dishes from beef, lamb, pork, chicken, and fish with vegetables, and made baked breads. For beverages they drank coffee, tea and chocolate. An article in the newspaper, \"The Warren Record,\" explains the influence of the English and Scottish on Southern American food: \"English settlers in the South baked yeast bread, made savory puddings and drank beer...\" \"Settlers from lowland Scotland brought with them a tradition of cooking a kale soup and drinking distilled beverages.\"\nEnglish and Scottish settlers introduced biscuits into Southern breakfast. In England and Ireland people ate biscuits as part of a meal and were taken aboard ships during long voyages because they lasted longer and did not spoil like other foods. In the Southern United States, Americans evolved the recipe and made fluffier biscuits and poured gravy, honey and jam over them which became a popular breakfast item. Biscuits were an economical food for Southerners after the mid-19th century as they were made with simple ingredients of flour, baking powder, salt, butter, and milk.\nIn 1614, the Dutch established several settlements in Maryland and other Northern colonies. Dutch colonists introduced pancakes, waffles, doughnuts, cookies, coleslaw and pretzels into the cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies. Colonial records showed Dutch people brought their waffle irons from the Netherlands to colonial America. The English and Dutch introduced pies and Dutch settlers introduced deep-dish crust pie recipes which enslaved African Americans and other Southerners adapted into their cuisine. The first documented pie recipe in Colonial America was in 1675; it was a pumpkin pie recipe modified from British spiced and boiled squash. European settlers prepared pies because they preserved food. They made meat and sweet pies using local ingredients and other ingredients from foreign countries. An article from Southern Living Magazine explains the history of the Southern American pie tradition: \"The mixture of eggs, butter, sugar, vanilla, and flour made its way to the American South from England. It became popular in Virginia and has had many incarnations, from the Classic Chess Pie to fruity versions, like Lemon Chess Pie.\"\nEnslaved Africans influence in Southern cuisine are food items from West Africa such as okra, black-eyed peas, one-pot rice cooking methods to make stews that influenced the making of gumbo and jambalaya, and adding a variety of spices and hot and sweet sauces to Southern dishes. West-Central Africans were trafficked to the South as early as 1526 under Spanish explorers to the colonies of South Carolina and Georgia called San Miguel de Gualdape, and enslaved people from Angola were brought to colonial Virginia in 1619. Other foods brought from West Africa during the slave trade that influenced Southern cuisine were guinea pepper, gherkin, sesame seeds, kola nuts, eggplant, watermelon, rice, and cantaloupe.\nGullah Geechee people in the Sea Islands of South Carolina and Georgia influenced some of the Southern rice-based dishes. West Africans in the rice growing regions of present-day Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Liberia cultivated African rice for about 3,000 years. African rice is a species related to, yet distinct from, Asian rice. It was originally domesticated in the inland delta of the Upper Niger River. Once Carolinian and Georgian planters in the American South discovered that African rice would grow in that region, they often sought enslaved Africans from rice-growing regions because they had the skills and knowledge needed to develop and build irrigation, dams and earthworks. The rice-based dished created by Gullah people are Charleston red rice and Hoppin' John. Enslaved African Americans grew collard greens in their gardens. They incorporated collards in their soups and stews a tradition that came from West Africa. As the National Museum of African American History and Culture explained that African Americans in the American South spread the recipe of collard greens to other parts of the United States when they left the South during the Great Migration.\nThe French established a permanent settlement in the South in present-day New Orleans, Louisiana in 1718. French colonists relied on Indigenous people to survive. As historian Gwendolyn Midlo Hall explained how the French learned from the Chitimacha and other Indigenous people about the flora and fauna, topography of the land, how to build boats and navigate the waters, how to preserve food, and cultivate corn, squash, potatoes, and other indigenous crops. The first enslaved Africans to arrive in Louisiana came in 1719 aboard two slave ships that brought several barrels of rice seeds. African rice became a staple in Louisiana cuisine cultivated by enslaved people from West Africa's rice growing regions.\nFrench people incorporated roux into Louisiana cuisine that influenced the making of gumbo. Another French influence is mirepoix made with carrots, celery, and onion that became a Creole and Cajun version in Louisiana called the \"holy trinity\" made with bell peppers, celery and onions. Indigenous peoples of Louisiana during the colonial period (and into present day) made fry bread and Indian tacos. They also prepared meals with hunted animals such as turkey and deer and caught fish. Native Americans in Louisiana influenced the foodways of African Americans and European Americans as non-Natives prepared their meals with turkey, cornbread, and other Indigenous staples.\nSpaniards and enslaved West Africans influenced the making of jambalaya in New Orleans. Some historians suggest jambalaya has its roots in West African cuisine. The French introduced the tomato (a food native to the Americas) to West Africans, and they incorporated the food into their one-pot rice cooking meals and enhanced jollof rice and created jambalaya. Author Ibraham Seck, director of research at the Whitney Plantation Slave Museum in St. John the Baptist Parish, suggests jambalaya originated on the Senegalese coast of West Africa. Senegalese people had knowledge of rice cultivation and created dishes using rice and meats that were brought to Louisiana during the era of the slave trade. About sixty percent of enslaved Africans brought to Louisiana came from Senegambia. Senegambians had knowledge of rice cultivation and prepared meals using rice and other grains adding meat and vegetables into one pot. An article from the United Nations states that the cuisines of Nigeria, Senegal, Guinea, and Benin influenced the development of jambalaya: \"Jambalaya (mixed rice, meat and vegetables), feijoada (black beans and meat), gombo(okra), and hopping johns (peas) are all dishes that have been re-adapted from Senegal, Nigeria, Guinea and Benin. You will find variations of these dishes in America and the Caribbean region.\"\nGerman immigrants came to colonial America beginning in 1608 and helped to start the colony of Jamestown, Virginia and established settlements in the Shenandoah Valley. They brought their food traditions from Germany and influenced cuisine in America. The classic southern dish chicken and dumplings have origins in German cuisine. \"...the famous southern dish, Chicken and Dumplings, received its birth from the German influence of Spaetzel, which are small potato dumplings, even smaller than its Italian cousin, gnocchi.\" Other German influences are liver beef dishes, German sausages, and liver dumplings. German people also influenced cuisine in Louisiana after their arrival to the colony in 1722. For example, \"German sausage making is called andouille. Andouille sausage is a combination of pork, pork fat, salt, garlic, red pepper and black pepper, all packed into a sausage casing, which is smoked over sugar cane and pecan logs. When smoked, the sausage becomes very dark in color.\" This method of preparation of sausage is found in between St. Charles and St. John Baptist parishes. German foods such as marinated meats, pastries, sour flavors, and wursts were assimilated into the Southern diet and they became classic American foods that are eaten today in the form of hot dogs and hamburgers.\nThe Southern side dish potato salad have German influences. An article from South Carolina National Public Radio (NPR) explains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The earliest written recipes for American potato salad date to the mid-19th century. Cooked potatoes were typically dressed with oil, vinegar and herbs, which culinary historians believe were introduced by German immigrants who had a penchant for sour, sweet and spicy ingredients such as vinegar, sugar and coarse mustard. Hot potato salad, usually made with bacon, onion and vinegar dressing, was so closely associated with German immigrants that it was called 'German potato salad.'\" Culinary historians do not know who added mayonnaise to potato salad. Mayonnaise became available to purchase in the early 1900s. By the 1920s and 1930s, people were adding mayonnaise to potato salad.\nAmerican Civil War (1861 to 1865).\nDuring the American Civil War, food supplies were limited for Union and Confederate soldiers. Civil War soldiers received limited food rations which consisted of bread, coffee, salt pork, hard bread, a pound of beef or pork and a pound of bread or flour, and sometimes extras which included dried beans or peas, rice, vinegar, and molasses. Historians found that a lot of food was fried during the Civil War. An article from the Florida Department of State explains the soldier's diet: \"The most common form of hard bread, was called hardtack, a basic wheat biscuit that did not easily decay and could survive a rough march. It was extremely hard, and was often soaked in water, coffee, or in meat fat to soften it enough to eat. Other items, such as beans, peas, rice, coffee, sugar, or salt, were also issued, but not on a daily basis.\" Enslaved African Americans prepared meals for wealthy Confederate soldiers. In Union camps, contraband of war (Freedmen) and other cooks prepared meals for the Union army. Over time, rations between Union and Confederate armies varied as Confederate rations were reduced in wheat and livestock because of a Union blockade that prevented the Confederates from obtaining food and supplies.\nHardtack was not available to many Confederates because it was made from wheat, and wheat was not grown in many Southern states except for Georgia and Virginia. Cornbread replaced the hardtack rations in the Confederate army. Confederate soldiers made Johnnie cakes and \"corn dodgers\" that was similar to hardtack. In addition, they made fried flatbread and balls of cornmeal called \"flapjacks\" cooked over an open fire, and ate bacon, imitation coffee, and molasses. In some Southern hospitals patients ate dried fruit, potatoes, mush, beef, chicken soup, and bread. Despite limited rations, some Union soldiers were able to make hearty meals. The meals prepared were \"...chicken fricassee, mushroom ketchup (a condiment made by boiling mushrooms), a beef-and-potato stew, cornish game hens and ham and beans.\" Union and Confederates foraged for food when rations were low and cooked the fresh food they found. They also ate desiccated vegetables which were dehydrated and compressed vegetables into one inch by one-foot rectangular bricks that were made from string beans, turnips, carrots, beets, and onions. Other vegetables were packed into cakes, dried, and boiled for consumption.\nPost antebellum era.\nInterest in American regional cooking continued to grow after the Civil War, especially concerning the traditions of the Southern United States. Many new cookbooks were added to the existing body of literature. Some of these fell within the scope of domestic manuals offering instruction to southern homemakers to the maintenance of homes in the new post-Slavery era. Some of these works like Mary Stuart Smith's \"Virginia Cookery Book\" (1885) aimed to preserve the culinary heritage of the South. Recipes made by former slaves were published in African-American cookbooks after the Civil War. The earliest such cookbook was self-published in 1866 by Malinda Russell as a pamphlet titled, \"A Domestic Cookbook: Containing a Careful Selection of Useful Receipts for the Kitchen\". A cookbook published in 1900 in the city of Charleston, South Carolina had recipes used by formerly enslaved Gullah people. Benne seeds from \"sesame\", a plant native to West Africa, were eaten raw with sugar or milk. Enslaved people also made cakes, wafers, and brittles from them for white plantation families.\nIn the Appalachian region, 19th-century meals included greens fried in bear grease, elk backstrap steaks and venison stew. Ashcakes were cornbread cooked directly on hearth coals. Cornbread was the most common bread in the mountains, and still remains a staple. As wheat flour and baking powder/baking soda became available in the late 19th century, buttermilk biscuits became popular. Today, buttermilk biscuits and sausage gravy are the classic Appalachian breakfast; they are also a common breakfast everywhere where Appalachian people have emigrated. Both North Carolina and West Virginia have statewide biscuit chain restaurants; many Southern or originally-Southern chains offer biscuits and gravy, and when McDonald's introduced a new breakfast menu selling either Egg McMuffins (with English muffins) or a variant with biscuits, the biscuit zone was practically a map of the South with the exception of Virginia, Maryland, and Florida.\nThe American hot dog originated from German sausages called \"frankfurts\" in Frankfurt-am-Main, Germany. Sausages in Germany were served without bread. Charles L Feltman was a German immigrant and came to Coney Island, New York in 1856 and served sausages wrapped in a bun beginning in 1867. This method of eating sausages later spread across America making its way into the Southern states and are eaten at baseball games. Southerners make different versions of hot dogs, giving them a southern flavor. Some Southern hot dogs have brown sugar mustard as a topping. In Huntsville, Alabama, hot dogs are served with chili and ketchup-slaw. In Mobile, Alabama, hot dogs are served on a toasted bun with a mustard-based coleslaw.\nOther cultural influences.\nSince the 20th century into present day, immigrants from Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and other European countries brought their cuisines to the South and influenced southern cuisine. An article from \"Time Magazine\" explains: \"...immigrants and their American-born sons and daughters have helped transform the perception of Southern cuisine into something beyond biscuits and gravy and mint juleps. Southern food is now kebabs in Nashville's Little Kurdistan, one of the largest enclaves of Kurds in the U.S. It's Greek diners across Alabama and Ethiopian restaurants standing next to Salvadoran pupuser\u00edas in Virginia. In rural towns that have seen their populations decline, it's the Chinese or Mexican restaurant that took over former greasy spoons while preserving them as de facto community centers. And in reborn urban centers, it's the Michelin-approved fine-dining restaurants where chefs have fused techniques from India, Laos and Nigeria with the staples of the Southern canon.\"\nMexican food culture influence on Southern cuisine is tacos. Texas was once a part of Mexico until it declared independence on March 2, 1836, and became a US state in 1845. Tex-Mex food is a fusion of Texas cuisine with Northern Mexican. Tacos in Texas have barbecued meats from pork, chicken, brisket, vegetables, and Mexican salsa. Indigenous people of Texas hunted pronghorn, deer, rabbits, turkeys, and quail. They made flour from ground acorns and mesquite pods. The Indigenous nations of the Antelope Creek in the Panhandle, the Caddo in East Texas, and the Jornada Mogollon near El Paso influenced Southern foodways as venison, catfish, and pecans are staples in Texas cuisine. The Tejanos are a multiethnic people of Spanish and Native American heritage, and their food influenced Texas cuisine. A common dish in Texas is chili con carne made with cumin, black pepper, garlic, onion, and beef are all foreign imported foods, and the chiles come from Mexico. Tamale is a dish native to Central America and Mexico. The Tejanos' Indigenous ancestors brought tamales to Texas.\nSouthern food in restaurants.\nChains serving Southern foods\u2014often along with American comfort food\u2014have had great success; many have spread across the country or across the world, while others have chosen to stay in the South. Pit barbecue is popular all over the American South; unlike the rest of the country, most of the rural South has locally owned, non-franchise pit-barbecue restaurants, many serving the regional style of barbecue instead of the nationally predominant Kansas City style. Family-style restaurants serving Southern cuisine are common throughout the South, and range from the humble and down-home to the decidedly upscale.\nDuring the civil rights movement, soul food restaurants were places where civil rights leaders and activists met to discuss and strategize civil rights protests and ideas for implementing social and political change. Paschal's Restaurant in Atlanta, like Georgia Gilmore's eatery in Montgomery, had an important part in the civil rights movement. Upon returning to Atlanta from Montgomery, Martin Luther King Jr. got permission \"to bring his team members and guests to Paschal's to eat, meet, rest, plan, and strategize.\"\nSouthern food in grocery stores.\nGrocery chains serving Southern foods\u2014often alongside national brands\u2014have maintained strong regional identities; many have expanded throughout the Southeast while others remain locally focused. Traditional Southern ingredients are popular all over the American South; unlike the rest of the country, most Southern grocery stores stock extensive selections of regionally specific items like stone-ground grits, country ham, and local hot sauces, many carrying products from small-scale regional producers instead of only nationally distributed brands. Chains specializing in Southern cuisine and ingredients are common throughout the South, and range from large regional players to small independent grocers.\nDuring the mid-20th century, Southern grocery stores played an important role in preserving regional food traditions as industrialization threatened to homogenize American cuisine. Chains like Winn-Dixie, and regional independents maintained strong relationships with local suppliers, ensuring customers could find everything from multiple varieties of cornmeal and pork products to regional beverages and locally produced specialties. These stores frequently feature extensive prepared food sections offering Southern classics such as fried chicken, mac and cheese, and fresh cornbread (more details below), while their produce departments emphasize ingredients central to Southern cooking like collard greens, okra, and sweet potatoes, helping preserve traditional foodways even as the region modernized.\nTraditional Southern dishes.\nA traditional Southern meal may include fried chicken, field peas (such as black-eyed peas), greens (such as collard greens, mustard greens, turnip greens, or poke sallet), mashed potatoes, cornbread or corn pone, sweet tea, and dessert\u2014typically a pie (sweet potato, chess, shoofly, pecan, and peach are the most common), or a cobbler (peach, blackberry, sometimes apple in Kentucky, Tennessee, or Appalachia).\nOther Southern foods include grits, country ham, hushpuppies, beignets (in the Gulf South), Southern styles of succotash, brisket, meatloaf, chicken fried steak, buttermilk biscuits (may be served with butter, jelly, fruit preserves, honey, gravy or sorghum molasses), pimento cheese, boiled or baked sweet potatoes, pit barbecue, fried catfish, fried green tomatoes, macaroni and cheese, bread pudding, okra (principally fried okra that has been dredged in cornmeal, but also steamed, stewed, sauteed, or pickled), butter beans, and pinto beans.\nBarbecue.\n\"White barbecue sauce\" made with mayonnaise, pepper and vinegar is a specialty of Alabama barbecue usually served with smoked barbecue chicken.\n\"Yellow barbecue sauce\" made with a mustard base is unique to South Carolina barbecue and has roots in the mass immigration of Germans to the area in the mid-1700s.\nFor barbecue in the United States, each Southern locale has its own variety of barbecue, particularly sauces. In recent years, the regional variations have blurred as restaurants and consumers experiment and adapt the styles of other regions. South Carolina is the only state that traditionally features all four recognized barbecue sauces, including mustard-based, vinegar-based, and light and heavy tomato-based sauces. North Carolina sauces vary by region; eastern North Carolina uses a vinegar-based sauce, the center of the state uses Lexington-style barbecue, with a combination of ketchup and vinegar as its base, and western North Carolina uses a heavier ketchup base. Memphis barbecue is best known for tomato- and vinegar-based sauces. In some Memphis establishments and in Kentucky, meat is rubbed with dry seasoning (dry rubs) and smoked over hickory wood without sauce. The finished barbecue is then served with barbecue sauce on the side.\nFried chicken.\nFried chicken is among the region's best-known exports. It is believed that the Scots, and later Scottish immigrants to many Southern states, had a tradition of deep-frying chicken in batter with seasonings and fat, unlike their English counterparts who baked or boiled chicken. However, some sources trace the origin of fried chicken to Southern and Western England where most of the early settlers to the South came from. They conclude that Southern and Western England had a strong tradition of frying, simmering, and saut\u00e9ing meats in a skillet as opposed to East Anglia which favored baking and boiling meats.\nThe importance of fried chicken to Southern cuisine is apparent through the multiple traditions and different adaptations of fried chicken, such as KFC, Nashville's Prince's Hot Chicken Shack, or the Cajun-inspired Bojangles' Famous Chicken 'n Biscuits and Popeyes Chicken.\nPork and ham.\nPork is an integral part of the cuisine. Stuffed ham is served in Southern Maryland. A traditional holiday get-together featuring whole hog barbecue is known in Virginia and the Carolinas and involves pit-smoking a hog. In much of the South, whole hogs are grilled as part of a \"pig pickin'\".\nGreen beans are often flavored with bacon and salt pork, turnip greens are stewed with pork and served with vinegar, ham biscuits (biscuits cut in half with slices of salt ham served between the halves) often accompany breakfast, and ham with red-eye gravy or country gravy is a common dinner dish.\nCountry ham, a heavily salt-cured ham, is common across the Southern United States, with the most well-known being the Virginia-originating Smithfield ham.\nPig feet, often called trotters, are perhaps less common because they are considered a southern delicacy, but can be prepared in a variety of ways. They are most often either pickled in white vinegar or braised in a mixture of sweet and smoky flavors, but can also be deep-fried, grilled, and stewed. They are usually served among other soul dishes such as yams, cornbread, and collard greens.\nVegetables.\nSouthern meals sometimes consist only of vegetables, with meat (especially salt pork) used for flavoring in cooking but with no meat dish served. \"Beans and greens\"\u2014white or brown beans served alongside greens stewed with a small amount of bacon\u2014is a traditional meal in many parts of the South. Turnip greens are the typical greens for such a meal, frequently cooked with some diced turnip and a piece of fatback.\nOther low-meat Southern meals include beans and cornbread\u2014the beans being pinto beans stewed with ham or bacon\u2014and Hoppin' John (black-eyed peas, rice, onions, red or green pepper, and bacon).\nCabbage is largely used as the basis of coleslaw, both as a side dish and on a variety of barbecued and fried meats. Saute\u00e9d red cabbage, flavored with vinegar and sugar, is popular in German-influenced areas of the South such as central Texas.\nButternut squash is common in winter, often prepared as a roasted casserole with butter and honey. Other typical vegetable sides include collard greens and congealed salads. Double stuffed potatoes with barbecue pork, cheddar cheese, cream cheese, mayonnaise and chives are served at barbecue restaurants throughout the South.\nThe tomato sandwich is associated with Southern cuisine and according to \"Yahoo News\" is considered an important part of the cuisine. According to Chuck Reece, editor of \"Georgia Public Radio\"'s Salvation South, the tomato sandwich is \"one thing\u2014\"one perfect thing\"\u2014about which every Southerner can agree\". The \"New York Times\" called it \"the sandwich southerners wait for all year\". Jenn Rice, writing in \"Garden &amp; Gun\", says \"The taste of tomato slathered in mayo is such a part of our summer memories that it's practically part of our DNA.\" Kathleen Purvis of the \"Charlotte Observer\" wrote, \"Of all the foods that define Southernness, the tomato sandwich may be right up there with grits as the true dividing line.\" According to \"Garden &amp; Gun\" it is \"the south's most beloved sandwich\".\nThough usually considered a snack, boiled peanuts are often sold throughout sports games and roadside stands as a southern favorite. This practice was adapted from West African culture and was recorded as early as 1899. It also has cultural significance drawn from the American Civil War with a song titled \u201cGoober peas\u201d from 1866 that reflected its purpose as a ration food.\nRice.\nCountry Captain is a regional dish of curry chicken and rice that dates back to at least the 1920s. It became well known after a Columbus, Georgia cook served the dish to then President Franklin D. Roosevelt. George Patton once said \"If you can't give me a party and have Country Captain, meet me at the train with a bucket of it.\"\nRed Rice is another staple of Low Country southern cuisine, which is a rice dish simmered in tomato paste, usually cooked with bacon, onion, and other spices\nSweets and pastries.\nGeorgia is known for peach cultivation and variations of Peach melba are commonly served as desserts. Chess pie is a traditional pastry made with eggs, butter and sugar or molasses. Bananas foster is a specialty of New Orleans.\nSeafood.\nGulf seafood like black grouper, shrimp and swordfish can be found, and \"channel catfish\" (\"Ictalurus punctatus\") farmed locally in the Mississippi Delta region is especially popular in Oxford, Mississippi. Fried catfish battered in cornmeal is commonly served at local establishments with hot sauce and a side of fries and coleslaw. Oysters Rockefeller is a New Orleans specialty, believed to have originated in the state. Creole dishes like gumbo and jambalaya often feature crawfish, oysters, blue crab and shrimp.\nBy region.\nSouthern cuisine varies widely by region. Generally speaking:\nLouisiana Creole cuisine.\nSouthern Louisiana is geographically part of the South, but its cuisine is probably best understood as having only mild Southern influences. Creole cuisine makes good use of many coastal animals\u2014crawfish (commonly called crayfish outside the region), crab, oysters, shrimp, and saltwater fish. Mirliton (chayote squash), is popular in Louisiana. Coffee blended with Chicory is sometimes preferred over pure ground\u2014especially as an accompaniment to beignets.\nLowcountry cuisine.\nThe Lowcountry region of the coastal Carolinas and Georgia shares many of the same food resources as the Upper Gulf Coast: fish, shrimp, oysters, rice, and okra. It also displays some similarities to Creole and Cajun cuisines.\nAppalachian cuisine.\nBecause of its geographic location, Appalachia cuisine offers a wide range of ingredients and products that can be transformed using traditional methods and contemporary applications. Staples of Appalachian cuisine that are common in other regional cuisines of the south include coconut cream cake, peanut brittle, sweet potato casserole, pork chops, biscuits and gravy, and chicken and dumplings. Basic soul food dishes like collard greens, hominy, cracklings and ham hocks are also common to the Appalachian kitchen.\nEuropean fruits\u2014especially apples and pears\u2014can grow in the mountains, and sweet fried apples are a common side dish. Appalachian cuisine also makes use of berries, both native and European, and some parts of the mountains are high enough or far enough north that sugar maple grows there\u2014allowing for maple syrup and maple sugar production. Wild morel mushrooms and ramps (similar to scallions and leeks) are often collected; there are even festivals dedicated to ramps, and they figure in some Appalachian fairy tales. The diet included corn, beans, squash, mixed pickles, milk, cheeses, butter, cream, tea, and coffee.\nSalt, a necessity for life, was always available (much of it coming from Saltville, Virginia), and local seasonings like spicebush were certainly known and used; but the only other seasonings used in the mountains are black pepper and flaked red pepper, along with a little use of cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves around Christmas. Gunpowder seasoning is also popular in the Appalachian region, often made from activated charcoal, dehydrated onion and garlic, paprika, salt, sugar, corn starch, and sunflower oil. Its \u2018smoky\u2019 flavor is commonly used as a dry rub, making it perfect for regional game as well as a variety of grilled vegetables such as bell peppers, white onion, and yellow squash. \u00a0\nCoffee, drunk without milk and only lightly sweetened, is a basic drink in Appalachia, often consumed with every meal; in wartime, chicory was widely used as a coffee substitute.\nRice and cane sugar, grown further south, were not easy to come by in Appalachia and generally sorghum, honey and maple syrup were used as sweetener in local dishes. Travel distances, conditions, and poor roads limited most early settlements to foods that could be grown or produced locally.\nFor farmers, pigs and chickens were the primary source of meat, with many farmers maintaining their own smokehouses to produce a variety of hams, bacon, and sausages. Seafood, beyond the occasionally locally caught fresh-water fish (pan-fried catfish is much loved, as is trout in the mountains of western North Carolina, East Tennessee, and Southwest Virginia) and crawfish, were unavailable until modern times.\nHowever, Appalachia did offer a wide variety of wild game, with venison, rabbit and squirrel particularly common, thus helping to compensate for distance from major cities and transportation networks. The popularity of hunting and fishing in Appalachia means that game and fresh-water fish were often staples of the table. Deer, wild turkey, grouse and other game birds are hunted and utilized in many recipes from barbecue to curing and jerky.\nHome canning, of both garden and foraged foods, is a strong tradition in Appalachia as well; mason jars are an everyday sight in mountain life; the most common canned foods are savory vegetables: green beans (half-runners, snaps), shelly beans (green beans that were more mature and had ripe beans along with the green husks), and tomatoes, as well as jam, jelly and local fruits.\nDried pinto beans are a major staple food during the winter months, used to make the ubiquitous ham-flavored bean soup usually called soup beans. Kieffer pears and apple varietals are used to make pear butter and apple butter.\nAlso popular are bread and butter pickles, fried mustard greens with vinegar, pickled beets, chow-chow (commonly called \"chow\"), a relish known as corn ketchup and fried green tomatoes; tomatoes are also used in tomato gravy, a variant of sausage gravy with a thinner, lighter roux. A variety of wild fruits like pawpaws, wild blackberries, and persimmons are also commonly available in Appalachia as well.\nThe gravy for biscuits and gravy is typically sausage or sawmill, not the red-eye gravy (made with coffee) used in the lowland South. Pork drippings from frying sausage, bacon, and other types of pan-fried pork are collected and saved, used for making gravy and in greasing cast-iron cookware. (Appalachia is overwhelmingly Protestant, the Catholic prohibition on meat-eating during Lent had no impact on Appalachian cuisine.)\nChicken and dumplings and fried chicken remain much-loved dishes. Cornbread, corn pone, hominy grits, mush, cornbread pudding and hominy stew are also quite common foods, as corn is the primary grain grown in the Appalachian hills and mountains, but are less common than in the past.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28554", "revid": "50928545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28554", "title": "Second Coming", "text": "Christian and Islamic belief that Jesus will return to Earth\nThe Second Coming (sometimes called the Second Advent or the Parousia) is the Christian and Islamic belief that Jesus Christ will return to Earth after his ascension to Heaven (the Ascension is said to have occurred about two thousand years ago). The idea is based on messianic prophecies and is part of most Christian eschatologies. \nIn Islamic eschatology, Jesus (\"\u02bf\u012as\u0101 ibn Maryam\") is also believed to return in the end times. According to Islamic belief, he will descend from Heaven to defeat the false messiah (\"al-Masih ad-Dajjal\"), restore justice, and reaffirm monotheism. His return is regarded as one of the major signs of the Day of Judgment, and he is viewed as a revered prophet, not divine, in Islamic theology.\nOther faiths have various interpretations of it.\nTerminology.\nSeveral different terms are used to refer to the Second Coming of Christ:\nIn the New Testament, the Greek word \u1f10\u03c0\u03b9\u03c6\u03ac\u03bd\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1 (\"epiphaneia\", appearing) is used six times to refer to the return of Christ.\nThe Greek New Testament uses the Greek term \"parousia\" (\u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03bf\u03c5\u03c3\u03af\u03b1, meaning \"arrival\", \"coming\", or \"presence\") 24 times, seventeen of them concerning Christ. However, parousia has the distinct reference to a period of time rather than an instant in time. At , the word \"parousia\" is used to clearly describe the period of time in which Noah lived. The Greek word \"eleusis\", which means \"coming\", is not interchangeable with \"parousia\". So this parousia or \"presence\" would be unique and distinct from anything that had occurred before. The word is also used six times referring to individuals (Stephanas, Fortunatus and Achaicus, Titus, and Paul the Apostle) and once referring to the \"coming of the lawless one\".\nGustav Adolf Deissmann (1908) showed that the Greek word \"parousia\" occurred as early as the 3rd century BC to describe the visit of a king or dignitary to a city \u2013 a visit arranged in order to show the visitor's magnificence to the people.\nIn Islam, the term Raj\u02bda () refers to the Second Coming. The term is most commonly used by Shia Muslims.\nSpecific date predictions and claims.\nViews about the nature of the Second Coming vary among Christian denominations and among individual Christians. Many specific dates have been predicted for the Second Coming, some now in the distant past, others still in the future.\nChristianity.\nMost English versions of the Nicene Creed include the following statements:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...he ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father. He will come again in his glory to judge the living and the dead, and his kingdom will have no end. ... We look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come.\nA 2010 survey showed that about 40% of Americans believe that Jesus is likely to return by 2050. This varies from 58% of white evangelical Christians, through 32% of Catholics to 27% of white mainline Protestants. Belief in the Second Coming was popularised in the US in the late nineteenth century by the evangelist Dwight L. Moody and the premillennial interpretation became one of the core components of Christian fundamentalism in the 1920s.\nEarly Christianity.\nMost scholars participating in the third quest for the historical Jesus view Jesus as an eschatological prophet preaching an imminent coming \u201cKingdom of God\". Some critical scholars see Jesus's predictions of an imminent parousia as mistaken, while many view it from the perspective of the conditional nature of judgement prophecy. A number of interpretations of the term \"Kingdom of God\" have thus appeared in its eschatological context, e.g., apocalyptic, realized or inaugurated eschatologies, yet no consensus has emerged among scholars.\nWhile the notion of an apocalyptic Jesus remains a mainstream view among scholars, it has been challenged by proponents of other portraits. Scholars of the Jesus Seminar attribute apocalyptic expectations to the early Church rather than the historical Jesus. Some argued that the earlier traditions in the Q Source and Gospel of Thomas showed that apocalyptic eschatology was not present in earlier layers of the Jesus tradition. Recent scholarship has re-evaluated the apocalyptic ideas in the early Christian gospels not as a literal prediction of the end times, but as relating to the destruction of the Jewish Temple in 70 AD. Scholars such as R.T. France and N.T. Wright argue that the Gospels use apocalyptic language borrowed from the Old Testament to describe the destruction of the Temple in 70 AD, and passages such as Mark 13:26 concerning the \"coming\" of the Son of Man are not about the Second Coming, but about the vindication of the Son of Man at the Right Hand of God, where he is bestowed new authority with the Temple's destruction.\nPreterism.\nThe position associating the Second Coming with 1st century events such as the destruction of Jerusalem and of the Jewish Temple in AD 70 is known as Preterism.\nSome Preterists see this \"coming of the Son of Man in glory\" primarily fulfilled in Jesus's death on the cross. They believe the apocalyptic signs are already fulfilled including \"the sun will be dark\", the \"powers ... will be shaken\", and \"then they will see\". Yet some critics note that many are missing, such as \"But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in which the heavens will pass away with a great noise, and the elements will melt with fervent heat; both the earth and the works that are in it will be burned up.\" And \"Then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.\"\nCatholicism.\nAccording to the Catholic Church, the second coming will happen in a single moment, suddenly and unexpectedly (not even the angels, saints, or demons know when it will occur). It will cause the fullness of the reign of God and the consummation of the universe and mankind.\nThe fullness of the reign of God means God fully manifests the victory he won over his enemies (sin, suffering, and Satan) on the Cross. Just as God gradually revealed himself to Israel until the birth of Jesus, so also God gradually manifests his victory through the church's sacraments (baptism, forgiving sin, exorcising Satan, holy unction, relieving suffering, etc.), until the moment when he will fully manifest his victory through the consummation of the universe and mankind, e.g., by granting the universe and mankind a share in Jesus' resurrection (the universe being transfigured and the dead being resurrected, judged, and recompensed).\nThe church does not believe the second coming will happen via a catastrophe (such as a nuclear war or extinction event), reincarnation (such as someone claiming to be Jesus), social or technological progress (such as mankind abolishing slavery or curing disease), or ascendancy (such as the church having political power). Nor does the church believe in double predestination.\nThe second coming is suspended until Jesus is recognized by \"all of Israel\", and it will be followed by a final and ultimate temptation to sin \u2013 in this case, apostasy \u2013 caused by the antichrist. Yet there are three things that hasten the second coming: the celebration of the Eucharist; Christians living with the mind of Jesus; and Christians praying for the Second Coming.\nLike many Christian denominations, the church considers this second coming of Christ to be the final and eternal judgment by God of the people in every nation resulting in the glorification of some and the punishment of others. The concept is found in all the Canonical gospels, particularly the Gospel of Matthew.\nA decisive factor in this Last Judgment during the second coming of Christ will be the question of whether the corporal and spiritual works of mercy were practised or not during lifetime. They rate as important acts of mercy, charity and justice. Therefore, and according to the Biblical sources (\u2013), the conjunction of the Last Judgment and the works of mercy is very frequent in the pictorial tradition of Christian art.\nOriental Orthodoxy and Eastern Orthodoxy.\nIt is the traditional view of Orthodox Christians, preserved from the early Church, that the Second Coming will be a sudden and unmistakable incident, like \"a flash of lightning\". They hold the general view that Jesus will not spend any time on the earth in ministry or preaching, but come to judge mankind. They teach that the ministry of the Antichrist will take place right before the Second Coming.\nThe Ethiopian Orthodox Church, a part of the Oriental Orthodox communion of churches, teaches that the second coming of Jesus will be radically different from his first coming, which \"was to save the lost world\".\nLutheranism and Anglicanism.\nA reference to the second coming is contained in the Nicene Creed and Apostles Creed, which is recited during the Lutheran and Anglican liturgies: \"He [Jesus] shall come again in glory to judge the living and the dead; and His kingdom shall have no end.\" An analogous statement is also in the biblical Pauline Creed ().\nThe Lutheran and Anglican churches proclaim the Mystery of Faith in their liturgies: \"Christ has died, Christ is risen, Christ will come again.\"\nMethodism.\nMethodist denominations teach that the Second Coming is connected with the Last Judgment, as professed in the Creeds.\nMethodist denominations differ on the nature of the Second Coming. For example, the United Methodist Church does not teach that there will be a \"rapture\". On the other hand, the Evangelical Methodist Church Conference teaches, with regard to the Second Coming of Christ:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLatter Day Saint movement.\nThe standard works of the largest denomination in the Latter Day Saint movement, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), say that Christ will return, as stated in the Bible. They also teach that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When the Savior comes again, He will come in power and glory to claim the earth as His kingdom. His Second Coming will mark the beginning of the Millennium. The Second Coming will be a fearful, mournful time for the wicked, but it will be a day of peace for the righteous. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and its leaders do not make predictions of the actual date of the Second Coming. Mormons believe Jesus appeared to his \"new world disciples\" in the Americas sometime after his crucifixion. This is a central tenet of the religion.\nLatter-day Saints have particularly distinct and specific interpretations of what are considered to be signs stated in the Book of Revelation.\nAccording to the teachings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the restored gospel will be taught in all parts of the world prior to the Second Coming. Church members believe that there will be increasingly severe wars, earthquakes, hurricanes, and other man-made and natural disasters prior to the Second Coming.\nSeventh-day Adventists.\nFundamental Belief #25 of the Seventh-day Adventist Church states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe second coming of Christ is the blessed hope of the church, the grand climax of the gospel. The Saviour's coming will be literal, personal, visible, and worldwide. When He returns, the righteous dead will be resurrected, and together with the righteous living will be glorified and taken to heaven, but the unrighteous will die. The almost complete fulfillment of most lines of prophecy, together with the present condition of the world, indicates that Christ's coming is imminent. The time of that event has not been revealed, and we are therefore exhorted to be ready at all times.\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nJehovah's Witnesses rarely use the term \"second coming\", preferring the term \"presence\" as a translation of \"parousia\". They believe that Jesus' comparison of \"the presence of the Son of man\" with \"the days of Noah\" at and suggests a duration rather than a moment of arrival. They also believe that biblical chronology points to 1914 as the start of Christ's \"presence\", which continues until the final battle of Armageddon. Other biblical expressions they correlate with this period include \"the time of the end\" (), \"the conclusion of the system of things\" (, ; ) and \"the last days\" (; ). Witnesses believe Christ's millennial reign begins after Armageddon.\nEmanuel Swedenborg and the New Church.\nEmanuel Swedenborg, an 18th-century scientist turned theologian, taught that his time (that historians have called the Age of Enlightenment) was an age of darkness and doubt for the Christian church. Historian Marguerite Beck Block writes,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now therefore it was time for a new church to be founded upon the earth, and for this purpose it was necessary for the Lord Himself to make his Second Coming to the sons of men.\n\"The night is followed by a morning which is the coming of the Lord. ... The prevailing opinion in the churches at the present day is, that when the Lord shall come for the last judgment. He will appear in the clouds of heaven with angels and the sound of trumpets, etc.,\" but this opinion is erroneous. The Second Coming of the Lord is not a coming in person, but in spirit and in the Word, which is from \nHim, and is Himself. ... Heretofore it has not been known that 'the clouds of heaven' mean the Word in the sense of the letter, and that the 'glory and power' in which He is then to come, mean the spiritual sense of the Word, because no one as yet has had the least conjecture that there is a spiritual sense in the Word, such as this sense is in itself. But as the Lord has now opened to me the spiritual sense of the Word, and has granted me to be associated with angels and spirits in their world as one of them, it is now disclosed.\n... This Second Coming of the Lord is effected by means of a man to whom the Lord has manifested Himself in Person, and whom He has filled with His Spirit, that he may teach the doctrines of the New Church from the Lord by means of the Word. ... That the Lord manifested Himself before me. His servant, and sent me to this office, ... I affirm in truth.\"\nEsoteric Christian teachings.\nIn Max Heindel's teaching, there is a distinction between the cosmic Christ, or Christ without, and the Christ within. According to this tradition, the Christ within is regarded as the true Saviour who needs to be born within each individual in order to evolve toward the future Sixth Epoch in the Earth's etheric plane, that is, toward the \"new heavens and a new earth\": the \"New Galilee.\" The Second Coming or Advent of the Christ is not in a physical body, but in the new \"soul body\" of each individual in the etheric plane of the planet where man \"shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air.\" The \"day and hour\" of this event is not known. The esoteric Christian tradition teaches that first there will be a preparatory period as the Sun enters Aquarius, an astrological concept, by precession: the coming Age of Aquarius.\nIslam.\nTraditional view.\nIn Islam, Jesus (or Isa; ) is considered to be a Messenger of God and the \"masih\" (messiah) who was sent to guide \"ban\u012b isr\u0101'\u012bl\" (the Israelites) with a new scripture, the \"Inj\u012bl\" (Gospel). The belief in Jesus (and all other messengers of God) is required in Islam, and a requirement of being a Muslim. However, Muslims believe that Jesus was never crucified or resurrected, instead ascending directly into heaven. Additionally, they do not recognize Jesus as the Son of God, as they believe God has no equals, but rather that he was a prophet. The Quran states that Jesus was born of the Virgin Mary. Muslims believe that Jesus performed all the miracles in the Gospels (with God's permission). The pertinent verses in Sura An-Nisa 4:157 reads \"And for their saying, 'Indeed, we have killed the Messiah, Jesus, the son of Mary, the messenger of Allah.' And they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him; but another was made to resemble him to them. And indeed, those who differ over it are in doubt about it. They have no knowledge of it except the following of assumption. And they did not kill him, for certain.\" 4:158 continues \"rather, Allah raised him to Himself. And ever is Allah Exalted in Might and Wise.\"\nThe Quran refers to a conversation between Jesus and God on judgement day in Sura Al-Ma'idah 5:116, 5:117. Jesus is questioned 5:116 \"Did you ever ask the people to worship you and your mother as gods besides Allah?\" To which Jesus replies 5:117 \"I never told them anything except what You ordered me to say: \"Worship Allah\u2014my Lord and your Lord!\" And I was witness over them as long as I remained among them.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And \u02f9on Judgment Day\u02fa Allah will say, \"O Jesus, son of Mary! Did you ever ask the people to worship you and your mother as gods besides Allah?\" He will answer, \"Glory be to You! How could I ever say what I had no right to say? If I had said such a thing, you would have certainly known it. You know what is \u02f9hidden\u02fa within me, but I do not know what is within You. Indeed, You \u02f9alone\u02fa are the Knower of all unseen. 5:116\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I never told them anything except what You ordered me to say: \"Worship Allah\u2014my Lord and your Lord!\" And I was witness over them as long as I remained among them. But when You took me, You were the Witness over them\u2014and You are a Witness over all things. 5:117\nIn the Quran, the second coming of Jesus is heralded in Sura Az-Zukhruf as a sign of the Day of Judgment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And (Jesus) shall be a Sign (for the coming of) the Hour (of Judgment): therefore have no doubt about the (Hour), but follow ye Me: this is a Straight Way. 43:61\nIbn Kathir presents this verse as proof of Jesus' second coming in the Quran in his exegesis \"Tafsir al-Qur'an al-Azim\".\nThere are also hadiths that foretell Jesus' future return such as: \"Sahih al-Bukhari\", Volume 3, Book 43: \"Kitab-ul-`Ilm\" (Book of Knowledge), Hadith Number 656:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Allah's Apostle said, \"The Hour will not be established until the son of Mary (i.e. Jesus) descends amongst you as a just ruler, he will break the cross, kill the pigs, and abolish the Jizya tax. Money will be in abundance so that nobody will accept it (as charitable gifts).\nAccording to Islamic tradition, Jesus' descent will be in the midst of wars fought by the Mahdi (\"lit\". \"the rightly guided one\"), known in Islamic eschatology as the redeemer of Islam, against the al-Masih ad-Dajjal (literally \"the false messiah\", synonymous with the Antichrist) and his followers. Jesus will descend at the point of a white minaret, east of Damascus, dressed in saffron robes\u2014his head anointed. He will then join the Mahdi in his war against the Dajjal. Jesus, considered in Islam as a Muslim (one who submits to God) and one of God's messengers, will abide by the Islamic teachings. Eventually, Jesus will slay the Antichrist Dajjal, and then everyone from the People of the Book (\"ahl al-kit\u0101b\", referring to Jews and Christians) will believe in him. Thus, there will be one community. \"Sahih Muslim\", https://\nAfter the death of the Mahdi, Jesus will assume leadership. This is a time associated in Islamic narrative with universal peace and justice. Islamic texts also allude to the appearance of Ya'juj and Ma'juj (Gog and Magog), ancient tribes that will disperse and cause disturbance on earth. God, in response to Jesus' prayers, will kill them by sending a type of worm in the napes of their necks. Jesus' rule is said to be around forty years, after which he will die (since according to Islam, Jesus did not die on the cross but was taken up to heaven and continues to live until his return in the second coming). Muslims will then perform the \"Salat al-Janazah\" (funeral prayer) for him and bury him in the city of Medina in a grave left vacant beside Muhammad.\nAhmadiyya.\nThe Ahmadiyya movement believe that the promised Mahdi and Messiah arrived in the person of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835\u20131908). This is widely rejected by other Muslims, who do not regard Ahmadis as a legitimate sect of Islam.\nThe Ahmadiyya movement interpret the Second Coming of Jesus prophesied as being that of a person \"similar to Jesus\" (\"math\u012bl-i \u02bfIs\u0101\") and not his physical return, in the same way as John the Baptist resembled the character of the biblical prophet Elijah in Christianity. Ahmadis believe that Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (the founder of the movement) demonstrated that the prophecy in Muslim and Christian religious texts were traditionally misunderstood to suggest that Jesus of Nazareth himself would return, and hold that Jesus survived the crucifixion and later died a natural death. Ahmadis consider Ghulam, in both his character and teachings, to be representative of Jesus, and that he attained the same spiritual rank of Prophethood as Jesus. Thus, Ahmadis believe this prediction was fulfilled and continued by his movement.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nAccording to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, the Second Coming is a gradual process that coincides with the advancement of human civilization from the beginning of humanity. It teaches that the founders of the major world religions each represent a return of the Word and Spirit of God as a new, unique personification sent by God, who introduces new teachings, laws and revelations, such that all major religions are part of a progressive revelation. Each Coming is said to build upon the major world religions emerging from earlier ages, verifying previous spiritual truths, and fulfilling its prophesies regarding a future return or coming. In this context, the Second Coming is depicted as a continuation of God's will in one continuous faith, with different names as presented by the founders of each religion as the voice of God at different times in history.\nBah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h announced that he was a manifestation of the returned Christ, understood as a reappearance of the Word and Spirit of God:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;O thou who art waiting, tarry no longer, for He is come. Behold His Tabernacle and His Glory dwelling therein. It is the Ancient Glory, with a new Manifestation. He wrote to Pope Pius IX, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He Who is the Lord of Lords is come overshadowed with clouds... He, verily, hath again come down from Heaven even as He came down from it the first time. Beware that thou dispute not with Him even as the Pharisees disputed with Him without a clear token or proof. He referred to himself as the \"Ancient of Days\" and the \"Pen of Glory\", and also claimed:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is the Father foretold by Isaiah, and the Comforter concerning Whom the Spirit had covenanted with you. Open your eyes, O concourse of bishops, that ye may behold your Lord seated upon the Throne of might and glory. Baha'u'llah also wrote, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFollowers of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith believe that prophecies of the second coming of Jesus (along with prophecies from other religions) were fulfilled by his forerunner the B\u00e1b in 1844 and then by the events occurring during the days of Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h. They believe that the fulfillment of Christian prophecies by Baha'u'llah is similar to Jesus' fulfillment of Jewish prophecies, where in both cases people were expecting the literal fulfillment of apocalyptic statements that led to rejections of the Return, instead of accepting fulfillment in symbolic and spiritual ways. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds understand that the return of the Christ with a new name was intended by Jesus to be a Return in a spiritual sense, due to Jesus explaining in the Gospels that the return of Elijah in John the Baptist was a return in a spiritual sense.\nJudaism.\nJudaism teaches that Jesus is one of the false Jewish Messiah claimants because he failed to fulfill any Messianic prophecies, which include:\nRastafari.\nIn the early developments of the Rastafari religion, Haile Selassie (the Ethiopian Emperor) was regarded as a member of the House of David, is worshipped as God incarnate, and is thought to be the \"black Jesus\" and \"black messiah\" \u2013 the second coming of Christ. It was claimed that Marcus Garvey preached the coming of the black messiah on the eve of Selassie's coronation. Due to this prophecy, Selassie was the source of inspiration of the poor and uneducated Christian populations of Jamaica, who believed that the Emperor would liberate the black people from the subjugation of European colonists.\nParamahansa Yogananda's commentary.\nIn modern times some traditional Indian religious leaders have moved to embrace Jesus as an avatar, or incarnation, of God. In light of this, the Indian guru Paramahansa Yogananda, author of \"Autobiography of a Yogi\", wrote an extensive commentary on the Gospels published in 2004 as a two-volume set: \"The Second Coming of Christ: The Resurrection of the Christ Within You\". The book offers a mystical interpretation of the Second Coming in which it is understood to be an inner experience, something that takes place within the individual heart. In the introduction of this book, Yogananda wrote that the true Second Coming is the resurrection within you of the Infinite Christ Consciousness. Also stated in the Book of Luke \u2013 \"Neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you.\" ()\nDaya Mata wrote in the preface of \"The Second Coming of Christ\" that the \"...scriptural treatise thus represents the inclusive culmination of Paramahansa Yogananda's divine commission to make manifest to the world the essence of original Christianity as taught by Jesus Christ.\" In sharing her memories of when she wrote down his words, she shares \u2013 \"the great Guru, his face radiantly enraptured, as he records for the world the inspired exposition of the Gospel teachings imparted to him through direct, personal communion with Jesus of Nazareth.\" Larry Dossey, M.D., wrote that \"Paramahansa Yogananda's \"The Second Coming of Christ\" is one of the most important analyses of Jesus' teachings that exists. ... Many interpretations of Jesus' words divide peoples, cultures, and nations; these foster unity and healing, and that is why they are vital for today's world\".\nIn modern culture.\nJesus Christ returning to earth has been a theme in several movies and books, for example:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28555", "revid": "50801055", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28555", "title": "Serialization", "text": "Conversion process for computer data\nIn computing, serialization (or serialisation, also referred to as pickling in Python) is the process of translating a data structure or object state into a format that can be stored (e.g. files in secondary storage devices, data buffers in primary storage devices) or transmitted (e.g. data streams over computer networks) and reconstructed later (possibly in a different computer environment). When the resulting series of bits is reread according to the serialization format, it can be used to create a semantically identical clone of the original object. For many complex objects, such as those that make extensive use of references, this process is not straightforward. Serialization of objects does not include any of their associated methods with which they were previously linked.\nThis process of serializing an object is also called marshalling an object in some situations. The opposite operation, extracting a data structure from a series of bytes, is deserialization, (also called unserialization or unmarshalling).\nIn networking equipment hardware, the part that is responsible for serialization and deserialization is commonly called SerDes.\nUses.\nUses of serialization include:\nFor some of these features to be useful, architecture independence must be maintained. For example, for maximal use of distribution, a computer running on a different hardware architecture should be able to reliably reconstruct a serialized data stream, regardless of endianness. This means that the simpler and faster procedure of directly copying the memory layout of the data structure cannot work reliably for all architectures. Serializing the data structure in an architecture-independent format means preventing the problems of byte ordering, memory layout, or simply different ways of representing data structures in different programming languages.\nInherent to any serialization scheme is that, because the encoding of the data is by definition serial, extracting one part of the serialized data structure requires that the entire object be read from start to end, and reconstructed. In many applications, this linearity is an asset, because it enables simple, common I/O interfaces to be utilized to hold and pass on the state of an object. In applications where higher performance is an issue, it can make sense to expend more effort to deal with a more complex, non-linear storage organization.\nEven on a single machine, primitive pointer objects are too fragile to save because the objects to which they point may be reloaded to a different location in memory. To deal with this, the serialization process includes a step called \"unswizzling\" or \"pointer unswizzling\", where direct pointer references are converted to references based on name or position. The deserialization process includes an inverse step called \"pointer swizzling\".\nSince both serializing and deserializing can be driven from common code (for example, the \"Serialize\" function in Microsoft Foundation Classes), it is possible for the common code to do both at the same time, and thus, 1) detect differences between the objects being serialized and their prior copies, and 2) provide the input for the next such detection. It is not necessary to actually build the prior copy because differences can be detected on the fly, a technique called differential execution. This is useful in the programming of user interfaces whose contents are time-varying\u00a0\u2014 graphical objects can be created, removed, altered, or made to handle input events without necessarily having to write separate code to do those things.\nDrawbacks.\nSerialization breaks the opacity of an abstract data type by potentially exposing private implementation details. Trivial implementations which serialize all data members may violate encapsulation.\nTo discourage competitors from making compatible products, publishers of proprietary software often keep the details of their programs' serialization formats a trade secret. Some deliberately obfuscate or even encrypt the serialized data. Yet, interoperability requires that applications be able to understand each other's serialization formats. Therefore, remote method call architectures such as CORBA define their serialization formats in detail.\nMany institutions, such as archives and libraries, attempt to future proof their backup archives\u2014in particular, database dumps\u2014by storing them in some relatively human-readable serialized format.\nSerialization formats.\nThe Xerox Network Systems Courier technology in the early 1980s influenced the first widely adopted standard. Sun Microsystems published the External Data Representation (XDR) in 1987. XDR is an open format, and standardized as https:// (RFC 4506) by IETF.\nIn the late 1990s, a push to provide an alternative to the standard serialization protocols started: XML, an SGML subset, was used to produce a human-readable text-based encoding. Such an encoding can be useful for persistent objects that may be read and understood by humans or communicated to other systems regardless of programming language. It has the disadvantage of losing the more compact, byte-stream-based encoding, but by this point larger storage and transmission capacities made file size less of a concern than in the early days of computing. In the 2000s, XML was often used for asynchronous transfer of structured data between client and server in Ajax web applications. XML is an open format and standardized as a W3C recommendation.\nJSON is a lightweight plain-text alternative to XML and is also commonly used for client-server communication in web applications. JSON is based on JavaScript syntax but is independent of JavaScript and supported in many other programming languages. JSON is standardized as https:// (), http://, and https://.\nYAML is a strict superset of JSON and includes additional features such as a data type tags, support for cyclic data structures, indentation-sensitive syntax, and multiple forms of scalar data quoting. YAML is an open format.\nProperty lists are used for serialization by NeXTSTEP, GNUstep, macOS, and iOS frameworks. \"Property list\", or \"p-list\" for short, doesn't refer to a single serialization format but instead several different variants, some human-readable and one binary.\nFor large volume scientific datasets, such as satellite data and output of numerical climate, weather, or ocean models, specific binary serialization standards have been developed, e.g. HDF, netCDF and the older GRIB.\nProgramming language support.\nSeveral object-oriented programming languages directly support \"object serialization\" (or \"object archival\"), either by syntactic sugar elements or providing a standard interface for doing so. The languages which do so include Ruby, Smalltalk, Python, PHP, Objective-C, Delphi, Java, and the .NET family of languages. There are also libraries available that add serialization support to languages that lack native support for it.\nC and C++.\nC and C++ do not provide serialization as any sort of high-level construct, but both languages support writing any of the built-in data types, as well as plain old data structs, as binary data. As such, it is usually trivial to write custom serialization functions. Moreover, compiler-based solutions, such as the ODB ORM system for C++ and the gSOAP toolkit for C and C++, are capable of automatically producing serialization code with few or no modifications to class declarations. Other popular serialization frameworks are Boost.Serialization from the Boost Framework, the S11n framework, and Cereal. MFC framework (Microsoft) also provides serialization methodology as part of its Document-View architecture.\nWith the introduction of reflective programming to C++26, serialisation has been greatly simplified. Reflection allows for compile-time serialisation of, for instance, JSON into a codice_1 with corresponding structure.\nCFML.\nCFML allows data structures to be serialized to WDDX with the codice_2 tag and to JSON with the https:// function.\nDelphi.\nDelphi provides a built-in mechanism for serialization of components (also called persistent objects), which is fully integrated with its IDE. The component's contents are saved to a DFM file and reloaded on-the-fly.\nGo.\nGo natively supports unmarshalling/marshalling of JSON and XML data. There are also third-party modules that support YAML and Protocol Buffers. Go also supports \"Gobs\".\nHaskell.\nIn Haskell, serialization is supported for types that are members of the Read and Show type classes. Every type that is a member of the codice_3 type class defines a function that will extract the data from the string representation of the dumped data. The codice_4 type class, in turn, contains the codice_5 function from which a string representation of the object can be generated. The programmer need not define the functions explicitly\u2014merely declaring a type to be deriving Read or deriving Show, or both, can make the compiler generate the appropriate functions for many cases (but not all: function types, for example, cannot automatically derive Show or Read). The auto-generated instance for Show also produces valid source code, so the same Haskell value can be generated by running the code produced by show in, for example, a Haskell interpreter. For more efficient serialization, there are haskell libraries that allow high-speed serialization in binary format, e.g. http://.\nJava.\nJava provides automatic serialization which requires that the object be marked by implementing the interface. Implementing the interface marks the class as \"okay to serialize\", and Java then handles serialization internally. There are no serialization methods defined on the codice_6 interface, but a serializable class can optionally define methods with certain special names and signatures that if defined, will be called as part of the serialization/deserialization process. The language also allows the developer to override the serialization process more thoroughly by implementing another interface, the interface, which includes two special methods that are used to save and restore the object's state. There are three primary reasons why objects are not serializable by default and must implement the codice_6 interface to access Java's serialization mechanism.Firstly, not all objects capture useful semantics in a serialized state. For example, a object is tied to the state of the current JVM. There is no context in which a deserialized codice_8 object would maintain useful semantics.Secondly, the serialized state of an object forms part of its class' compatibility contract. Maintaining compatibility between versions of serializable classes requires additional effort and consideration. Therefore, making a class serializable needs to be a deliberate design decision and not a default condition.Lastly, serialization allows access to non-transient private members of a class that are not otherwise accessible. Classes containing sensitive information (for example, a password) should not be serializable nor externalizable. The standard encoding method uses a recursive graph-based translation of the object's class descriptor and serializable fields into a byte stream. Primitives as well as non-transient, non-static referenced objects are encoded into the stream. Each object that is referenced by the serialized object via a field that is not marked as codice_9 must also be serialized; and if any object in the complete graph of non-transient object references is not serializable, then serialization will fail. The developer can influence this behavior by marking objects as transient, or by redefining the serialization for an object so that some portion of the reference graph is truncated and not serialized. Java does not use constructor to serialize objects. It is possible to serialize Java objects through JDBC and store them into a database. While Swing components do implement the Serializable interface, they are not guaranteed to be portable between different versions of the Java Virtual Machine. As such, a Swing component, or any component which inherits it, may be serialized to a byte stream, but it is not guaranteed that this will be re-constitutable on another machine.\nJavaScript.\nSince ECMAScript 5.1, JavaScript has included the built-in codice_10 object and its methods codice_11 and codice_12. Although JSON is originally based on a subset of JavaScript, there are boundary cases where JSON is not valid JavaScript. Specifically, JSON allows the Unicode line terminators and to appear unescaped in quoted strings, while ECMAScript 2018 and older does not. See the main article on JSON.\nJulia.\nJulia implements serialization through the codice_13 / codice_14 modules, intended to work within the same version of Julia, and/or instance of the same system image. The codice_15 package offers a more stable alternative, using a documented format and common library with wrappers for different languages, while the default serialization format is suggested to have been designed rather with maximal performance for network communication in mind.\nLisp.\nGenerally a Lisp data structure can be serialized with the functions \"codice_16\" and \"codice_17\". A variable foo containing, for example, a list of arrays would be printed by codice_18. Similarly an object can be read from a stream named s by codice_19. These two parts of the Lisp implementation are called the Printer and the Reader. The output of \"codice_17\" is human readable; it uses lists demarked by parentheses, for example: . In many types of Lisp, including Common Lisp, the printer cannot represent every type of data because it is not clear how to do so. In Common Lisp for example the printer cannot print CLOS objects. Instead the programmer may write a method on the generic function codice_21, this will be invoked when the object is printed. This is somewhat similar to the method used in Ruby. Lisp code itself is written in the syntax of the reader, called read syntax. Most languages use separate and different parsers to deal with code and data, Lisp only uses one. A file containing lisp code may be read into memory as a data structure, transformed by another program, then possibly executed or written out, such as in a read\u2013eval\u2013print loop. Not all readers/writers support cyclic, recursive or shared structures.\n.NET.\n.NET has several serializers designed by Microsoft. There are also many serializers by third parties. More than a dozen serializers are discussed and tested http://. and https://\nOCaml.\nOCaml's standard library provides marshalling through the codice_22 module and the Pervasives functions codice_23 and codice_24. While OCaml programming is statically type-checked, uses of the codice_22 module may break type guarantees, as there is no way to check whether an unmarshalled stream represents objects of the expected type. In OCaml it is difficult to marshal a function or a data structure which contains a function (e.g. an object which contains a method), because executable code in functions cannot be transmitted across different programs. (There is a flag to marshal the code position of a function but it can only be unmarshalled in exactly the same program). The standard marshalling functions can preserve sharing and handle cyclic data, which can be configured by a flag.\nPerl.\nSeveral Perl modules available from CPAN provide serialization mechanisms, including codice_26 , codice_27 and codice_28. Storable includes functions to serialize and deserialize Perl data structures to and from files or Perl scalars. In addition to serializing directly to files, codice_26 includes the codice_30 function to return a serialized copy of the data packed into a scalar, and codice_31 to deserialize such a scalar. This is useful for sending a complex data structure over a network socket or storing it in a database. When serializing structures with codice_26, there are network safe functions that always store their data in a format that is readable on any computer at a small cost of speed. These functions are named codice_33, codice_34, etc. There are no \"n\" functions for deserializing these structures\u00a0\u2014 the regular codice_31 and codice_36 deserialize structures serialized with the \"codice_37\" functions and their machine-specific equivalents.\nPHP.\nPHP originally implemented serialization through the built-in codice_13 and codice_39 functions. PHP can serialize any of its data types except resources (file pointers, sockets, etc.). The built-in codice_39 function is often dangerous when used on completely untrusted data. For objects, there are two \"magic methods\" that can be implemented within a class\u00a0\u2014 codice_41 and codice_42\u00a0\u2014 that are called from within codice_13 and codice_39, respectively, that can clean up and restore an object. For example, it may be desirable to close a database connection on serialization and restore the connection on deserialization; this functionality would be handled in these two magic methods. They also permit the object to pick which properties are serialized. Since PHP 5.1, there is an object-oriented serialization mechanism for objects, the codice_6 interface.\nProlog.\nProlog's \"term\" structure, which is the only data structure of the language, can be serialized out through the built-in predicate codice_46 and serialized-in through the built-in predicates codice_47 and codice_48. The resulting stream is uncompressed text (in some encoding determined by configuration of the target stream), with any free variables in the term represented by placeholder variable names. The predicate codice_46 is standardized in the ISO Specification for Prolog (ISO/IEC 13211-1) on pages 59 ff. (\"Writing a term, \u00a7 7.10.5\"). Therefore it is expected that terms serialized-out by one implementation can be serialized-in by another without ambiguity or surprises. In practice, implementation-specific extensions (e.g. SWI-Prolog's dictionaries) may use non-standard term structures, so interoperability may break in edge cases. As examples, see the corresponding manual pages for SWI-Prolog, SICStus Prolog, GNU Prolog. Whether and how serialized terms received over the network are checked against a specification (after deserialization from the character stream has happened) is left to the implementer. Prolog's built-in Definite Clause Grammars can be applied at that stage.\nPython.\nThe core general serialization mechanism is the codice_50 standard library module, alluding to the database systems term \"pickling\" to describe data serialization (\"unpickling\" for \"deserializing\"). Pickle uses a simple stack-based virtual machine that records the instructions used to reconstruct the object. It is a cross-version https:// but unsafe (not secure against erroneous or malicious data) serialization format. Malformed or maliciously constructed data, may cause the deserializer to import arbitrary modules and instantiate any object. The standard library also includes modules serializing to standard data formats: codice_2 (with built-in support for basic scalar and collection types and able to support arbitrary types via https://). codice_2 (with support for both binary and XML property list formats). codice_2 (with support for the External Data Representation (XDR) standard as described in RFC 1014). Finally, it is recommended that an object's codice_2 be evaluable in the right environment, making it a rough match for Common Lisp's codice_55. Not all object types can be pickled automatically, especially ones that hold operating system resources like file handles, but users can register custom \"reduction\" and construction functions to support the pickling and unpickling of arbitrary types. Pickle was originally implemented as the pure Python codice_50 module, but, in versions of Python prior to 3.0, the codice_57 module (also a built-in) offers improved performance (up to 1000 times faster). The codice_57 was adapted from the Unladen Swallow project. In Python 3, users should always import the standard version, which attempts to import the accelerated version and falls back to the pure Python version.\nR.\nR has the function codice_59 which writes an ASCII text representation of an R object to a file or connection. A representation can be read from a file using codice_60. More specific, the function codice_61 serializes an R object to a connection, the output being a raw vector coded in hexadecimal format. The codice_62 function allows to read an object from a connection or a raw vector.\nREBOL.\nREBOL will serialize to file (codice_63) or to a codice_64 (codice_65). Strings and files can be deserialized using the polymorphic codice_66 function. codice_67 provides cross-language data serialization in R, using Protocol Buffers.\nRuby.\nRuby includes the standard module codice_2 with 2 methods codice_69 and codice_66, akin to the standard Unix utilities codice_69 and codice_72. These methods serialize to the standard class codice_73, that is, they effectively become a sequence of bytes. Some objects cannot be serialized (doing so would raise a codice_74 exception): bindings, procedure objects, instances of class IO, singleton objects and interfaces. If a class requires custom serialization (for example, it requires certain cleanup actions done on dumping / restoring), it can be done by implementing 2 methods: codice_75 and codice_76. The instance method codice_75 should return a codice_73 object containing all the information necessary to reconstitute objects of this class and all referenced objects up to a maximum depth given as an integer parameter (a value of -1 implies that depth checking should be disabled). The class method codice_76 should take a codice_73 and return an object of this class.\nRust.\ncodice_2 is the most widely used library, or crate, for serialization in Rust which provides the and traits.\nSmalltalk.\nIn general, non-recursive and non-sharing objects can be stored and retrieved in a human readable form using the codice_82/codice_83 protocol. The codice_82 method generates the text of a Smalltalk expression which \u2013 when evaluated using codice_83 \u2013 recreates the original object. This scheme is special, in that it uses a procedural description of the object, not the data itself. It is therefore very flexible, allowing for classes to define more compact representations. However, in its original form, it does not handle cyclic data structures or preserve the identity of shared references (i.e. two references a single object will be restored as references to two equal, but not identical copies). For this, various portable and non-portable alternatives exist. Some of them are specific to a particular Smalltalk implementation or class library. There are several ways in Squeak Smalltalk to serialize and store objects. The easiest and most used are codice_86 and binary storage formats based on codice_87 serializers. In addition, bundled objects can be stored and retrieved using codice_88. Both provide a so-called \"binary-object storage framework\", which support serialization into and retrieval from a compact binary form. Both handle cyclic, recursive and shared structures, storage/retrieval of class and metaclass info and include mechanisms for \"on the fly\" object migration (i.e. to convert instances which were written by an older version of a class with a different object layout). The APIs are similar (storeBinary/readBinary), but the encoding details are different, making these two formats incompatible. However, the Smalltalk/X code is open source and free and can be loaded into other Smalltalks to allow for cross-dialect object interchange. Object serialization is not part of the ANSI Smalltalk specification. As a result, the code to serialize an object varies by Smalltalk implementation. The resulting binary data also varies. For instance, a serialized object created in Squeak Smalltalk cannot be restored in Ambrai Smalltalk. Consequently, various applications that do work on multiple Smalltalk implementations that rely on object serialization cannot share data between these different implementations. These applications include the MinneStore object database and some RPC packages. A solution to this problem is SIXX, which is a package for multiple Smalltalks that uses an XML-based format for serialization.\nSwift.\nThe Swift standard library provides two protocols, codice_89 and codice_90 (composed together as codice_91), which allow instances of conforming types to be serialized to or deserialized from JSON, property lists, or other formats. Default implementations of these protocols can be generated by the compiler for types whose stored properties are also codice_90 or codice_89.\nPowerShell.\nPowerShell implements serialization through the built-in cmdlet codice_94. codice_94 serializes .NET objects and stores the resulting XML in a file. To reconstitute the objects, use the codice_96 cmdlet, which generates a deserialized object from the XML in the exported file. Deserialized objects, often known as \"property bags\" are not live objects; they are snapshots that have properties, but no methods. Two dimensional data structures can also be (de)serialized in CSV format using the built-in cmdlets codice_97 and codice_98.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28561", "revid": "329764", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28561", "title": "Separation of powers", "text": "Division of a state's government into branches\nThe separation of powers principle functionally differentiates several types of state power (usually legislation, adjudication, and execution) and requires these operations of government to be conceptually and institutionally distinguishable and articulated, thereby maintaining the integrity of each. To put this model into practice, government is divided into structurally independent branches to perform various functions (most often a legislature, a judiciary and an administration, sometimes known as the ). When each function is allocated strictly to one branch, a government is described as having a high degree of separation; whereas, when one person or branch plays a significant part in the exercise of more than one function, this represents a fusion of powers. When one branch holds unlimited state power and delegates its powers to other organs as it sees fit, as is the case in communist states, that is called unified power.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nPolybius (\"Histories\", Book 6, 11\u201313) described the Roman Republic as a mixed government ruled by the Roman Senate, Consuls and the Assemblies. Polybius explained the system of checks and balances in detail, crediting Lycurgus of Sparta with the first government of this kind.\nTripartite system.\nDuring the English Civil War, the parliamentarians viewed the English system of government as composed of three branches \u2013 the King, the House of Lords and the House of Commons \u2013 where the first should have executive powers only, and the latter two legislative powers. One of the first documents proposing a tripartite system of separation of powers was the Instrument of Government, written by the English general John Lambert in 1653, and soon adopted as the constitution of England for few years during The Protectorate. The system comprised a legislative branch (the Parliament) and two executive branches, the English Council of State and the Lord Protector, all being elected (though the Lord Protector was elected for life) and having checks upon each other.\nA further development in English thought was the idea that the judicial powers should be separated from the executive branch. This followed the use of the juridical system by the Crown to prosecute opposition leaders following the Restoration, in the late years of Charles II and during the short reign of James II (namely, during the 1680s).\nJohn Locke's legislative, executive, and federative powers.\nAn earlier forerunner to Montesquieu's tripartite system was articulated by John Locke in his work \"Two Treatises of Government\" (1690). In the \"Two Treatises\", Locke distinguished between legislative, executive, and federative power. Locke defined legislative power as having \"the right to direct how the force of the commonwealth shall be employed\" (\"Second Treatise\", \u00a7\u00a0143), while executive power entailed the \"execution of the laws that are made, and remain in force\" (\"Second Treatise\", \u00a7\u00a0144). Locke further distinguished federative power, which entailed \"the power of war and peace, leagues and alliances, and all transactions with all persons and communities without [outside] the commonwealth\" (\"Second Treatise\", \u00a7\u00a0145), or what is now known as foreign policy. Locke distinguishes between separate powers but not discretely separate institutions, and notes that one body or person can share in two or more of the powers. For instance, Locke noted that while the executive and federative powers are different, they are often combined in a single institution (\"Second Treatise\", \u00a7\u00a0148).\nLocke believed that the legislative power was supreme over the executive and federative powers, which are subordinate. Locke reasoned that the legislative was supreme because it has law-giving authority; \"[F]or what can give laws to another, must need to be superior to him\" (\"Second Treatise\", \u00a7\u00a0150). According to Locke, legislative power derives its authority from the people, who have the right to make and unmake the legislature. He argues that once people consent to be governed by laws, only those representatives they have chosen can create laws on their behalf, and they are bound solely by laws enacted by these representatives.\nLocke maintained that there are restrictions on the legislative power. Locke says that the legislature cannot govern arbitrarily, cannot levy taxes, or confiscate property without the consent of the governed (cf. \"No taxation without representation\"), and cannot transfer its law-making powers to another body, known as the nondelegation doctrine (\"Second Treatise\", \u00a7\u00a0142).\nMontesquieu's separation of powers system.\nThe term \"tripartite system\" is commonly ascribed to French Enlightenment political philosopher Montesquieu, although he did not use such a term but referred to the \"distribution\" of powers. In \"The Spirit of Law\" (1748), Montesquieu described the various forms of distribution of political power among a legislature, an executive, and a judiciary. Montesquieu's approach was to present and defend a form of government whose powers were not excessively centralized in a single monarch or similar ruler (a form known then as \"aristocracy\"). He based this model on the Constitution of the Roman Republic and the British constitutional system. Montesquieu took the view that the Roman Republic had powers separated so that no one could usurp complete power. In the British constitutional system, Montesquieu discerned a separation of powers among the monarch, Parliament, and the courts of law.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In every government there are three sorts of power: the legislative; the executive in respect to things dependent on the law of nations; and the executive in regard to matters that depend on the civil law.\nBy virtue of the first, the prince or magistrate enacts temporary or perpetual laws and amends or abrogates those that have been already enacted. By the second, he makes peace or war, sends or receives embassies, establishes public security, and provides against invasions. By the third, he punishes criminals or determines the disputes that arise between individuals. The latter we shall call the judiciary power, and the other simply the executive power of the state.\nMontesquieu argues that each Power should only exercise its own functions. He was quite explicit here:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When the legislative and executive powers are united in the same person, or in the same body of magistrates, there can be no liberty; because apprehensions may arise, lest the same monarch or senate should enact tyrannical laws, to execute them in a tyrannical manner.\nAgain, there is no liberty, if the judiciary power is not separated from the legislative and executive. Were it joined with the legislative, the life and liberty of the subject would be exposed to arbitrary control; for the judge would be then the legislator. Were it joined to the executive power, the judge might behave with violence and oppression.\nThere would be an end to everything, were the same man or the same body, whether of the nobles or of the people, to exercise those three powers, that of enacting laws, executing the public resolutions, and trying the causes of individuals.\nSeparation of powers requires a different source of legitimization, or a different act of legitimization from the same source, for each of the separate powers. If the legislative branch appoints the executive and judicial powers, as Montesquieu indicated, there will be no separation or division of its powers, since the power to appoint carries with it the power to revoke.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The executive power ought to be in the hands of a monarch, because this branch of government, having need of despatch, is better administered by one than by many: on the other hand, whatever depends on the legislative power is oftentimes better regulated by many than by a single person.\nBut if there were no monarch, and the executive power should be committed to a certain number of persons selected from the legislative body, there would be an end then of liberty; by reason, the two powers would be united, as the same persons would sometimes possess, and would be always able to possess, a share in both.\nChecks and balances.\nIn most modern constitutions, the separation of powers doctrine is modified by the notion of moderate, balanced government or checks and balances \u2013 a distinct idea that was developed from the ancient theory of mixed government. Since the two concepts developed alongside each other, they have been closely associated, even though they are in conflict to some extent. Further, constitutional provisions \u2013 notably those of the United States Constitution \u2013 may reflect compromises between the two principles, leading the terms \"separation of powers\" and \"checks and balances\" to become shorthand for the institutional distribution of legal authority under a specific constitution. They are at times even used interchangeably.\nA government with checks and balances comprises more than one institution (often called a \"branch\" or \"a power\") exercising state power, and intends for each institution to have some influence over the other (interdependence). One institution may then \"check\" the other, or hinder it from using its power to pursue its ends \u2013 such as by declaring one of its actions a legal nullity or by questioning and removing one of its officers from their position. For instance, many parliaments consist of two houses; both of which are required to pass a bill before it becomes a law. A system of checks and balances also requires a balance of power between the institutions, so that the goals and actions of one are not completely determined by the other (independence); if both institutions were always in agreement by dint of one dominating the other, they would never challenge each other.\nIn a democratic state, where all government institutions are constituted by popular elections or through appointment by an elected body, disagreement between institutions may arise from conflicting institutional identities, fostered by differing internal power structures, decision-making processes or appointment procedures. To continue the example of a bicameral parliament, members of the upper house of the United States Congress are each elected by the entire people of one federal state; whereas each member of its lower house is elected by their electoral district, a smaller and more localized constituency. A member representing a larger and more diverse base may require a broader coalition, composed of people with opposing interests, to win election, and is thus incentivized to moderate their stance; and vice versa.\nOne branch's efforts to prevent another branch from becoming supreme are thought to perpetually hinder any branch from imposing unduly severe measures on the governed. Immanuel Kant took this view, saying that \"the problem of setting up a state can be solved even by a nation of devils,\" so long as they possess an appropriate constitution to pit opposing factions against each other.\nChecks and balances are designed to maintain the system of separation of powers keeping each branch in its place. The idea is that it is not enough to separate the powers and guarantee their independence but the branches need to have the constitutional means to defend their own legitimate powers from the encroachments of the other branches. Under this influence it was implemented in 1787 in the Constitution of the United States separation of powers. In Federalist No. 78, Alexander Hamilton, citing Montesquieu, redefined the judiciary as a separately distinct branch of government with the legislative and the executive branches. Before Hamilton, many colonists in the American colonies had adhered to British political ideas and conceived of government as divided into executive and legislative branches (with judges operating as appendages of the executive branch).\nJames Madison wrote about checks (and balances) in Federalist No. 51:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If men were angels, no government would be necessary. If angels were to govern men, neither external nor internal controls on government would be necessary. In framing a government that is to be administered by men over men, the great difficulty lies in this: you must first enable the government to control the governed; and in the next place oblige it to control itself.\nA dependence on the people is, no doubt, the primary control of the government; but experience has taught mankind the necessity of auxiliary precautions. This policy of supplying, by opposite and rival interests, the defect of better motives, might be traced through the whole system of human affairs, private as well as public. We see it particularly displayed in all the subordinate distributions of power, where the constant aim is to divide and arrange the several offices in such a manner as that each may be a check on the other and that the private interest of every individual may be a sentinel over the public rights. These inventions of prudence cannot be less requisite in the distribution of the supreme powers of the State.\nThomas Paine wrote about balances in \"Common Sense\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some writers have explained the English Constitution thus: the king, say they, is one, the people another; the peers are a house in behalf of the king, the Commons in behalf of the people; but this hath all the distinctions of a house divided against itself; and though the expressions be pleasantly arranged, yet when examined they appear idle and ambiguous [...] for as the greater weight will always carry up the less, and as all the wheels of a machine are put in motion by one, it only remains to know which power in the constitution has the most weight, for that will govern: and though the others [may] check the rapidity of its motion, yet so long as they cannot stop it, their endeavours will be ineffectual: The first moving power will at last have its way, and what it wants in speed is supplied by time.\nImportantly, Thomas Paine rejected the theory that English liberty was secured by constitutionally guaranteed checks and balances. Denouncing the whole notion of checks and balances, at least as far as the English constitution was concerned, Paine articulated the case for republican virtue as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he plain truth is that it is wholly owing to the constitution of the people and not to the constitution of the government that the crown is not as oppressive in England as in Turkey.\nTheories of division of state power.\nThere are different theories about how to differentiate the functions of the state (or types of government power), so that they may be distributed among multiple structures of government (usually called branches of government, or arms). There are analytical theories that provide a conceptual lens through which to understand the separation of powers as realized in real-world governments (developed by the academic discipline of comparative government); there are also normative theories, both of political philosophy and constitutional law, meant to propose a reasoned (not conventional or arbitrary) way to separate powers. Disagreement arises between various normative theories in particular about what is the (desirable, in the case of political philosophy, or prescribed, in the case of legal studies) allocation of functions to specific governing bodies or branches of government. How to correctly or usefully delineate and define the 'state functions' is another major bone of contention.\nLegislation.\nThe legislative function of the government broadly consists of authoritatively issuing binding rules.\nAdjudication.\nThe function of adjudication (judicial function) is the binding application of legal rules to a particular case, which usually involves creatively interpreting and developing these rules.\nExecution.\nThe executive function of government includes many exercises of powers in fact, whether in carrying into effect legal decisions or affecting the real world on its own initiative.\nAdditional types.\nAdjudicating constitutional disputes is sometimes conceptually distinguished from other types of power, because applying the often unusually indeterminate provisions of constitutions tends to call for exceptional methods to come to reasoned decisions. Administration is sometimes proposed as a hybrid function, combining aspects of the three other functions; opponents of this view conceive of the actions of administrative agencies as consisting of the three established functions being exercised next to each other merely in fact. Supervision and integrity-assuring activities (e.g., supervision of elections), as well as mediating functions (), are also in some instances regarded as their own type, rather than a subset or combination of other types. For instance, Sweden has four powers, judicial, executive, legislative and administrative branches.\nOne example of a country with more than 3 branches is Taiwan, which uses a five-branch system. This system consists of the Executive Yuan, Legislative Yuan, Judicial Yuan, Control Yuan, and Examination Yuan.\nNotes.\nCitation footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28563", "revid": "11042835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28563", "title": "Second Punic War", "text": "War between Rome and Carthage, 218 to 201 BC\nThe Second Punic War (218 to 201 BC) was the second of three wars fought between Carthage and Rome, the two main powers of the western Mediterranean in the 3rd century BC. For 17 years the two states struggled for supremacy, primarily in Italy and Iberia, but also on the islands of Sicily and Sardinia and, towards the end of the war, in North Africa. After immense materiel and human losses on both sides, the Carthaginians were once again defeated. Macedonia, Syracuse and several Numidian kingdoms were drawn into the fighting, and Iberian and Gallic forces fought on both sides. There were three main military theatres during the war: Italy, where Hannibal defeated the Roman legions repeatedly, with occasional subsidiary campaigns in Sicily, Sardinia and Greece; Iberia, where Hasdrubal, a younger brother of Hannibal, defended the Carthaginian colonial cities with mixed success before moving into Italy; and Africa, where Rome finally won the war.\nThe First Punic War had ended in a Roman victory in 241BC after 23 years and enormous losses on both sides. After the war Carthage expanded its holdings in Iberia where in 219BC a Carthaginian army under Hannibal besieged, captured and sacked the pro-Roman city of Saguntum. In spring 218BC Rome declared war on Carthage, beginning the Second Punic War. Later that year, Hannibal surprised the Romans by marching his army overland from Iberia, through Gaul and over the Alps to Cisalpine Gaul (modern northern Italy). Reinforced by Gallic allies he obtained crushing victories over the Romans at the battles of Trebia (218) and Lake Trasimene (217). Moving to southern Italy in 216 Hannibal defeated the Romans again at the battle of Cannae, where he annihilated the largest army the Romans had ever assembled. After the death or capture of more than 120,000 Roman troops in less than three years, many of Rome's Italian allies, notably Capua, defected to Carthage, giving Hannibal control over much of southern Italy. As Syracuse and Macedonia joined the Carthaginian side after Cannae, the conflict spread. Between 215 and 210 BC the Carthaginians attempted to capture Roman-held Sicily and Sardinia, but were unsuccessful. The Romans took drastic steps to raise new legions: enrolling slaves, criminals and those who did not meet the usual property qualification; this vastly increased the number of men they had under arms. For the next decade the war in southern Italy continued, with Roman armies slowly recapturing most of the Italian cities that had joined Carthage.\nThe Romans established a lodgement in north-east Iberia in 218 BC; the Carthaginians repeatedly attempted and failed to reduce it. In 211 the Romans took the offensive in Iberia and were badly defeated but maintained their hold on the north-east. In 209 BC the new Roman commander Publius Scipio captured Carthago Nova, the main Carthaginian base in the peninsula. In 208 Scipio defeated Hasdrubal, although Hasdrubal was able to withdraw most of his troops into Gaul and then Cisalpine Gaul in early 207 BC. This new Carthaginian invasion was defeated at the Battle of the Metaurus. At the battle of Ilipa in 206 Scipio permanently ended the Carthaginian presence in Iberia.\nScipio invaded Carthaginian Africa in 204 BC, compelling the Carthaginian Senate to recall Hannibal's army from Italy. The final engagement of the war took place between armies under Scipio and Hannibal at Zama in 202 and resulted in Hannibal's defeat and in Carthage suing for peace. The peace treaty dictated by Rome stripped Carthage of all of its overseas territories and some of its African ones. An indemnity of 10,000 silver talents was to be paid over 50 years. Carthage was prohibited from waging war outside Africa, and in Africa only with Rome's express permission. Henceforth it was clear Carthage was politically subordinate to Rome. Rome used Carthaginian military activity against the Numidians as a pretext to declare war again in 149BC starting the Third Punic War. In 146BC the Romans stormed the city of Carthage, sacked it, slaughtered most of its population and completely demolished it.\nPrimary sources.\nThe most reliable source for the Second Punic War is the historian Polybius (c.\u2009200\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009118 BC), a Greek sent to Rome in 167BC as a hostage. He is best known for \"The Histories\", written sometime after 146BC. Polybius's work is considered broadly objective and largely neutral between Carthaginian and Roman points of view. Polybius was an analytical historian and wherever possible interviewed participants, from both sides, in the events he wrote about. Modern historians consider Polybius to have treated the relatives of Scipio Aemilianus, his patron and friend, unduly favourably but the consensus is to accept his account largely at face value. The modern historian Andrew Curry sees Polybius as being \"fairly reliable\"; Craige Champion describes him as \"a remarkably well-informed, industrious, and insightful historian\".\nMuch of Polybius's account of the Second Punic War is missing after 216 BC or only exists in fragmentary form. As a result, the main source for much of the war is the account written by the Roman historian Livy. This is commonly used by modern historians where Polybius's account is not extant. Livy relied heavily on Polybius, but wrote in a more structured way, with more details about Roman politics; he was also openly pro-Roman. His accounts of military encounters are often demonstrably inaccurate; the classicist Adrian Goldsworthy says Livy's \"reliability is often suspect\", and the historian Phillip Sabin refers to Livy's \"military ignorance\".\nOther, later, ancient histories of the war exist, although often in fragmentary or summary form. Modern historians usually take into account the writings of Diodorus Siculus and Cassius Dio, two Greek authors writing during the Roman era; they are described by John Lazenby as \"clearly far inferior\" to Livy, but some fragments of Polybius can be recovered from their texts. The Greek moralist Plutarch wrote several biographies of Roman commanders in his \"Parallel Lives\". Other sources include coins, inscriptions, archaeological evidence and empirical evidence from reconstructions.\nOpposing forces.\nMost male Roman citizens were liable for military service and would serve as infantry, the wealthier equites providing a cavalry component. Traditionally, when at war the Romans would raise four legions, each of 4,200 infantry and 300 cavalry. Approximately 1,200 of the infantry, poorer or younger men unable to afford the armour and equipment of a standard legionary, served as javelin-armed skirmishers, known as velites. They carried several javelins, which would be thrown from a distance, a short sword and a shield. The rest were equipped as heavy infantry, with body armour, a large shield and short thrusting swords. They were divided into three ranks: the front rank also carried two javelins, while the second and third ranks were equipped with a thrusting spear instead. Legionary sub-units and individual legionaries both fought in relatively open order. It was the long-standing Roman procedure to elect two men each year as senior magistrates, known as consuls, who in time of war would each lead an army. An army was usually formed by combining two Roman legions with a similarly sized and equipped pair of legions provided by their Latin allies. These legions usually had a larger attached complement of cavalry than Roman ones.\nCarthaginian citizens only served in their army if there was a direct threat to the city. When they did, they fought as well-armoured heavy infantry armed with long thrusting spears, although they were notoriously ill-trained and ill-disciplined. In most circumstances Carthage recruited foreigners to make up its army. Many were from North Africa and these were frequently referred to as \"Libyans\". The region provided several types of fighters, including: close-order infantry equipped with large shields, helmets, short swords and long thrusting spears; javelin-armed light infantry skirmishers; close-order shock cavalry also known as \"heavy cavalry\" carrying spears; and light cavalry skirmishers who threw javelins from a distance and avoided close combat. The latter cavalry were usually Numidians. \nThe close-order Libyan infantry and the citizen-militia would fight in a tightly packed formation known as a phalanx. On occasion some of the infantry would wear captured Roman armour, especially among Hannibal's troops. Both Iberia and Gaul provided large numbers of experienced infantry and cavalry. These infantry were unarmoured troops who would charge ferociously, but had a reputation for breaking off if a combat was protracted. The Gallic cavalry, and possibly some of the Iberians, wore armour and fought as close-order troops; most or all of the mounted Iberians were light cavalry. Slingers were frequently recruited from the Balearic Islands. The Carthaginians also employed war elephants; North Africa had indigenous African forest elephants at the time.\nGarrison duty and land blockades were the most common operations. When armies were campaigning, surprise attacks, ambushes and stratagems were common. More formal battles were usually preceded by the two armies camping apart for days or weeks; sometimes forming up in battle order each day. If either commander felt at a disadvantage, they might march off without engaging. In such circumstances it was difficult to force a battle if the other commander was unwilling to fight. Forming up in battle order was a complicated and premeditated affair, which took several hours. Infantry were usually positioned in the centre of the battle line, with light infantry skirmishers to their front and cavalry on each flank. Many battles were decided when one side's infantry force was attacked in the flank or rear and they were partially or wholly enveloped.\nBoth states possessed large fleets throughout the war. The Carthaginian fleet rarely put to sea, and when it did it was usually to escort transport ships; it rarely acted aggressively. This gave the Romans naval superiority for the duration of the war.\nBackground.\nThe Roman Republic had been aggressively expanding in the southern Italian mainland for a century and had conquered peninsular Italy south of the Arno River by 270BC, after the Pyrrhic War when the Greek cities of southern Italy (Magna Graecia) submitted. During this period of Roman expansion, Carthage, with its capital in what is now Tunisia, had come to dominate southern Iberia, much of the coastal regions of North Africa, the Balearic Islands, Corsica, Sardinia and the western half of Sicily. \nBy 264BC Carthage was the dominant external power on Sicily, and Carthage and Rome were the preeminent powers in the western Mediterranean. Relationships were good, the two states had several times declared their mutual friendship and there were strong commercial links. According to the classicist Richard Miles Rome's expansionary attitude after southern Italy came under its control combined with Carthage's proprietary approach to Sicily caused the two powers to stumble into war more by accident than design. The immediate cause of the First Punic War was the issue of control of the independent Sicilian city state of Messana (modern Messina). In 264BC Carthage and Rome went to war.\nThe war was fought primarily on Sicily and its surrounding waters; the Romans also unsuccessfully invaded North Africa in 256BC. It was the longest continuous conflict and the greatest naval war of antiquity, with immense materiel and human losses on both sides. In 241BC, after 23 years of war, the Carthaginians were defeated. Under the Roman-dictated Treaty of Lutatius Carthage ceded its Sicilian possessions to Rome. Rome exploited Carthage's distraction during the Truceless War against rebellious mercenaries and Libyan subjects to break the peace treaty and annex Carthaginian Sardinia and Corsica in 238 BC. Under the leadership of Hamilcar Barca, Carthage defeated the rebels in 237 BC.\nWith the suppression of the rebellion, Hamilcar understood that Carthage needed to strengthen its economic and military base if it was to confront Rome again; Carthaginian possessions in Iberia (modern Spain and Portugal) were limited to a handful of prosperous coastal cities in the south and Hamilcar took the army which he had led in the Truceless War to Iberia in 237BC and carved out a quasi-monarchical, autonomous state in southern and eastern Iberia. This gave Carthage the silver mines, agricultural wealth, manpower, military facilities such as shipyards, and territorial depth to stand up to future Roman demands with confidence. Hamilcar ruled as a viceroy and was succeeded by his son-in-law, Hasdrubal, in 229BC and then his son, Hannibal, in 221BC. \nIn 226BC the Ebro Treaty was agreed with Rome, specifying the Ebro River as the northern boundary of the Carthaginian sphere of influence. At some time during the next six years Rome made a separate agreement with the city of Saguntum, which was situated well south of the Ebro. In 219BC a Carthaginian army under Hannibal besieged Saguntum, and after eight months captured and sacked it. Rome complained to the Carthaginian government, sending an embassy headed by Quintus Fabius Maximus to its senate with peremptory demands. When these were rejected Rome declared war in the spring of 218BC.\nSince the end of the First Punic War Rome had also been expanding, especially in the area of north Italy either side of the River Po known as Cisalpine Gaul. Roman attempts to establish towns and farms in the region from 232 BC led to repeated wars with the local Gallic tribes, who were finally defeated in 222. In 218 the Romans pushed even further north, establishing two new towns, or \"colonies\", on the Po and appropriating large areas of the best land. Most of the Gauls resented this intrusion.\nItaly.\nHannibal crosses the Alps, 218 BC.\nDuring 218BC there was some naval skirmishing in the waters around Sicily; the Romans repulsed a Carthaginian attack and captured the island of Malta. In Cisalpine Gaul (modern northern Italy), the major Gallic tribes attacked the Roman colonies there, causing the settlers to flee to their previously established colony of Mutina (modern Modena), where they were besieged. A Roman relief force broke through the siege, but was then ambushed and itself besieged. An army had previously been raised by the Romans to campaign in Iberia, but the Roman Senate detached one Roman and one allied legion from it to send to north Italy. Recruiting fresh troops to replace these delayed the army's departure for Iberia until September. At the same time a Roman army in Sicily under the consul Sempronius Longus was preparing for an invasion of Africa.\nMeanwhile, Hannibal assembled a Carthaginian army in New Carthage (modern Cartagena) and led it northwards along the Iberian coast in May or June. It entered Gaul and took an inland route, to avoid the Roman allies to the south. At the battle of the Rh\u00f4ne Crossing, Hannibal defeated a force of local Gauls which sought to bar his way. A Roman fleet carrying the Iberian-bound army landed at Rome's ally Massalia (modern Marseille) at the mouth of the Rhone, but Hannibal evaded the Romans and continued to Italy. \nThe Carthaginians reached the foot of the Alps by late autumn and crossed them in 15 days, surmounting the difficulties of climate, terrain and the guerrilla warfare tactics of the native Ligurians. Hannibal arrived in Cisalpine Gaul with 20,000 infantry, 6,000 cavalry and an unknown number of elephants\u00a0\u2013 the survivors of the 37 with which he left Iberia\u00a0\u2013 some time in November; the Romans had already gone into their winter quarters. Hannibal's surprise entry into the Italian peninsula led to the cancellation of Rome's planned campaign for the year: an invasion of Africa.\nCarthaginian victories, 218\u2013216 BC.\nShortly after arriving in Italy the Carthaginians captured the chief city of the hostile Taurini (in the area of modern Turin) and seized its food stocks. In late November 218BC the Carthaginian cavalry routed the cavalry and light infantry of the Romans at the battle of Ticinus. As a result, most of the Gallic tribes declared for the Carthaginian cause and Hannibal's army grew to more than 40,000 men. The Senate ordered the army in Sicily north to join the force already facing Hannibal, thus abandoning the plan to invade Africa. The combined Roman force under the command of Sempronius was lured into combat by Hannibal on ground of his choosing at the battle of the Trebia. The Carthaginians encircled the Romans and only 10,000 out of 40,000 were able to fight their way to safety. Having secured his position in Cisalpine Gaul by this victory, Hannibal quartered his troops for the winter among the Gauls. The latter joined his army in large numbers, bringing it up to 50,000 men.\nThere was shock when news of the defeat reached Rome, but this calmed once Sempronius arrived, to preside over the consular elections in the usual manner. The consuls-elect recruited further legions, both Roman and from Rome's Latin allies; reinforced Sardinia and Sicily against the possibility of Carthaginian raids or invasion; placed garrisons at Tarentum and other places for similar reasons; built a fleet of 60 quinqueremes; and established supply depots at Ariminum and Arretium in preparation for marching north later in the year. Two armies of four legions each, two Roman and two allied but with stronger than usual cavalry contingents, were formed. One was stationed at Arretium and one on the Adriatic coast; they would be able to block Hannibal's possible advance into central Italy and were positioned to move north to operate in Cisalpine Gaul.\nIn early spring 217BC the Carthaginians crossed the Apennines unopposed, taking a difficult but unguarded route. Hannibal attempted to draw the main Roman army under Gaius Flaminius into a pitched battle by devastating the area they had been sent to protect provoking Flaminius into a hasty pursuit. Hannibal set an ambush and in the battle of Lake Trasimene completely defeated the Roman army, killing 15,000 Romans, including Flaminius, and taking 10,000 prisoners. A cavalry force of 4,000 from the other Roman army was also defeated at the battle of Umbrian Lake and annihilated. The prisoners were badly treated if they were Romans; captured Latin allies were well treated by the Carthaginians and many were freed and sent back to their cities, in the expectation they would speak well of Carthaginian martial prowess and of their treatment. Hannibal hoped some of these allies could be persuaded to defect.\nThe Carthaginians continued their march through Etruria, then Umbria, to the Adriatic coast, then turned south into Apulia, hoping to win over some of the ethnic Greek and Italic cities of southern Italy. News of the defeat again caused a panic in Rome. The head of the embassy that was sent to Carthage right before the war broke out in 218 BC, Quintus Fabius Maximus, was elected dictator by the Roman Assembly and adopted the \"Fabian strategy\" of avoiding pitched battles, relying instead on low-level harassment to wear the invader down, until Rome could rebuild its military strength. Hannibal was left largely free to ravage Apulia for the next year. \nFabius was unpopular at this period with parts of the Roman army, public and the senate, for avoiding battle while Italy was being devastated by the enemy: there was awareness that his tactics would not lead to a quick end to the war. Hannibal marched through the richest and most fertile provinces of Italy, hoping the devastation would draw Fabius into battle, but Fabius refused. The Roman populace derided Fabius as \"the Delayer\" (in Latin, ) and in 216 BC elected new consuls: Gaius Terentius Varro, who advocated pursuing a more aggressive war strategy, and Lucius Aemilius Paullus, who advocated a strategy somewhere between Fabius's and that suggested by Varro. \nIn the spring of 216 BC Hannibal seized the large supply depot at Cannae on the Apulian plain. The Roman Senate authorised the raising of double-sized armies by Varro and Paullus, a force of 86,000 men, the largest in Roman history up to that point. Paullus and Varro marched southward to confront Hannibal and encamped away. Hannibal accepted battle on the open plain between the armies in the battle of Cannae. The Roman legions forced their way through Hannibal's deliberately weak centre, but Libyan heavy infantry on the wings swung around their advance, menacing their flanks. Hasdrubal Gisco led the Carthaginian cavalry on the left wing and routed the Roman cavalry opposite, then swept around the rear of the Romans to attack their cavalry on the other wing. The heavily outnumbered Carthaginian infantry held out until Hasdrubal charged into the legions from behind. As a result, the Roman infantry was surrounded with no means of escape. At least 67,500 Romans were killed or captured.\nMiles describes Cannae as \"Rome's greatest military disaster\". Toni \u00d1aco del Hoyo describes the Trebia, Lake Trasimene and Cannae as the three \"great military calamities\" suffered by the Romans in the first three years of the war. Brian Carey writes that these three defeats brought Rome to the brink of collapse. Within a few weeks of Cannae a Roman army of 25,000 was ambushed by Boii Gauls in Cisalpine Gaul at the battle of Silva Litana and annihilated. Fabius became consul in 215 BC and was re-elected in 214 BC.\nRoman allies defect, 216\u2013214 BC.\nLittle has survived of Polybius's account of Hannibal's army in Italy after Cannae. Livy gives a fuller record, but according to Goldsworthy \"his reliability is often suspect\", especially with regard to his descriptions of battles; many modern historians agree, but nevertheless his is the best surviving source for this part of the war.\nSeveral of the city states in southern Italy allied with Hannibal, or were captured when pro-Carthaginian factions betrayed their defences. These included the large city of Capua and the major port city of Tarentum (modern Taranto). Two of the major Samnite tribes also joined the Carthaginian cause. By 214BC the bulk of southern Italy had turned against Rome, although there were many exceptions and the majority of Rome's allies in central Italy remained loyal. All except the smallest towns were too well fortified for Hannibal to take by assault, and blockade could be a long-drawn-out affair, or if the target was a port, impossible. Carthage's new allies felt little sense of community with Carthage, or even with each other. They increased the number of places which Hannibal's army was expected to defend from Roman retribution, but provided relatively few fresh troops to assist him in doing so. Such Italian forces as were raised resisted operating away from their home cities and performed poorly when they did.\nAn important part of Hannibal's campaign in Italy was to attempt to fight the Romans by using local resources; raising recruits from among the local population. His subordinate Hanno was able to raise troops in Samnium in 214 BC, but the Romans intercepted these new levies in the battle of Beneventum and eliminated them before they rendezvoused with Hannibal. Hannibal could win allies, but defending them against the Romans was a new and difficult problem, as the Romans could still field multiple armies, which in total greatly outnumbered his own forces.\nThe greatest gain was the second largest city of Italy, Capua, when Hannibal's army marched into Campania in 216 BC. The inhabitants of Capua held limited Roman citizenship and the aristocracy was linked to the Romans via marriage and friendship, but the possibility of becoming the supreme city of Italy after the evident Roman disasters proved too strong a temptation. The treaty between them and Hannibal can be described as an agreement of friendship, since the Capuans had no obligations. When the port city of Locri defected to Carthage in the summer of 215BC it was immediately used to reinforce the Carthaginian forces in Italy with soldiers, supplies and war elephants. It was the only time during the war Carthage reinforced Hannibal. A second force, under Hannibal's youngest brother Mago, was meant to land in Italy in 215BC but was diverted to Iberia after a major Carthaginian defeat there.\nMeanwhile, the Romans took drastic steps to raise new legions: enrolling slaves, criminals and those who did not meet the usual property qualification. By early 215BC they were fielding at least 12 legions; by 214BC 18; and by 213BC 22. By 212 BC the full complement of the legions deployed would have been in excess of 100,000 men, plus, as always, a similar number of allied troops. The majority were deployed in southern Italy in field armies of approximately 20,000 men each. This was insufficient to challenge Hannibal's army in open battle, but sufficient to force him to concentrate his forces and to hamper his movements.\nMacedonia, Sardinia and Sicily.\nDuring 215BC the Macedonian king, Philip V, pledged his support to Hannibal, initiating the First Macedonian War against Rome in 215BC. The Romans were concerned that the Macedonians would attempt to cross the Strait of Otranto and land in Italy. They strongly reinforced their navy in the area and despatched a legion to stand guard, and the threat petered out. In 211BC Rome contained the Macedonians by allying with the Aetolian League, a coalition of Greek city states which was already at war with Macedonia. In 205BC this war ended with a negotiated peace.\nA rebellion in support of the Carthaginians broke out on Sardinia in 213BC, but it was quickly put down by the Romans.\nPrior to 215 BC Sicily remained firmly in Roman hands, blocking the ready seaborne reinforcement and resupply of Hannibal from Carthage. Hiero II, the old tyrant of Syracuse of forty-five-years standing and a staunch Roman ally, died in 215BC and his successor Hieronymus was discontented with his situation. Hannibal negotiated a treaty whereby Syracuse came over to Carthage, at the price of making the whole of Sicily a Syracusan possession. The Syracusan army proved no match for a Roman army led by Claudius Marcellus and by spring 213BC Syracuse was besieged. Both Polybius' and Livy's accounts of the siege focus on Archimedes' invention of war machines to counteract Roman siege warfare, which was already made difficult by the strong defences of the city.\nA large Carthaginian army led by Himilco was sent to relieve the city in 213BC and several further Sicilian cities deserted the Romans. In the spring of 212BC the Romans stormed Syracuse in a surprise night assault and captured several districts of the city. Meanwhile, the Carthaginian army was crippled by plague. After the Carthaginians failed to resupply the city, the rest of Syracuse fell in the autumn of 212BC; Archimedes was killed by a Roman soldier.\nCarthage sent more reinforcements to Sicily in 211BC and went on the offensive. In 211 BC Hannibal sent a force of Numidian cavalry to Sicily, which was led by the skilled Liby-Phoenician officer Mottones, who inflicted heavy losses on the Roman army through hit-and-run attacks. A fresh Roman army attacked the main Carthaginian stronghold on the island, Agrigentum, in 210BC and the city was betrayed to the Romans by a discontented Carthaginian officer. The remaining Carthaginian-controlled towns then surrendered or were taken through force or treachery and the Sicilian grain supply to Rome and its armies was resumed.\nItaly, 213\u2013208 BC.\nFor 11 years after Cannae the war surged around southern Italy as cities went over to the Carthaginians or were taken by subterfuge and the Romans recaptured them by siege or by suborning factions within to give them entry. Hannibal repeatedly defeated Roman armies, but wherever his main army was not active the Romans threatened Carthaginian-supporting towns or sought battle with Carthaginian or Carthaginian-allied detachments; frequently with success. By 208BC many of the cities and territories which had joined the Carthaginian cause had returned to their Roman allegiance.\nFabius captured the Carthaginian-allied town Arpi in 213 BC. In 212 BC Hannibal destroyed the Roman army of Centenius Penula at the battle of the Silarus in northwest Lucania. Later the same year, Hannibal defeated another Roman army at the battle of Herdonia, with 16,000 men lost from a force of 18,000. Despite these losses, the Romans besieged Capua, the Carthaginians' key ally in Italy. Hannibal offered battle to the Romans; Livy's account of the subsequent fighting is unclear, but the Romans seem to have suffered heavy casualties while the Carthaginians were unable to lift the siege. Hannibal then assaulted the Romans' siege works, but was again unable to relieve the city. In 211BC Hannibal again offered battle to the besieging Roman forces, this time they declined to leave their fortifications. In desperation Hannibal again assaulted them and again failed to break through. He next marched his army towards Rome, hoping to compel the Romans to abandon the siege to defend it; however, the besieging force stayed in place and Capua fell soon afterwards. The city was stripped of its political autonomy and placed under Roman appointees.\nIn 210 the Carthaginians caught a Roman army off guard outside Herdonia, heavily defeating it after its commander accepted battle. Livy then has Hannibal fighting the inconclusive battle of Numistro, although modern historians doubt his account. The Romans stayed on Hannibal's heels, fighting another pitched battle at Canusium in 209 BC and again suffering heavy losses. This battle enabled another Roman army to approach Tarentum and capture it by treachery.\nItaly, 207\u2013203 BC.\nIn the spring of 207BC Hasdrubal Barca repeated the feat of his elder brother by marching an army across the Alps. He invaded Cisalpine Gaul with an army of 35,000 men, intending to join forces with Hannibal, but Hannibal was unaware of his presence. The Romans facing Hannibal in southern Italy tricked him into believing the whole Roman army was still in camp, while a large portion marched north under the consul Claudius Nero. They reinforced the Romans under the second consul, Marcus Salinator, who were already facing Hasdrubal. This combined Roman force attacked at the battle of the Metaurus and destroyed the Carthaginian army, killing Hasdrubal. This battle confirmed Roman dominance in Italy and marked the end of their Fabian strategy. Without the expected reinforcement Hannibal's forces were compelled to evacuate allied towns and withdraw to Bruttium.\nIn 205BC, Mago Barca, another of Hannibal's younger brothers, landed in Genua in north-west Italy with the remnants of his Spanish army. It soon received Gallic and Ligurian reinforcements. Mago's arrival in the north of the Italian peninsula was followed by Hannibal's inconclusive battle of Crotona in 204BC in the far south of the peninsula. Mago marched his reinforced army towards the lands of Carthage's main Gallic allies in Cisalpine Gaul, but was checked by a large Roman army and defeated at the battle of Insubria in 203BC.\nAfter a Roman army invaded the Carthaginian homeland in 204BC, defeating the Carthaginians in two major battles and winning the allegiance of the Numidian kingdoms of North Africa, Hannibal and the remnants of his army were recalled. They sailed from Croton and landed at Carthage with 15,000\u201320,000 experienced veterans. Mago was also recalled; he died of wounds on the voyage and some of his ships were intercepted by the Romans, but 12,000 of his troops reached Carthage.\nIberia.\nIberia 218\u2013211 BC.\nThe Roman fleet continued on from Massala in the autumn of 218BC, landing the army it was transporting in north-east Iberia, where it won support among the local tribes. The Romans' lodgement between the Ebro and the Pyrenees blocked the route from Iberia to Italy, making the despatch of reinforcements from Iberia to Hannibal difficult. A Carthaginian attack in late 218BC was repelled at the battle of Cissa. In 217BC 40 Carthaginian and Iberian warships were beaten by 35 Roman and Massalian vessels at the battle of Ebro River, with the loss of 29 Carthaginian ships.\nIn 216 Hasdrubal received orders from Carthage to move into Italy and join up with Hannibal to put pressure on the Romans in their homeland. Hasdrubal demurred, arguing that Carthaginian authority over the Iberian tribes was too fragile and the Roman forces in the area too strong for him to execute the planned movement. In 215 Hasdrubal eventually acted, besieging a pro-Roman town and offering battle at Dertosa, where he attempted to use his cavalry superiority to clear the flanks of the Roman army while enveloping their centre on both sides with his infantry. However, the Romans broke through the centre of the Carthaginian line and then defeated each wing separately, inflicting severe losses. It was no longer possible for Hasdrubal to reinforce Hannibal in Italy.\nThe Carthaginians suffered a wave of defections of local Celtiberian tribes to Rome. The Roman commanders captured Saguntum in 212BC and in 211BC hired 20,000 Celtiberian mercenaries to reinforce their army. Observing that the Carthaginian forces in Iberia were divided into three armies which were deployed apart from each other, the Romans split their forces. This strategy resulted in two separate battles in 211, usually referred to jointly as the battle of the Upper Baetis. Both battles ended in complete defeat for the Romans, as Hasdrubal had bribed the Romans' mercenaries to desert. The Roman survivors retreated to their coastal stronghold north of the Ebro, from which the Carthaginians again failed to expel them. Claudius Nero brought over reinforcements in 210BC and stabilised the situation.\nIberia, 211\u2013205 BC.\nIn 210 BC Publius Cornelius Scipio, arrived in Iberia with further Roman reinforcements. In a carefully planned assault in 209BC he captured the lightly defended centre of Carthaginian power in Iberia, New Carthage, seizing a vast booty of gold, silver and siege artillery. He released the captured population and liberated the Iberian hostages held there by the Carthaginians, in an attempt to ensure the loyalty of their tribes.\nIn the spring of 208BC Hasdrubal moved to engage Scipio at the battle of Baecula. The Carthaginians were defeated, but Hasdrubal was able to withdraw the majority of his army and prevent any Roman pursuit; most of his losses were among his Iberian allies. Scipio was not able to prevent Hasdrubal from leading his depleted army over the western passes of the Pyrenees into Gaul. In 207BC, after recruiting heavily in Gaul, Hasdrubal crossed the Alps into Italy in an attempt to join his brother, Hannibal, but was defeated before he could.\nIn 206BC, at the battle of Ilipa, Scipio with 48,000 men, half Italian and half Iberian, defeated a Carthaginian army of 54,500 men and 32 elephants. This sealed the fate of the Carthaginians in Iberia. The last Carthaginian-held city in Iberia, Gades, defected to the Romans. Later the same year a mutiny broke out among Roman troops, which attracted support from Iberian leaders, disappointed that Roman forces had remained in the peninsula after the expulsion of the Carthaginians, but it was put down by Scipio. In 205BC an attempt was made by Mago to recapture New Carthage when the Roman occupiers were shaken by another mutiny and an Iberian uprising, but he was repulsed. Mago left Iberia for northern Italy with his remaining forces. In 203BC Carthage succeeded in recruiting at least 4,000 mercenaries from Iberia, despite Rome's nominal control.\nAfrica.\nAfrica, 213\u2013206 BC.\nIn 213BC Syphax, a powerful Numidian king in North Africa, declared for Rome. In response Carthaginian troops were sent to North Africa from Spain. In 206BC the Carthaginians ended this drain on their resources by dividing several Numidian kingdoms with Syphax. One of those disinherited was the Numidian prince Masinissa, who was thus driven into the arms of Rome.\nRoman invasion of Africa, 204\u2013201 BC.\nIn 205BC Publius Scipio was given command of the legions in Sicily and allowed to enrol volunteers for his plan to end the war by an invasion of Africa. After landing in Africa in 204BC he was joined by Masinissa and a force of Numidian cavalry. Scipio twice gave battle and destroyed two large Carthaginian armies. After the second encounter Syphax was pursued and taken prisoner by Masinissa at the battle of Cirta; Masinissa then seized most of Syphax's kingdom with Roman help.\nRome and Carthage entered into peace negotiations and Carthage recalled both Hannibal and Mago from Italy. The Roman Senate ratified a draft treaty, but because of mistrust and a surge in confidence when Hannibal arrived from Italy, Carthage repudiated it. Hannibal was placed in command of another army, formed from his veterans from Italy and newly raised troops from Africa, but with few cavalry. The decisive battle of Zama followed in October 202BC. Unlike most battles of the Second Punic War, the Romans had superiority in cavalry and the Carthaginians in infantry. Hannibal attempted to use 80 elephants to break into the Roman infantry formation, but the Romans countered them effectively and the elephants routed back through the Carthaginian ranks. The Roman and allied Numidian cavalry then pressed their attacks and drove the Carthaginian cavalry from the field. The two sides' infantry fought inconclusively until the Roman cavalry returned and attacked the Carthaginian rear. The Carthaginian formation collapsed; Hannibal was one of the few to escape the field.\nRoman victory.\nThe new peace treaty dictated by Rome stripped Carthage of all of its overseas territories and some of its African ones. An indemnity of 10,000 talents of silver was to be paid over 50 years and hostages were taken. Carthage was forbidden to possess war elephants and its fleet was restricted to ten warships. It was prohibited from waging war outside Africa and in Africa only with Rome's permission. Many senior Carthaginians wanted to reject the treaty but Hannibal spoke strongly in its favour and it was accepted in spring 201BC. Henceforth it was clear Carthage was politically subordinate to Rome. Scipio was awarded a triumph and received the \"Africanus\".\nRome's African ally, King Masinissa of Numidia, exploited the prohibition on Carthage waging war to repeatedly raid and seize Carthaginian territory with impunity. In 149 BC, fifty years after the end of the Second Punic War, Carthage sent an army, under Hasdrubal, against Masinissa, the treaty notwithstanding. The campaign ended in disaster at the battle of Oroscopa and anti-Carthaginian factions in Rome used the illicit military action as a pretext to prepare a punitive expedition. The Third Punic War began later in 149 BC when a large Roman army landed in North Africa and besieged Carthage. In the spring of 146 BC the Romans launched their final assault, systematically destroying the city and killing its inhabitants; 50,000 survivors were sold into slavery. The formerly Carthaginian territories became the Roman province of Africa. It was a century before the site of Carthage was rebuilt as a Roman city.\nNotes, citations and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28565", "revid": "50512162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28565", "title": "Stuttgart", "text": "Capital of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany\nStuttgart (; ; Swabian: ; Alemannic: ; ) is the capital and largest city of the German state of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. It is located on the Neckar river in a fertile valley known as the \"Stuttgarter Kessel\" (Stuttgart Cauldron) and lies an hour from the Swabian Jura and the Black Forest. Stuttgart has a population of 613,111 as of 2023, making it the seventh largest city in Germany, while over 2.8 million people live in the city's administrative region and nearly 5.5 million people in its metropolitan area, making it the fourth largest metropolitan area in Germany. The city and metropolitan area are consistently ranked among the top 5 European metropolitan areas by GDP; Mercer listed Stuttgart as 21st on its 2015 list of cities by quality of living; innovation agency 2thinknow ranked the city 24th globally out of 442 cities in its Innovation Cities Index; and the Globalization and World Cities Research Network ranked the city as a Beta-status global city in their 2020 survey. Stuttgart was one of the host cities for the official tournaments of the 1974 and 2006 FIFA World Cups.\nStuttgart is unusual in the scheme of German cities. It is spread across a variety of hills (some of them covered in vineyards), valleys (especially around the Neckar river and the Stuttgart basin) and parks. The city is known as the \"cradle of the automobile\". As such, it is home to famous automobile museums like the Mercedes-Benz Museum and Porsche Museum, as well as numerous auto-enthusiast magazines, which contributes to Stuttgart's status as Germany's \"Autohauptstadt\" (\"car capital city\"/\"capital of cars\"). The city's tourism slogan is \"Stuttgart offers more\". Under current plans to improve transport links to the international infrastructure (as part of the Stuttgart 21 project), Stuttgart unveiled a new city logo and slogan in March 2008, describing itself as \"\" (\"The new Heart of Europe\"). For business, it describes itself as \"Where business meets the future\". In July 2010, the city unveiled a new logo, designed to entice more business people to stay in the city and enjoy breaks in the area.\nSince the seventh millennium BC, the Stuttgart area has been an important agricultural area and has been host to a number of cultures seeking to utilize the rich soil of the Neckar valley. The Roman Empire conquered the area in AD 83 and built a massive near Bad Cannstatt, making it the most important regional centre for several centuries. Stuttgart's roots were truly laid in the tenth century with its founding by Liudolf, Duke of Swabia, as a stud farm for his warhorses. Initially overshadowed by nearby Bad Cannstatt, the town grew steadily and was granted a charter in 1320. The fortunes of Stuttgart turned with those of the House of W\u00fcrttemberg, and they made it the capital of their county, duchy, and kingdom from the 15th century to 1918. Stuttgart prospered despite setbacks in the Thirty Years' War and devastating air raids by the Allies on the city and its automobile production during World War II. However, by 1952, the city had bounced back and became the major cultural, economic, industrial, financial, tourism and publishing centre it is today.\nStuttgart is known for its strong high-tech industry, especially in the automotive sector. It has the highest general standard of prosperity of any German city. In addition to many medium-sized companies, several major corporations are headquartered in Stuttgart, including Porsche, Bosch, Exyte, and Mercedes-Benz Group. Stuttgart is an important financial center; the Stuttgart Stock Exchange is the second largest in Germany (after Frankfurt), and the Landesbank Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg (LBBW) is Germany's largest Landesbank. Stuttgart is also a major transport junction; it is among the most congested conurbations of Europe, and its airport is the sixth-busiest in Germany (2019). Stuttgart is a city with a high number of immigrants; according to Dorling Kindersley's \"Eyewitness Travel Guide to Germany\", \"In the city of Stuttgart, every third inhabitant is a foreigner.\" 40% of Stuttgart's residents, and 64% of the population below the age of five, are of immigrant background. In the rest of Germany, 28.7% of people are of immigrant background, with a relatively higher percentage living in cities and former western Germany (such as Stuttgart).\nEtymology.\nStuttgart, often nicknamed the \"Schwabenmetropole\" () in reference to its location in the centre of Swabia and the local dialect spoken by the native Swabians, has its etymological roots in the Old High German word , or \"stud farm\", because the city was founded in 950\u00a0AD by Duke Liudolf of Swabia to breed warhorses.\nIn the local dialects of Alemannic German it can be \", and in Swabian German \"; with similar variant spellings, usually dropping the central T sound.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\nAntiquity.\nOriginally, the most important location in the Neckar river valley was the hilly rim of the at what is today Bad Cannstatt. Thus, the first settlement of Stuttgart was a massive Roman \"Castra stativa\" () built c.\u200990 AD to protect the Villas and vineyards blanketing the landscape and the road from Mogontiacum (now Mainz) to Augusta Vindelicorum (Augsburg). Cannstatt was a part of the Roman imperial province Germania Superior.\nAs with many military installations, a settlement sprang up nearby and remained there even after the limes moved further east. When they did, the town was left in the capable hands of a local brickworks that produced sophisticated architectural ceramics and pottery. When the Romans were driven back past the Rhine and Danube rivers in the third century by the Alamanni, the settlement temporarily vanished from history until the seventh century.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn 700, Duke Gotfrid mentions a \"Chan Stada\" in a document regarding property. Archaeological evidence shows that later Merovingian era Frankish farmers continued to till the same land the Romans did.\nCannstatt is mentioned in the Abbey of St. Gall's archives as \"\"Canstat ad Neccarum\" () in 708. The etymology of the name \"Cannstatt\"\" is not clear, but as the site is mentioned as \"condistat\" in the Annals of Metz (9th century), it is mostly derived from the Latin word \"condita\" (\"foundation\"), suggesting that the name of the Roman settlement might have had the prefix \"Condi-\". Alternatively, Sommer (1992) suggested that the Roman site corresponds to the \"Civitas Aurelia G\" attested to in an inscription found near \u00d6hringen. There have also been attempts at a derivation from a Gaulish \"*kond\u00e2ti-\" \"confluence\".\nIn AD 950, Duke Liudolf of Swabia, son of the current Holy Roman Emperor Otto I, decided to establish a stud farm for his cavalry during the Hungarian invasions of Europe on a widened area of the Nesenbach river valley south of the old Roman castrum. The land and title of Duke of Swabia remained in Liudolf's hands until his rebellion was quashed by his father four years later. In 1089, Bruno of Calw built the precursor building to the Old Castle.\nStuttgart's viticulture, first documented in the Holy Roman Empire in the year AD 1108, kept people in the area of that stud farm for some time, but the area was still largely overshadowed by nearby Cannstatt because of its role as a local crossroad for many major European trade routes. Nevertheless, the existence of a settlement here (despite the terrain being more suited for that original stud farm) during the High Middle Ages is provided by a gift registry from Hirsau Abbey dated to around 1160 that mentions a \"Hugo de Stuokarten\". A settlement at this locale was again mentioned in 1229, but this time by Pope Gregory IX. In AD 1219, Stuttgart (then Stuotgarten) became a possession of Herman V, Margrave of Baden. In addition to Backnang, Pforzheim, and Besigheim, Hermann would also found the Stuttgart we know today in c.\u20091220. In 1251, the city passed to the Ulrich I von W\u00fcrttemberg as part of Mechthild von Baden's dowry. His son, Eberhard I \"the Illustrious\", would be the first to begin the many major expansions of Stuttgart under the House of W\u00fcrttemberg.\nEberhard desired to expand the realm his father had built through military action with the aid of the anti-king Henry Raspe IV, Landgrave of Thuringia, but was thwarted by the action of Emperor Rudolph I. Further resistance by Eberhard I against the Emperor's created Vogts and Bailiwicks as well as the newly appointed Duke of Swabia Rudolf II, Duke of Austria, eventually led to armed conflict and initial successes upon Emperor Rudolph I's death in 1291 against the Emperor's men. After initially defeating his regional rivals, Henry VII, newly elected as Emperor, decided to take action against Eberhard I in 1311 during his war with the Free imperial city of Esslingen by ordering his Vogt, Konrad IV von Weinberg, to declare war on Eberhard I. Eberhard I, defeated on the battlefield, lost Stuttgart and his castle (razed in 1311) to Esslingen and the city was thus managed by the city state from 1312 to 1315. Total destruction of the county was prevented by Henry VII's death on 24 August 1313 and the elections of Louis IV as King of the Germans and Frederick III as anti-king. Eberhard seized the opportunity granted to him by the political chaos, and recaptured his hometown and birthplace in 1316, and made much territorial gain. With peace restored at last, Eberhard began repairs and expansion to Stuttgart beginning with the reconstruction of Wirtemberg Castle, ancestral home to the House of W\u00fcrttemberg, in 1317 and then began expansion of the city's defenses. The early 1320s were important years for Stuttgart: Eberhard I moved the seat of the county to the city to a new and expanded castle, the collegiate church in Beutelsbach, where previous members of the W\u00fcrttemberg dynasty had been buried prior to its destruction in 1311, moved to its current location in Stuttgart in 1320, and the town's Stiftkirche was expanded into an abbey, and the control of the Martinskirche by the Bishopric of Constance was broken by Papal order in 1321. A year after the city became the principal seat of the Counts of W\u00fcrttemberg in 1320, the city was granted status as a city and given civic rights. At the end of the 14th century, new suburbs sprang up around Leonhard Church and near the city's fortifications as well. Towards the end of the 15th century, Count Ulrich V began construction of a new suburb on the northeastern edge of the city around the Dominican monastery Hospitalkirche. In the 1457, the first Landtag of the Estates of W\u00fcrttemberg was established in Stuttgart and a similar institution was established in Leonberg. After the temporary partitions of the County of W\u00fcrttemberg by the Treaties of N\u00fcrtingen, M\u00fcnsingen, and Esslingen, Stuttgart was once again declared the capital of the county in 1483.\nEarly Modern era.\nIn 1488, Stuttgart officially became the de facto residence of the Count himself as opposed to the location of his home, the Old Castle. Eberhard I, then Count Eberhard V, became the first Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg in 1495, and made Stuttgart the seat of the Duchy of W\u00fcrttemberg in addition to the County thereof. All this would be lost to the W\u00fcrttembergs during the reign of his son, Ulrich. Though Ulrich initially made territorial gains as a result of his decision to fight alongside the Emperor Maximilian I, he was no friend of the powerful Swabian League nor of his own subjects, who launched the Poor Conrad rebellion of 1514. Despite this and his rivalry with the Swabian League, his undoing would actually come in the form of his unhappy marriage to Sabina of Bavaria. In 1515, Ulrich killed an imperial knight and lover of Sabina's by the name of Hans von Hutten, obliging her to flee to the court of her brother, William IV, Duke of Bavaria, who successfully had Ulrich placed under Imperial ban twice. When the Emperor died in 1519, Ulrich struck, seizing the Free Imperial City of Reutlingen, prompting the League to intervene. That same year, Ulrich was soundly defeated and he was driven into exile in France and Switzerland following the League's conquest of W\u00fcrttemberg. W\u00fcrttemberg was then sold by the League to Emperor Charles V, who then granted it to his brother, Ferdinand I, thus beginning the 12 year ownership of the county by the Habsburgs. When the peasants Ulrich had crushed before rose once again in the German Peasants' War, Stuttgart was occupied by the peasant armies for a few days in the Spring of 1525. Ulrich, with the help of Philip I, Landgrave of Hesse, seized the chance to restore himself to power (albeit as an Austrian vassal) in the turmoil of the Reformation and War with the Turks and invited Erhard Schnepf to bring the Reformation to Stuttgart. He accepted, was named Court Preacher in Stuttgart, and worked in concert with Ambrosius Blarer until his dismissal following his resistance to the Augsburg Interim by the Duke in 1548. Duke Ulrich himself died two years later, and was succeeded by his son, Christoph. He had grown up in a W\u00fcrttemberg in turmoil and wished to rebuild its image. To this end, he once again began a construction boom all over the Duchy under the direction of Court Architect Aberlin Tretsch; knowing full well that the time of the Reisek\u00f6nigtum was over, Christoph and Tretsch rebuilt and remodeled the Old Castle into a Renaissance palace, and from 1542 to 1544, what is today the Schillerplatz was built as a town square. Duke Christoph also responded to the increasing need for drinking water by embarking upon a massive hydraulic engineering project in the form of a tunnel to Pffaf Lake, the Glems, and the Nesenbach from 1566 to 1575. In 1575, Georg Beer was also appointed Court Architect, and he built the Lusthaus. But it was architect Heinrich Schickhardt who would carry Tretsch's torch further; Schickhardt constructed the Stammheim Castle in the suburb of Stammheim, rebuilt the Fruchtkasten in the today's Schillerplatz, and expanded the Prinzebau.\nThe Thirty Years' War devastated the city, and it would slowly decline for a period of time from then on. After the catastrophic defeat of the Protestant Heilbronn League by the Habsburgs at N\u00f6rlingen in 1634, Duke Eberhard III and his court fled in exile to Strasbourg, abandoning the Duchy to looting by pro-Habsburg forces. The Habsburgs once again had full reign of the city for another four years, and in that time Stuttgart had to carry the burden of billeting the pro-Habsburg armies in Swabia. Ferdinand III, King of the Romans, entered the city in 1634 and, two years later in 1636, once again attempted to re-Catholicize W\u00fcrttemberg. The next year, the Bubonic plague struck and devastated the population. The Duke returned in 1638 to a realm somewhat partitioned to Catholic factions in the region, and entirely ravaged by the war. In the Duchy itself, battle, famine, plague and war reduced the Duchy's population of 350,000 in 1618 to 120,000 in 1648 \u2013 about 57% of the population of W\u00fcrttemberg. Recovery would be slow for the next several decades, but began nonetheless with the city's first bookstore in 1650 and high school in 1686. This progress was almost entirely undone when French soldiers under Ez\u00e9chiel du Mas appeared outside the city's walls in 1688 during the Nine Years' War, but the city was saved from another sack due to the diplomatic ability of Magdalena Sibylla, reigning over W\u00fcrttemberg as regent for her son, Eberhard Ludwig.\nFor the first time in centuries, Duke Eberhard Ludwig moved the seat of the Duchy out of the declining city of Stuttgart in 1718 to Ludwigsburg, founded in 1704, while the namesake Baroque palace, known as the \"Versailles of Swabia\", was still under construction. When Eberhard Ludwig died, his nephew Charles Alexander, ascended to the throne. Charles Alexander himself died in 1737, meaning his son Charles Eugene became the premature Duke (and later King) at the age of nine. When he came of age and returned from his tutoring at the court of Frederick the Great, King of Prussia, Charles desired to move the capital back to Stuttgart. He commissioned the construction of the New Castle in 1746, Castle Solitude in 1763, Castle Hohenheim in 1785, and the Karlsschule in 1770. The rule of Charles Eugene also saw the tutoring and origins of Friedrich Schiller in Stuttgart, who studied medicine and completed \"The Robbers\" here. Stuttgart, at the end of the 18th century, remained a very provincial town of 20,000 residents, narrow alleys, and agriculture and livestock. Despite being the capital and seat of the Duchy, the general staff of the Army of W\u00fcrttemberg was not present in the city. In 1794, Duke Charles dissolved the Karlsschule to prevent the spreading of revolutionary ideas.\nStuttgart was proclaimed capital once more when W\u00fcrttemberg became an electorate in 1803, and was yet again named as capital when the Kingdom of W\u00fcrttemberg was formed in 1805 by the Peace of Pressburg.\nKingdom of W\u00fcrttemberg and German Empire.\nKing Frederick I's W\u00fcrttemberg was given high status in the Confederation of the Rhine among the College of Kings, and the lands of nearby secondary German states. Within Stuttgart, the royal residence was expanded under Frederick although many of Stuttgart's most important buildings, including Wilhelm Palace, Katharina Hospital, the State Gallery, the Villa Berg and the K\u00f6nigsbau were built under the reign of King Wilhelm I. In 1818. King Wilhelm I and Queen Catherine in an attempt to assuage the suffering caused by the Year Without Summer and following famine, introduced the first Cannstatter Volksfest to celebrate the year's bountiful harvest. Hohenheim University was founded in 1818, and two years later the W\u00fcrttemberg Mausoleum as completed on the hill where Wirtemberg Castle once stood.\nFrom the outset of the 19th century, Stuttgart's development was once again impeded by its location (population of the city at the time was around 50,000), but the city began to experience the beginning of economic revival with the opening of the Main Station in 1846. Prior to then, the signs of rebirth in Stuttgart were evidenced by the construction of such buildings of Rosenstein Castle in 1822\u20131830, the Wilhelmspalais 1834\u20131840, and the foundations of the Staatsgalerie in 1843, University of Stuttgart in 1829, the University of Music and Performing Arts later, in 1857. Stuttgart had a role to play during the revolution of 1848/1849 as well. When internal divisions of the Frankfurt Parliament began the demise of that congress, the majority of the Frankfurt Congress voted to move to Stuttgart to flee the reach of the Prussian and Austrian armies in Frankfurt and Mainz. Even though the Congress may have had contacts with revolutionaries in Baden and W\u00fcrttemberg, the Congress, not popular with the content citizens of Stuttgart, were driven out by the King's army.\nStuttgart's literary tradition also bore yet more fruits, being the home of such writers of national importance as Wilhelm Hauff, Ludwig Uhland, Gustav Schwab, and Eduard M\u00f6rike. From 1841 to 1846, the Jubil\u00e4umss\u00e4ule was erected on the Schlossplatz before the New Palace according to the plans of Johann Michael Knapp to celebrate the rule of King Wilhelm I. A decade later, the K\u00f6nigsbau was constructed by Knapp and court architect Christian Friedrich von Leins as a concert hall. Another milestone in Stuttgart's history was the running of the first rail line from Cannstatt to Untert\u00fcrkheim on 22 October 1845. The advent of Industrialisation in Germany heralded a major growth of population for Stuttgart: In 1834, Stuttgart counted 35,200 inhabitants, rose to 50,000 in 1852, 69,084 inhabitants in 1864, and finally 91,000 residents in 1871. By 1874, Stuttgart once again exceeded the 100,000 inhabitant mark. This number doubled, due to the incorporation of local towns, to approximately 185,000 in 1901 and then 200,000 in 1904. In 1871, W\u00fcrttemberg joined the German Empire created by Otto von Bismarck, Prime Minister of Prussia, during the Unification of Germany, as an autonomous kingdom.\nStuttgart is purported to be the location of the automobile's invention by Karl Benz and then industrialized by Gottlieb Daimler and Wilhelm Maybach in a small workshop in Bad Cannstatt that would become Daimler-Motoren-Gesellschaft in 1887. As a result, it is considered to be the starting point of the worldwide automotive industry and is sometimes referred to as the 'cradle of the automobile', and today Mercedes-Benz and Porsche both have their headquarters in Stuttgart, as well as automotive parts giants Bosch and Mahle. The year prior, Robert Bosch opened his first \"Workshop for Precision Mechanics and Electrical Engineering\" in Stuttgart. In 1907, the International Socialist Congress was held in Stuttgart was attended by about 60,000 people. In 1912, VfB Stuttgart was founded. Two years later, the current iteration of the Stuttgart Hauptbahnhof was completed according to plan by Paul Bonatz from 1914 to 1927.\nDuring World War I, the city was a target of air raids. In 1915, 29 bombs struck the city and the nearby Roteb\u00fchlkaserne, killing four soldiers and injuring another 43, and likewise killing four civilians. The next major air raid on Stuttgart occurred 15 September 1918, when structural damage caused house collapses that killed eleven people.\nWeimar Republic.\nAt the end of the First World War, November revolutionaries stormed the Wilhelmpalais on 30 November 1918 to force King Wilhelm II to abdicate, but failed halfway. Under pressure from the revolutionaries, Wilhelm II refused the crown, but also refused to abdicate the throne. When he did eventually abdicate, the Free State of W\u00fcrttemberg was established as a part of the Weimar Republic, and Stuttgart was declared its capital. On 26 April 1919, a new constitution was devised, and the final draft was approved and ratified on 25 September 1919 by the Constituent Assembly. In 1920, Stuttgart temporarily became the seat of the German National Government when the administration fled from Berlin from the Kapp Putsch. Also in 1920, Erwin Rommel became the company commander of the 13th Infantry Regiment based in Stuttgart and would remain as such for the next nine years.\nNazi Germany.\nDue to the Nazi Party's practice of \"Gleichschaltung\", Stuttgart's political importance as state capital became totally nonexistent, though it remained the cultural and economic centre of the central Neckar region. Stuttgart, one of the cities bestowed an honorary title by the Nazi regime, was given the moniker \"City of the Abroad Germans\" in 1936. The first prototypes of the Volkswagen Beetle were manufactured in Stuttgart, according to designs by Ferdinand Porsche, by a design team including Erwin Komenda and Karl Rabe.\nThe Hotel Silber (), previously occupied by other forms of political police, was occupied by the Gestapo in 1933 to detain and torture political dissidents. The hotel was used for the transit of Nazi prisoners of conscience including Eugen Bolz, Kurt Schumacher, and Lilo Herrmann to concentration camps. The nearby court at Archive Street () 12A was also used as a central location for executions in Southwest Germany, as the headstone located in its atrium dedicated to the 419 lives lost there recalls. Participants of the Kristallnacht burned the Old Synagogue to the ground along with the relics contained within and also destroyed its Jewish cemetery. The next year the Nazi regime began the arrests and deportation of Stuttgart's Jewish inhabitants, beginning with the entire male Jewish population of Stuttgart, to the police-run prison camp at Welzheim or directly to Dachau. Other Jews from around W\u00fcrttemberg were brought to Stuttgart and housed in the ghetto on the former Trade Fair grounds in Killesberg. As the Memorial at Stuttgart North records, between 1941 (the first train arrived 1 December 1941, and took around 1,000 men to Riga) and 1945, more than 2,000 Jews from all over W\u00fcrttemberg were deported to Theresienstadt, Auschwitz, and the ghettos at Riga and Izbica. Of them, only 180 held in Internment survived the Shoah.\nStuttgart, like many of Germany's major cities, was ravaged throughout the war by Allied air raids. For the first four years of the war, successful air raids on the city were rare because of the capable defence of the city by Wehrmacht ground forces, the Luftwaffe, and artificial fog. Despite opinions among some Royal Air Force members that day-time air raids on the city were suicidal, substantial damage to the city's industrial capacity still occurred, such as the 25 August bombing of the Daimler AG plant in 1940 that killed five people. With the war increasingly turning against the Third Reich, more and more troops were pulled from the defence of the city in 1943 to fight on the Eastern Front. In 1944, the city centre was entirely in ruins due to Allied bombing raids that could now more easily attack the city. The heaviest raid took place on 12 September 1944, when the Royal Air Force, dropping over 184,000 bombs \u2013 including 75 blockbusters \u2013 levelled Stuttgart's city centre, killing 957 people in the resulting firestorm. In totality, Stuttgart was subjected to 53 bombing raids, resulting in the destruction of 57.7% of all buildings in the city, the deaths of 4,477 inhabitants, the disappearance of 85 citizens, and the injury of 8,908 more people. The Allies lost 300 aircraft and seven to ten enlisted men. To commemorate the city citizens who died during the war, the rubble was assembled and used to create the Birkenkopf. Today Stuttgart consists of over 40% of buildings from before World War II, besides all destruction.\nFrench-American tensions.\nThe Allied ground advance into Germany reached Stuttgart in April 1945. Although the attack on the city was to be conducted by the US Seventh Army's 100th Infantry Division, French leader Charles de Gaulle found this to be unacceptable, as he felt the capture of the region by Free French forces would increase French influence in post-war decisions. Independently, he directed General de Lattre to order the French 5th Armored Division, 2nd Moroccan Infantry Division and 3rd Algerian Infantry Division to begin their drive to Stuttgart on 18 April 1945. Two days later, the French forces coordinated with the US Seventh Army and VI Corps heavy artillery, who began a barrage of the city. The French 5th Armored Division then captured Stuttgart on 21 April 1945, encountering little resistance. The city fared poorly under their direction; French troops forcefully quartered their troops in what housing remained in the city, rapes were frequent (there were at least 1,389 recorded incidents of rape of civilians by French soldiers), and the city's surviving populace were poorly rationed. The circumstances of what later became known as \"The Stuttgart Crisis\" provoked political repercussions that reached even the White House. President Harry S. Truman was unable to get De Gaulle to withdraw troops from Stuttgart until after the final boundaries of the zones of occupation were established. The French army remained in the city until they finally relented to American demands on 8 July 1945 and withdrew. Stuttgart then became capital of W\u00fcrttemberg-Baden, one of the three areas of Allied occupation in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, from 1945 until 1952.\nBaden-W\u00fcrttemberg.\nThe military government of the American occupation zone established a Displaced persons camp for displaced persons, mostly forced labourers from Central and Eastern European industrial firms in the area. There was, however, a camp located in Stuttgart-West that, until its closure and transportation of internees to Heidenheim an der Brenz in 1949, housed almost exclusively 1400 Jewish survivors of the Shoah.\nAn early concept of the Marshall Plan aimed at supporting reconstruction and economic/political recovery across Europe was presented during a speech 6 September 1946 given by US Secretary of State James F. Byrnes at the Stuttgart Opera House. His speech led to the unification of the British and American occupation zones, resulting in the 'bi-zone' (later the 'tri-zone' when the French reluctantly agreed to cede their occupied territory to the new state). In 1948, the city applied to become the capital of the soon to-be Federal Republic of Germany, and was a serious contender against Frankfurt, Kassel, and Bonn. All these cities were examined by the Parlamentarischer Rat, but ultimately Bonn won the bid when the Republic was founded on 23 May 1949. The city's bid for capital failed primarily because of the financial burdens its high rents would place on the government.\nThe immediate aftermath of the War would be marked by the controversial efforts of Arnulf Klett, the first Oberb\u00fcrgermeister of Stuttgart, to restore the city. Klett favored the idea of a modernist Automotive city with functional divisions for residential, commercial and industrial areas according to the Athens Charter. Klett demolished both ruins and entire streets of largely undamaged buildings without rebuilding them to their original visage, a move that earned him much scorn from his contemporaries. In the 150th year since his death (1955), the last remnant of the alma mater of Friedrich Schiller, the Karlsschule, was removed in favor of an expansion to the Bundesstra\u00dfe 14. Klett also dramatically expanded the public transportation of Stuttgart with the Stuttgart Stadtbahn and, in 1961, initiated a city partnership with the French city of Strasbourg as part of an attempt to mend Franco-German relations. It would be finalized in 1962 and is still active today. Klett's Stuttgart saw two major media events: the same year the partnership with Strasbourg was finalized, then French president Charles de Gaulle visited the city and Ludwigsburg Palace in the ending moments of his state visit to Germany, and Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom visited the city 24 May 1965.\nOn 25 April 1952, the other two parts of the former German states of Baden and W\u00fcrttemberg, South Baden and W\u00fcrttemberg-Hohenzollern merged and formed the modern German state of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, with Stuttgart as its capital. Since the 1950s, Stuttgart has been the third largest city in southern Germany behind Frankfurt and Munich. The city's population, halved by the Second World War, began sudden growth with the mass influx of German refugees expelled from their homes and communities by the Soviets from the late 1940s until 1950 to the city. Economic migrants, called \"\"Gastarbeiter\", from Italy, and later Greece and Turkey but primarily from Yugoslavia, came flocking to Stuttgart because of the economic wonder called the \"Wirtschaftswunder\"\" unfolding in West Germany. These factors saw the city reach its (then) peak population of 640,000 in 1962.\nIn May 1965 Queen Elizabeth II made a state visit to Stuttgart and nearby Marbach and Schw\u00e4bisch Hall. Her great-grandfather Duke Francis (1837\u20131900) had been a member of the W\u00fcrttemberg royal family.\nIn the late 1970s, the municipal district of Stammheim was centre stage to one of the most controversial periods of German post-war history. Stammheim Prison, built from 1959 to 1963, came to be the place of incarceration for Ulrike Meinhof, Andreas Baader, Gudrun Ensslin, and Jan-Carl Raspe, members of a communist terrorist organization known as the Red Army Faction, during their trial at the Oberlandesgericht Stuttgart in 1975. Several attempts were made by the organization to free the terrorists during the \"German Autumn\" of 1977 that culminated in such events as the kidnap and murder of Hanns-Martin Schleyer and the hijacking of Lufthansa Flight 181. When it became clear, after many attempts to free the inmates including the smuggling of three weapons into the prison by their lawyer, that the terrorists could not escape and that they would receive life sentencing, the terrorists killed themselves in April 1977 in an event remembered locally as the \"Todesnacht von Stammheim\", \"Night of Death at Stammheim\".\nThe trauma of the early 1970s was quickly left behind, starting in 1974 with the 1974 FIFA World Cup and the opening of the Stuttgart S-Bahn on 1 October 1978 with a scheduled three routes. from 17 to 19 June 1983, ten European heads of state and representatives from the European Union met in Stuttgart for a summit and there made the Solemn Declaration on European Union. In 1986, the European Athletics Championships of that year were held in the Neckarstadion. Mikhail Gorbachev, while on a trip to West Germany to offer a spot for a West German astronaut in a Soviet space mission, visited Stuttgart 14 June 1989 and was the honored guest of a sumptuous reception held at the New Palace.\nSince the monumental happenings of the 1980s, Stuttgart has continued being an important centre of not just Europe, but also the world. In 1993, the World Horticultural Exposition, for which two new bridges were built, and World Athletics Championships of that year took place in Stuttgart in the Killesburg park and Gottlieb-Daimler-Stadion respectively, bringing millions of new visitors to the city. At the 1993 WCA, British athlete Sally Gunnell and the United States Relay team both set world records. In 2003, Stuttgart applied for the 2012 Summer Olympics but failed in their bid when the German Committee for the Olympics decided on Leipzig to host the Olympics in Germany. Three years later, in 2006, Stuttgart once again hosted the FIFA World Cup as it had in 1974.\nStuttgart still experienced some growing pains even long after its recovery from the Second World War. In 2010, the inner city become the focal point of the protests against the controversial Stuttgart 21.\nUS military in Stuttgart.\nSince shortly after the end of World War\u00a0II, there has been a US military presence in Stuttgart. At the height of the Cold War over 45,000 Americans were stationed across over 40 installations in and around the city. Today about 10,000 Americans are stationed on 5 installations (Patch Barracks, Panzer Kaserne, Kelley Barracks, Robinson Barracks, and Stuttgart Army Airfield) representing all branches of service within the Department of Defense, unlike the mostly Army presence of the Occupation and Cold War.\nIn March 1946 the US Army established a unit of the US Constabulary and a headquarters at Kurm\u00e4rker Kaserne (later renamed Patch Barracks) in Stuttgart. These units of soldiers retrained in patrol and policing provided the law and order in the American zone of occupied Germany until the civilian German police forces could be re-established. In 1948 the headquarters for all Constabulary forces was moved to Stuttgart. In 2008 a memorial to the US Constabulary was installed and dedicated at Patch Barracks. The US Constabulary headquarters was disbanded in 1950 and most of the force was merged into the newly organized 7th Army. As the Cold War developed US Army VII Corps was re-formed in July 1950 and assigned to Hellenen Kaserne (renamed Kelley Barracks in 1951) where the headquarters was to remain throughout the Cold War.\nIn 1990 VII Corps was deployed directly from Germany to Saudi Arabia for Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm to include many of the VII Corps troops stationed in and around Stuttgart. After returning from the Middle East, the bulk of VII Corps units were reassigned to the United States or deactivated. The VII Corps Headquarters returned to Germany for a short period to close out operations and was deactivated later in the United States. The withdrawal of VII Corps caused a large reduction in the US military presence in the city and region and led to the closure of the majority of US installations in and around Stuttgart which resulted in the layoff of many local civilians who had been career employees of the US Army.\nSince 1967, Patch Barracks in Stuttgart has been home to the US EUCOM. In 2007 AFRICOM was established as a cell within EUCOM and in 2008 established as the US Unified Combatant Command responsible for most of Africa headquartered at Kelley Barracks. Due to these two major headquarters, Stuttgart has been identified as one of the few \"enduring communities\" where the United States forces will continue to operate in Germany. The remaining U.S. bases around Stuttgart are organized into US Army Garrison Stuttgart and include Patch Barracks, Robinson Barracks, Panzer Kaserne and Kelley Barracks. From the end of World War II until the early 1990s these installations excepting Patch were almost exclusively Army, but have become increasingly \"Purple\"\u2014as in joint service\u2014since the end of the Cold War as they are host to United States Department of Defense Unified Commands and supporting activities.\nGeography.\nThe core area of Stuttgart lies in a fertile bowl-shaped valley about above sea level, an hour from the Black Forest and Swabian Jura on the banks of the Neckar river at to the west and north of Munich. The city is often described as being \"zwischen Wald und Reben\" (\"between forest and vines\") because of its viticulture and surrounding forests. Stuttgart covers an area of and sits at elevation ranging from above sea level by the Neckar river to on Bernhartsh\u00f6he hill \u2013 something rather unique in large German cities. The most prominent elevated locales in Stuttgart are the Birkenkopf () on the edge of the Stuttgart basin, the W\u00fcrttemberg () rising above the Neckar valley, and the Gr\u00fcner Heiner () at the northeast end of the city.\nStuttgart is one of 14 regional centers in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg and is naturally the primary centre of the Stuttgart Region, making it the administrative centre for a region of containing a total of 2.76 million people as of December 2014. In addition, Stuttgart serves as a Mittelzentrum for Esslingen District cities Leinfelden-Echterdingen and Filderstadt as well as Ditzingen, Gerlingen, and Korntal-M\u00fcnchingen in Ludwigsburg District. Stuttgart is also chief of the three centres Stuttgart Metropolitan Region, an area of containing 5.5 million persons.\nClimate.\nStuttgart experiences an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"). Its summers are warm, with average highs around , while its winters are chilly, with daily means just above freezing. Annually, the city receives average of rain. On average, Stuttgart enjoys 1,807 hours of sunshine per year and an average annual temperature of .\nTypically during summer months, the nearby hills, Swabian Alb mountains, the Black Forest, Schurwald, and the Swabian-Franconian Forest act as shields from harsh weather, nevertheless the city can be subject to thunderstorms, whereas in the winter periods snow may last for several days. Snow cover tends to last no longer than a few days although it had lasted several weeks at a time as recently as 2010. Though it is a rare occurrence in Stuttgart, the city sometimes receives damaging hailstorms, such as in July 2013. In order to fight this phenomenon, weather stations known as \"Hagelflieger\" are stationed near the city and are largely funded by Daimler AG, who maintain several parking lots and factories in the municipal area.\nClimate atlas and ventilation corridors.\nStuttgart has become a widely cited case study in urban climatology for its use of \"ventilation corridors\" to mitigate the effects of heat and air pollution. Owing to its location in a basin surrounded by hills, the city is prone to stagnant air masses and elevated summer temperatures. To address these challenges, municipal planners developed a detailed \"Climate Atlas\" (\"Klimaanalyse\") beginning in the late 20th century, which maps local wind patterns, cold-air drainage flows, and areas of heat accumulation.\nThe atlas has informed zoning regulations that preserve open spaces and prohibit construction in designated corridors, allowing cooler night-time air from surrounding forests and vineyards to flow into the urban core. These corridors also function as green belts, providing ecological and recreational benefits in addition to climate regulation. Studies in urban climatology have highlighted Stuttgart\u2019s approach as an early example of integrating microclimatic analysis into statutory planning, influencing similar initiatives in other European and Asian cities.\nLandmarks and culture.\nInner city.\nAt the center of Stuttgart lies its main square, Schlossplatz. As well as being the largest square in Stuttgart, it stands at the crossover point between the city's shopping area, \"Schlossgarten\" park which runs down to the river Neckar, Stuttgart's two central castles and major museums and residential areas to the south west. K\u00f6nigstra\u00dfe, Stuttgart's most important shopping street which runs along the northwestern edge of Schlossplatz, claims to be the longest pedestrianized street in Germany.\nAlthough the city center was heavily damaged during World War II, many historic buildings have been reconstructed and the city boasts some fine pieces of modern post-war architecture. Buildings and squares of note in the inner city include:\nArchitecture in other districts.\nA number of significant castles stand in Stuttgart's suburbs and beyond as reminders of the city's royal past. These include:\nOther landmarks in and around Stuttgart include (\"see also museums below\"):\nParks, lakes, cemeteries and other places of interest.\nAt the center of Stuttgart lies a series of gardens which are popular with families and cyclists. Because of its shape on a map, the locals refer to it as the \"Green U\". The Green U starts with the old Schlossgarten, castle gardens first mentioned in records in 1350. The modern park stretches down to the river Neckar and is divided into the upper garden (bordering the Old Castle, the Main Station, the State Theater and the State Parliament building), and the middle and lower gardens \u2013 a total of 61 hectares. The park also houses Stuttgart planetarium.\nAt the far end of Schlossgarten lies the second \"Green U\" park, the larger Rosensteinpark which borders Stuttgart's Wilhelma zoo and botanical gardens. Planted by King William I of W\u00fcrttemberg, it contains many old trees and open areas and counts as the largest English-style garden in southern Germany. In the grounds of the park stands the former Rosenstein castle, now the Rosenstein Museum.\nBeyond bridges over an adjacent main road lies the final \"Green U\" park, Killesbergpark or 'H\u00f6henpark' which is a former quarry that was converted for the Third Reich garden show of 1939 (and was used as a collection point for Jews awaiting transportation to concentration camps). The park has been used to stage many gardening shows since the 1950s, including the Bundesgartenschau and 1993 International Gardening Show, and runs miniature trains all around the park in the summer months for children and adults. The viewing tower (Killesbergturm) offers unique views across to the northeast of Stuttgart.\nOn the northern edge of the Rosensteinpark is the famous 'Wilhelma', Germany's only combined zoological and botanical garden. The whole compound, with its ornate pavilions, greenhouses, walls and gardens was built around 1850 as a summer palace in moorish style for King Wilhelm I of W\u00fcrttemberg. It currently houses around 8000 animals and some 5000 plant species and contains the biggest magnolia grove in Europe.\nOther parks in Stuttgart include the historic Botanischer Garten der Universit\u00e4t Hohenheim and Landesarboretum Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg at Castle Hohenheim (which date back to 1776 and are still used to catalog and research plant species), Uhlandsh\u00f6he hill (between the city center, Bad Cannstatt and Frauenkopf, and home to Stuttgart observatory), the Wei\u00dfenburgpark (a five-hectare park in the Bopser area of Stuttgart South which dates back to 1834 and is now home to a 'tea house' and the 'marble room' and offers a relaxing view across the city center), the Birkenkopf a Schuttberg (at the highest point in central Stuttgart, where many ruins were laid to commemorate the Second World War), and the Eichenhain park in Sillenbuch (declared a nature reserve in 1958 and home to 200 oak trees, many 300\u2013400 years old).\nThere are a number of natural and artificial lakes and ponds in Stuttgart. The largest is the Max-Eyth-See, which was created in 1935 by reclaiming a former quarry and is now an official nature reserve. It is surrounded by an expansive open area overlooked by vineyards on the banks of the river Neckar near M\u00fchlhausen.\nThere are expansive areas of woodland to the west and south west of Stuttgart which are popular with walkers, families, cyclists and ramblers. The most frequented lakes form a trio made up of the B\u00e4rensee, Neuer See and Pfaffensee. The lakes are also used for local water supplies.\nIn the Feuersee area in the west of Stuttgart lies one of two 'Feuersee's (literally fire lakes), striking for its views of the Johanneskirche (St. Johns) church across the lake, surrounded by nearby houses and offices. The other Feuersee can be found in Vaihingen.\nCemeteries in Stuttgart include:\nThe city boasts the second-largest mineral water deposits in Europe after Budapest, with over 250 springs within the urban area. The Athenebrunnen (or Fountain of Pallas Athena) is along Jean-Amery-Weg in the western part of Stuttgart, dating from 1911.\nCulture and events.\nStuttgart is known for its rich cultural heritage, in particular its State Theatre (\"Staatstheater\") and State Gallery (\"Staatsgalerie\"). The \"Staatstheater\" is home to the State opera and three smaller theatres. It regularly stages opera, ballet and theatre productions as well as concerts. The Staatstheater was named Germany/Austria/Switzerland \"Theatre of the year\" in 2006; the Stuttgart Opera has won the 'Opera of the year' award six times. Stuttgart Ballet is connected to names like John Cranko and Marcia Hayd\u00e9e.\nStuttgart is also home to one of Germany's most prestigious symphony orchestras, the Stuttgart Radio Symphony Orchestra, with famous English conductor Sir Roger Norrington, who developed a distinct sound of that orchestra, known as the \"Stuttgart Sound\". They mostly perform in the \"Liederhalle\" concert hall.\nThe city offers two Broadway-style musical theatres, the Apollo and the Palladium Theater (each approx. 1800 seats). Ludwigsburg Palace in the nearby town of Ludwigsburg is also used throughout the year as a venue for concerts and cultural events.\nAs a result of Stuttgart's long history of viticulture (Even today there are vineyards less than from the Main Station), there are more than 400 flights of stairs (known in the local dialect as the \"St\u00e4ffele\") around the city, equivalent to approximately of steps. Later, in the early 19th century, the city continued to grow and many vineyards were replaced by houses and streets and the \"St\u00e4ffele\" were used as footpaths to connect the newly built neighborhoods. Some of the stairs were elaborately decorated with fountains and plantings.\nThe Schleyerhalle sports arena is regularly used to stage rock and pop concerts with major international stars on European tour.\nStuttgart's Swabian cuisine, beer and wine have been produced in the area since the 17th century and are now famous throughout Germany and beyond. For example, Gaisburger Marsch is a stew that was invented in Stuttgart's Gaisburg area of Stuttgart East.\nIn October 2009 the Stuttgart Ministry of Agriculture announced that the European Union was to officially recognise the pasta dish Maultaschen as a \"regional specialty\", thus marking its significance to the cultural heritage of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg.\nIn 1993 Stuttgart hosted the International Garden Show in the suburb of Killesberg. In 2006 it was also one of the host cities of the Football World Cup. In 2007, Stuttgart hosted the 2007 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships. In 2008 it was host to the World Individual Debating and Public Speaking Championships. In 2015, Stuttgart hosted the Protestant Kirchentag (church convention) festival, a festival that takes place in a different German city every two years.\nRegular events that take place in Stuttgart:\nMuseums.\nStuttgart is home to five of the eleven state museums in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. The foremost of these is the Old State Gallery (opened in 1843, extended in 1984) which holds art dating from the 14th to 19th century including works by Rubens, Rembrandt, Monet, Renoir, C\u00e9zanne and Beuys. Next door to the Old State Gallery is the New State Gallery (1980) with its controversial modern architecture. Among others, this gallery houses works from Max Beckmann, Dal\u00ed, Matisse, Mir\u00f3, Picasso, Klee, Chagall and Kandinsky.\nThe Old Castle is also home to the State Museum of W\u00fcrttemberg which was founded in 1862 by William I of W\u00fcrttemberg. The museum traces the rich history of W\u00fcrttemberg with many artifacts from its dukes, counts and kings, as well as earlier remnants dating back to the Stone Age. On the Karlsplatz side of the Old Castle is a museum dedicated to the memory of Claus Schenk Graf von Stauffenberg, former resident of Stuttgart who attempted to assassinate Adolf Hitler on 20 July 1944.\nOther leading museums in Stuttgart include:\nChurches.\nStuttgart is the seat of a Protestant bishop (Protestant State Church in W\u00fcrttemberg) and one of the two co-seats of the bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Rottenburg-Stuttgart. The Stuttgart-based Pentecostal \"Gospel Forum\" is the largest place of worship (megachurch) in Germany. It is also home to a large English speaking church, The International Baptist Church of Stuttgart.\nLibraries.\nThe (WLB) is one of two state libraries for Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. The WLB is specifically responsible for the administrative regions of Stuttgart and T\u00fcbingen. Especially devoted to the National Library of acquiring, cataloging, archiving and provision of literature about W\u00fcrttemberg, called \"W\u00fcrttembergica\". Together with the Badische Landesbibliothek (BLB) in Karlsruhe it also has the legal deposit for Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, making it an archive library.\nThe Stuttgart University Library (UBS) is a central institution of the University of Stuttgart. It forms the center of the library system of the university, ensuring the supply of research, teaching and studies with literature and other information resources. It stands next to the members of the university and citizens of the city are available. Together with other research libraries and documentation centers in the Stuttgart area \u2013 such as the University of Hohenheim Library \u2013 it forms the UBS Library Information System of the Stuttgart Region (BISS).\nThe Central State Archive Stuttgart is the archive in charge of the Ministries of the State of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. Since 1965, it is located right next to the WLB and belongs since 2005 as a department of the Landesarchiv Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg in. It includes the stocks of the county and the duchy W\u00fcrttemberg until 1806, the W\u00fcrttemberg central authorities of the 19th and 20th century and the early 19th century as a result of media coverage of fallen W\u00fcrttemberg gentlemen and imperial cities in South W\u00fcrttemberg.\nThe Stadtarchiv Stuttgart is the archive in charge of the provincial capital Stuttgart. The archived material is in principle open to the public and can be consulted in the reading room in Bellingweg 21 in Bad Cannstatt.\nThe Landeskirchliche Archives preserve the stocks of the W\u00fcrttemberg church leaders and of other ecclesial bodies and institutions: the ducal and royal W\u00fcrttemberg consistory, the Evangelical Supreme Ecclesiastical Council, deanery and parish archives, educational institutions, the works and associations as well as estates and collections. It also has the microfilms of all church books (especially baptism, marriage, and family Death's Register) in the area of the Evangelical-Lutheran Church in W\u00fcrttemberg.\nThe \"Archive instigator\" is dedicated to the dead of the city. Since 2005, the instigators are working on a memoir about \"The dead town\". So far, about 5,000 names of victims of the regime of National Socialism have been acquired.\nThere are two large tours that are available to visitors to Stuttgart. The first is the Hop-on Hop-off bus tour (also called the CityTour Stuttgart), lasting from 10 AM to 4 PM that takes visitors around the city. The other is the Neckar-K\u00e4pt'n, only available from May to October, which cruises on the Neckar river from its dock at Wilhelma in Bad Cannstatt.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStuttgart has a population of about 630,000 and is the 6th largest city in Germany. Stuttgart reached its population peak of over 100,000 in 1874. In 1946, when Stuttgart became the capital of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg state, it had a population of about 415,000. In 1960s the industrialization boomed in Stuttgart due to its automobile companies Mercedes-Benz and Porsche and other companies came to Stuttgart. It also saw the growth of foreign population, mostly from Turkey, Greece, India, Italy and former Yugoslavian countries. The population of Stuttgart hasn't changed a lot since then due to its high rent of the city where many people moved to neighbouring municipalities.\nImmigrants.\nMore than half of the population today is not of Swabian background, as many non-Swabian Germans have moved here due to the employment situation, which is far better than in most areas of Germany. Since the 1960s, many foreigners have also immigrated to Stuttgart to work here (as part of the \"Gastarbeiter\" program); another wave of immigrants came as refugees from the Wars in Yugoslavia in the 1990s. Thus, as of 2022, 47% of the city's population is of foreign background. In 2000, 22.8% of the population did not hold German citizenship, in 2022 this had increased to 27.6%. By end of 2018 the largest groups of foreign nationals were Turks (17,900), Greeks (13,757), Italians (14,021), Croats (15,268), Serbs (5,844) followed by immigrants from Romania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Portugal, Poland, France, Austria, Morocco and Cameroon. 39% of foreign nationals come from the European Union (mostly Italy, Greece, and Poland).\nReligion.\nThe religious landscape in Stuttgart changed in 1534 as a direct result of the Reformation. Since this time W\u00fcrttemberg has been predominantly Protestant. However, since 1975 the number of Protestants in Stuttgart has dropped from around 300,000 to 200,000. In 2014, 26.2% of inhabitants were Protestant and 24.0% were Roman Catholic. 49.8% of the population fell into other categories: Muslims, Jews and those who either followed no religion or one not accounted for in official statistics.\nUnemployment.\nUnemployment in the Stuttgart Region is above the average of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, but very low compared to other metropolitan areas in Germany. In November 2008, before the annual winter rise, unemployment in the Stuttgart Region stood at 3.8%, 0.1% lower than the rate for Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, in February 2009 it was 4.7%. Unemployment in the actual city of Stuttgart during the same periods stood at 5.2% and 6.0% (8 November and 9 February respectively). By comparison: unemployment for the whole of Germany stood at 7.1% (8 Nov) and 8.5% (9 Feb).\nCrime rates.\nStuttgart ranks as one of the safest cities in Germany. In 2003, 8535 crimes were committed in Stuttgart for every 100,000 inhabitants (versus the average for all German cities of 12,751). Figures for 2006 indicate that Stuttgart ranked second behind Munich. 60% of Stuttgart crimes were solved in 2003, ranking second behind Nuremberg.\nGovernment and politics.\nWhen Stuttgart was run as a (or within) the Duchy of W\u00fcrttemberg, it was governed by a type of protectorate called a Vogt appointed by the Duke. After 1811 this role was fulfilled by a City Director or 'Stadtdirektor'. After 1819 the community elected its own community mayor or 'Schulthei\u00df'. Since 1930 the title of Oberb\u00fcrgermeister (the nearest equivalent of which would be an executive form of lord mayor in English) has applied to Stuttgart and all other W\u00fcrttemberg towns of more than 20,000 inhabitants.\nAt the end of the Second World War, French administrators appointed the independent politician Arnulf Klett as Burgomaster, a role he fulfilled without interruption until his death in 1974. Since this time Stuttgart has mainly been governed by the CDU. One former mayor was Manfred Rommel (son of perhaps the most famous German field marshal of World War II, Erwin Rommel).\nAs the capital of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Stuttgart is an important political centre in Germany and the seat of the State Parliament, or Landtag as well as all Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg state departments.\nIn June 2009, for the first time the Greens gained the most seats in a German city with more than 500,000 inhabitants, effectively changing the balance of power in the city council. For the first time since 1972 the CDU no longer held the most seats, toppling its absolute majority shared with the Independent Party and the FDP. According to the German newspaper , the main reason for the Greens' victory was disgruntlement with the controversial Stuttgart 21 rail project.\nMayor.\nThe current mayor of Stuttgart is Frank Nopper of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) since 2020. The most recent mayoral election was held on 8 November 2020, with a runoff held on 29 November, and the results were as follows:\nCity council.\nThe Stuttgart city council governs the city alongside the Mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 9 June 2024, and the results were as follows:\nCity districts.\nThe city of Stuttgart is administratively divided into 23 city districts \u2013 five \"inner\" districts and 18 \"outer\" districts. Each district has a council headed by a district director. From there, the districts are broken down into quarters. Since the changes in city statutes on 1 July 2007 and 1 January 2009, the total number of quarters rose to 152.\nEconomy.\nThe Stuttgart area is known for its high-tech industry. Companies include Mercedes-Benz Group, Porsche, Robert Bosch GmbH, McKesson Europe, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, and Sika AG \u2013 all of whom have their world or European headquarters here.\nStuttgart is home to Germany's ninth biggest exhibition center, Stuttgart Trade Fair, which lies on the city outskirts next to Stuttgart Airport. Hundreds of SMEs are still based in Stuttgart (often termed \"Mittelstand\"), many still in family ownership with strong ties to the automotive, electronics, engineering and high-tech industry. Examples include Recaro, LAPP, D\u00fcrr and Leitz\nThe cradle of the automobile.\nThe automobile and motorcycle were purported to have been invented in Stuttgart (by Karl Benz and subsequently industrialized in 1887 by Gottlieb Daimler and Wilhelm Maybach at the Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft). As a result, it is considered to be the starting point of the worldwide automotive industry and is sometimes referred to as the 'cradle of the automobile'. Today, Mercedes-Benz and Porsche both have their headquarters in Stuttgart, as well as automotive parts giants Bosch and Mahle. A number of auto-enthusiast magazines are published in Stuttgart.\nScience and research and development.\nThe region currently has Germany's highest density of scientific, academic and research organisations. No other region in Germany registers so many patents and designs as Stuttgart. 45% of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg's R&amp;D capacities are concentrated in the Swabian capital. More than 11% of all German R&amp;D costs are invested in the Stuttgart region (approximately 4.3\u00a0billion euros per year). In addition to several universities and colleges (e.g. University of Stuttgart, University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart Institute of Management and Technology and several Stuttgart Universities of Applied Sciences), the area is home to six Fraunhofer institutes, four institutes of collaborative industrial research at local universities, two Max-Planck institutes and a major establishment of the German Aerospace Centre (DLR).\nFinancial services.\nThe Stuttgart Stock Exchange is the second largest in Germany (after Frankfurt). Many leading companies in the financial services sector are headquartered in Stuttgart with around 100 credit institutes in total (e.g. LBBW Bank, W\u00fcstenrot &amp; W\u00fcrttembergische, Allianz Life Assurance).\nA history of wine and beer.\nStuttgart is the only city in Germany where wine grapes are grown within the urban area, mainly in the districts of Rotenberg, Uhlbach and Untert\u00fcrkheim.\nWine-growing in the area dates back to 1108 when, according to State archives, Blaubeuren Abbey was given vineyards in Stuttgart as a gift from 'Monk Ulrich'. In the 17th century the city was the third largest German wine-growing community in the Holy Roman Empire. Wine remained Stuttgart's leading source of income well into the 19th century.\nStuttgart is still one of Germany's largest wine-growing cities with more than 400 hectares of vine area, thanks in main to its location at the center of Germany's fourth largest wine region, the W\u00fcrttemberg wine growing area which covers and is one of only 13 official areas captured under German wine law. The continuing importance of wine to the local economy is marked every year at the annual wine festival ('Weindorf').\nStuttgart also has several famous breweries such as Stuttgarter Hofbr\u00e4u, Dinkelacker, and Schwaben Br\u00e4u.\nEducation.\nStuttgart and its region have been home to some significant figures of German thought and literature, the most important ones being Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Friedrich Schiller and Friedrich H\u00f6lderlin.\nThe city, in its engineering tradition as the cradle of the automobile, has also always been a fruitful place of research and innovation. Stuttgart has Germany's second-highest number of institutions (six) of applied research of the Fraunhofer Society (after Dresden).\nTertiary education.\nThe city is not considered a traditional university city, but nevertheless has a variety of institutions of higher education. The most significant of them are:\nHistorically, an elite military academy existed in Stuttgart in the late 18th century (1770\u20131794), the Hohe Karlsschule, at Solitude Castle. Friedrich Schiller and the city's most famous Classicist architect, Nikolaus Friedrich von Thouret, were among its many esteemed alumni.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nThe first Waldorf School (also known as Rudolf Steiner School) was founded here in 1919 by the director of the Waldorf Astoria tobacco factory, Emil Molt, and Austrian social thinker Rudolf Steiner, a comprehensive school following Steiner's educational principles of anthroposophy and humanistic ideals. Today, four of these schools are located in Stuttgart.\nThe Eberhard-Ludwigs-Gymnasium was created in 1668 from a historical Latin School as a model high school with the goal of modernising education. Later, the Dillman-Gymnasium, Friedrich-Eugens-Gymnasium and Karls-Gymnasium emerged from it.\nInternational School.\nSince 1985 Stuttgart is home to the International School of Stuttgart, one of fewer than 100 schools worldwide that offer all three International Baccalaureate programs- the IB Primary Years (Early Learning to Grade 5), IB Middle Years (Grade 6 to 10), IB Diploma (grades 11\u201312). The International School of Stuttgart is accredited by both the Council of International Schools and the New England Association of Schools and Colleges.\nMedia and publishing.\nOne of the headquarters of the public S\u00fcdwestrundfunk (SWR; \"Southwest Broadcasting\") channels (several radio and one TV channel; regional focus on the southwestern German States of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg and Rhineland-Palatinate) is located in Stuttgart (the other ones being Baden-Baden and Mainz). It also has a \"Landesmedienzentrum\", a state media center.\nFurthermore, the city is a significant centre of publishing and specialist printing, with renowned houses such as Georg von Holtzbrinck Publishing Group, (schoolbooks), Kohlhammer Verlag, Metzler Verlag and Motor Presse having their head offices there. The Reclam Verlag is located in nearby Ditzingen.\nThe newspapers \"Stuttgarter Zeitung\" (StZ; regional, with significant supra-regional, national and international sections) and Stuttgarter Nachrichten (StN; regional) are published here as well as a number of smaller, local papers such as \"Cannstatter Zeitung\".\nAs is the case wherever the US military is stationed, there is an American Forces Network (AFN) station. It transmits on FM on 102.3\u00a0MHz from Fernmeldeturm Frauenkopf and on AM on 1143\u00a0kHz from Hirschlanden transmitter.\nTransport.\nFollowing the suit of other German cities such as Berlin, Cologne and Hanover, on 1 March 2008 a low emission zone (LEZ) came into effect in Stuttgart with the aim of improving air quality. This affects all vehicles entering the Stuttgart 'Environmental zone' (\"Umweltzone\"), including vehicles from abroad.\nLocal transport.\nStuttgart has a light rail system known as the Stuttgart Stadtbahn. In the city center and densely built-up areas, the Stadtbahn runs underground. Stations are signposted with a 'U' symbol, which stands for \"unabh\u00e4ngig\" (independent), due to the system being mostly separated from road traffic. Until 2007, Stuttgart also operated regular trams. Stuttgart also has a large bus network. Stadtbahn lines and buses are operated by the Stuttgarter Stra\u00dfenbahnen AG (SSB). The outlying suburbs of Stuttgart and nearby towns are served by a suburban railway system called the Stuttgart S-Bahn, using tracks supplied by the national Deutsche Bahn AG (DB).\nA peculiarity of Stuttgart is the \"Zahnradbahn\", a rack railway that is powered by electricity and operates between Marienplatz in the southern inner-city district of the city and the district of Degerloch. It is the only urban rack railway in Germany. Stuttgart also has a \"Standseilbahn\", a funicular railway that operates in the Heslach area and the forest cemetery (Waldfriedhof). In Killesberg Park, on a prominent hill overlooking the city, there is the miniature railway run by diesel (and on weekends with steam).\nRail links.\nStuttgart is a hub in the Intercity-Express and Intercity networks of Deutsche Bahn AG (DB), with through services to most other major German cities. It also operates international services to Strasbourg, Vienna, Z\u00fcrich and Paris (five times a day, journey time 3 hours 11 minutes).\nLong-distance trains stop at Stuttgart Hauptbahnhof, the city's main line terminus, which is also used by Interregio-Express, Regional-Express and Regionalbahn trains for services to stations in the Stuttgart metropolitan area. The local rail networks (see above) operate underneath the terminus.\nStuttgart also has its own rail freight centre with marshalling yards and a container terminal in the Obert\u00fcrkheim area of Hedelfingen.\nRail: The \"Stuttgart 21\" project.\nAfter years of political debate and controversy, plans were approved in October 2007 to convert the existing above-ground main train station to an underground through station. The \"Stuttgart 21 project\" will include the rebuilding of surface and underground lines connecting the station in Stuttgart's enclosed central valley with existing railway and underground lines. Building work started in 2010 with controversial modifications to the Hauptbahnhof and was slated to be completed in 2019, then 2021 and now 2025.\nAir transport.\nStuttgart is served by Stuttgart Airport (, IATA airport code \"STR\"), an international airport approximately south of the city centre on land belonging mainly to neighboring towns. It takes 30 minutes to reach the airport from the city center using S-Bahn lines S2 or S3 or Stadtbahn line U6. Stuttgart airport is Germany's only international airport with one runway. Despite protests and local initiatives, surveys are currently underway to assess the impact of a second runway.\nRoad transport.\nStuttgart is served by Autobahn A8, that runs east\u2013west from Karlsruhe to Munich, and Autobahn A81 that runs north\u2013south from W\u00fcrzburg to Singen. The Autobahn A831 is a short spur entering the southern side of Stuttgart.\nBesides these Autobahns, Stuttgart is served by a large number of expressways, many of which are built to Autobahn standards, and were once intended to carry an A-number. Important expressways like B10, B14, B27 and B29 connect Stuttgart with its suburbs. Due to the hilly surroundings, there are many road tunnels in and around Stuttgart. There are also a number of road tunnels under intersections in the center of Stuttgart.\nWaterways.\nStuttgart has an inland port in Hedelfingen on the Neckar.\nSport.\nFootball.\nAs in many parts of Germany, football is the most popular sport in Stuttgart which is home to 'The Reds' and 'The Blues'. 'The Reds', VfB Stuttgart, are the most famous and popular local club. An established team currently playing in the German Bundesliga, VfB was founded in 1893 and has won five German titles since 1950, most recently in 1992 and 2007. VfB is based at the MHPArena in Bad Cannstatt.\n'The Blues', Stuttgarter Kickers, are the second most important football team; their most successful years date back to the time when young J\u00fcrgen Klinsmann started his career as forward in their team. They currently play in the Regionalliga S\u00fcdwest (fourth division) at the smaller Gazi Stadium close to the TV tower in Degerloch.\nOther lower-division football teams are \"Sportfreunde Stuttgart\" \u2013 most famous for taking part in the Sir Thomas Lipton Trophy in 1908, considered the first \"World Cup\" \u2013 and FV Zuffenhausen.\nOther sports.\nTV Bittenfeld has been playing in the men's Handball-Bundesliga since the 2015\u20132016 season under the name TVB 1898 Stuttgart. The home venue is the Scharrena Stuttgart, part of the home games also take place in the Porsche-Arena for capacity reasons. VfL Pfullingen/Stuttgart played in the Bundesliga from 2001 to 2006, where they played their home games in the Hanns-Martin-Schleyer-Halle. \nSince 2008, the women's volleyball team Allianz MTV Stuttgart (until 2010 Allianz Volley Stuttgart, until 2012 Smart Allianz Stuttgart) plays in the Deutsche Volleyball-Bundesliga. They became German champions in 2019 and 2022, having previously been runners-up four times in a row from 2015 to 2018, and also won the German cup four times and reached the final of CEV Cup. CJD Feuerbach was German champion in women's volleyball three times. The club withdrew its first team from the Bundesliga in 1996 for financial reasons.\nStuttgart has two major ice hockey teams. Stuttgart Rebels EC, plays in the \"Landesliga\" (4th tier) at the Waldau ice rink in Degerloch. The Bietigheim Bissingen Steelers play in the first division of the DEL. The Steelers play in the new Ege Trans Arena in Bietigheim.\nThe strongest local water polo team is SV Cannstatt, which won the German championship in 2006.\nStuttgart has three American Football teams: the Stuttgart Silver Arrows, who play in the Regionalliga S\u00fcdwest, and the Stuttgart Scorpions as part of the German Football League, who play in Stuttgarter Kickers' Gazi Stadium. With Stuttgart Surge a third team was founded in 2021 as part of the European League of Football (ELF) and is likewise supposed to play in the Gazi Stadium.\nAustralian Football is practiced by the Stuttgart Emus \u2013 one of only six active teams in Germany. It participates in the Australian Football League Germany when they play their home games in the Eberhard-Bauer-Stadion.\nTC Weissenhof is a Stuttgart-based women's tennis team that has won the German championship four times. Another women's team is TEC Waldau Stuttgart (German champions in 2006).\nHTC Stuttgarter Kickers is one of the most successful field hockey clubs in Germany, having won the German championship in 2005 and a European title in 2006.\nStuttgart has also hosted the Stihl Timbersports Series in world logging championships.\nSporting events.\nStuttgart has a reputation for staging major events, including the FIFA World Cup 1974, the finals stages of the FIBA EuroBasket 1985, the UEFA Euro 1988, and the World Championships in Athletics 1993. It was also one of the twelve host cities of the FIFA World Cup 2006. Six matches, three of them second round matches, including the third and fourth place playoff, were played at the Gottlieb Daimler Stadium (today MHPArena). Stuttgart was also 2007 European Capital of Sport, hosting events such as the UCI World Cycling Championships Road Race and the IAAF World Athletics Final.\nOther famous sports venues are the Weissenhof tennis courts, where the annual Mercedes Cup tennis tournament is played, the Porsche Arena (hosting tennis, basketball and handball), the Schleyerhalle (boxing, equestrianism/show jumping, gymnastics, track cycling etc.), and Scharrena Stuttgart.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nStuttgart is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city district of Bad Cannstatt is twinned with:\nThe city district of Vaihingen is twinned with:\nThe city district of Zuffenhausen is twinned with:\nFriendships.\nStuttgart has friendly relations with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28566", "revid": "47613265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28566", "title": "Self-propelled artillery", "text": "Artillery mounted on a vehicle for mobility and protection\nSelf-propelled artillery (also called locomotive artillery) is artillery equipped with its own propulsion system to move toward its firing position. Within the terminology are the self-propelled gun, self-propelled howitzer, self-propelled mortar, and self-propelled rocket artillery. They are high-mobility vehicles, usually based on continuous tracks carrying either a large field gun, howitzer, mortar, or some form of rocket/missile launcher. They are usually used for long-range indirect bombardment support on the battlefield.\nIn the past, self-propelled artillery has included direct-fire vehicles, such as assault guns and tank destroyers, which were typically well-armoured vehicles often based upon the chassis of a tank. In lieu of the standard tank's general-purpose main gun that fired both high-explosive and anti-tank ammunition, direct-fire vehicles had specialized roles, with assault guns providing close fire-support for infantry and tank destroyers mounting an anti-tank gun to take on enemy armour.\nModern self-propelled artillery vehicles often mount their main gun in a turret on a tracked chassis so they superficially resemble tanks. However, they are generally lightly armoured, which is insufficient to withstand direct-fire combat; nonetheless this protects their crews against shrapnel and small arms and therefore they are usually included as armoured fighting vehicles. Many are equipped with machine guns for defense against enemy infantry.\nThe key advantage of self-propelled over towed artillery is that it can be brought into action much faster. Before the towed artillery can be used, it has to stop, unlimber and set up the guns. To move position, the guns must be limbered up again and brought\u2014usually towed\u2014to the new location. By comparison, self-propelled artillery can stop at a chosen location and begin firing almost immediately, then quickly move on to a new position. This shoot-and-scoot ability is very useful in a mobile conflict and particularly on the advance in open battlefields.\nConversely, towed artillery was and remains cheaper to build and maintain. It is also lighter and can be deployed in areas that self-propelled guns cannot reach. Since the Vietnam War, heavy transport helicopters have also been used for rapid artillery deployment albeit at considerable expense and risk, mitigating one of towed artillery's disadvantages. Both self-propelled and towed artillery remain in the arsenals of many modern armies.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nDuring the Thirty Years' War, early 17th-century experiments were made with early types of horse artillery. Batteries towed light field guns where most or all of the crew rode horses into battle. The gunners were trained to quickly dismount, deploy the guns and provide instant fire support to cavalry, and act as a flexible reserve. The Russian army organized small units of horse artillery that were distributed among their cavalry formations in the early 18th century. While not forming large batteries and employing only lighter 2- and 3-pound guns, they were still effective and inflicted serious losses to Prussian units in the Seven Years' War. This inspired Frederick the Great to organize the first regular horse artillery unit in 1759. Other nations quickly realized the capability of the new arm and by the start of French Revolutionary Wars in 1790s Austria, Hannover, Portugal, Russia, France, Great Britain and Sweden had all formed regular units of horse artillery. The arm was employed throughout the Napoleonic Wars and remained in use throughout the entire 19th century and into the first half of the 20th century, when advances in weapons technology finally made it obsolete.\nZamburak was a specialized form of self-propelled artillery from the early modern period. It featured small swivel guns to be mounted and fired from the back of camels. It was used by the Islamic gunpowder empires, especially those of Iran, especially in the rugged Iranian plateau, where the transportation of heavy cannons is difficult.\nWorld War I.\nThe British Gun Carrier Mark I was the first example of a self-propelled gun, fielded in 1917 during World War I. It was based on the first tank, the British Mark I and carried a heavy field gun. The gun could either be fired from the vehicle, or removed and set up as normal. In effect, the carrier replaced the use of a separate horse team or internal combustion engine-powered artillery tractor, and allowed a new way for the gun to be used.\nBetween the wars.\nThe next major advance can be seen in the Birch gun developed by the British for their motorised warfare experimental brigade (the Experimental Mechanized Force) after the end of the War. This mounted an 18-pounder field gun, capable of both the usual artillery trajectories and high-angle anti-aircraft fire, on a Vickers medium tank chassis. It was designed and built for investigations into a general approach to warfare where all arms, infantry and artillery included, would be able to operate over the same terrain as tanks. The Red Army also experimented with truck- and tank-mounted artillery, but produced none in quantity.\nWorld War II.\nAt the outbreak of World War II, virtually all artillery was still being moved around by artillery tractors or horses. While the German Blitzkrieg doctrine called for combined-arms action, which required fire support for armoured units, during the invasion of Poland and France this was provided by the Luftwaffe using Junkers Ju 87 'Stuka' dive-bombers effectively acting as artillery. Conventional towed howitzers followed.\nAs the war progressed, most nations developed self-propelled artillery. Some early attempts were often no more than a field gun or anti-tank gun mounted on a truck\u2014a technique known in the British Army as carrying \"portee\". These were mobile, but lacked protection for the crew. The next step was to mount the guns on a tracked chassis (often that of an obsolete or superseded tank) and provide an armoured superstructure to protect the gun and its crew. Many of the early designs were improvised, and the lessons learned led to better designs later in the war. For example, the first British design, \"Bishop\", carried the 25 pdr gun-howitzer on a Valentine tank chassis, but in a mounting that severely limited the gun's performance. It was replaced by the more effective Sexton.\nThe first battery of self-propelled artillery guns was created when Hauptmann Alfred Becker, a mechanical engineer and battery captain in the 227th Infantry Division, mounted his 10.5 cm leFH 16 howitzers on the chassis of captured British Vickers Mk.VI light tanks to mobilize his guns. His 10.5 cm leFH 16 Gesch\u00fctzwagen Mk VI 736 (e) was the forerunner to German tracked field guns such as the Wespe and Hummel.\nThe Germans also mobilized their anti-tank guns, using light, obsolete or captured tracked vehicles. Examples include the Marder I, using captured French Lorraine 37L tractors, the Marder II, using the Panzer II light tank chassis, and the Marder III, which was based on the Panzer 38(t) Czech chassis. These led to better-protected assault guns \u2013 \"Sturmgesch\u00fctz\" \u2013 with fully enclosed casemates, built on medium tank chassis. In the same way self-propelled anti-tank guns such as the Jagdpanzer IV and Jagdpanther were built. Some designs were based on existing chassis (such as the Brummb\u00e4r), leftover chassis from cancelled programs (Elefant and Sturer Emil); others were converted from battle-damaged tanks (Sturmtiger). The single most-produced armored fighting vehicle design for Germany in WW II, the Sturmgesch\u00fctz III (StuG III) assault gun, in 1936\u20131937 pioneered the later casemate-style fully enclosed armor that would be used on almost all late-war German self-propelled artillery and \"Jagdpanzer\"-format tank destroyers.\nThe Soviets experimented with truck- and tank-based self-propelled weapons, producing a few Komsomolets tractor-mounted 57mm ZiS-2 guns early in the war. By 1943, the series of \"Samokhodnaya Ustanovka\" casemate-armored vehicles had started to appear at the front, starting with the SU-85, and by late 1944 the SU-100, which mounted powerful guns on modern chassis adopting the full-casemate enclosure of the crew compartment as the Germans had done with the StuG III. These had the advantage of being relatively cheap to build and mounting a larger gun compared to the conventional tank that they were derived from, but at the expense of flexibility.\nHeavily armoured assault guns were designed to provide direct-fire support to infantry in the face of enemy defenses. Although often similar to tank destroyers, they carried larger-caliber guns with weaker anti-armor performance but capable of firing powerful HE projectiles. The German 105\u00a0mm howitzer-armed StuH 42 based on the StuG III, and the immense 152\u00a0mm howitzer-armed, Soviet ISU-152, both fully casemated in their design, are examples of this type of self-propelled artillery.\nAll major nations developed self-propelled artillery that would be able to provide indirect support while keeping pace with advancing armoured formations. These were usually lightly armoured vehicles with an open-topped hull; the American M7 Priest, the British Sexton (25 pdr) and the German Wespe and Hummel being typical examples. A different route was chosen by the Soviets, who did not develop a specialized indirect-fire vehicle, but following a tradition of dual-purpose towed artillery, built a series of versatile assault guns with indirect-fire capabilities (example ISU-152). A related and novel program was the development of the Soviet Katyusha self-propelled multiple rocket launchers, which were unarmored trucks with a simple rocket rack on the back, a cheap and crushingly effective weapon, it provided area saturation rather than accurate fire. The Axis powers had captured the Katyusha and made their own versions; Germany created the \"8 cm Raketen-Vielfachwerfer\", while Romania developed the Mare\u0219al tank destroyer, an early prototype of which was armed with a Katyusha. It also had self-propelled howitzer versions.\nAfter the end of World War II, the assault gun fell from use with a general trend towards a single heavy gun-equipped vehicle, the main battle tank, although some wheeled AFVs such as the South African Rooikat, the Maneuver Combat Vehicle of the JGSDF, and the US M1128 MGS, among others, are still developed with large-caliber, direct-fire weapons. Self-propelled indirect-fire artillery remains important and continues to develop alongside the general-purpose field gun.\nMortars.\nMany vehicles have used ancillary smoke mortars for local defense, which project one or more smoke grenades in a pattern that allows them to lay down a smoke screen some distance in order to conceal the vehicle from enemy observers. Mortar carriers are vehicles which carry a mortar as a primary weapon. Numerous vehicles have been used to mount mortars, from improvised civilian trucks used by insurgents, to modified infantry fighting vehicles, such as variants of the M3 half track and M113 APC, to vehicles specifically intended to carry a mortar, such as the 2S31 Vena. The Israeli Makmat is a mortar carrier based on the M4 Sherman tank chassis.\nThe Russian army uses a \"2S4 Tyulpan\" (Tulip) self-propelled 240\u00a0mm heavy mortar. Patria H\u00e4gglunds, a joint venture between Finnish Patria and Swedish BAE Systems H\u00e4gglunds, manufactures AMOS (Advanced Mortar System), which is a 120\u00a0mm automatic twin-barrelled, breech-loaded mortar turret. There are also numerous AFVs and even main battle tanks that can be equipped with a mortar, either outside or inside the cabin. The Israeli Merkava main battle tank carried a 60\u00a0mm mortar in the small troop compartment in the rear, which fired through an opening in the roof, allowing the crew to remain protected. This was useful for fighting nearby infantry, as a mortar is shorter-ranged and cheaper to shoot than the large main gun, as well as being better suited to wounding enemy infantry taking cover behind objects. However, since the mortar is only a secondary weapon in this case, the Merkava is not considered a mortar carrier.\nHowitzers and guns.\nSelf-propelled artillery remains important in the equipment of many modern armies. It saw a significant role throughout the Cold War era conflicts and in the 1991 Gulf War.\nModern SP artillery is highly computerized, with the ability to self-survey firing positions using systems such as GPS and inertial navigation systems. This, in conjunction with digital fire control/ballistic computers and digital communications, allows individual guns to disperse over a wide area and still deliver rounds on target simultaneously with the other guns in their battery.\nThese capabilities also increase survivability manyfold as modern SP artillery can displace and avoid counterbattery fire much more quickly and effectively and, if desired, more frequently than previously possible. In conjunction with modern logistic systems (where the SP gun's systems can track and report on ammunition consumption and levels) with similar navigation systems and palletized load dropping/lifting capabilities mean that the rapid displacement can occur without significant disruption to actually firing missions as it is possible for the ammunition to keep up with the guns.\nA modern battery of six guns, each firing 43\u00a0kg projectiles with a burst firing speed of four rounds per minute, can deliver over a tonne of ordnance per minute for up to four minutes. This is an immense weight of fire, which can be delivered with very high accuracy.\nOne example of the increased firepower provided by modern mobile howitzers is the latest version of the 155\u00a0mm G6 howitzer, the G6-52. It can fire up to six rounds in quick succession that will land nearly simultaneously. This is achieved by firing the shells at different trajectories so that the first round has the longest flight time and the last round the shortest. This is an improvement of the concept of multiple-round simultaneous impact (MRSI), itself an enhancement of the earlier TOT (time on target) concept. The necessary rapid reloading is made possible by an automated ammunition feed system.\nRockets and missiles.\nRockets have greater ranges and carry much more complex \"shells\" than guns, since there is less restriction on size (calibre). A multiple launch rocket system (MLRS) can be used to saturate a large area with sub-munitions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28568", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28568", "title": "Sinatra Doctrine", "text": "Joke slogan describing the loosening of relations between the USSR and satellite states\nThe Sinatra Doctrine was a Soviet foreign policy under Mikhail Gorbachev for allowing member states of the Warsaw Pact to determine their own domestic affairs. The name humorously alluded to the song \"My Way\" popularized by Frank Sinatra\u2014the Soviet Union was allowing these states to go their own way. Its implementation was part of Gorbachev's doctrine of new political thinking.\nHistory.\nThe Sinatra Doctrine was a significant break from the earlier Brezhnev Doctrine, under which Moscow tightly controlled the internal affairs of satellite states. This had been used to justify the crushing of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 and the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, as well as the invasion of the non-Warsaw Pact nation of Afghanistan in 1979. By the late 1980s, structural flaws within the Soviet system, growing economic problems, the rise of anti-communist sentiment, and the effects of the Soviet\u2013Afghan War made it increasingly impractical for the Soviet Union to impose its will on its neighbors.\nThe phrase was coined on 25 October 1989 by Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennadi Gerasimov. He was speaking to reporters in Helsinki about a speech made two days earlier by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze. The latter had said that the Soviets recognized the freedom of choice of all countries, specifically including the other Warsaw Pact states. Gerasimov told the interviewer, \"We now have the Frank Sinatra doctrine. He has a song, 'I Did It My Way'. So every country decides on its own which road to take.\" When asked whether this would include Moscow accepting the rejection of communist parties in the Soviet bloc, he replied: \"That's for sure\u00a0... political structures must be decided by the people who live there.\"\nThe Sinatra Doctrine has been seen as Moscow permitting its allies to decide their futures. It was a retrospective policy, as Soviet allies had already acquired much greater freedom of action. A month before Gerasimov's statement, Poland had elected its first non-communist government since the 1940s. The Hungarian government began dismantling the Iron Curtain on the border with Austria in the spring of 1989. From the Pan-European Picnic in August, it was clear to the media-informed Eastern European population that, on the one hand, the Soviet Union would not prevent the opening of the border. On the other hand, the Eastern European governments were divided. Since Hungary was one of the few countries East Germans could travel to, thousands then traveled there to flee to the West across the newly opened border. To the great annoyance of the East German government, the Hungarians refused to stop the exodus.\nThese developments greatly disturbed hardline communists such as the East German leader Erich Honecker, who condemned the end of the Soviet bloc's traditional \"socialist unity\" and appealed to Moscow to rein in the Hungarians. Honecker faced a growing crisis at home, with massive anti-government demonstrations in Leipzig and other East German cities. Shevardnadze's speech and Gerasimov's memorable description of the new policy contradicted Honecker's appeals.\nThe Sinatra Doctrine proclamation had dramatic effects across the Soviet bloc. The beleaguered East German government had hoped for a Soviet intervention to defend communism in East Germany and elsewhere. However, the Sinatra Doctrine announcement signaled that the Soviet Union would not aid the East German communists. In a few months, the communist governments of East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, and Romania had all been overthrown, thus bringing the Cold War to an end.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28569", "revid": "50405284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28569", "title": "Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System", "text": "Chemical species structure notation\nThe Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System (SMILES) is a specification in the form of a line notation for describing the structure of chemical species using short ASCII strings. SMILES strings can be imported by most molecule editors for conversion back into two-dimensional drawings or three-dimensional models of the molecules.\nThe original SMILES specification was initiated in the 1980s. It has since been modified and extended. In 2007, an open standard called OpenSMILES was developed in the open source chemistry community.\nHistory.\nThe original SMILES specification was initiated by David Weininger at the USEPA Mid-Continent Ecology Division Laboratory in Duluth in the 1980s. Acknowledged for their parts in the early development were \"Gilman Veith and Rose Russo (USEPA) and Albert Leo and Corwin Hansch (Pomona College) for supporting the work, and Arthur Weininger (Pomona; Daylight CIS) and Jeremy Scofield (Cedar River Software, Renton, WA) for assistance in programming the system.\" The Environmental Protection Agency funded the initial project to develop SMILES.\nIt has since been modified and extended by others, most notably by Daylight Chemical Information Systems. In 2007, an open standard called \"OpenSMILES\" was developed by the Blue Obelisk open-source chemistry community. Other 'linear' notations include the Wiswesser Line Notation (WLN), ROSDAL and SLN (Tripos Inc).\nIn July 2006, the IUPAC introduced the InChI as a standard for formula representation. SMILES is generally considered to have the advantage of being more human-readable than InChI; it also has a wide base of software support with extensive theoretical backing (such as graph theory).\nTerminology.\nThe term SMILES refers to a line notation for encoding molecular structures and specific instances should strictly be called SMILES strings. However, the term SMILES is also commonly used to refer to both a single SMILES string and a number of SMILES strings; the exact meaning is usually apparent from the context. The terms \"canonical\" and \"isomeric\" can lead to some confusion when applied to SMILES. The terms describe different attributes of SMILES strings and are not mutually exclusive.\nTypically, a number of equally valid SMILES strings can be written for a molecule. For example, codice_1, codice_2 and codice_3 all specify the structure of ethanol. Algorithms have been developed to generate the same SMILES string for a given molecule; of the many possible strings, these algorithms choose only one of them. This SMILES is unique for each structure, although dependent on the canonicalization algorithm used to generate it, and is termed the canonical SMILES. These algorithms first convert the SMILES to an internal representation of the molecular structure; an algorithm then examines that structure and produces a unique SMILES string. Various algorithms for generating canonical SMILES have been developed and include those by Daylight Chemical Information Systems, OpenEye Scientific Software, MEDIT, Chemical Computing Group, MolSoft LLC, and the Chemistry Development Kit. A common application of canonical SMILES is indexing and ensuring uniqueness of molecules in a database.\nThe original paper that described the CANGEN algorithm claimed to generate unique SMILES strings for graphs representing molecules, but the algorithm fails for a number of simple cases (e.g. cuneane, 1,2-dicyclopropylethane) and cannot be considered a correct method for representing a graph canonically. There is currently no systematic comparison across commercial software to test if such flaws exist in those packages.\nSMILES notation allows the specification of configuration at tetrahedral centers, and double bond geometry. These are structural features that cannot be specified by connectivity alone, and therefore SMILES which encode this information are termed isomeric SMILES. A notable feature of these rules is that they allow rigorous partial specification of chirality. The term isomeric SMILES is also applied to SMILES in which isomers are specified.\nGraph-based definition.\nIn terms of a graph-based computational procedure, SMILES is a string obtained by printing the symbol nodes encountered in a depth-first tree traversal of a chemical graph. The chemical graph is first trimmed to remove hydrogen atoms and cycles are broken to turn it into a spanning tree. Where cycles have been broken, numeric suffix labels are included to indicate the connected nodes. Parentheses are used to indicate points of branching on the tree.\nThe resultant SMILES form depends on the choices:\nSMILES definition as strings of a context-free language.\nFrom the view point of a formal language theory, SMILES is a word. A SMILES is parsable with a context-free parser. The use of this representation has been in the prediction of biochemical properties (incl. toxicity and biodegradability) based on the main principle of chemoinformatics that similar molecules have similar properties. The predictive models implemented a syntactic pattern recognition approach (which involved defining a molecular distance) as well as a more robust scheme based on statistical pattern recognition.\nDescription.\nAtoms.\nAtoms are represented by the standard abbreviation of the chemical elements, in square brackets, such as codice_4 for gold. Brackets may be omitted in the common case of atoms which:\nAll other elements must be enclosed in brackets, and have charges and hydrogens shown explicitly. For instance, the SMILES for water may be written as either codice_5 or codice_6. Hydrogen may also be written as a separate atom; water may also be written as codice_7.\nWhen brackets are used, the symbol codice_8 is added if the atom in brackets is bonded to one or more hydrogen, followed by the number of hydrogen atoms if greater than 1, then by the sign codice_9 for a positive charge or by codice_10 for a negative charge. For example, codice_11 for ammonium (NH4+). If there is more than one charge, it is normally written as digit; however, it is also possible to repeat the sign as many times as the ion has charges: one may write either codice_12 or codice_13 for titanium(IV) Ti4+. Thus, the hydroxide anion (\u200aOH\u2212) is represented by codice_14, the hydronium cation () is codice_15 and the cobalt(III) cation (Co3+) is either codice_16 or codice_17.\nBonds.\nA bond is represented using one of the symbols codice_18.\nBonds between aliphatic atoms are assumed to be single unless specified otherwise and are implied by adjacency in the SMILES string. Although single bonds may be written as codice_10, this is usually omitted. For example, the SMILES for ethanol may be written as codice_20, codice_21 or codice_22, but is usually written codice_1.\nDouble, triple, and quadruple bonds are represented by the symbols codice_24, codice_25, and codice_26 respectively as illustrated by the SMILES codice_27 (carbon dioxide CO2), codice_28 (hydrogen cyanide HCN) and codice_29 (gallium arsenide).\nAn additional type of bond is a \"non-bond\", indicated with codice_30, to indicate that two parts are not bonded together. For example, aqueous sodium chloride may be written as codice_31 to show the dissociation.\nAn aromatic \"one and a half\" bond may be indicated with codice_32; see below.\nSingle bonds adjacent to double bonds may be represented using codice_33 or codice_34 to indicate stereochemical configuration; see below.\nRings.\nRing structures are written by breaking each ring at an arbitrary point (although some choices will lead to a more legible SMILES than others) to make an acyclic structure and adding numerical ring closure labels to show connectivity between non-adjacent atoms.\nFor example, cyclohexane and dioxane may be written as codice_35 and codice_36 respectively. For a second ring, the label will be 2. For example, decalin (decahydronaphthalene) may be written as codice_37.\nSMILES does not require that ring numbers be used in any particular order, and permits ring number zero, although this is rarely used. Also, it is permitted to reuse ring numbers after the first ring has closed, although this usually makes formulae harder to read. For example, bicyclohexyl is usually written as codice_38, but it may also be written as codice_39.\nMultiple digits after a single atom indicate multiple ring-closing bonds. For example, an alternative SMILES notation for decalin is codice_40, where the final carbon participates in both ring-closing bonds 1 and 2. If two-digit ring numbers are required, the label is preceded by codice_41, so codice_42 is a single ring-closing bond of ring 12.\nEither or both of the digits may be preceded by a bond type to indicate the type of the ring-closing bond. For example, cyclopropene is usually written codice_43, but if the double bond is chosen as the ring-closing bond, it may be written as codice_44, codice_45, or codice_46. (The first form is preferred.) codice_47 is illegal, as it explicitly specifies conflicting types for the ring-closing bond.\nRing-closing bonds may not be used to denote multiple bonds. For example, codice_48 is not a valid alternative to codice_49 for ethylene. However, they may be used with non-bonds; codice_50 is a peculiar but legal alternative way to write propane, more commonly written codice_51.\nChoosing a ring-break point adjacent to attached groups can lead to a simpler SMILES form by avoiding branches. For example, cyclohexane-1,2-diol is most simply written as codice_52; choosing a different ring-break location produces a branched structure that requires parentheses to write.\nAromaticity.\nAromatic rings such as benzene may be written in one of three forms:\nIn the latter case, bonds between two aromatic atoms are assumed (if not explicitly shown) to be aromatic bonds. Thus, benzene, pyridine and furan can be represented respectively by the SMILES codice_62, codice_63 and codice_64.\nAromatic nitrogen bonded to hydrogen, as found in pyrrole must be represented as codice_65; thus imidazole is written in SMILES notation as codice_66.\nWhen aromatic atoms are singly bonded to each other, such as in biphenyl, a single bond must be shown explicitly: codice_67. This is one of the few cases where the single bond symbol codice_10 is required. (In fact, most SMILES software can correctly infer that the bond between the two rings cannot be aromatic and so will accept the nonstandard form codice_69.)\nThe Daylight and OpenEye algorithms for generating canonical SMILES differ in their treatment of aromaticity.\nBranching.\nBranches are described with parentheses, as in codice_70 for propionic acid and codice_71 for fluoroform. The first atom within the parentheses, and the first atom after the parenthesized group, are both bonded to the same branch point atom. The bond symbol must appear inside the parentheses; outside (e.g. codice_72) is invalid.\nSubstituted rings can be written with the branching point in the ring as illustrated by the SMILES codice_73 (https://) and codice_74 (https://) which encode the 3 and 4-cyanoanisole isomers. Writing SMILES for substituted rings in this way can make them more human-readable.\nBranches may be written in any order. For example, bromochlorodifluoromethane may be written as codice_75, codice_76, codice_77, or the like. Generally, a SMILES form is easiest to read if the simpler branch comes first, with the final, unparenthesized portion being the most complex. The only caveats to such rearrangements are:\nThe one form of branch which does \"not\" require parentheses are ring-closing bonds: the SMILES fragment codice_78 is equivalent to codice_79, both denoting a bond between the codice_80 and the codice_81. Choosing ring-closing bonds adjacent to branch points can reduce the number of parentheses required. For example, toluene is normally written as codice_82 or codice_83, avoiding the parentheses required if written as codice_84 or codice_85.\nStereochemistry.\nSMILES permits, but does not require, specification of stereoisomers.\nConfiguration around double bonds is specified using the characters codice_33 and codice_34 to show directional single bonds adjacent to a double bond. For example, codice_88 (https://) is one representation of \"trans\"-1,2-difluoroethylene, in which the fluorine atoms are on opposite sides of the double bond (as shown in the figure), whereas codice_89 (https://) is one possible representation of \"cis\"-1,2-difluoroethylene, in which the fluorines are on the same side of the double bond.\nBond direction symbols always come in groups of at least two, of which the first is arbitrary. That is, codice_90 is the same as codice_88. When alternating single-double bonds are present, the groups are larger than two, with the middle directional symbols being adjacent to two double bonds. For example, the common form of (2,4)-hexadiene is written codice_92.\nAs a more complex example, beta-carotene has a very long backbone of alternating single and double bonds, which may be written codice_93.\nConfiguration at tetrahedral carbon is specified by codice_94 or codice_95. Consider the four bonds in the order in which they appear, left to right, in the SMILES form. Looking toward the central carbon from the perspective of the first bond, the other three are either clockwise or counter-clockwise. These cases are indicated with codice_95 and codice_94, respectively (because the codice_94 symbol itself is a counter-clockwise spiral).\nFor example, consider the amino acid alanine. One of its SMILES forms is codice_99, more fully written as codice_100. -Alanine, the more common enantiomer, is written as codice_101 (https://). Looking from the nitrogen\u2013carbon bond, the hydrogen (codice_8), methyl (codice_80), and carboxylate (codice_104) groups appear clockwise. -Alanine can be written as codice_105 (https://).\nWhile the order in which branches are specified in SMILES is normally unimportant, in this case it matters; swapping any two groups requires reversing the chirality indicator. If the branches are reversed so alanine is written as codice_106, then the configuration also reverses; -alanine is written as codice_107 (https://). Other ways of writing it include codice_108, codice_109 and codice_110.\nNormally, the first of the four bonds appears to the left of the carbon atom, but if the SMILES is written beginning with the chiral carbon, such as codice_111, then all four are to the right, but the first to appear (the codice_112 bond in this case) is used as the reference to order the following three: -alanine may also be written codice_113.\nThe SMILES specification includes elaborations on the codice_94 symbol to indicate stereochemistry around more complex chiral centers, such as trigonal bipyramidal molecular geometry.\nIsotopes.\nIsotopes are specified with a number equal to the integer isotopic mass preceding the atomic symbol. Benzene in which one atom is carbon-14 is written as codice_115 and deuterochloroform is codice_116.\nExamples.\nTo illustrate a molecule with more than 9 rings, consider cephalostatin-1, a steroidic 13-ringed pyrazine with the empirical formula C54H74N2O10 isolated from the Indian Ocean hemichordate \"Cephalodiscus gilchristi\":\nStarting with the left-most methyl group in the figure:\ncodice_117\ncodice_41 appears in front of the index of ring closure labels above 9; see above.\nOther examples of SMILES.\nThe SMILES notation is described extensively in the SMILES theory manual provided by Daylight Chemical Information Systems and a number of illustrative examples are presented. Daylight's depict utility provides users with the means to check their own examples of SMILES and is a valuable educational tool.\nExtensions.\nSMARTS is a line notation for specification of substructural patterns in molecules. While it uses many of the same symbols as SMILES, it also allows specification of wildcard atoms and bonds, which can be used to define substructural queries for chemical database searching. One common misconception is that SMARTS-based substructural searching involves matching of SMILES and SMARTS strings. In fact, both SMILES and SMARTS strings are first converted to internal graph representations which are searched for subgraph isomorphism.\nSMIRKS, a superset of \"reaction SMILES\" and a subset of \"reaction SMARTS\", is a line notation for specifying reaction transforms. The general syntax for the reaction extensions is codice_119 (without spaces), where any of the fields can either be left blank or filled with multiple molecules delineated with a dot (codice_30), and other descriptions dependent on the base language. Atoms can additionally be identified with a number (e.g. codice_121) for mapping, for example in .\nSMILES corresponds to discrete molecular structures. However many materials are macromolecules, which are too large (and often stochastic) to conveniently generate SMILES for. BigSMILES is an extension of SMILES that aims to provide an efficient representation system for macromolecules.\nConversion.\nSMILES can be converted back to two-dimensional representations using structure diagram generation (SDG) algorithms. This conversion is sometimes ambiguous. Conversion to three-dimensional representation is achieved by energy-minimization approaches. There are many downloadable and web-based conversion utilities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28571", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28571", "title": "SMILES", "text": ""}
{"id": "28573", "revid": "49231714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28573", "title": "Soweto", "text": "Township in Gauteng, South Africa\nSoweto () is a township of the City of Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality in Gauteng, South Africa, bordering the city's mining belt in the south. Its name is an English syllabic abbreviation for \"South Western Townships\". Formerly a separate municipality, it is now incorporated in the City of Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality and is one of the suburbs of Johannesburg.\nHistory.\nGeorge Harrison and George Walker are today credited as the men who discovered an outcrop of the Main Reef of gold on the farm Langlaagte in February 1886. The fledgling town of Johannesburg was laid out on a triangular wedge of \"uitvalgrond\" (area excluded when the farms were surveyed) named Randjeslaagte, situated between the farms Doornfontein to the east, Braamfontein to the west and Turffontein to the south.\nWithin a decade of the discovery of gold in Johannesburg, 100,000 people flocked to this part of the Zuid-Afrikaansche Republiek in search of riches. They were of many races and nationalities. In October 1887, the government of the South African Republic (ZAR) bought the south-eastern portion of the farm Braamfontein. There were large quantities of clay, suitable for brickmaking, along the stream. The government decided that more money was to be made from issuing brick maker's licences at five shillings per month. The result was that many landless Dutch-speaking burghers (citizens) of the ZAR settled on the property and started making bricks. They also erected their shacks there. Soon, the area was known either Brickfields or Veldschoendorp. Soon other working poor, Coloureds, Indians and Africans also settled there. The government, who sought to differentiate the white working class from the black, laid out new suburbs for the Burghers (Whites), Coolies (Indians), Malays (Coloureds) and Black Africans (Africans), but the whole area simply stayed multiracial.\nSoweto was created in the 1930s, when the White government started separating Blacks from Whites, to create black \"townships\". Blacks were moved away from Johannesburg, to an area separated from White suburbs by a so-called \"cordon sanitaire\" (or sanitary corridor) which was usually a river, railway track, industrial area or highway. This was carried out using the infamous Urban Areas Act of 1923.\nWilliam Carr, chair of non-European affairs, initiated the naming of Soweto in 1949. He called for a competition to give a collective name to townships dotted around the South-west of Johannesburg. People responded to this competition with great enthusiasm. Among the names suggested to the city council was KwaMpanza, meaning Mpanza's place, invoking the name of Mpanza and his role in bringing the plight of Orlando sub tenants to the attention of the city council. The city council settled for the acronym SOWETO (South West Townships). The name Soweto was first used in 1963 and within a short period of time, following the 1976 uprising of students in the township, the name became internationally known.\nSoweto became the largest Black city in South Africa, but until 1976, its population could have status only as temporary residents, serving as a workforce for Johannesburg. It experienced civil unrest during the Apartheid regime. There were serious riots in 1976, sparked by a ruling that Afrikaans be used in African schools there; the riots were violently suppressed, with 176 striking students killed and more than 1,000 injured. Reforms followed, but riots flared up again in 1985 and continued until the first non-racial elections were held in April 1994. In 2010, South Africa's oldest township hosted the FIFA World Cup Final and the attention of more than a billion soccer spectators from all over the world was focused on Soweto.\nKliptown and Pimville.\nIn April 1904, there was a bubonic plague scare in the shanty town area of Brickfields. The town council decided to condemn the area and burn it down. Beforehand, most of the Africans living there were moved far out of town to the farm Klipspruit (later called Pimville), south-west of Johannesburg, where the council had erected iron barracks and a few triangular hutments. The rest of them had to build their own shacks. The fire brigade then set the 1600 shacks and shops in Brickfields alight. Thereafter, the area was redeveloped as Newtown. Pimville was next to Kliptown, the oldest Black residential district of Johannesburg and first laid out in 1891, on land which formed part of Klipspruit farm. The future Soweto was to be laid out on Klipspruit and the adjoining farm called Diepkloof.\nIn the Zuid-Afrikaansche Republiek and the subsequent Transvaal Colony, it was lawful for people of colour to own fixed property. Consequently, the township of Sophiatown was laid out in 1903 and Blacks were encouraged to buy property there. For the same reasons, Alexandra, Gauteng was planned for Black ownership in 1912. The subsequent Natives Land Act of 1913 did not change the situation because it did not apply to land situated within municipal boundaries.\nOrlando, Moroka and Jabavu.\nIn 1923, the Parliament of the Union of South Africa passed the Natives (Urban Areas) Act. The purpose of the Act was to provide for improved conditions of residence for natives in urban areas, to control their ingress into such areas and to restrict their access to intoxicating liquor. The Act required local authorities to provide accommodation for Natives (then the polite term for Africans or Blacks) lawfully employed and resident within the area of their jurisdiction. Pursuant to this Act, the Johannesburg town council formed a Municipal Native Affairs Department in 1927. It bought 1 300 morgen of land on the farm Klipspruit No. 8 and the first houses in what was to become Orlando Location were built there in the latter half of 1930. The township was named after the chairman of the Native Affairs committee, Mr. Edwin Orlando Leake. In the end, some 10,311 houses were built there by the municipality. In addition, it built 4,045 temporary single-room shelters.\nIn about 1934, James Sofasonke Mpanza moved to 957 Pheele Street, Orlando, and lived there for the rest of his life. A year after his arrival in Orlando, he formed his own political party, the Sofasonke Party. He also became very active in the affairs of the Advisory Board for Orlando. Towards the end of World War II, there was an acute shortage of housing for Blacks in Johannesburg. By the end of 1943, the Sofasonke Party advised its members to put up their own squatters' shacks on municipal property. On Saturday 25 March 1944, the squat began. Hundreds of homeless people from Orlando and elsewhere joined Mpanza in marching to a vacant lot in Orlando West and starting a squatters camp. The city council's resistance crumbled. After feverish consultations with the relevant government department, it was agreed that an emergency camp, which could house 991 families, be erected. It was to be called Central Western Jabavu. The next wave of land invasions took place in September 1946. Some 30,000 squatters congregated west of Orlando. Early the next year, the city council proclaimed a new emergency camp. It was called Moroka. 10,000 sites were made available immediately. Moroka became Johannesburg's worst slum area. Residents erected their shanties on plots measuring six metres by six metres. There were only communal bucket-system toilets and very few taps. The camps were meant to be used for a maximum of five years, but when they were eventually demolished in 1955, Moroka and Jabavu housed 89,000 people.\nChris Hani Baragwanath Academic Hospital.\nIn 1941, the British Government built a military hospital next to the road between Johannesburg and Potchefstroom. The place was to be at the 8th milestone near the old Wayside Inn, owned by a Cornishman called John Albert Baragwanath. It was called The Imperial Military Hospital, Baragwanath. After the war, the Transvaal Provincial Administration bought the hospital for \u00a31\u00a0million. On 1 April 1948, the Black section of Johannesburg Hospital (known as Non-European Hospital or NEH) was transferred to Baragwanath Hospital. In 1997, the facility was renamed Chris Hani Baragwanath Academic Hospital after former General Secretary of the South African Communist Party, Chris Hani.\nApartheid.\nThe National Party won the general election of 1948 and formed a new government. The party's policy was called apartheid, the Afrikaans word meaning separateness. They thought they could separate the various racial groups in South Africa. In those days, the Johannesburg City Council did not support the National Party. The city council and the central government competed to control the Black townships of Johannesburg.\n1948 to 1976.\nFollowing the election of the new government, some 7,000 new houses were built in the first two or three years, but very little was done thereafter. In 1952, there was a breakthrough. Firstly, the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research came up with a standard design for low-cost, four-roomed, forty-square-metre houses. In 1951, the Parliament passed the Building Workers Act, which permitted Blacks to be trained as artisans in the building trade. In 1952, it passed the Bantu Services Levy Act, which imposed a levy on employers of African workers and the levy was used to finance basic services in Black townships. In 1954, the City Council built 5,100 houses in Jabavu and 1,450 in Mofolo.\nThe city council's pride and joy was its economic scheme known as Dube Village. It was intended \"primarily for the thoroughly urbanised and economically advanced Native\". Stands, varying in size from fifty by hundred feet to forty by 70 feet, were made available on a thirty-year leasehold tenure. Tenants could erect their own dwellings in conformity with approved plans.\nIn June 1955, Kliptown was the home of an unprecedented Congress of the People, which adopted the Freedom Charter.\nFrom the onset, the Apartheid government purposed Soweto to house the bulk of the labour force which was needed by Johannesburg. Africans used to live in areas surrounding the city, so the authorities felt it would be more expedient to concentrate black workers in one district that could be easily controlled.\nThe new sub-economic townships took off in 1956, when Tladi, Zondi, Dhlamini, Chiawelo and Senoane were laid out providing 28,888 people with accommodation. Jabulani, Phiri and Naledi followed the next year. Sir Ernest Oppenheimer arranged a loan of \u00a33\u00a0million from the mining industry, which allowed an additional 14,000 houses to be built. It was decided to divide Soweto into various language groups. Naledi, Mapetla, Tladi, Moletsane and Phiri were for Sotho- and Tswana-speaking people. Chiawelo for Tsonga and Venda. Dlamini Senaoane, Zola, Zondi, Jabulani, Emdeni and White City were for Zulus and Xhosas.\nThe central government was busy with its own agenda. The presence of Blacks with freehold title to land among Johannesburg's White suburbs irked them. In 1954, Parliament passed the Native Resettlement Act, which permitted the government to remove Blacks from suburbs like Sophiatown, Martindale, Newclare and Western Native Township. Between 1956 and 1960, they built 23,695 houses in Meadowlands and Diepkloof to accommodate the evicted persons. By 1960, the removals were more-or-less complete.\nIn 1959, the city council launched a competition to find a collective name for all the townships south-west of the city's centre. It was only in 1963 that the city council decided to adopt the name Soweto as the collective name. The name Soweto was officially endorsed by the municipalities' authorities only in 1963 after a special committee had considered various names. The apartheid government's intention was for Soweto to house black people who were working for Johannesburg. Other names considered included \"apartheid Townships\" and \"Verwoerdstad\".\nIn 1971, Parliament passed the Black Affairs Administration Act, No. 45 of 1971. In terms of this Act, the central government appointed the West Rand Administration Board to take over the powers and obligations of the Johannesburg City Council in respect of Soweto. As chairman of the board it appointed Manie Mulder, a political appointment of a person who had no experience of the administration of native affairs.\nManie Mulder's most famous quote was given to the Rand Daily Mail in May 1976: \"The broad masses of Soweto are perfectly content, perfectly happy. Black-White relationships at present are as healthy as can be. There is no danger whatever of a blow-up in Soweto.\"\nSoweto uprising.\nSoweto came to the world's attention on 16 June 1976 with the Soweto uprising, when mass protests erupted over the government's policy to enforce education in Afrikaans rather than their native language. Police opened fire in Orlando West on 10,000 students marching from Naledi High School to Orlando Stadium. The rioting continued and 23 people died on the first day in Soweto, 21 of whom were black, including the minor Hector Pieterson, as well as two white people, including Melville Edelstein, a lifelong humanitarian.\nThe impact of the Soweto protests reverberated through the country and across the world. In their aftermath, economic and cultural sanctions were introduced from abroad. Political activists left the country to train for guerrilla resistance. Soweto and other townships became the stage for violent state repression. Since 1991, this date and the schoolchildren have been commemorated by the International Day of the African Child.\nAftermath.\nIn response, the apartheid state started providing electricity to more Soweto homes, yet phased out financial support for building additional housing. Soweto became an independent municipality with elected black councilors in 1983, in line with the Black Local Authorities Act. Previously, the townships were governed by the Johannesburg council, but from the 1970s, the state took control.\nBlack African councilors were not provided by the apartheid state with the finances to address housing and infrastructural problems. Township residents opposed the black councilors as puppet collaborators who personally benefited financially from an oppressive regime. Resistance was spurred by the exclusion of blacks from the newly formed tricameral Parliament (which did include Whites, Indians and Coloreds). Municipal elections in black, coloured, and Indian areas were subsequently widely boycotted, returning extremely low voting figures for years. Popular resistance to state structures dates back to the Advisory Boards (1950) that co-opted black residents to advise whites who managed the townships.\nFurther popular resistance: incorporation into the City.\nIn Soweto, popular resistance to apartheid emerged in various forms during the 1980s. Educational and economic boycotts were initiated, and student bodies were organized. Street committees were formed, and civic organizations were established as alternatives to state-imposed structures. One of the most well-known \"civics\" was Soweto's Committee of Ten, started in 1978 in the offices of \"The Bantu World\" newspaper. Such actions were strengthened by the call issued by African National Congress's 1985 Kabwe congress in Zambia to make South Africa ungovernable. As the state forbade public gatherings, church buildings like Regina Mundi were sometimes used for political gatherings.\nIn 1995, Soweto became part of the Southern Metropolitan Transitional Local Council, and in 2002, was incorporated into the City of Johannesburg. A series of bombings occurred in 2002. The right-wing extremist group, Boeremag claimed responsibility for the attacks that damaged buildings, railway lines, and killed one person. In 2022, 15 people were killed in a mass shooting at a bar.\nDemographics.\nSoweto's population is predominantly black and the most common first language is Zulu.\nCityscape.\nLandmarks.\nSoweto landmarks include:\nClimate.\nK\u00f6ppen-Geiger climate classification system classifies its climate as subtropical highland (Cwb).\nTransport.\nThe suburb was not historically allowed to create employment centres within the area, so almost all of its residents are commuters to other parts of the city.\nRail.\nMetrorail operates commuter trains between Soweto and central Johannesburg. Soweto train stations are at Naledi, Merafe, Inhlazane, Ikwezi, Dube, Phefeni, Phomolong, Mzimhlophe, New Canada, Mlamlankunzi, Orlando, Nancefield, Kliptown, Tshiawelo and Midway.\nRoad.\nThe N1 highway skirts the eastern boundary of Soweto. There is efficient road access for many parts of the region along busy highways to Johannesburg and Roodepoort, but commuters are largely reliant on trains and taxis.\nThe N12 (named the Moroka Bypass) forms the southern border of Soweto, separating it from Lenasia.\nA new section of the N17 has been built, connecting Soweto with Nasrec as a four-lane dual carriageway.\nThe M70, also known as the Soweto Highway, links Soweto with central Johannesburg via Nasrec and Booysens. This road is multi lane, passes next to Soccer City in Nasrec and has dedicated taxiway lanes from Soweto eastwards to Booysens and Johannesburg Central.\nThe M68, also known as the Old Potchefstroom Road, links Soweto with Johannesburg South.\nA major thoroughfare through the south-eastern part of Soweto (Eldorado Park) is the R553 Golden Highway. It provides access to the N1, N12 and M1 highways.\nMinibus taxis are a popular form of transport. In 2000 it was estimated that around 2000 minibus taxis operated from the Baragwanath taxi rank alone.\nA Bus rapid transit system, \"Rea Vaya\", provides transport for around 16 000 commuters daily.\nPUTCO has for many years provided bus commuter services to Soweto residents.\nHousing.\nThe area is mostly composed of old \"matchbox\" houses, or four-room houses built by the government, that were built to provide cheap accommodation for black workers during apartheid. However, there are a few smaller areas where prosperous Sowetans have built houses that are similar in stature to those in more affluent suburbs. Many people who still live in matchbox houses have improved and expanded their homes, and the City Council has enabled the planting of more trees and the improving of parks and green spaces in the area.\nHostels are another prominent physical feature of Soweto. Originally built to house male migrant workers, many have been improved as dwellings for couples and families.\nIn 1996, the City of Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality awarded tenders to Conrad Penny and his company Penny Brothers Brokers &amp; Valuers (Pty) Ltd. for the valuation of the whole of Soweto (which at the time consisted of over 325,000 properties) for rating and taxing purpose. This was the single largest valuation ever undertaken in Africa.\nSociety and culture.\nMedia.\nBeing part of the urban agglomerations of Gauteng, Soweto shares much of the same media as the rest of Gauteng province. There are however some media sources dedicated to Soweto itself:\nMusic.\nSoweto is credited as one of the founding places for Kwaito and Kasi rap, which is a style of hip hop specific to South Africa. This form of music, which combined many elements of house music, American hip-hop, and traditional African music, became a strong force amongst black South Africans.\nEarly Career\nThe experiences of other developing nations were examined at the Soweto entrepreneurship conference, which looked for ways to help turn the economic tide in townships. \nSOWETO'S entrepreneurs gathered at the University of Johannesburg Soweto Campus on 13 and 14 April to engage with experts from all over the globe about how to enhance skills and value-add in township economies.\nThe restrictions on economic activities were lifted in 1977, spurring the growth of the taxi industry as an alternative to Soweto's inadequate bus and train transport systems. \nIn 1994 Sowetans earned on average almost six and a half times less than their counterparts in wealthier areas of Johannesburg (1994 estimates). Sowetans contribute less than 2% to Johannesburg's rates Some Sowetans remain impoverished, and others live in shanty towns with little or no services. About 85% of Kliptown comprises informal housing. The Soweto Electricity Crisis Committee argues that Soweto's poor are unable to pay for electricity. The committee believes that the South African government's privatization drives will worsen the situation. Research showed that 62% of residents in Orlando East and Pimville were unemployed or pensioners. \nThere have been signs recently indicating economic improvement. The Johannesburg City Council began to provide more street lights and to pave roads. Private initiatives to tap Sowetans' combined spending power of R4.3\u00a0billion were also planned, including the construction of Protea Mall, Jabulani Mall, and the development of Maponya Mall, an upmarket hotel in Kliptown, and the Orlando Ekhaya entertainment center. Soweto has also become a Centre for nightlife and culture.\nWell-known artists from Soweto, besides those mentioned above, include:\nFestivals.\nThe Soweto Wine Festival was started in 2004. The three-night festival is hosted at the University of Johannesburg's Soweto Campus on Chris Hani Road in the first weekend of September. Organised by the Cape Wine Academy, the festival attracts over 6000 wine enthusiasts, over 100 of South Africa's finest wineries and well over 900 fine wines.\nSoweto Pride, an annual pride parade, is held in Soweto every year, on the last Saturday of September. The inaugural Pride was in 2004. The parade aims to celebrate black lesbian, queer and trans women plus non-binary people, and offer them space to voice issues affecting them.\nAwards.\nThe Soweto Awards, which will become an annual event, honours those who have their roots in Soweto.\nFormer president Nelson Mandela received the Life Time Award from the first Soweto Awards in Johannesburg on 25 February 2001. The Legends Awards went to Gibson Kente, the \"godfather\" of township theatre, Felicia Mabuza-Suttle, a talk show host, Aggrey Klaaste, editor of the Sowetan newspaper and Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, MP and African National Congress Women's League president.\nSuburbs.\nBy 2003, the Greater Soweto area consisted of 87 townships grouped together into Administrative Regions 6 and 10 of Johannesburg.\nEstimates of how many residential areas make up Soweto itself vary widely. Some counts say that Soweto comprises 29 townships, whilst others find 34. The differences may be due to confusion arising from the merger of adjoining townships (such as Lenasia and Eldorado Park) with those of Soweto into Regions 6 and 10. The total number also depends on whether the various \"extensions\" and \"zones\" are counted separately, or as part of one main suburb. The 2003 Regional Spatial Development Framework arrived at 87 names by counting various extensions (e.g. Chiawelo's 5) and zones (e.g. Pimville's 7) separately. The City of Johannesburg's website groups the zones and extensions together to arrive at 32, but omits Noordgesig and Mmesi Park.\nThe list below provides the dates when some of Soweto's townships were established, along with the probable origins or meanings of their names, where available:\nOther Soweto townships include Phomolong and Snake Park.\nEconomy.\nMany parts of Soweto rank among the poorest in Johannesburg, although individual townships tend to have a mix of wealthier and poorer residents. In general, households in the outlying areas to the northwest and southeast have lower incomes, while those in southwestern areas tend to have higher incomes.\nThe economic development of Soweto was severely curtailed by the apartheid state, which provided very limited infrastructure and prevented residents from creating their own businesses. Roads remained unpaved, and many residents had to share one tap between four houses, for example. Soweto was meant to exist only as a dormitory town for black Africans who worked in white houses, factories, and industries. The 1957 Natives (Urban Areas) Consolidation Act and its predecessors restricted residents between 1923 and 1976 to seven self-employment categories in Soweto itself. Sowetans could operate general shops, butcheries, eating houses, sell milk or vegetables, or hawk goods. The overall number of such enterprises at any time were strictly controlled. As a result, informal trading developed outside the legally-recognized activities.\nBy 1976, Soweto had only two cinemas and two hotels, and 83% of houses had electricity. Up to 93% of residents had no running water. Using fire for cooking and heating resulted in respiratory problems that contributed to high infant mortality rates (54 per 1,000 compared to 18 for whites, 1976 figures.\nThe restrictions on economic activities were lifted in 1977, spurring the growth of the taxi industry as an alternative to Soweto's inadequate bus and train transport systems.\nIn 1994, Sowetans earned on average almost six and a half times less than their counterparts in wealthier areas of Johannesburg (1994 estimates). Sowetans contribute less than 2% to Johannesburg's rates. Some Sowetans remain impoverished, and others live in shanty towns with little or no services. About 85% of Kliptown comprises informal housing. The Soweto Electricity Crisis Committee argues that Soweto's poor are unable to pay for electricity. The committee believes that the South African government's privatization drives will worsen the situation. Research showed that 62% of residents in Orlando East and Pimville were unemployed or pensioners.\nThere have been signs recently indicating economic improvement. The Johannesburg City Council began to provide more street lights and to pave roads. Private initiatives to tap Sowetans' combined spending power of R4.3\u00a0billion were also planned, including the construction of Protea Mall, Jabulani Mall, the development of Maponya Mall, an upmarket hotel in Kliptown, and the Orlando Ekhaya entertainment centre. Soweto has also become a centre for nightlife and culture.\nIn popular culture.\nFilms.\nThe 1976 uprising is depicted in the film \"A Dry White Season\" (1989), starring Donald Sutherland, Marlon Brando, and Susan Sarandon, who portray white South Africans pursuing justice for the deaths of black Soweto residents which followed the demonstrations.\nThe American film \"Stander\" (2003) portrays the story of Andre Stander, a rogue South African police Captain who rebelled against the corruption of South Africa under apartheid by becoming a bank robber. The Soweto uprising are depicted as Stander's breaking point in the film.\nSara Blecher and Rimi Raphoto's popular documentary, \"Surfing Soweto\" (2006), addresses the phenomenon of young kids \"surfing\" on the roofs of Soweto trains and the social problem this represents.\nThe film \"District 9\" (2009) was shot in Tshiawelo, Soweto. The plot involves a species of aliens who arrive on Earth in a starving and helpless condition, seeking aid. The originally benign attempts to aid them turn increasingly oppressive due to the overwhelming numbers of aliens and the cost of maintaining them, and to increasing xenophobia on the part of humans who treat the intelligent and sophisticated aliens like animals while taking advantage of them for personal and corporate gain. The aliens are housed in shacks in a slum-like concentration camp called \"District 9\", which is in fact modern-day Soweto; an attempt to relocate the aliens to another camp leads to violence and a wholesale slaughter by South African mercenary security forces (a reference to historical events in \"District Six\", Cape Town, a mostly Coloured neighborhood subjected to forced segregation during the apartheid years). The parallels to South Africa under apartheid are both deliberate and obvious, but are not explicitly remarked upon in the film.\nFilms that include Soweto scenes:\nLiterature.\nThe marches by students in Soweto are briefly mentioned in Linzi Glass' novel, \"Ruby Red\", which was nominated for the Carnegie Medal in 2008.\nSoweto is also mentioned in Sheila Gordon's novel, \"Waiting for the Rain\" (1987).\nThe main protagonist from the Jonas Jonasson novel \"The Girl Who Saved the King of Sweden\" (2013), Nombeko Mayeki was born in 1961 in Soweto.\nIn his first Anthology of Poems titled \"In Quiet Realm\" South African Soweto Born poet Lawrence Mduduzi Ndlovu dedicated a poem called \"Soweto My Everything\" to honour the place of his birth.\nTrevor Noah, in his autobiographical comedy \"Born a Crime\" (2016), describes his early childhood and growing up in Soweto.\nMusic.\nPJ Powers has a song called \"Soweto\" which appears on her 2023 album \"Rightfully Mine\".\nClarence Carter has a song called \"The Girl From Soweto\" or \"Where did the girl go, from Soweto\".\nSoweto is mentioned in the song \"Burden of Shame\" by the British band UB40, on their album \"Signing Off\" (1980).\nSinger\u2013songwriter Joe Strummer, formerly of the Clash, referenced Soweto in his solo album \"Streetcore\" on the song \"Arms Aloft\", as well as in The Clash's track, \"Where You Gonna Go (Soweto)\", found on the album \"London Calling\" \"(Legacy Edition)\".\nThe UK music duo Mattafix have a song called \"Memories Of Soweto\" on their album \"Rhythm &amp; Hymns\" (2007).\nSoweto is mentioned in the anti-apartheid song \"Gimme Hope Jo'anna\" by Eddy Grant. The line, \"While every mother in a black Soweto fears the killing of another son\", refers to police brutality during apartheid.\nMiriam Makeba has the song: \"Soweto Blues\".\nDr. Alban's song \"Free Up Soweto\" was included in the album \"Look Who's Talking\" (1994).\nThe Mexican group Tijuana No! recorded the song \"Soweto\" for their first album \"No\", in reference to the city and the movements.\n\"Soweto\" is the name of a song by the rap group Hieroglyphics.\nThe American band Vampire Weekend refers to its own musical style, a blend of indie rock and pop with African influences, as \"Upper West Side Soweto\", based on the same description of Paul Simon's album \"Graceland.\"\n\"Soweto\" is the title of the opening track of the album \"Joined at the Hip\", by Bob James and Kirk Whalum.\nBrazilian singer-songwriter Djavan, in his 1987 album \"N\u00e3o \u00c9 Azul, mas \u00c9 Mar\", recorded a song called \"Soweto\". Also this song inspired the naming of Brazilian pagode group \"Soweto\".\nThe American group the Magnetic Fields mentions Soweto in their song \"World Love\" on the album \"69 Love Songs\" (1999).\nNotable people.\nNative Sowetans.\nSoweto is the birthplace of:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28575", "revid": "27706643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28575", "title": "Sampo", "text": "Magical artifact in Finnish mythology\nIn Finnish mythology, the Sampo () or Sammas () is a magical device or object described in many different ways, constructed by the blacksmith, inventor and originally the sky god Ilmarinen, and which brings riches and good fortune to its holder, akin to the horn of plenty (cornucopia) of Greek mythology. A central myth in Finnish mythology is the idea that the sampo was once in Pohjola but a group of heroes attempt to steal it. Sammas, as something at the center of the world, also exists in Estonian mythology.\nThe Sampo or Sammas has multiple other names in runic songs as well, including Samppu, Samppi and Kirjokansi ().\nInterpretation.\nThe Sampo has been interpreted in many ways: a world pillar or world tree, the Sun, a compass or astrolabe, a chest containing a treasure, a Byzantine coin die, a book, a decorated Vendel period shield, a Christian relic, etc. In the \"Kalevala\", compiler L\u00f6nnrot interpreted it to be a quern or mill of some sort that made flour, salt, and gold out of thin air. The world pillar/tree hypothesis was argued for by figures such as theosophian Pekka Ervast, historian of religions Uno Harva and the linguist Eemil Nestor Set\u00e4l\u00e4 in the early 20th century.\nIn Estonian runic songs, the Sammas, an oak or an ash (akin to the Yggdrasil) is something which stands at the center of the world. According to the archaeologist Elena Kuz'mina, the Sampo mill myth originates from the Indo-European \"skambh\u00e1\" 'support, pillar, column', and was borrowed into Finno-Ugric. In the \"Atharvaveda\", the \"skambh\u00e1\" is a creature that supports the universe, analogous to the World Tree \u2013 the Sampo has been claimed to be the Finnish equivalent of the world tree. At the top of this tree is the 'golden cradle', which according to Forest Finn tiet\u00e4j\u00e4 Kaisa Vilhunen is a rainbow which works as a bridge between heaven and earth.\nThe world pillar or tree is attached to the center of the sky, turning it around, while also working as a path between the different layers of the world. Vilhunen gave a detailed explanation of the Sammas which supports the theory of its nature as the world pillar. She described it as a golden pillar with a golden head and a copper foot. The golden head is Polaris, which attached the Sammas to the sky. The pillar went down deep underground like the roots of a tree and was attached to a copper mountain there. The dome of the sky spun around Polaris, which Vilhunen described as the Sammas \"grinding\". According to her, the root has three guardians: Tuokkoi, Pajas and Ruoskakup 'whip guy'. They make sure no one can dig up the gold at the root of the pillar so it won't snap. The identities of these guardians are a mystery, but Pajas could mean Ukko: the Forest Finnish Sammas myths originate from Savonia, where Ukko also has the name Pajainen. Jenuveeva (Genevieve) sat at the top of the pillar, at the center of three branches.\nThe mill-like qualities of the Sampo connect it to the Grotti mill from Norse mythology, which like the Sampo is a source of wealth and everything good. Martti Haavio saw the two as different branches of the same myth of creation. He also connected it to myths from Ancient Indian literature. He thought Sampo's name comes from *\"t\u0161ampa\", which would also be the origin of \"sammakko\" 'frog'. Connection to Ancient India holds up, as Sampo is possibly a loan from Indo-Iranian languages, but the frog theory is not supported in contemporary research. Maths Bertell also connected the Sampo to the Grotti mill and the cult of Freyr.\nFor runic singers, the Sampo was a representation of growth and its mythic origin, and initially not an object. Ilmarinen was able to forge the Sampo because he is a god, the one who had also created the sky. Anna-Leena Siikala thought that the concepts of the theft of the Sampo and its mill-like qualities are a sign of influence born out of contacts with the Norwegians. A runic song from Satakunta mentions a smith creating a 'witch/shaman machine', the nature of which is a mystery, unless it's a Sampo-like magical object.\nMatti Kuusi described the purpose of the Sampo myth as a ritual song of the birth of agriculture.\nThe meaning of the Sampo had become unknown even to the Karelian runic singers of the 19th century. Some of the called it an iron kantele, a boat, the stars and the Moon, or a millstone. To the Forest Finn Maja Hindriksdotter, it was like a magical bird. Julius Krohn thought the Sampo was the Sun, while Jens Andreas Friis thought it was a S\u00e1mi drum. Kaarle Krohn did not agree with Friis: he thought the theft of Sampo had been mixed with two other runic songs, God's sea voyage () and Release of the Sun (), and it to have originally described a raid on Gotland.\nRunic songs from Kainuu and White Karelia describe Sampo, Sammot, Samppu or Samppi as something which has words in it: \"Aukasen sanasen arkun, / Virsilippani virit\u00e4n, / Jott'ei samppu sanoja puutu / Eik\u00e4 S\u00e4mps\u00e4 siemeni\u00e4, / Umpilampi ahvenia, / Eik\u00e4 kallio kivi\u00e4\" (\"I open my chest of words, / Tune my box of songs, / So Samppu would not lack words / Nor S\u00e4mps\u00e4 seeds, / A closed pond perches, / Nor a rock stones\"). According to the White Karelian runic singer Jaakko Huovinen, Samma is the thing where all runes and sorcery originate from.\nIn runic songs.\nThe Sea Beneath the Yard and the Rune of Four Maidens.\nThe Sammas appears in the Estonian and Finnish runic songs in chain poems which describe the island at the center of the world. The runic songs are called the Sea Beneath the Yard () and the Rune of Four Maidens (), and versions of them can be found from a big area from Ostrobothnia, Tavastia, Savonia, Karelia, Ingria, land of the Votians, Estonia and Setomaa.\nThese runic songs describe in various ways that there is a sea, and in the sea is a grassy island. In the center of the island is a well and the Sammas or and oak. At the end of the Sammas or on the branches of the oak is a maiden and a sifter (symbolizing the sky much like the term ), and the maiden has a son. From a Christian perspective, this virgin mother and her son symbolize Virgin Mary and Jesus at the center of the sky. This tree at the center of the world also often has a golden cradle (a rainbow and a bridge between earth and sky) which was used when the bear and a spark of fire was brought down from the heavens to earth.\nIn Finnish versions, there is often a house at the center of the island in addition to an oak. A small man like a smith might descend from the golden cradle. In the house are four maidens, originally three luonnottaret and, from a Christian perspective, Virgin Mary and her sisters. War often appears as a theme: either the singular maiden on the island gives birth to sons who go to war, or one of the four maidens cries in the house because her brother has gone to war.\nIn addition to these runic songs, the runic song Golden Wheel Oak () has been connected to the world tree: the oak has an apple on every branch, every apple has a golden wheel (the Sun) on it, and on the wheel is a cuckoo, a stream of gold dripping from its beak.\nThe Theft of Sampo.\nThe oldest written down version of the myth of the Theft of Sampo () was written down from the Forest Finns in 1817, proving that the myth had once been known in Savonia and Central Finland. According to this version, V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen and Joukahainen once went to Northlands to fetch the Sammas. When it was in their boat, Joukahainen told V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen to start singing spells but he refused, saying that the gates of the Northlands were still too close. Eventually he started singing, and the Sammas itself jumped up to the sky. Joukahainen jumped after it, hitting it with his sword and cutting off two of its toes. One fell into the sea, making it salty; the other one on land, making wild hay grow. If he had been able to cut off the third toe, crops would grow without the need of farming.\nAccording to many White Karelian versions, Louhi promised to give V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen a maiden to marry if he forges for her the Sampo. V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen did not have the skill for this but knows Ilmarinen to be able to forge it as he had also forged the sky. He sent Ilmarinen to Pohjola with wind, where he forged the Sampo. Later, V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen pointed out all the riches the Sampo was providing for Pohjola and suggested they go steal it back. Other heroes such as Tiera or Vesiliito might join them depending on the version. They ploughed loose the roots of the Sampo from the rocky hill of Pohjola and took it to their boat. Ilmarinen suggested V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen start singing but V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen refused, thinking the gates of Pohjola were still too close. An ant urinated on a crane's foot and the crane screamed, waking up the people of Pohjola. Louhi transformed into a bird, ordering the forces of Pohjola to chase the heroes. V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen struck Louhi's bird toes with a sword or a paddle and the Sampo ends up in water, making the seas rich.\nKaarle Krohn saw the Forest Finn version as a description where the Sampo and Louhi turned into a bird had fused into one, like the Sampo itself was a bird. V\u00e4in\u00f6 Salminen pointed out the Forest Finn belief that storm itself was an evil being, a storm bird from Pohjola, like it was the storm bird which had taken the Sampo from V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen and Joukahainen's boat.\nRunic songs from Kainuu do not speak of a theft of Sampo: instead, it is the Sun which V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen frees from a rock by forging, set in the same mythic setting as the theft of Sampo. Because majority of the versions of the theft of Sampo are from Western White Karelia, Siikala considered the myth to originate from the coasts of the Bothnian Bay from where it had spread eastwards as most families of Western White Karelia were of Ostrobothnian origin.\nIn the Kalevala.\nThe Sampo is a pivotal element of the plot of the epic poem \"Kalevala\", compiled in 1835 (and expanded in 1849) by Elias L\u00f6nnrot based on Finnish and Karelian oral tradition.\nIn the expanded second version of the poem, the Sampo is forged by Ilmarinen, a legendary blacksmith, to fulfill a task set by the witch queen of Pohjola, Louhi, in return for her daughter's hand.\n \"Ilmarinen, worthy brother,\"\n \"Thou the only skilful blacksmith,\"\n \"Go and see her wondrous beauty,\"\n \"See her gold and silver garments,\"\n \"See her robed in finest raiment,\"\n \"See her sitting on the rainbow,\"\n \"Walking on the clouds of purple.\"\n \"Forge for her the magic Sampo,\"\n \"Forge the lid in many colors,\"\n \"Thy reward shall be the virgin,\"\n \"Thou shalt win this bride of beauty;\"\n \"Go and bring the lovely maiden\"\n \"To thy home in Kalevala.\"\nIlmarinen works for many days at a mighty forge until he finally succeeds in creating the Sampo:\n \"On one side the flour is grinding,\"\n \"On another salt is making,\"\n \"On a third is money forging,\"\n \"And the lid is many-colored.\"\n \"Well the Sampo grinds when finished,\"\n \"To and fro the lid in rocking,\"\n \"Grinds one measure at the day-break,\"\n \"Grinds a measure fit for eating,\"\n \"Grinds a second for the market,\"\n \"Grinds a third one for the store-house.\"\nLater, Louhi steals the Sampo, and then Ilmarinen and V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen enter her stronghold in secret and retrieve it. Louhi pursues them and combats V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen. In the struggle, Louhi is vanquished but the Sampo is destroyed.\nSimilar devices.\nIn the Aarne\u2013Thompson classification systems of folktales, tale type 565 refers to a magic mill that continuously produces food or salt. Examples include \"Why the Sea is Salt\" (Norway, based on the poem \"Grottas\u00f6ngr\"), \"Sweet porridge\" (Germanic), and \"The Water Mother\" (Chinese). Such devices have been included into modern tales such as \"Strega Nona\" (1975, children's book). Variants on the theme with a cautionary tale and pupil-master relationship include \"The Master and his Pupil\" (English), and Goethe's 1797 poem \"The Sorcerer's Apprentice\".\nThe cornucopia of Greek mythology also produces endless goods, and some versions of the Grail myth emphasize how the Grail creates food and goods.\nThe Japanese folktale \"Shiofuki usu\" speaks of a grindstone that could be used to create anything. Like the Sampo, it too was lost to the sea, endlessly grinding salt.\nThe Sanskrit epic the \"Mahabharatha\" tells of the Akshaya Patra, a vessel or bowl capable of creating food that stops at the end of the day when the lady of the house has had her last meal. Similarly, in the Irish myth of the Cauldron of the Dagda (\"coire ansic\" or \"un-dry cauldron\") is a magical vessel that satisfies any number of people.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28576", "revid": "39276444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28576", "title": "Sysop", "text": "Short-hand for user with administrative permissions on a multi-user system\nA sysop (, ; an abbreviation of system operator, and sometimes further abbreviated to just op) is an administrator of a multi-user computer system, such as a bulletin board system (BBS) or an online service virtual community. The phrase may also be used to refer to administrators of other Internet-based network services. Sysops typically do not earn money, but donate their activity to the community.\nCo-sysops are users who may be granted certain admin privileges on a BBS. Generally, they help validate users and monitor discussion forums. Some co-sysops serve as file clerks, reviewing, describing, and publishing newly uploaded files into appropriate download directories.\nHistorically, the term \"system operator\" applied to operators of any computer system, especially a mainframe computer. In general, a sysop is a person who oversees the operation of a server, typically in a large computer system. Usage of the term became popular in the late 1980s and 1990s, originally in reference to BBS operators. A person with equivalent functions on a network host or server is typically called a \"sysadmin\", short for system administrator.\nBecause such duties were often shared with that of the sysadmin prior to the advent of the World Wide Web, the term \"sysop\" is often used more generally to refer to an administrator or moderator, such as a forum administrator. Hence, the term \"sysadmin\" is technically used to distinguish the professional position of a network operator.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28577", "revid": "32104885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28577", "title": "Skuld (Oh My Goddess!)", "text": " is a fictional character in the anime/manga \"Oh My Goddess!\" and is the younger sister of Belldandy. Her character design shows influences from shoujo and Art Nouveau.\nCreation and conception.\nSkuld was one of a series of characters created by K\u014dsuke Fujishima, and is depicted as the younger sister of Belldandy, one of the two main protagonists of the series. Along with the characters of Belldandy, Urd and Keiichi Morisato, she is regarded as one of the four major characters in \"Oh My Goddess!\". Skuld's first appearance in the manga was in chapter 32, \"The Third Goddess\", but she has also been depicted in a novel (\"Ah! My Goddess: First End\"), three anime series\u2014\"Oh My Goddess!\" (OVA), \"Ah! My Goddess\" and \"The Adventures of Mini-Goddess\"\u2014and in \"\".\nNorse origins.\nAs with her fictional sisters, Belldandy and Urd, Skuld has her origins in Norse mythology. Skuld is one of the three Norns and represents the future (while Belldandy represents the present and Urd the past), and this role continues into the series, although the three \"Oh My Goddess! \" characters otherwise bear no resemblance to their Norse namesakes. Her affinity is with water, and her magic usually involves manipulating water. Unlike the problems with transliteration that were encountered with Belldandy (resulting in Verdandi becoming \"Belldandy\" in the manga), \"Skuld\" presented no difficulties for translators.\nBiography.\nSkuld is the younger sister of Belldandy (who she refers to as Onee-sama, \"lit.\" \"Big sis\" in the English anime) and is the third Goddess to appear to Keiichi Morisato. Skuld has a Goddess second class, type one, limited license, a category similar to her eldest sister Urd. Her true age is unknown, but her appearance (and actions) is that of a girl in her early teens.\nSkuld is one of Yggdrasil's system debuggers. She compensates for her lack of magic power with her innate talent for invention which is known throughout Heaven (though it is revealed much later that this is also a type of magical ability). Skuld recharges her energy by consuming ice cream and travels via warm or hot water. (She can't swim.) She bears the emblem of the future.\nSkuld is an engineering genius, capable of building just about anything out of the most mundane parts under most limited resources. Sample gadgets have included: explosives, a neutrino detector, glasses that allow user to see invisible \"computer bugs,\" and even a device for removing a miniature black hole from Keiichi's body. Banpei-kun RX and the converted mannequin Sigel are \"living\" proof of her talent. She can compute equations and redesign even the most complex engineering blueprints in no time. All too frequently, though, she forgets to include \"instructions\" with her devices, which can create havoc if someone unsuspecting of their true power (such as Keiichi) interferes with them. Other times, she will concentrate too much on one aspect of a device (usually power) and forgets to compensate by boosting other aspects of the same device, making many of her inventions rather unstable. Though many of her contraptions tend to blow up, or self-destruct, she dislikes machines that have meaningless functions. In her battle with demonic puppet master, Mokkurkalfi she states that she dislikes machines whose prime directive is meaningless combat, and that a true mechanic must value the sanctity of his or her mecha's life.\nIn the manga, she has been gradually developing the ability to do magic. For a long time one of her only magic skills was the ability to imprint words (usually insults) on the surface of her targets, a power she often used when expressing frustration with Urd and Keiichi. Upon meeting a young boy named Sentaro, who taught her how to ride a bike, Skuld became determined to never quit and began to practice with her powers more, learning how to levitate small objects. When Sentaro was in danger, Skuld created a huge wave which saved him, although Urd, who was nearby, stated that it would have caused a huge flood if she hadn't been there to help contain it. Skuld's spells sometimes get out of control (which usually results in large waves of water), which Urd constantly teases her for. However, Urd states that losing control of a low level spell is proof of the depths of her true power.\nSkuld's latent power is addressed once more in Chapter 256 of the manga in a one on one mecha battle with the demon Mokkurkalfi. Belldandy explains that Skuld uses a type of magic called Direct Manipulation, and has been able to unconsciously access this ability since the very beginning. This magic presents itself through Skuld's hands, and it is because of this magic that Skuld is always able to build machines even out of mundane objects. It is explained that Skuld's magical field is always active because of this, even if she's unconsciously aware of this fact. However, because Skuld has a low capacity her powers are restricted to building machines. Belldandy states that if Skuld were to hone this power, she could potentially be the strongest of the three sisters in the future. Urd on the other hand pleas to Keiichi to keep this a secret because she does not want her sister to get a big ego.\nShe travels to Earth after Belldandy's proximity to Keiichi started creating an increasing number of bugs in Heaven's supercomputer Yggdrasil. At least that was her official excuse, as she believed Belldandy was living with Keiichi against her will. She tried to convince Belldandy to return to Heaven to resolve the bug problem and at the same time with the ulterior motive of alleviating her loneliness. After realizing that Belldandy's relationship with Keiichi was not going to end any time soon, Skuld decides to stay on Earth and act as Belldandy's unofficial chaperone.\nSkuld regularly clashes with her sister Urd, particularly when it comes to Belldandy's relationship with Keiichi. However, the two sisters do love each other and will work together to solve a problem or stave off a mutual threat.\nIn the manga, Skuld's engineering skills made her a minor celebrity around the Nekomi Tech campus, especially when she engaged in a \"Robot Wars\" competition with Keiichi's sister Megumi Morisato. Keiichi's friends are aware of Skuld's existence and of her living with Keiichi and Belldandy; however, they do not know of her \"goddess\" status.\nUnlike Belldandy and Urd, Skuld did not possess an angel when she was first introduced. Later on in the manga she found an angel egg in Urd's room and accidentally swallowed it (whilst in the process of performing the classic little kid rebellion of touching something that was specifically marked as \"hands off!\", namely the egg.), leading to the birth of Noble Scarlet. Because of Skuld's lack of magic power, Noble Scarlet lacked the full unequivocal obedience an angel must have for her goddess. After interfering with Skuld's budding relationship with Sentaro, Noble Scarlet returned to her egg form as per Skuld's instruction (\"If you do that again, you'll have to go back to your egg.\"). Urd promised that they'd meet again when Skuld gained enough power. In the meanwhile, Skuld wore the angel egg mounted on a necklace. Some time later, Skuld threw together a device with the intent of boosting her powers to the point that she could control and regain Noble Scarlet. When said gadget went out of control, Urd used her angel to save Skuld, thus unlocking World Of Elegance, and also revealing the back story as to why Urd couldn't initially call her and why she had Scarlet's egg in the first place - Urd wanted to \"try again\" since she had believed that she had sealed her angel away forever at its own birth. Later on the promise is fulfilled when Skuld calls forth Noble Scarlet in the fight against the Angel Eater. At this time, Skuld had gained the necessary power to control the angel and the only thing lacking was the desire to truly be with her.\nDebugging mallet.\nSkuld generally carries her debugging mallet, used against Yggdrasil bugs (eight-legged rabbit-looking entities), as a precaution wherever she goes. Yggdrasil bugs can cause adverse effects to the surrounding area such as making it snow on a single house and causing the holy steed Sleipnir to temporarily show up in the temple, and the only way to counter such effects is by debugging. One way to debug is through squishing the bugs with a mallet. Other ways include various gadgets Skuld has built, such as the Mr. Bug Zapper.\nPersonality.\nPerper and Cornog described Skuld as being \"\"somewhat bratty\" - a view that is in keeping with her behavior throughout the series. Skuld started as very defensive of Belldandy and interpreted anyone having any kind of intimate relationship with her as an attempt to steal Belldandy from her. She and Banpei repeatedly placed restrictions to limit Belldandy's and Keiichi's relationship. For a brief while it was also implied that Skuld had a crush on Keiichi; the second special episode of the first TV series (where she's grown up for a day) explored this angle by placing Skuld and Keiichi in situations where they appear as a couple. Over time ground rules have been worked out and there haven't been any recent episodes of relationship restriction enforcement.\nSkuld also doesn't appear to get along with her oldest sister, Urd perhaps because Urd is somewhat the opposite of Belldandy. However, it is slowly revealed that Skuld and Urd share a complex love-hate relationship, and so even when they are gambling violently over rights to the television, it is obvious that they are \"the very best of friends.\"\nBeing the inventor that she is, Skuld loves anything technical, but hates inefficiencies, flawed creations, and useless mechanics. This is Urd's favorite way of punishing Skuld whenever she touches or breaks any of Urd's potions and such, by making her create gadgets that do absolutely nothing useful. She has a tendency to get carried away fixing or improving anything she sees inefficient. Even when her original intention is to destroy it, she always ends up with something much better (usually more destructive). Most of her inventions, more often than not, have extra functions that make situations more complicated, including a self-destruct device in almost everything (including her Robot Wars robot...).\nLike Chihiro Fujimi, Skuld has a weakness for cute things, albeit a different kind of cute. She squeals at things like plushies, cute animals and cute stuff, but also mechanical equipment and tools.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28578", "revid": "1287555581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28578", "title": "Steve Jackson", "text": "Steve Jackson may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "28579", "revid": "45807063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28579", "title": "Software development tool", "text": ""}
{"id": "28580", "revid": "2273576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28580", "title": "Springbok", "text": "Antelope of southwest and south Africa\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe springbok or springbuck (Antidorcas marsupialis) is an antelope found mainly in south and southwest Africa. The sole living member of the genus \"Antidorcas\", this bovid was first described by the German zoologist Eberhard August Wilhelm von Zimmermann in 1780. Three subspecies are identified. A slender, long-legged antelope, the springbok reaches at the shoulder and weighs between . Both sexes have a pair of black, long horns that curve backwards. The springbok is characterised by a white face, a dark stripe running from the eyes to the mouth, a light brown coat marked by a reddish-brown stripe that runs from the upper foreleg to the buttocks across the flanks like the Thomson's gazelle, and a white rump flap.\nActive mainly at dawn and dusk, springbok form harems (mixed-sex herds). In earlier times, springbok of the Kalahari Desert and Karoo migrated in large numbers across the countryside, a practice known as \"trekbokking\". A feature, peculiar but not unique, to the springbok is pronking, in which the springbok performs multiple leaps into the air, up to above the ground, in a stiff-legged posture, with the back bowed and the white flap lifted. Primarily a browser, the springbok feeds on shrubs and succulents; this antelope can live without drinking water for years, meeting its requirements through eating succulent vegetation. Breeding takes place year-round, and peaks in the rainy season, when forage is most abundant. A single calf is born after a five- to six-month-long pregnancy; weaning occurs at nearly six months of age, and the calf leaves its mother a few months later.\nSpringbok inhabit the dry areas of south and southwestern Africa. The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources classifies the springbok as a least concern species. No major threats to the long-term survival of the species are known; the springbok is one of the few antelope species considered to have an expanding population. They are popular game animals, and are valued for their meat and skin. The springbok is the national animal of South Africa.\nEtymology.\nThe common name \"springbok\", first recorded in 1775, comes from the Afrikaans words (\"jump\") and (\"antelope\" or \"goat\"). The scientific name of the springbok is \"Antidorcas marsupialis\". is Greek for \"opposite\", and for \"gazelle\" \u2013 identifying the animal as not a gazelle. The specific epithet \"marsupialis\" comes from the Latin (\"pocket\"), and refers to a pocket-like skin flap which extends along the midline of the back from the tail, distinguishing the springbok from true gazelles.\nTaxonomy and evolution.\nThe springbok, in the family Bovidae, was first described by the German zoologist Eberhard August Wilhelm von Zimmermann in 1780, who assigned the genus \"Antilope\" (blackbuck) to the springbok. In 1845, Swedish zoologist Carl Jakob Sundevall placed the springbok as the sole living member of the genus \"Antidorcas\".\nSubspecies.\nThree subspecies of \"Antidorcas marsupialis\" are recognised:\nEvolution.\nFossil springbok are known from the Pliocene; the antelope appears to have evolved about three million years ago from a gazelle-like ancestor. Three fossil species of \"Antidorcas\" have been identified, in addition to the extant form, and appear to have been widespread across Africa. Two of these, \"A.\u00a0bondi\" and \"A.\u00a0australis\", became extinct around 7,000 years ago (early Holocene). The third species, \"A.\u00a0recki\", probably gave rise to the extant form \"A.\u00a0marsupialis\" during the Pleistocene, about 100,000 years ago. Fossils have been reported from Pliocene, Pleistocene, and Holocene sites in northern, southern, and eastern Africa. Fossils dating back to 80 and 100 thousand years ago have been excavated at Herolds Bay Cave (Western Cape Province, South Africa) and Florisbad (Free State), respectively. \nAdaptations for speed.\nConvergent shared mutations have been found between the pronghorn and antilopines such as the springbok in genes related to the mitochondrial electron transport chain (\"NDUFA10\", \"SDHB\", \"UQCRC2\" and \"ATP5B\"). Two mutations unique to the Antilopinae (\"SUOX\" and \"NLN\") and two mutations unique to pronghorns (\"COX5A\" and \"PPOX\") have been found in additional mitochondrial electron transport chain genes. These genes partly explain the speed of these animals.\nSpringbok have a 58% concentration of glycolytic fast twitch muscle fibres along with an activity of the anaerobic enzyme lactate dehydrogenase four times higher than that of humans in the vastus lateralis muscle, and a high antioxidant capacity. Although their concentration of type IIx fibres and LDH activity are lower than equivalent muscle in wild cheetahs, have an activity of the aerobic enzyme citrate synthase comparable to human endurance runners, and their muscles in general are rich in iron. Females have higher concentrations of type IIx fibres and a higher amount of muscle glycogen than males.\nDescription.\nThe springbok is a slender antelope with long legs and neck. Both sexes reach at the shoulder with a head-and-body length typically between . The weights for both sexes range between . The tail, long, ends in a short, black tuft. Major differences in the size and weight of the subspecies are seen. A study tabulated average body measurements for the three subspecies. \"A.\u00a0m. angolensis\" males stand tall at the shoulder, while females are tall. The males weigh around , while the females weigh . \"A.\u00a0m. hofmeyri\" is the largest subspecies; males are nearly tall, and the notably shorter females are tall. The males, weighing , are heavier than females, that weigh . However, \"A.\u00a0m. marsupialis\" is the smallest subspecies; males are tall and females tall. Average weight of males is , while for females it is . Another study showed a strong correlation between the availability of winter dietary protein and the body mass.\nDark stripes extend across the white face, from the corner of the eyes to the mouth. A dark patch marks the forehead. In juveniles, the stripes and the patch are light brown. The ears, narrow and pointed, measure . Typically light brown, the springbok has a dark reddish-brown band running horizontally from the upper foreleg to the edge of the buttocks, separating the dark back from the white underbelly. The tail (except the terminal black tuft), buttocks, the insides of the legs and the rump are all white. Two other varieties \u2013 pure black and pure white forms \u2013 are artificially selected in some South African ranches. Though born with a deep black sheen, adult black springbok are two shades of chocolate-brown and develop a white marking on the face as they mature. White springbok, as the name suggests, are predominantly white with a light tan stripe on the flanks. \nThe three subspecies also differ in their colour. \"A.\u00a0m. angolensis\" has a brown to tawny coat, with thick, dark brown stripes on the face extending two-thirds down to the snout. While the lateral stripe is nearly black, the stripe on the rump is dark brown. The medium brown forehead patch extends to eye level and is separated from the bright white face by a dark brown border. A brown spot is seen on the nose. \"A.\u00a0m. hofmeyri\" is a light fawn, with thin, dark brown face stripes. The stripes on the flanks are dark brown to black, and the posterior stripes are moderately brown. The forehead patch, dark brown or fawn, extends beyond the level of the eyes and mixes with the white of the face without any clear barriers. The nose may have a pale smudge. \"A.\u00a0m. marsupialis\" is a rich chestnut brown, with thin, light face stripes. The stripe near the rump is well-marked, and that on the flanks is deep brown. The forehead is brown, fawn, or white, the patch not extending beyond the eyes and having no sharp boundaries. The nose is white or marked with brown.\nThe skin along the middle of the dorsal side is folded in, and covered with white hair erected by arrector pili muscles (located between hair follicles). This white hair is almost fully concealed by the surrounding brown hairs until the fold opens up, and this is a major feature distinguishing this antelope from gazelles. Springbok differ from gazelles in several other ways; for instance, springbok have two premolars on both sides of either jaw, rather than the three observed in gazelles. This gives a total of 28 teeth in the springbok, rather than 32 of gazelles. Other points of difference include a longer, broader, and rigid bridge to the nose and more muscular cheeks in springbok, and differences in the structure of the horns.\nBoth sexes have black horns, about long, that are straight at the base and then curve backward. In \"A.\u00a0m. marsupialis\", females have thinner horns than males; the horns of females are only 60 to 70% as long as those of males. Horns have a girth of at the base; this thins to towards the tip. In the other two subspecies, horns of both sexes are nearly similar. The spoor, narrow and sharp, is long.\nEcology and behaviour.\nSpringbok are mainly active around dawn and dusk. Activity is influenced by weather; springbok can feed at night in hot weather, and at midday in colder months. They rest in the shade of trees or bushes, and often bed down in the open when weather is cooler.\nThe social structure of the springbok is similar to that of Thomson's gazelle. Mixed-sex herds or harems have a roughly 3:1 sex ratio; bachelor individuals are also observed. In the mating season, males generally form herds and wander in search of mates. Females live with their offspring in herds, that very rarely include dominant males. Territorial males round up female herds that enter their territories and keep out the bachelors; mothers and juveniles may gather in nursery herds separate from harem and bachelor herds. After weaning, female juveniles stay with their mothers until the birth of their next calves, while males join bachelor groups.\nA study of vigilance behaviour of herds revealed that individuals on the borders of herds tend to be more cautious, and vigilance decreases with group size. Group size and distance from roads and bushes were found to have major influence on vigilance, more among the grazing springbok than among their browsing counterparts. Adults were found to be more vigilant than juveniles, and males more vigilant than females. Springbok passing through bushes tend to be more vulnerable to predator attacks as they cannot be easily alerted, and predators usually conceal themselves in bushes. Another study calculated that the time spent in vigilance by springbok on the edges of herds is roughly double that spent by those in the centre and the open. Springbok were found to be more cautious in the late morning than at dawn or in the afternoon, and more at night than in the daytime. Rates and methods of vigilance were found to vary with the aim of lowering risk from predators.\nDuring the rut, males establish territories, ranging from , which they mark by urinating and depositing large piles of dung. Males in neighbouring territories frequently fight for access to females, which they do by twisting and levering at each other with their horns, interspersed with stabbing attacks. Females roam the territories of different males. Outside of the rut, mixed-sex herds can range from as few as three to as many as 180 individuals, while all-male bachelor herds are of typically no more than 50 individuals. Harem and nursery herds are much smaller, typically including no more than 10 individuals.\nIn earlier times, when large populations of springbok roamed the Kalahari Desert and Karoo, millions of migrating springbok formed herds hundreds of kilometres long that could take several days to pass a town. These mass treks, known as in Afrikaans, took place during long periods of drought. Herds could efficiently retrace their paths to their territories after long migrations. \"Trekbokking\" is still observed occasionally in Botswana, though on a much smaller scale than earlier.\nSpringbok often go into bouts of repeated high leaps of up to into the air \u2013 a practice known as pronking (derived from the Afrikaans , \"to show off\") or stotting. In pronking, the springbok performs multiple leaps into the air in a stiff-legged posture, with the back bowed and the white flap lifted. When the male shows off his strength to attract a mate, or to ward off predators, he starts off in a stiff-legged trot, leaping into the air with an arched back every few paces and lifting the flap along his back. Lifting the flap causes the long white hairs under the tail to stand up in a conspicuous fan shape, which in turn emits a strong scent of sweat. Although the exact cause of this behaviour is unknown, springbok exhibit this activity when they are nervous or otherwise excited. The most accepted theory for pronking is that it is a method to raise alarm against a potential predator or confuse it, or to get a better view of a concealed predator; it may also be used for display.\nSpringbok are very fast antelopes, clocked at . They generally tend to be ignored by carnivores unless they are breeding. Cheetahs, lions, leopards, spotted hyenas, African wild dogs, caracals, crocodiles and pythons are major predators of the springbok. Southern African wildcats, black-backed jackals, Verreaux's eagles, martial eagles, and tawny eagles target juveniles. Springbok are generally quiet animals, though they may make occasional low-pitched bellows as a greeting and high-pitched snorts when alarmed.\nParasites.\nA 2012 study on the effects of rainfall patterns and parasite infections on the body of the springbok in Etosha National Park observed that males and juveniles were in better health toward the end of the rainy season. Health of females was more affected by parasites than by rainfall; parasite count in females peaked prior to and immediately after parturition. Studies show that springbok host helminths (\"Haemonchus\", \"Longistrongylus\" and \"Trichostrongylus\"), ixodid ticks (\"Rhipicephalus\" species), lice (\"Damalinia\" and \"Linognathus\" species). \"Eimeria\" species mainly affect juveniles.\nDiet.\nSpringbok are primarily browsers and may switch to grazing occasionally; they feed on shrubs and young succulents (such as \"Lampranthus\" species) before they lignify. They prefer grasses such as \"Themeda triandra\". Springbok can meet their water needs from the food they eat, and are able to survive without drinking water through dry season. In extreme cases, they do not drink any water over the course of their lives. Springbok may accomplish this by selecting flowers, seeds, and leaves of shrubs before dawn, when the food items are most succulent. In places such as Etosha National Park, springbok seek out water bodies where they are available. Springbok gather in the wet season and disperse during the dry season, unlike other African mammals.\nReproduction.\nSpringbok mate year-round, though females are more likely to enter oestrus during the rainy season, when food is more plentiful. Females are able to conceive at as early as six to seven months, whereas males do not attain sexual maturity until two years; rut lasts 5 to 21 days. When a female approaches a rutting male, the male holds his head and tail at level with the ground, lowers his horns, and makes a loud grunting noise to attract her. The male then urinates and sniffs the female's perineum. If the female is receptive, she urinates, as well, and the male makes a flehmen gesture, and taps his leg until the female leaves or permits him to mate. Copulation consists of a single pelvic thrust.\nGestation lasts five to six months, after which a single calf (or rarely twins) is born. Most births take place in the spring (October to November), prior to the onset of the rainy season. The infant weighs . The female keeps her calf hidden in cover while she is away. Mother and calf rejoin the herd about three to four weeks after parturition; the young are weaned at five or six months. When the mother gives birth again, the previous offspring, now 6 to 12 months old, deserts her to join herds of adult springbok. Thus, a female can calve twice a year, and even thrice if one calf dies. Springbok live for up to 10 years in the wild.\nDistribution and habitat.\nSpringbok inhabit the dry areas of south and southwestern Africa. Their range extends from northwestern South Africa through the Kalahari Desert into Namibia and Botswana. The Transvaal marks the eastern limit of the range, from where it extends westward to the Atlantic and northward to southern Angola and Botswana. In Botswana, they mostly occur in the Kalahari Desert in the southwestern and central parts of the country. They are widespread across Namibia and the vast grasslands of the Free State and the shrublands of Karoo in South Africa; however, they are confined to the Namib Desert in Angola.\nThe historic range of the springbok stretched across the dry grasslands, bushlands, and shrublands of south-western and southern Africa; springbok migrated sporadically in southern parts of the range. These migrations are rarely seen nowadays, but seasonal congregations can still be observed in preferred areas of short vegetation, such as the Kalahari Desert.\nThreats and conservation.\nThe springbok has been classified as least concern on the IUCN Red List. No major threats to the long-term survival of the species are known. The springbok is one of the few antelope species with a positive population trend.\nSpringbok occur in several protected areas across their range: Makgadikgadi and Nxai National Park (Botswana); Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park between Botswana and South Africa; Etosha National Park and Namib-Naukluft Park (Namibia); Mokala and Karoo National Parks and a number of provincial reserves in South Africa. In 1999, Rod East of the IUCN SSC Antelope Specialist Group estimated the springbok population in South Africa at more than 670,000, noting that it might be an underestimate. However, estimates for Namibia, Angola, Botswana, Transvaal, Karoo, and the Free State (which gave a total population estimate of nearly 2,000,000 to 2,500,000 animals in southern Africa), were in complete disagreement with East's estimate. Springbok are under active management in several private lands. Small populations have been introduced into private lands and provincial areas of KwaZulu-Natal.\nRelationship with humans.\nSpringbok are hunted as game throughout Namibia, Botswana, and South Africa because of their attractive coats; they are common hunting targets due to their large numbers and the ease with which they can be supported on farmlands. The export of springbok skins, mainly from Namibia and South Africa, is a booming industry; these skins serve as taxidermy models. The meat is a prized fare, and is readily available in South African supermarkets. As of 2011, the springbok, the gemsbok, and the greater kudu collectively account for around two-thirds of the game meat production from Namibian farmlands; nearly of the springbok meat is exported as mechanically deboned meat to overseas markets.\nThe latissimus dorsi muscle of the springbok comprises 1.1\u20131.3% ash, 1.3\u20133.5% fat, 72\u201375% moisture and 18\u201322% protein. Stearic acid is the main fatty acid, accounting for 24\u201327% of the fatty acids. The cholesterol content varies from per of meat. The pH of the meat increases if the springbok is under stress or cropping is done improperly; consequently, the quality deteriorates and the colour darkens. The meat might be adversely affected if the animal is killed by shooting. The meat may be consumed raw or used in prepared dishes. Biltong can be prepared by preserving the raw meat with vinegar, spices, and table salt, without fermentation, followed by drying. Springbok meat may also be used in preparing salami; a study found that the flavour of this salami is better than mutton salami, and feels oilier than salami of beef, horse meat, or mutton.\nThe springbok has been a national symbol of South Africa since the white minority rule in the 20th century. It was adopted as a nickname or mascot by several South African sports teams, most famously by the national rugby union team. Also, the winged springbok served as the logo of South African Airways from 1934 to 1997. The springbok is the national animal of South Africa. Even after the decline of apartheid, Nelson Mandela intervened to keep the name of the animal for the reconciliation of rugby fans, the majority of whom were whites. The springbok is featured on the reverse of the South African Krugerrand coin.\nThe cap badge of the Royal Canadian Dragoons has featured a springbok since 1913, a reference to the unit's involvement in the Second Boer War.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28582", "revid": "16614872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28582", "title": "Song of Songs", "text": "Book of the Hebrew Bible and the Christian Old Testament\nThe Song of Songs (), also called the Canticle of Canticles or the Song of Solomon, is a biblical poem, one of the five (\"scrolls\") in the ('writings'), the last section of the Tanakh. Unlike other books in the Hebrew Bible, it is erotic poetry; lovers express passionate desire, exchange compliments, and invite one another to enjoy. The poem narrates an intense, poetic love story between a woman and her lover through a series of sensual dialogues, dreams, metaphors, and warnings to the \u201cdaughters of Jerusalem\u201d not to awaken love before its time.\nModern scholarship tends to hold that the lovers in the Song are unmarried, which accords with its ancient Near East context. The women of Jerusalem form a chorus to the lovers, functioning as an audience whose participation in the lovers' erotic encounters facilitates the participation of the reader.\nMost scholars view the Song of Songs as erotic poetry celebrating human love, not divine metaphor, with some seeing influences from fertility cults and wisdom literature. Its authorship, date, and origins remain uncertain, with scholars debating its unity, structure, and possible influences from Mesopotamian, Egyptian, and Greek love poetry.\nIn modern Judaism, the Song is read on the Sabbath during the Passover, which marks both the beginning of the grain-harvest and the commemoration of the Exodus from Egypt. Jewish tradition interprets it as an allegory of the relationship between God and Israel. In Christianity, it is viewed as an allegory of Christ and his bride, the Church. The Song of Songs has inspired diverse works in art, film, theater, and literature, including pieces by Marc Chagall, Carl Theodor Dreyer, Toni Morrison, and John Steinbeck.\nStructure.\nThere is widespread consensus that, although the book has no plot, it does have what can be called a framework, indicated by the links between its beginning and end. Beyond this, however, there appears to be little agreement: attempts to find a chiastic structure have not found acceptance, and analyses dividing the book into units have employed various methods, yielding diverse conclusions. \nThe following indicative schema is from Kugler and Hartin's \"An Introduction to The Bible\":\nTitle.\nThe introduction calls the poem \"the song of songs\", a phrase that follows an idiomatic construction commonly found in Scriptural Hebrew to indicate the object's status as the greatest and most beautiful of its class (as in \"Holy of Holies\"). The work is also referred to as the \"Song of Solomon\", meaning the song 'of', 'by', 'for', or '[dedicated] to' Solomon.\nSummary.\nThe poem proper begins with the woman's expression of desire for her lover and her self-description to the \"daughters of Jerusalem\": she insists on her sun-born blackness, likening it to the \"tents of Kedar\" (nomads) and the \"curtains of Solomon\". A dialogue between the lovers follows: the woman asks the man to meet; he replies with a lightly teasing tone. The two compete in offering flattering compliments (\"my beloved is to me as a cluster of henna blossoms in the vineyards of En Gedi\", \"an apple tree among the trees of the wood\", \"a lily among brambles\", while the bed they share is like a forest canopy). The section closes with the woman telling the daughters of Jerusalem not to stir up love such as hers until it is ready.\nThe woman recalls a visit from her lover in the springtime. She uses imagery from a shepherd's life, and she says of her lover that \"he pastures his flock among the lilies\".\nThe woman again addresses the daughters of Jerusalem, describing her fervent and ultimately successful search for her lover through the night-time streets of the city. When she finds him she takes him almost by force into the chamber in which she was conceived. She reveals that this is a dream, seen on her \"bed at night\", and ends by again warning the daughters of Jerusalem \"not to stir up love until it is ready\".\nThe next section reports a royal wedding procession. Solomon is mentioned by name, and the daughters of Jerusalem are invited to come out and see the spectacle.\nThe man describes his beloved: Her eyes are like doves, her hair is like a flock of goats, her teeth like shorn ewes, and so on from face to breasts. Place-names feature heavily: her neck is like the Tower of David, her smell like the scent of Lebanon. He hastens to summon his beloved, saying that he is ravished by even a single glance. The section becomes a \"garden poem\", in which he describes her as a \"locked garden\" (usually taken to mean that she is chaste). The woman invites the man to enter the garden and taste the fruits. The man accepts the invitation, and a third party tells them to eat, drink, \"and be drunk with love\".\nThe woman tells the daughters of Jerusalem of another dream. She was in her chamber when her lover knocked. She was slow to open, and when she did, he was gone. She searched through the streets again, but this time she failed to find him and the watchmen, who had helped her before, now beat her. She asks the daughters of Jerusalem to help her find him, and describes his physical good looks. Eventually, she admits her lover is in his garden, safe from harm, and committed to her as she is to him.\nThe man describes his beloved; the woman describes a rendezvous they have shared. (The last part is unclear and possibly corrupted.)\nThe people praise the beauty of the woman. The images are the same as those used elsewhere in the poem, but with an unusually dense use of place-names, e.g., pools of Hebron, gate of Bath-rabbim, tower of Damascus, etc. The man states his intention to enjoy the fruits of the woman's garden. The woman invites him to a tryst in the fields. She once more warns the daughters of Jerusalem against waking love until it is ready.\nThe woman compares love to death and Sheol: love is as relentless and jealous as these two, and cannot be quenched by any force. She summons her lover, using the language used before: he should come \"like a gazelle or a young stag upon the mountain of spices\".\nComposition.\nThe poem seems to be rooted in festive performance, and connections have been proposed with the \"sacred marriage\" of Ishtar and Tammuz. It offers no clue to its author or to the date, place, or circumstances of its composition. The superscription states that it is \"Solomon's\", but even if this is meant to identify the author, it cannot be read as strictly as a similar modern statement. The most reliable evidence for its date is its language: Aramaic gradually replaced Hebrew after the end of the Babylonian exile in the late 6th century BCE, and the evidence of vocabulary, morphology, idiom and syntax clearly point to a late date, centuries after King Solomon to whom it is traditionally attributed. It has parallels with Mesopotamian and Egyptian love poetry from the first half of the 1st millennium, and with the pastoral idylls of Theocritus, a Greek poet who wrote in the first half of the 3rd century BCE; as a result of these conflicting signs, speculation ranges from the 10th to the 2nd centuries BCE, with the language supporting a date around the 3rd century. Other scholars are more skeptical about the idea that the language demands a post-exilic date.\nDebate continues on the unity or disunity of the book. Those who see it as an anthology or collection point to the abrupt shifts of scene, speaker, subject matter and mood, and the lack of obvious structure or narrative. Those who hold it to be a single poem point out that it has no internal signs of composite origins, and view the repetitions and similarities among its parts as evidence of unity. Some claim to find a conscious artistic design underlying it, but there is no agreement among them on what this might be. The question, therefore, remains unresolved.\nGenre.\nThe consensus among contemporary scholars of the Bible is that the Song of Songs is an erotic poem, and not an elaborate metaphor.\nIn his commentary for the Anchor Bible Series, Marvin H. Pope describes the Song as a fertility cult liturgy, rooted in the fertility cults of the ancient Near Eastern cultures of Mesopotamia and Canaan, as well as their sacred marriage rites and funeral feasts.\nJ. Cheryl Exum wrote: \"The erotic desire of its protagonists, everywhere evident in the Song, leads me, in conclusion, to the Song's unique contribution to the conceptualization of love in the Bible: its romantic vision of love\".\nThe historian and rabbi Shaye J. D. Cohen summarises:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Song of Songs [is a] collection of love poems sung by him to her and her to him: [\u2013 \u2013] While authorship is ascribed to Solomon in its first verse and by traditionalists, [modern Bible scholarship] argues that while the book may contain ancient material, there is no evidence that Solomon wrote it. [\u2013 \u2013] What is a collection of erotic poems doing in the Hebrew Bible? Indeed, some ancient rabbis were uneasy about the book\u2019s inclusion in the canon.\nSeveral scholars have also argued that, alongside its condition as love poetry, the Song of Songs also shares a number of features with Wisdom literature. For instance, Jennifer L. Andruska argues that the Song employs a number of literary conventions typical of this didactic literature and that it combines features of both ancient Near Eastern love song and wisdom genres to produce a wisdom literature about romantic love, instructing readers to pursue what she describes as a particular type of 'wise love' relationship, modelled by the lovers of the poem. Likewise, Katharine J. Dell notes a number of Wisdom motifs in the Song such as parallels between the lovers and the advices and conduct of Woman Wisdom and the Loose Woman of Proverbs, among others.\nCanonisation and interpretation.\nJudaism.\nThe Song was accepted into the Jewish canon of scripture and was understood as \"an allegory for the love between God and Israel\", a view \"dominant for a thousand years and more\". However, according to Catholic priest Fr. Andrew Greeley, Song of Songs is \"secular love poetry, a collection of love songs gathered around a single theme\" and scholarship has \"routed the allegorical interpretation\". Although \"there is a tradition that even this book was considered as one to be excluded\", as stated in Aboth d'Rabbi Nathan A1, a 700\u2013900 CE work, the Song of Songs was not only included but regarded as \"especially meritorious\". Reformed Jewish Solomon Freehof notes that one must think \"if the book is so gross ... unlike all other books of the Bible tradition ... why accept it at all?\" \nCanonicity was tied to its attribution to Solomon, and based on an allegorical reading where the subject matter was taken to be not sexual desire but God's love for Israel. For instance, the famed first and second century Rabbi Akiva forbade the use of the Song of Songs in popular celebrations. He reportedly said, \"He who sings the Song of Songs in wine taverns, treating it as if it were a vulgar song, forfeits his share in the world to come\". However, Rabbi Akiva famously defended the canonicity of the Song of Songs, reportedly saying when the question came up of whether it should be considered a defiling work, \"God forbid!\u00a0[...] For all of eternity in its entirety is not as worthy as the day on which Song of Songs was given to Israel, for all the Writings are holy, but Song of Songs is the Holy of Holies.\"\nOther rabbinic scholars who have employed allegorical exegesis in explaining the meaning of Song of Songs are Tobiah ben Eliezer, author of \"Lekach Tov\", and Zechariah ha-Rof\u00e9, author of \"Midrash ha-Hefez\". The French rabbi Rashi did not believe the Song of Songs to be an erotic poem. \nSong of Songs is one of the overtly mystical Biblical texts for the Kabbalah, which gave an esoteric interpretation on all the Hebrew Bible. Following the dissemination of the Zohar in the 13th century, Jewish mysticism took on a metaphorically anthropomorphic erotic element, and Song of Songs is an example of this. In Zoharic Kabbalah, God is represented by a system of ten sephirot emanations, each symbolizing a different attribute of God, comprising both male and female. The Shechina (indwelling Divine presence) was identified with the feminine sephira Malchut, the vessel of Kingship. This symbolizes the Jewish people, and in the body, the female form, identified with the woman in Song of Songs. Her beloved was identified with the male sephira Tiferet, the \"Holy One Blessed be He\", a central principle in the beneficent heavenly flow of divine emotion. In the body, this represents the male torso, uniting through the sephira Yesod of the male sign of the covenant organ of procreation.\nThrough beneficent deeds and Jewish observance, the Jewish people restore cosmic harmony in the divine realm, healing the exile of the Shechina with God's transcendence, revealing the essential unity of God. This elevation of the world is aroused from above on the Sabbath, a foretaste of the redeemed purpose of Creation. The text thus became a description, depending on the aspect, of the creation of the world, the passage of \"Shabbat\", the covenant with Israel, and the coming of the Messianic age. \"Lecha Dodi\", a 16th-century liturgical song with strong Kabbalistic symbolism, contains many passages, including its opening two words, taken directly from Song of Songs.\nIn modern Judaism, certain verses from the Song are read on Shabbat eve or at Passover, which marks the beginning of the grain harvest as well as commemorating the Exodus from Egypt, to symbolize the love between the Jewish people and their God. Jewish tradition reads it as an allegory of the relationship between God and Israel. The entire Song of Songs in its original Hebrew is read in synagogues during the intermediate days of Passover. It is often read from a scroll similar to a Torah scroll in style. It is also read in its entirety by some at the end of the Passover Seder and is usually printed in most Hagadahs. Some Jews have the custom to recite the entire book prior to the onset of the Jewish Sabbath.\nChristianity.\nThe literal subject of the Song of Songs is love and sexual longing between a man and a woman, and it has little (or nothing) to say about the relationship of God and man; in order to find such a meaning it was necessary to turn to allegory, treating the love that the Song celebrates as an analogy for the love between God and Church. The Christian church's interpretation of the Song as evidence of God's love for his people, both collectively and individually, began with Origen. Saint Gregory of Nyssa wrote fifteen \"Homilies on the Song of Songs\", which are considered the pinnacle of his biblical exegesis. In them, he compares the bride to the soul and the invisible groom to God: the finite soul is incessantly reaching out towards the infinite God and remains continually disappointed in this life due to the failure to achieve ecstatic union with the beloved, a vision which enraptures and can be achieved fully and perfectly only in life after death. Similarly, following the allegoric interpretation of Ambrose of Milan, Saint Augustine of Hippo stated that the Song of Songs represents the wedding between Jesus Christ and the Catholic Church, pure and virgin, within an ascetic context. However, going against the prevailing opinion, Theodore of Mopsuestia, influenced by the School of Antioch, interpreted the Song of Songs literally, understanding it as an erotic poem written by Solomon to the daughter of Pharaoh. But, since the allegorical view was so predominant, his interpretation was condemned at the Second Council of Constantinople. As a result, his writings on this book were lost, and only his literalist position is known, which would later (from the 18th century onwards) become predominant among biblical scholars.\nOver the centuries the emphases of interpretation shifted, first reading the Song as a depiction of the love between Christ and Church, the 11th century adding a moral element, and the 12th century understanding of the Bride as the Virgin Mary, with each new reading absorbing rather than simply replacing earlier ones, so that the commentary became ever more complex. These theological themes are not found explicitly in the poem, but they come from a theological reading. Nevertheless, what is notable about this approach is the way it leads to conclusions not found in the overtly theological books of the Bible. Those books reveal an abiding imbalance in the relationship between God and man, ranging from slight to enormous; but reading Songs as a theological metaphor produces quite a different outcome, one in which the two partners are equals, bound in a committed relationship.\nIn modern times the poem has attracted the attention of feminist biblical critics, with Phyllis Trible's foundational \"Depatriarchalizing in Biblical Interpretation\" treating it as an exemplary text, and the Feminist Companion to the Bible series edited by Athalya Brenner and Carole Fontaine devoting two volumes to it.\nJoseph Smith called the book \"not inspired\" in his Translation of the Bible but The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints includes it in its standard works.\nIslam.\nSeveral Islamic apologists contend that the word in Song of Songs 5:16 mentions Muhammad. Whereas most translators will render the first words of that verse in terms such as \"His mouth is most sweet, he is altogether lovely (\"mahamaddim\").\" In his book \"Demystifying Islam\", Muslim apologist Harris Zafar argues that the last word (), with the plural suffix \"-im\" (which is occasionally used to indicate intensity, and is normally understood to do so for both of the adjectives in this verse), expressing respect and greatness (as the plural form seems to do in the common Hebrew appellation of God, \"Elohim\" (\"pl. maiestatus\")), should be translated \"Muhammad\", for the translation \"His mouth is most sweet; he is Muhammad\". Some Christian apologists, however, have countered this claim.\nMusical settings.\nExcerpts from the book have inspired composers to write vocal and instrumental compositions, including:\nIn popular culture.\nNovels.\nIn Marilynne Robinson's 2004 novel, Gilead, Reverend John Ames mentions the Song of Songs (pg 207, Picador paperback).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28584", "revid": "48439861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28584", "title": "Sheridan Le Fanu", "text": "Irish Gothic and mystery writer (1814\u20131873)\nJoseph Thomas Sheridan Le Fanu (; 28 August 1814\u00a0\u2013 7 February 1873), often shortened to J. S. Le Fanu, was an Irish writer of Gothic tales and mystery novels. He is considered by literary critics to be among the greatest ghost story writers of the Victorian era, as several of his works were central to the development of the genre. Le Fanu was the author of novels such as \"Uncle Silas\" (1864) and the collection of stories \"In a Glass Darkly\" (1872), which includes the novella \"Carmilla\" (1872), a foundational work of vampire literature.\nBorn into a family of writers, Le Fanu began writing poetry at the age of fifteen, using his father's personal library to educate himself. Due to severe financial constraints, his family were forced to sell the library and its books to settle some of their debts following the passing of his father. In 1838, he began writing stories for the \"Dublin University Magazine\" to make money, which included his first ghost story, \"The Ghost and the Bone-Setter\" (1838). It was during this period that Le Fanu decided to focus on the ghost story genre, despite continuing to also write short stories and commentaries across other genres, and by 1840 he had become the owner of several local newspapers. \nHe also wrote \"The House by the Churchyard\" (1863), which became one of his best-known novels. Initially, his work fell into neglect following his death, and it was the efforts of later writers, such as Elizabeth Bowen and M. R. James, that brought the public's attention back to his novels. M. R. James, in particular, greatly admired his works and described Le Fanu as \"absolutely in the first rank as a writer of ghost stories\".\nLe Fanu became a key figure in the dark romanticism movement during the 19th century, and had a major influence on later vampire and horror fictions such as Bram Stoker's \"Dracula\" (1897), among others. While several of his short stories, fictional novels, novellas, and horror pieces proved popular in his lifetime, he remains a central figure in vampire fiction largely due to the significance of \"Carmilla\". Since his death, the novella has become one of the most influential works of vampire literature, having been adapted for , operas, video games, Halloween plays, comics, songs, cartoons, and other media.\nEarly life.\nSheridan Le Fanu was born at 45 Lower Dominick Street, Dublin, into a literary family of Huguenot, Irish and English descent. He had an elder sister, Catherine Frances, and a younger brother, William Richard. His parents were Thomas Philip Le Fanu and Emma Lucretia Dobbin. \nBoth his grandmother Alicia Sheridan Le Fanu and his great-uncle Richard Brinsley Sheridan were playwrights (his niece Rhoda Broughton would become a successful novelist), and his mother was also a writer, producing a biography of Charles Orpen. Within a year of his birth, his family moved to the Royal Hibernian Military School in the Phoenix Park, where his father, a Church of Ireland clergyman, was appointed to the chaplaincy of the establishment. The Phoenix Park and the adjacent village and parish church of Chapelizod would appear in Le Fanu's later stories.\nIn 1826, the family moved to Abington, County Limerick, where Le Fanu's father Thomas took up his second rectorship in Ireland. Although he had a tutor, who, according to his brother William, taught them nothing and was finally dismissed in disgrace, Le Fanu used his father's library to educate himself. By the age of fifteen, Joseph was writing poetry which he shared with his mother and siblings but never with his father. His father was a stern Protestant churchman and raised his family in an almost Calvinist tradition.\nIn 1832, the disorders of the Tithe War (1831\u201336) affected the region. There were about six thousand Catholics in the parish of Abington and only a few dozen members of the Church of Ireland. In bad weather, the Dean cancelled Sunday services because so few parishioners would attend. However, the government compelled all farmers, including Catholics, to pay tithes for the upkeep of the Protestant church. The following year the family moved back temporarily to Dublin, to Williamstown Avenue in the southern suburb of Blackrock, where Thomas was to work on a Government commission.\nLater life.\nAlthough Thomas Le Fanu tried to live as though he were well-off, the family was in constant financial difficulty. Thomas took the rectorships in the south of Ireland for the money, as they provided a decent living through tithes. However, from 1830, as the result of agitation against the tithes, this income began to fall, and it ceased entirely two years later. In 1838 the government instituted a scheme of paying rectors a fixed sum, but in the interim, the Dean had little besides rent on some small properties he had inherited. In 1833 Thomas had to borrow \u00a3100 from his cousin Captain Dobbins (who himself ended up in the debtors' prison a few years later) to visit his dying sister in Bath, who was also deeply in debt over her medical bills. At his death, Thomas had almost nothing to leave to his sons, and the family had to sell his library to pay off some of his debts. His widow went to stay with the younger son, William.\nSheridan Le Fanu studied law at Trinity College Dublin, where he was elected Auditor of the College Historical Society, and graduated in 1836. Under a system peculiar to Ireland he did not have to live in Dublin to attend lectures, but could study at home and take examinations at the university when necessary. He was called to the bar in 1839, but he never practised and soon abandoned law for journalism. In 1838 he began contributing stories to the \"Dublin University Magazine\", including his first ghost story, entitled \"The Ghost and the Bone-Setter\" (1838). He became the owner of several newspapers from 1840, including the \"Dublin Evening Mail\" and the \"Warder\".\nOn 18 December 1844, Le Fanu married Susanna Bennett, the daughter of a leading Dublin barrister, George Bennett, and granddaughter of John Bennett, a justice of the Court of King's Bench. Future Home Rule League MP Isaac Butt was a witness. The couple then travelled to his parents' home in Abington for Christmas. They took a house in Warrington Place near the Grand Canal in Dublin. Their first child, Eleanor, was born in 1845, followed by Emma in 1846, Thomas in 1847 and George in 1854.\nIn 1847 Le Fanu supported John Mitchel and Thomas Francis Meagher in their campaign against the indifference of the government to the Irish Famine. Others involved in the campaign included Samuel Ferguson and Isaac Butt. Butt wrote a forty-page analysis of the national disaster for the \"Dublin University Magazine\" in 1847. His support cost him the nomination as Tory MP for County Carlow in 1852.\nIn 1856 the family moved from Warrington Place to the house of Susanna's parents at 18 Merrion Square (later number 70, the office of the Irish Arts Council). Her parents retired to live in England. Le Fanu never owned the house, but rented it from his brother-in-law for \u00a322 per annum, equivalent in 2023 to about \u00a32,000 (which he failed to pay in full).\nHis personal life also became difficult at this time, as his wife suffered from increasing neurotic symptoms. She had a crisis of faith and attended religious services at the nearby St. Stephen's Church. She also discussed religion with William, Le Fanu's younger brother, as Le Fanu had apparently stopped attending services. She suffered from anxiety after the deaths of several close relatives, including her father two years before, which may have led to marital problems.\nIn April 1858, she suffered an \"hysterical attack\" and died the following day in unclear circumstances. She was buried in the Bennett family vault in Mount Jerome Cemetery beside her father and brothers. The anguish of Le Fanu's diaries suggests that he felt guilt as well as loss. From then on he did not write any fiction until the death of his mother in 1861. He turned to his cousin Lady Gifford for advice and encouragement, and she remained a close correspondent until her death at the end of the decade.\nIn 1861, Le Fanu became the editor and proprietor of the \"Dublin University Magazine\", and he began to take advantage of double publication, first serialising in the \"Dublin University Magazine\", then revising for the English market. He published both \"The House by the Churchyard\" and \"Wylder's Hand\" in this way. After lukewarm reviews of the former novel, set in the Phoenix Park area of Dublin, Le Fanu signed a contract with Richard Bentley, his London publisher, which specified that future novels be stories \"of an English subject and of modern times\", a step Bentley thought necessary for Le Fanu to satisfy the English audience. Le Fanu succeeded in this aim in 1864, with the publication of \"Uncle Silas\", which he set in Derbyshire. In his last short stories, however, Le Fanu returned to Irish folklore as an inspiration and encouraged his friend Patrick Kennedy to contribute folklore to the \"D.U.M.\"\nDeath.\nLe Fanu died of a heart attack in his native Dublin on 7 February 1873, at the age of 58. According to Russell Kirk, in his essay \"A Cautionary Note on the Ghostly Tale\" in \"The Surly Sullen Bell\", Le Fanu \"is believed to have literally died of fright\"; but Kirk does not give the circumstances. In his memory, there is a road and a park in Ballyfermot, near his childhood home in southwest Dublin, named after him.\nWork.\nLe Fanu worked in many genres but remains best known for his horror fiction. He was a meticulous craftsman and frequently reworked plots and ideas from his earlier writing in subsequent pieces. Many of his novels, for example, are expansions and refinements of earlier short stories. He specialised in tone and effect rather than \"shock horror\" and liked to leave important details unexplained and mysterious. He avoided overt supernatural effects: in most of his major works, the supernatural is strongly implied but a \"natural\" explanation is also possible. \nThe demonic monkey in \"Green Tea\" could be a delusion of the story's protagonist, who is the only person to see it; in \"The Familiar\", Captain Barton's death seems to be supernatural but is not actually witnessed, and the ghostly owl may be a real bird. This technique influenced later horror artists, both in print and on film (see, for example, the film producer Val Lewton's principle of \"indirect horror\"). \nThough other writers have since chosen less subtle techniques, Le Fanu's finest tales, such as the vampire novella \"Carmilla\" and the short story \"Schalken the Painter\", remain some of the most powerful in the genre. He had an enormous influence on one of the 20th century's most important ghost story writers, M. R. James, and although his work fell out of favour in the early part of the 20th century, towards the end of the century interest in his work increased and remains comparatively strong.\n\"The Purcell Papers\".\nHis earliest twelve short stories, written between 1838 and 1840, purport to be the literary remains of an 18th-century Catholic priest called Father Purcell. They were published in the \"Dublin University Magazine\" and were later collected as \"The Purcell Papers\" (1880). They are mostly set in Ireland and include some classic stories of Gothic horror, with gloomy castles, supernatural visitations from beyond the grave, madness, and suicide. \nThe other themes that are apparent are nostalgia and sadness for the dispossessed Catholic aristocracy of Ireland, whose ruined castles stand as a mute witness to this history. Some of the stories still often appear in anthologies:\nRevised versions of \"Irish Countess\" (as \"The Murdered Cousin\") and \"Schalken\" were reprinted in Le Fanu's first collection of short stories, titled \"Ghost Stories and Tales of Mystery\" (1851).\n\"Spalatro\".\nAn anonymous novella \"Spalatro: From the Notes of Fra Giacomo\", published in the \"Dublin University Magazine\" in 1843, was added to the Le Fanu canon as late as 1980, being recognised as Le Fanu's work by W. J. McCormack in his biography of that year. \"Spalatro\" has a typically Gothic Italian setting, featuring a bandit as the hero, as in Ann Radcliffe (whose 1797 novel \"The Italian\" includes a repentant minor villain of the same name). \nMore disturbing, however, is the hero Spalatro's necrophiliac passion for an undead blood-drinking beauty, who seems to be a predecessor of Le Fanu's later female vampire Carmilla. Like Carmilla, this undead femme fatale is not portrayed in an entirely negative way and attempts, but fails, to save the hero Spalatro from the eternal damnation that seems to be his destiny.\nLe Fanu wrote this story after the death of his elder sister Catherine in March 1841. She had been ailing for about ten years, but her death came as a great shock to him.\nHistorical fiction.\nLe Fanu's first novels were historical, \"\u00e0 la\" Sir Walter Scott, though with an Irish setting. Like Scott, Le Fanu was sympathetic to the old Jacobite cause:\nSensation novels.\nLe Fanu published many novels in the contemporary sensation fiction style of Wilkie Collins and others:\nMajor works.\nLe Fanu's best-known works, still widely read today, are:\n*\"Green Tea\", a haunting narrative of a man plagued by a demonic monkey. \n*\"The Familiar\", a slightly revised version of Le Fanu's 1847 tale \"The Watcher\". M. R. James considered this to be the best ghost story ever written.\n*\"Mr Justice Harbottle\", another panorama of hell and much loved by M. R. James. \n*\"The Room in the Dragon Volant\", not a ghost story but a notable mystery story that includes the theme of premature burial.\n*\"Carmilla\", a compelling tale of a female vampire, set in central Europe. It has inspired several films, including Hammer's \"The Vampire Lovers\" (1970), Roger Vadim's \"Blood and Roses\" (1960), and Danish director Carl Theodor Dreyer's \"Vampyr\" (1932). Scholars like A. Asbj\u00f8rn J\u00f8n have also noted the important place that \"Carmilla\" holds in shifting the portrayal of vampires in modern fiction.\n* \"A Strange Adventure in the Life of Miss Laura Mildmay\", incorporating the story \"Madam Crowl's Ghost\"\n* \"The Haunted Baronet\"\n* \"The Bird of Passage\"\n* \"The Watcher\"\n* \"Passage in the Secret History of an Irish Countess\"\n* \"Strange Event in the Life of Schalken the Painter\"\n* \"The Fortunes of Sir Robert Ardagh\"\n* \"The Dream\" (from \"The Drunkard's Dream\")\n* \"A Chapter in the History of a Tyrone Family\"\n*\"Madam Crowl's Ghost\" (from \"All the Year Round\"), December 1870\n*\"Squire Toby's Will\", from \"Temple Bar\", January 1868\n*\"Dickon the Devil\", from \"London Society\", Christmas Number, 1872\n*\"The Child That Went with the Fairies\", from \"All the Year Round\", February 1870\n*\"The White Cat of Drumgunniol\", from \"All the Year Round\", April 1870\n*\"An Account of Some Strange Disturbances in Aungier Street\", from the \"Dublin University Magazine\", January 1851\n*\"Ghost Stories of Chapelizod\", from the \"Dublin University Magazine\", January 1851\n*\"Wicked Captain Walshawe, of Wauling\", from the \"Dublin University Magazine\", April 1864\n*\"Sir Dominick's Bargain\", from \"All the Year Round\", July 1872\n*\"Ultor de Lacy\", from the \"Dublin University Magazine\", December 1861\n*\"The Vision of Tom Chuff\", from \"All the Year Round\", October 1870\n*\"Stories of Lough Guir\", from \"All the Year Round\", April 1870\nThe publication of this book, which has often been reprinted, led to the revival in interest in Le Fanu, which has continued to this day.\nLegacy and influence.\nLe Fanu is considered by many to be one of the foremost ghost story writers of the Victorian era, and \"Carmilla\" remains hugely popular in vampire fiction. In addition to M. R. James, several other writers have expressed strong admiration for Le Fanu's fiction. E. F. Benson stated that Le Fanu's stories \"Green Tea\", \"The Familiar\", and \"Mr. Justice Harbottle\" \"are instinct with an awfulness which custom cannot stale, and this quality is due, as in \"The Turn of the Screw\" [by Henry James], to Le Fanu's admirably artistic methods in setting and narration\". Benson added, \"[Le Fanu's] best work is of the first rank, while as a 'flesh-creeper' he is unrivalled. No one else has so sure a touch in mixing the mysterious atmosphere in which horror darkly breeds\". \nJack Sullivan has asserted that Le Fanu is \"one of the most important and innovative figures in the development of the ghost story\" and that Le Fanu's work has had \"an incredible influence on the genre; [he is] regarded by M. R. James, E. F. Bleiler, and others as the most skilful writer of supernatural fiction in English.\"\nLe Fanu's work influenced several later writers. Most famously, \"Carmilla\" influenced Bram Stoker in the writing of \"Dracula\". M. R. James' ghost fiction was influenced by Le Fanu's work in the genre. Oliver Onions's supernatural novel \"The Hand of Kornelius Voyt\" (1939) was inspired by Le Fanu's \"Uncle Silas\". His works had fallen into obscurity following his death, and it was the efforts of later horror writers, among them Elizabeth Bowen and M. R. James, that put the spotlight back on his writings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nThere is an extensive critical analysis of Le Fanu's supernatural stories (particularly \"Green Tea\", \"Schalken the Painter\", and \"Carmilla\") in Jack Sullivan's book \"Elegant Nightmares: The English Ghost Story from Le Fanu to Blackwood\" (1978). Other books on Le Fanu include \"Wilkie Collins, Le Fanu and Others\" (1931) by S. M. Ellis, \"Sheridan Le Fanu\" (1951) by Nelson Browne, \"Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu\" (1971) by Michael H. Begnal, \"Sheridan Le Fanu\" (third edition, 1997) by W. J. McCormack, \"Le Fanu's Gothic: The Rhetoric of Darkness\" (2004) by Victor Sage and \"Vision and Vacancy: The Fictions of J. S. Le Fanu\" (2007) by James Walton.\nLe Fanu, his works, and his family background are explored in Gavin Selerie's mixed prose/verse text \"Le Fanu's Ghost\" (2006). Gary William Crawford's \"J. Sheridan Le Fanu: A Bio-Bibliography\" (1995) is the first full bibliography. Crawford and Brian J. Showers's \"Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu: A Concise Bibliography\" (2011) is a supplement to Crawford's out-of-print 1995 bibliography. With Jim Rockhill and Brian J. Showers, Crawford has edited \"Reflections in a Glass Darkly: Essays on J. Sheridan Le Fanu\". Jim Rockhill's introductions to the three volumes of the Ash-Tree Press edition of Le Fanu's short supernatural fiction (\"Schalken the Painter and Others\" [2002], \"The Haunted Baronet and Others\" [2003], \"Mr Justice Harbottle and Others\" [2005]) provide an account of Le Fanu's life and work.\nJulian Moynahan's \"Anglo-Irish: The Literary Imagination in a Hyphenated Culture\" (Princeton University Press, 1995) includes a study of Le Fanu's mystery writing."}
{"id": "28587", "revid": "2278355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28587", "title": "Star Chamber", "text": "15th to 17th century English court\nThe court of Star Chamber () was an English court that sat at the royal Palace of Westminster, from the late 15th century to the mid-17th century (c.\u20091641), and was composed of privy counsellors and common-law judges, to supplement the judicial activities of the common-law and equity courts in civil and criminal matters. \nIt was originally established to ensure the fair enforcement of laws against socially and politically prominent people sufficiently powerful that ordinary courts might hesitate to convict them of their crimes. It was mainly a court of appeal and could impose any penalty, except the death penalty, in its own right. At various times it had sub-courts for particular areas, notably for appeals of \"poor man's causes\".\nThe Chamber building itself was also sometimes used for other councils, courts, and committee meetings, which may cause confusion as to the role of the court of Star Chamber.\nIn modern times, legal or administrative bodies with strict, arbitrary rulings, no due process rights to those accused, and secretive proceedings are sometimes metaphorically called \"star chambers\". However, the arbitrariness is considered mythological by at least one academic.\nOrigin of the name.\nThe first reference to the \"star chamber\" is in 1398, as the \"Sterred chambre\"; the more common form of the name appears in 1422 as \"le Sterne-chamere\". Both forms recur throughout the fifteenth century, with \"Sterred Chambre\" last attested as appearing in the Supremacy of the Crown Act 1534 (establishing the English monarch as head of the Church in England). It was housed in a three-storied building with at least three rooms and kitchen. The origin of the name has usually been explained as first recorded by John Stow, writing in his \"Survey of London\" (1598), who noted \"this place is called the Star Chamber, at the first all the roofe thereof was decked with images of starres gilted\". Gold stars on a blue background were a common medieval decoration for ceilings in richly decorated rooms: the Star Chamber ceiling itself is still to be seen at Leasowe Castle, Wirral, and similar examples are in the Scrovegni Chapel in Padua and elsewhere.\nAlternatively, William Blackstone, a notable English jurist writing in 1769, speculated that the name had been derived from the legal word \"starr\" meaning the contract or obligation to a Jew (from the Hebrew \u05e9\u05d8\u05e8 (\"shtar\") meaning \"document\"). This term was in use until 1290, when Edward I had all Jews expelled from England. Blackstone thought the \"Starr Chamber\" might originally have been used for the deposition and storage of such contracts. However, the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" gives this etymology \"no claim to consideration.\"\nOther etymological speculations mentioned by Blackstone include the derivation from Old English \"steoran\" (steer) meaning \"to govern\"; as a court used to punish (in Latin: \"crimen stellionatus\"); or that the chamber was full of windows.\nHistory.\nPlantagenets and Tudors.\nThe Court evolved from meetings of the King's Council, with its roots going back to the medieval period. The so-called &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Star Chamber Act 1487 (3 Hen. 7. c. 1) of King Henry VII's second Parliament (1487) did not actually empower the Star Chamber, but rather created a separate tribunal distinct from the King's general Council.\nInitially well-regarded because of its speed and flexibility, the Star Chamber was regarded as one of the most just and efficient courts of the Tudor era. Sir Edward Coke described the Star Chamber as \"The most honourable court (Our Parliament excepted) that is in the Christian world. Both in respect of the judges in the court and its honourable proceeding.\"\nThe Star Chamber was made up of Privy Counsellors, as well as common-law judges, and it supplemented the activities of the common-law and equity courts in both civil and criminal matters. In a sense, the court was a court of appeal, a supervisory body, overseeing the operation of the lower courts, although it could hear cases by direct appeal as well. The court was set up to ensure the fair enforcement of laws against the English upper class, those so powerful that ordinary courts could never convict them of their crimes. Despite its subsequent reputation, it followed elaborate procedures and innovated in allowing defendants the right to counsel and to call witnesses.\nAnother function of the Court of Star Chamber was to act like a court of equity, which could impose punishment for actions that were deemed to be morally reprehensible, but were not in violation of the letter of the law. This gave the Star Chamber great flexibility, as it could punish defendants for any action that the court felt should be unlawful, even though it was technically lawful.\nHowever, this meant that the justice meted out by the Star Chamber could be very arbitrary and subjective, and it enabled the court to be used later on in its history as an instrument of oppression rather than for the purpose of justice for which it was intended. Many crimes that are now commonly prosecuted, such as attempt, conspiracy, criminal libel, and perjury, were originally developed by the Court of Star Chamber, along with its more common role of dealing with misdemeanours, and, later, riots and sedition. Capital felonies and capital treason were not in its jurisdiction, it was not authorised to torture, and it could not impose the death sentence. \nThe cases decided in those sessions enabled both the very powerful and those without power to seek redress. Thus, King Henry VII used the power of the Star Chamber to break the power of the landed gentry, which had been such a cause of problems in the Wars of the Roses. Yet, when local courts were often clogged or mismanaged, the Court of Star Chamber also became a means of appeal for the common people against the excesses of the nobility.\nIn the time of Henry VII, the privy counsellors not attending the King at the time might sit in the star chamber. \nIn the reign of King Henry VIII, the court was under the successive leaderships of Cardinal Wolsey (the Archbishop of York and Lord Chancellor), perhaps the King himself and Thomas Cranmer (the Archbishop of Canterbury). From this time forward, the Court of Star Chamber became a political weapon for bringing actions against those who opposed the policies of King Henry VIII, his ministers and his parliament.\nAlthough it was initially a court of appeal, King Henry, Wolsey and Cranmer encouraged plaintiffs to bring their cases directly to the Star Chamber, bypassing the lower courts entirely.\nThe Court was used extensively to control Wales, after the Laws in Wales Acts (sometimes referred to as the \"Acts of Union\"). The Tudor-era gentry in Wales turned to the Chamber to evict Welsh landowners, to protect themselves, and in general, to protect the advantages given to them by the Laws in Wales Acts.\nOne of the weapons of the Star Chamber was the \"ex officio\" oath where, because of their positions, individuals were forced to swear to answer truthfully all questions that might be asked. Faced with hostile questioning, this then gave them the \"cruel trilemma\" of having to incriminate themselves, face charges of perjury if they gave unsatisfactory answers to their accusers, or be held in contempt of court if they gave no answer.\nStuarts.\nThe power of the Court of Star Chamber grew considerably under the House of Stuart, and by the time of King Charles I, it had become synonymous with misuse and abuse of power by the King and his circle. and his son Charles used the court to examine cases of sedition, which meant that the court could be used to suppress opposition to royal policies. It came to be used to try nobles too powerful to be brought to trial in the lower courts.\nKing Charles I used the Court of Star Chamber as a Parliamentary substitute during the eleven years of Personal Rule, when he ruled without a Parliament. King Charles made extensive use of the Court of Star Chamber to prosecute dissenters, including the Puritans who fled to New England. This was one of the causes of the English Civil War.\nOn 17 October 1632, the Court of Star Chamber banned all \"news books\" because of complaints from Spanish and Austrian diplomats that coverage of the Thirty Years' War in England was unfair. As a result, newsbooks pertaining to this matter were often printed in Amsterdam and then smuggled into the country, until control of the press collapsed with the developing ideological conflict of 1640\u201341.\nThe Star Chamber became notorious for judgments favourable to the king, for example when Archbishop Laud had William Prynne branded on both cheeks through its agency in 1637 for seditious libel.\nIn 1571, Elizabeth I set up an equivalent Court in Ireland, the Court of Castle Chamber, to deal with cases of riot and offences against public order. Although it was initially popular with private litigants, under the Stuarts it developed the same reputation for harsh and arbitrary proceedings as its parent court, and during the political confusion of the 1640s, it disappeared.\nIn the early 1900s, Edgar Lee Masters commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the Star Chamber the council could inflict any punishment short of death, and frequently sentenced objects of its wrath to the pillory, to whipping and to the cutting off of ears. ... With each embarrassment to arbitrary power the Star Chamber became emboldened to undertake further usurpation. ... The Star Chamber finally summoned juries before it for verdicts disagreeable to the government, and fined and imprisoned them. It spread terrorism among those who were called to do constitutional acts. It imposed ruinous fines. It became the chief defence of Charles against assaults upon those usurpations which cost him his life.\nAbolition and aftermath.\nIn 1641, the Long Parliament, led by John Pym and inflamed by the severe treatment of John Lilburne, as well as that of other religious dissenters such as William Prynne, Alexander Leighton, John Bastwick and Henry Burton, abolished the Star Chamber with the Habeas Corpus Act 1640.\nThe gruesome punishments that the Star Chamber had imposed were not forgotten, and were revived by King James II, prompting an article in the Bill of Rights of 1688 \"That excessive Baile ought not to be required nor excessive Fines imposed nor cruell and unusuall Punishments inflicted\".\nThe Chamber itself stood until its demolition in 1806 (or 1834 or early in 1836), when its materials were salvaged. The door was reused in the nearby Westminster School until it was destroyed in the Blitz, and the historic Star Chamber ceiling, with its bright gold stars, was brought to Leasowe Castle on the Wirral Peninsula in Cheshire from the Court of Westminster, along with four tapestries depicting the four seasons.\nRecent history.\nIn the late 20th century, the expression was revived in reference to ways of resolving internal high-level questions within the government, usually relating to budget appropriations. The press and some civil servants under the premiership of Margaret Thatcher (1979\u20131990) revived the term for private ministerial meetings at which disputes between the Treasury and high-spending departments were resolved. Neil Kinnock made reference to this style of Thatcher's government during his first outing at Prime Minister's Questions in 1983.\nIn 2010, the press employed the term for a committee established by the Cameron ministry to plan spending cuts to reduce public debt.\nIn March 2019, the European Research Group formed its own \"Star Chamber\" to pass judgement on Theresa May's then proposed Brexit deal, recommending that MPs should not back it. On 29 December 2020, the ERG's Star Chamber gave a similar verdict on Boris Johnson's recently agreed EU\u2013UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement, but on this occasion recommended that their members vote for it because the deal was \"consistent with the restoration of UK sovereignty\". In December 2023 the ERG's Star Chamber rejected Rishi Sunak's proposed legislation to allow the Rwanda plan to go ahead.\nInfluence on the US Constitution.\nThe historical abuses of the Star Chamber are considered to be some of the reasons, along with English common law precedent, behind the protections against compelled self-incrimination embodied in the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The meaning of \"compelled testimony\" under the Fifth Amendment \u2013 i.e., the conditions under which a defendant is allowed to \"plead the Fifth\" to avoid self-incrimination \u2013 is thus often interpreted via reference to the inquisitorial methods of the Star Chamber.\nAs the US Supreme Court described it, \"the Star Chamber has, for centuries, symbolised disregard of basic individual rights. The Star Chamber not merely allowed, but required, defendants to have counsel. The defendant's answer to an indictment was not accepted unless it was signed by counsel. When counsel refused to sign the answer, for whatever reason, the defendant was considered to have confessed.\"\nIn addition, the \"excessive bail\" article of the Bill of Rights 1689 was reproduced near-verbatim as the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which forms part of the US' own Bill of Rights.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28588", "revid": "46591300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28588", "title": "Coat of arms of South Africa", "text": "The coat of arms of South Africa is the main heraldic insignia of South Africa. The present coat of arms was introduced on Freedom Day, 27 April 2000, and was designed by Iaan Bekker. It replaced the earlier national arms, which had been in use since 1910. The motto is written in the extinct \u01c0Xam, a member of the Khoisan languages, and translates literally to \"diverse people unite\". The previous motto, in Latin, was \"\", translated as \"From unity, strength\".\nHistory.\nFollowing the end of apartheid, the new constitution of South Africa initially retained the coat of arms granted to South Africa in 1910. However, they had been viewed as outdated due to being designed by the British and Afrikaner minorities and not being representative of the black majority. The design process for a new coat of arms was initiated in 1999, the Department of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology requested ideas for the new coat of arms from the public. A brief was then prepared based on the ideas received, along with input from the Cabinet. The Government Communication and Information System then approached Design South Africa to brief ten of the top designers. Three designers were chosen to present their concepts to the Cabinet, and Iaan Bekker's design was chosen.\nThe new arms were introduced on Freedom Day, 27 April 2000. The change reflected the government's aim to highlight the democratic change in South Africa and a new sense of patriotism.\nThe coat of arms is a series of elements organised in distinct symmetric egg-like or oval shapes placed on top of one another. The completed structure of the coat of arms combines the lower and higher oval shape in a symbol of infinity. The path that connects the lower edge of the scroll, through the lines of the tusks, with the horizon above and the sun rising at the top, forms the shape of the cosmic egg from which the secretary bird rises. In the symbolic sense, this is the implied rebirth of the spirit of the great and heroic nation of South Africa.\nThe coat of arms is also a central part of the Seal of the Republic, traditionally considered to be the highest emblem of the state. Absolute authority is given to every document with an impression of the Seal of the Republic on it, as this means that it has been approved by the president of South Africa. Since 1997, however, the use of the Seal of the Republic has not actually been required by the Constitution, but it continues to be used.\nBlazon.\nThe official blazon of the arms is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Or, representations of two San human figures of red ochre, statant respectant, the hands of the innermost arms clasped, with upper arm, inner wrist, waist and knee bands Argent, and a narrow border of red ochre; the shield ensigned of a spear and knobkierie in saltire, Sable. Thereabove a demi-secretary bird displayed Or, charged on the breast with a stylised representation of a protea flower with outer petals Vert, inner petals Or and seeded of nine triangles conjoined in three rows, the upper triangle Gules, the second row Vert, Or inverted and Vert, and the third row Vert, Or inverted, Sable, Or inverted and Vert. Above the head of the secretary bird an arc of seven rays facetted Or and Orange, the two outer rays conjoined to the elevated wings.\"\n\"Upon a riband Vert, the motto in letters Argent. Issuant from the ends of the riband two pairs of elephant tusks curving inwards, the tips conjoined to the wings of the secretary bird, Or, therewithin and flanking the shields, two ears of wheat Brunatr\u00e9.\"\nThe oval shape of foundation.\nThe first element is the motto, in a green semicircle. Completing the semicircle are two symmetrically placed pairs of elephant tusks pointing upwards. Within the oval shape formed by the tusks are two symmetrical ears of wheat, that in turn frame a centrally placed gold shield.\nThe shape of the shield makes reference to the drum, and contains two human figures derived from Khoisan rock art \"Linton Stone\", which is housed and displayed in the South African Museum in Cape Town. The figures are depicted facing one another in greeting and in unity.\nAbove the shield are a spear and a knobkierie, crossed in a single unit. These elements are arranged harmoniously to give focus to the shield and complete the lower oval shape of foundation.\nThe motto is: \u01c3ke e\ua789 \u01c0xarra \u01c1ke, written in the Khoisan language of the \u01c0Xam people, literally meaning \"diverse people unite\". It addresses each individual effort to harness the unity between thought and action. On a collective scale it calls for the nation to unite in a common sense of belonging and national pride \u2013 unity in diversity.\nAn emblem of fertility, it also symbolises the idea of germination, growth and the feasible development of any potential. It relates to the nourishment of the people and signifies the agricultural aspects of the Earth.\nElephants symbolise wisdom, strength, moderation and eternity.\nIt has a dual function as a vehicle for the display of identity and of spiritual defence. It contains the primary symbol of our nation.\nThe figures are depicted in an attitude of greeting, symbolising unity. This also represents the beginning of the individual's transformation into the greater sense of belonging to the nation and by extension, collective humanity.\n A dual symbol of defence and authority, they in turn represent the powerful legs of the secretary bird. The spear and knobkierie are lying down, symbolising peace.\nThe oval shape of ascendance.\nImmediately above the oval shape of foundation, is the visual centre of the coat of arms, a protea. The petals of the protea are rendered in a triangular pattern reminiscent of the crafts of Africa.\nThe secretary bird is placed above the protea and the flower forms the chest of the bird. The secretary bird stands with its wings uplifted in a regal and uprising gesture. The distinctive head feathers of the secretary bird crown a strong and vigilant head.\nThe rising sun above the horizon is placed between the wings of the secretary bird and completes the oval shape of ascendance.\nThe combination of the upper and lower oval shapes intersect to form an unbroken infinite course, and the great harmony between the basic elements result in a dynamic, elegant and thoroughly distinctive design. Yet it clearly retains the stability, gravity and immediacy that a coat of arms demands.\nThe protea is an emblem of the beauty of our land and the flowering of our potential as a nation in pursuit of the African Renaissance. The protea symbolises the holistic integration of forces that grow from the Earth and are nurtured from above. The most popular colours of Africa have been assigned to the protea \u2013 green, gold, red and black.\nThe secretary bird is characterised in flight, the natural consequence of growth and speed. It is the equivalent of the lion on Earth. A powerful bird whose legs \u2013 depicted as the spear and knobkierie \u2013 serve it well in its hunt for snakes, symbolising protection of the nation against its enemies. It is a messenger of the heavens and conducts its grace upon the Earth. In this sense it is a symbol of divine majesty. Its uplifted wings are an emblem of the ascendance of our nation, while simultaneously offering us its protection. It is depicted in gold, which clearly symbolises its association with the sun and the highest power.\nAn emblem of brightness, splendour and the supreme principle of the nature of energy. It symbolises the promise of rebirth, the active faculties of reflection, knowledge, good judgement and willpower. It is the symbol of the source of life, of light and the ultimate wholeness of humanity.\n1910 arms.\nThe first coat of arms was granted by King George V by royal warrant on 17 September 1910. This was a few months after the formation of the Union of South Africa.\nIt was a combination of symbols representing the four provinces (formerly colonies) that made up the Union. \nThe motto, \"\" was officially translated as \"Union is Strength\" until 1961, and thereafter as \"Unity is Strength\".\nEvolution.\nThree official renditions of the arms were used. The original rendition (1910) was the only version used until 1930, and it continued to be used as the rank badge of warrant officers in the South African Defence Force and South African National Defence Force until 2002. The second version, painted in 1930 and known as the \"ordinary coat of arms\", and the third version, painted in 1932 and known as the \"embellished coat of arms\", were both used until 2000. The former was also used on the insignia of the South African Police until the 1990s.\nProvincial arms.\n1910\u20131994.\nBetween 1910 and 1994, South Africa was divided into four provinces, Cape Province, Natal, Orange Free State and Transvaal. These provinces had their own coat of arms.\n1994\u2013present.\nIn April 1994, South Africa was divided into nine provinces. Each province was granted a coat of arms, in most cases designed by State Herald Frederick Brownell.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28590", "revid": "21857263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28590", "title": "Shoah (disambiguation)", "text": "Shoah (\u05e9\u05d5\u05d0\u05d4) is the Hebrew term for the Holocaust.\nShoah may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28591", "revid": "39457116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28591", "title": "Second Epistle to the Corinthians", "text": "Book of the New Testament\nThe Second Epistle to the Corinthians is a Pauline epistle of the New Testament of the Christian Bible. The epistle is attributed to Paul the Apostle and a co-author named Timothy, and is addressed to the church in Corinth and Christians in the surrounding province of Achaea, in modern-day Greece. According to Jerome, Titus was the amanuensis of this epistle.\nComposition.\nWhile there is little doubt among scholars that Paul is the author, there is discussion over whether the Epistle was originally one letter or composed from two or more of Paul's letters.\nAlthough the New Testament contains only two letters to the Corinthian church, the evidence from the letters themselves is that he wrote at least four and the church replied at least once:\n states that Paul was replying to certain questions written and sent to him by the church in Corinth.\nThe abrupt change of tone from being previously harmonious to bitterly reproachful in 2 Corinthians 10\u201313 has led many to infer that chapters 10\u201313 form part of the \"letter of tears\" which were in some way appended to Paul's main letter. Those who disagree with this assessment usually say that the \"letter of tears\" is no longer extant. Others argue that although the letter of tears is no longer extant, chapters 10\u201313 come from a later letter.\nThe seemingly sudden change of subject from chapter 7 to chapters 8\u20139 leads some scholars to conclude that chapters 8\u20139 were originally a separate letter, and some even consider the two chapters to have originally been distinct themselves. Other scholars dispute this claim, however.\nSome scholars also find fragments of the \"warning letter\", or of other letters, in chapters 1\u20139, for instance that part of the \"warning letter\" is preserved in 2 Cor 6:14\u20137:1, but these hypotheses are less popular.\nDate.\nThere is evidence that Paul wrote 2 Corinthians from Macedonia in 55 or 56 AD, roughly a year after writing 1 Corinthians and a year before he wrote his letter to the Romans from Corinth.\nStructure.\nThe book is usually divided as follows:\nBackground.\nPaul's contacts with the Corinthian church can be reconstructed as follows:\nContent.\nPaul refers to himself in the letter as an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and reassures the people of Corinth that they will not have another painful visit, but what he has to say is not to cause pain but to reassure them of the love he has for them. The letter is shorter than the first one, and can be confusing if the reader is unaware of the social, religious, and economic situation of the community. Paul felt the situation in Corinth was still complicated and felt attacked.\nSome challenged his authority as an apostle, and he compares the level of difficulty to other cities he has visited who had embraced it, like the Galatians. He is criticized for the way he speaks and writes and finds it just to defend himself with some of his important teachings. He states the importance of forgiving others, and God's new agreement that comes from the Spirit of the living God (2 Cor. 3:3), and the importance of being a person of Christ and giving generously to God's people in Jerusalem, and ends with his own experience of how God changed his life (Sandmel, 1979).\nUniqueness.\nAccording to \"Easton's Bible Dictionary\",\nThis epistle, it has been well said, shows the individuality of the apostle more than any other. \"Human weakness, spiritual strength, the deepest tenderness of affection, wounded feeling, sternness, irony, rebuke, impassioned self-vindication, humility, a just self-respect, zeal for the welfare of the weak and suffering, as well as for the progress of the church of Christ and for the spiritual advancement of its members, are all displayed in turn in the course of his appeal.\" \u2014Lias, Second Corinthians.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOnline translations of Second Epistle to the Corinthians:\nCommentary articles by J. P. Meyer on Second Corinthians, by chapter: https://, https://, https://,"}
{"id": "28596", "revid": "49884957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28596", "title": "Shaka", "text": "King of the Zulu Kingdom (c.1787-1828) (r.1816\u20131828)\nShaka kaSenzangakhona (c.\u20091787\u201324 September 1828), also known as Shaka (the) Zulu () and Sigidi kaSenzangakhona, was the king of the Zulu Kingdom from 1816 to 1828. One of the most influential monarchs of the Zulu, he ordered wide-reaching reforms that reorganized the military into a formidable force.\nKing Shaka was born in the lunar month of \"uNtulikazi\" (July) in 1787, in Mthonjaneni, KwaZulu-Natal Province, South Africa. The son of the Zulu King Senzangakhona kaJama, he was spurned as an illegitimate son. Shaka spent part of his childhood in his mother's settlements, where he was initiated into an \"ibutho lempi\" (fighting unit/regiment), serving as a warrior under Inkosi Dingiswayo.\nKing Shaka refined the ibutho military system with the Mthethwa Paramountcy's support over the next several years. He forged alliances with his smaller neighbours to counter Ndwandwe raids from the north. The initial Zulu maneuvers were primarily defensive, as King Shaka preferred to apply pressure diplomatically, with an occasional strategic assassination. His reforms of local society built on existing structures. Although he preferred social and propagandistic political methods, he also engaged in several battles.\nKing Shaka's reign coincided with the start of the (\"upheaval\" or \"crushing\"), a period of devastating warfare and chaos in southern Africa between 1815 and 1840 that depopulated the region. His role in the \"Mfecane/Difaqane\" is controversial. He was assassinated by his half-brothers, King Dingane and Prince Mhlangana and Mbopha kaSithayi.\nEarly life.\nShaka (roughly translated as \"intestinal beetle\") was born to the reigning Zulu king. He was the eldest of many sons, but was considered to be a bastard child and was sent away to live with his mother's tribe, known as the Elangeni, leaving his half-brother to rule the Zulu kingdom. At the time, the Zulu were a regional tribe relying on pastoral livestock, sorghum, and milk. When Shaka reached a suitable age, he and his mother were sent to the Mthethwa clan, the most powerful regional tribe. There, he matured, and served as a warrior under Jobe, and then for Dingiswayo, a respected warrior and chief of the clan. When Inkosi Dingiswayo discovered Shaka was royalty, he put him in charge of a regiment, helping to develop Shaka's military tactics and strategy.\nAfter Inkosi Zwide, the king of the Ndwandwe (Nxumalo) nation, murdered Dingiswayo, Shaka sought to avenge his death. During that encounter, Zwide's mother, Ntombazi, a sangoma, was killed by Shaka. Shaka chose a particularly gruesome revenge on her by locking her in a house with jackals or hyenas inside. They devoured her, and in the morning, Shaka burned the house to the ground. Shaka continued his pursuit of Zwide. It was not until around 1825 that the two military leaders met in the vicinity of Pongola, near the present-day border of Mpumalanga, a province of South Africa. Shaka was victorious in battle, although his forces sustained heavy casualties, including his military commander, Mgobhozi Ovela Entabeni.\nIn his initial years, Shaka had neither the influence nor reputation to compel any but the smallest of groups to join him, and upon Dingiswayo's death, he moved southwards across the Thukela River, establishing his capital, Bulawayo, in Qwabe territory. He never returned to the traditional Zulu heartland. In Qwabe, Shaka may have intervened in an existing succession dispute to help his own choice, Nqetho, into power.\nExpansion of power and conflict with Zwide.\nAs Shaka became more respected by his people, he was able to spread his ideas with greater ease. Using his background as a soldier, Shaka taught the Zulus that the most effective way of gaining power quickly was by conquering and controlling other tribes. His teachings greatly influenced the social outlook of the Zulus. The Zulu tribe soon developed a warrior outlook, which Shaka used to his advantage.\nShaka's hegemony was primarily based on military might, smashing rivals and incorporating scattered remnants into his own army. He supplemented this with a mixture of diplomacy and patronage, incorporating friendly chieftains, including Zihlandlo of the Mkhize, Jobe of the Sithole, and Mathubane of the Thuli. These people were never defeated in battle by the Zulus; they did not have to be. Shaka won them over with subtler tactics, such as patronage and reward. As for the ruling of Qwabe, they began re-inventing their genealogies to give the impression that Qwabe and Zulu were closely related (i.e. as Nguni) in the past. In this way, a greater sense of cohesion was created, though it never became complete, as subsequent civil wars attest.\nShaka still recognised Dingiswayo and his larger Mthethwa clan, as overlord after he returned to the Zulu land but, some years later, Dingiswayo was ambushed by Zwide's Ndwandwe and killed. There is no evidence to suggest that Shaka betrayed Dingiswayo. The Zulu people had to retreat before several Ndwandwe incursions; the Ndwandwe was clearly the most aggressive grouping in the sub-region.\nShaka was able to form an alliance with the leaders of the Mthethwa peoples and was able to establish himself amongst the Qwabe, after Phakathwayo was overthrown with relative ease. With Qwabe, Hlubi and Mkhize support, Shaka was finally able to summon a force capable of resisting the Ndwandwe (of the Nxumalo clan). Shaka's first major battle against Zwide, of the Ndwandwe, was the Battle of Gqokli Hill, on the Mfolozi River. Shaka's troops maintained a strong position on the crest of the hill. A frontal assault by their opponents failed to dislodge them, and Shaka sealed the victory by sending his reserve forces in a sweep around the hill to attack the enemy's rear. Losses were high overall but the efficiency of the new Shakan innovations was proven. It is probable that, over time, the Zulus were able to hone and improve their encirclement tactics.\nAnother decisive battle eventually took place on the Mhlatuze River, at the confluence with the Mvuzane stream. In the two-day running battle, the Zulus inflicted a resounding defeat on their opponents. Shaka then led a fresh reserve some to the royal kraal of Zwide, ruler of the Ndwandwe, and destroyed it. Zwide himself escaped with a handful of followers before falling afoul of a chieftain named Mjanji, ruler of a Babelu clan. (He died in mysterious circumstances soon afterwards.) Zwide's general, Soshangane (of the Shangaan), moved north towards what is now Mozambique to inflict further damage on less resistant foes and take advantage of slaving opportunities, obliging Portuguese traders to pay tribute. Shaka later had to contend again with Zwide's son, Sikhunyane, in 1826.\nShaka granted permission to Europeans to enter Zulu territory on rare occasions. In the mid-1820s, Henry Francis Fynn provided medical treatment to the king after an assassination attempt by a rival tribe member hidden in a crowd. To show his gratitude, Shaka permitted European settlers to enter and operate in the Zulu kingdom. Shaka observed several demonstrations of European technology and knowledge, but he held that the Zulu way was superior to that of the foreigners.\nDeath.\nDingane and Mhlangana, Shaka's half-brothers, appeared to have made at least two attempts to assassinate Shaka before they succeeded, with support from the Mpondo elements and some disaffected iziYendane people. Shaka had made enough enemies among his own people to hasten his demise. It came relatively quickly after the death of his mother, Nandi, in October 1827 and the devastation caused by Shaka's subsequent erratic behavior. According to Donald Morris, Shaka ordered that no crops should be planted during the following year of mourning, no milk (the basis of the Zulu diet at the time) was to be used, and any woman who became pregnant was to be killed along with her husband. At least 7,000 people who were deemed to be insufficiently grief-stricken were executed, although the killing was not restricted to humans; cows were slaughtered so that their calves would know what losing a mother felt like.\nShaka was killed by three assassins sometime in 1828; September is the most frequently cited date, when almost all available Zulu manpower had been sent on yet another mass sweep to the north. This left the royal kraal critically lacking in protection. It was all the conspirators needed. An iNduna named Mbopa created a diversion, and Dingane and Mhlangana struck the fatal blows. Shaka's corpse was dumped by his assassins in an empty grain pit, which was then filled with stones and mud. The exact location is unknown. A monument was built at one alleged site. Historian Donald Morris holds that the true site is somewhere on Couper Street in the village of Stanger, in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.\nDingane assumed power and embarked on an extensive purge of pro-Shaka elements and chieftains, over the course of several years, in order to secure his position. The initial problem Dingane faced was maintaining the loyalty of the Zulu fighting regiments. He set up his main residence at Mgungundlovu and established his authority over the Zulu kingdom. Dingane ruled for some twelve years, during which time he fought, disastrously, against the Voortrekkers, and against another half-brother, Mpande, who, with Boer and British support, took over the Zulu leadership in 1840, ruling for some 30 years.\nSocial and military revolution.\nSome older histories have doubted the military and social innovations customarily attributed to Shaka, denying them outright, or attributing them variously to European influences. More modern researchers argue that such explanations fall short, and that the general Zulu culture, which included other tribes and clans, contained a number of practices that Shaka could have drawn on to fulfill his objectives, whether in raiding, conquest or hegemony. Some of these practices are shown below.\nWeapons changes.\nShaka is often said to have been dissatisfied with the long throwing assegai, and is credited with having introduced a new variant of the weapon: the \"iklwa\", a short stabbing spear with a long, broad, sword-like spearhead.\nAlthough he is credited with introducing the \"ilkwa\" to his people, Shaka likely did not invent it himself. He most likely outsourced it from Nzama, who later had a feud with him because he did not want to pay for the spears. Deneys Reitz also reports an account that Shaka's use of the \"iklwa\" was inspired by a British explorer, a Dr. Cowan, who told him that British troops owed their military success to the bayonet.\nAccording to Zulu scholar John Laband, Shaka insisted that his warriors train with the weapon, which gave them a \"terrifying advantage over opponents who clung to the traditional practice of throwing their spears and avoiding hand-to-hand conflict.\" The throwing spear was not discarded, but used as an initial missile weapon before close contact with the enemy, when the shorter stabbing spear was used in hand-to-hand combat.\nIt is also supposed that Shaka introduced a larger, heavier version of the Nguni shield. Furthermore, it is believed that he taught his warriors how to use the shield's left side to hook the enemy's shield to the right, exposing the enemy's ribs for a fatal spear stab. In Shaka's time, these cowhide shields were supplied by the king, and they remained the king's property. Different-coloured shields distinguished different \"amabutho\" within Shaka's army. Some had black shields, others used white shields with black spots, and some had white shields with brown spots, while others used pure brown or white shields.\nMobility of the army.\nThe story that sandals were discarded to toughen the feet of Zulu warriors has been noted in various military accounts such as \"The Washing of the Spears\", \"Like Lions They Fought\", and \"Anatomy of the Zulu Army\". Implementation was typically blunt. Those who objected to going without sandals were simply killed. Shaka drilled his troops frequently, in forced marches that sometimes covered more than a day in a fast trot over hot, rocky terrain. He also drilled the troops to carry out encirclement tactics.\nHistorian John Laband dismisses these stories as myth, writing: \"What are we to make, then, of [European trader Henry Francis] Fynn's statement that once the Zulu army reached hard and stony ground in 1826, Shaka ordered sandals of ox-hide to be made for himself?\"\nLaband also dismissed the idea of an march in a single day as ridiculous. He further claims that even though these stories have been repeated by \"astonished and admiring white commentators,\" the Zulu army covered \"no more than a day, and usually went only about .\" Furthermore, Zulus under Shaka sometimes advanced more slowly. They spent two whole days recuperating in one instance, and on another they rested for a day and two nights before pursuing their enemy. Several other historians of the Zulu and the Zulu military system, however, affirm the mobility rate of up to per day.\nLogistic support by youths.\nBoys aged six and over joined Shaka's force as apprentice warriors (\"udibi\") and served as carriers of rations, supplies such as cooking pots and sleeping mats, and extra weapons until they joined the main ranks. It is sometimes held that such support was used more for very light forces designed to extract tribute in cattle and slaves from neighboring groups. Nevertheless, the concept of \"light\" forces is questionable. The fast-moving Zulu raiding party, or \"ibutho lempi,\" on a mission invariably traveled light, driving cattle as provisions on the hoof, and were not weighed down with heavy weapons and supply packs.\nAge-grade regimental system.\nAge-grade groupings of various sorts were common in the Bantu culture of the day, and indeed are still important in much of Africa. Age grades were responsible for a variety of activities, from guarding the camp, to cattle herding, to certain rituals and ceremonies. Shaka organised various grades into regiments, and quartered them in special military kraals, with regiments having their own distinctive names and insignia. The regimental system clearly built on existing tribal cultural elements that could be adapted and shaped to fit an expansionist agenda.\n\"Bull horn\" formation.\nMost historians credit Shaka with initial development of the famous \"bull horn\" formation. It was composed of three elements:\nDiscipline.\nShaka created ruthless determination in his army by instilling in his warriors the knowledge of what would happen if their courage failed them in battle or their regiments were defeated. A brutal fate awaited them and their families if they did not perform well in combat. H. Rider Haggard learned about Shaka's methods from his nephew and late 19th-century Zulu king, Cetshwayo kaMpande:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs Shaka conquered a tribe, he enrolled its remnants in his army, so that they might in their turn help to conquer others. He armed his regiments with the short stabbing \"Iklwa\", instead of the throwing assegai which they had been accustomed to use, and kept them subject to an iron discipline. If a man was observed to show the slightest hesitation about coming to close quarters with the enemy, he was executed as soon as the fight was over. If a regiment had the misfortune to be defeated, whether by its own fault or not, it would on its return to headquarters find that a goodly proportion of the wives and children belonging to it had been beaten to death on Shaka's orders, and that he was waiting their arrival to complete his vengeance by dashing out their brains. The result was, that though Shaka's armies were occasionally defeated, they were rarely annihilated, and they never ran away.\nShaka's methods versus European technology.\nThe expanding Zulu power inevitably clashed with European hegemony in the decades after Shaka's death. In fact, European travellers to Shaka's kingdom demonstrated advanced technology such as firearms and writing, but the Zulu monarch was less than convinced. There was no need to record messages, he held, since his messengers stood under penalty of death should they bear inaccurate tidings. As for firearms, Shaka acknowledged their utility as missile weapons after seeing muzzle-loaders demonstrated, but he argued that in the time a gunman took to reload, he would be swamped by charging spear-wielding warriors.\nThe first major clash after Shaka's death took place under his successor Dingane, against expanding European Voortrekkers from the Cape. Initial Zulu success rested on fast-moving surprise attacks and ambushes, but the Voortrekkers recovered and dealt the Zulu a severe defeat from their fortified wagon laager at the Battle of Blood River. The second major clash was against the British during 1879. Once again, most Zulu successes rested on their mobility, ability to screen their forces and to close when their opponents were unfavourably deployed. Their major victory at the Battle of Isandlwana was the most prominent one, but they also forced back a British column at the Battle of Hlobane, by deploying fast-moving regiments over a wide area of rugged ravines and gullies, and attacking the British who were forced into a rapid disorderly fighting retreat, back to the town of Kambula.\nCreator of a revolutionary warfare style.\nA number of historians argue that Shaka \"changed the nature of warfare in Southern Africa\" from \"a ritualised exchange of taunts with minimal loss of life into a true method of subjugation by wholesale slaughter.\" Others dispute this characterization. A number of writers focus on Shaka's military innovations such as the \"iklwa\" \u2013 the Zulu thrusting spear, and the \"buffalo horns\" formation. This combination has been compared to the standardization supposedly implemented by the reorganized Roman legions under Marius.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Combined with Shaka's \"buffalo horns\" attack formation for surrounding and annihilating enemy forces, the Zulu combination of iklwa and shield\u2014similar to the Roman legionaries' use of gladius and scutum\u2014was devastating. By the time of Shaka's assassination in 1828, it had made the Zulu kingdom the greatest power in southern Africa and a force to be reckoned with, even against Britain's modern army in 1879.\nMuch controversy still surrounds the character, methods and activities of the Zulu king. From a military standpoint, historian John Keegan notes exaggerations and myths that surround Shaka, but nevertheless maintains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Fanciful commentators called him Shaka, the Black Napoleon, and allowing for different societies and customs, the comparison is apt. Shaka is without doubt the greatest commander to have come out of Africa.\nAs a borrower, not an innovator.\nSome scholars hold that popular depictions of Shaka as a suddenly appearing genius creating innovation are overstated, and that to the contrary, Shaka was a borrower and imitator of indigenous methods, customs and even ruler-lineages already in place. They also argue that Shaka's line was relatively short-lived and receives undue attention, compared to other, longer established lines and rulers in the region.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It seems much more likely that Shaka, seeking to build the power of a previously insignificant chiefdom, drew on an existing heritage of statecraft known to his immediate neighbors. J.H. Soga implied as much when he used genealogical evidence to argue that the Zulu were an upstart group inferior in dignity and distinction to established chiefdoms in their region, for example, the Hlubi, Ndwandwe, and Dlamini lines. Using different informants and genealogical charts, A.T. Bryant arrived at similar conclusions. The Zulu line \u2013 \"a royal house of doubtful pedigree\" \u2013 was very short in comparison to the Langene, Ndwandwe, Swazi, and Hlubi lines. Using his standard formula of eighteen years per reign, Bryant calculated that the Swazi, Ndwandwe, and Hlubi lines could be traced back to the beginning of the fifteenth century, while the eponymous chief Zulu had died at the beginning of the eighteenth century.\u2014\u200a\nShaka's triumphs did not succeed in obliterating or diminishing the memories of his better-born rivals. The hypothesis that several states of a new kind arose about the same time does not take account of the contrast between the short line of Shaka and the long pedigrees of his most important opponents \u2013 especially the coalition grouped around his deadly enemy Zwide (d. 1822). The founders of the states which Omer-Cooper called \"Zulu-type states,\" including the Ndebele, the Gasa, the Ngoni, and the Swazi had all been closely associated with Zwide. Instead of hypothesizing that they all chose to imitate Shaka, it is easier to imagine that he modeled his state on theirs. And as they stemmed from ancient families it is entirely possible that states of that type existed in a more remote past. Soga and Bryant related each of them to a larger grouping they called Mho.\nScholarship.\nBiographical sources.\nScholarship in recent years has revised views of the sources on Shaka's reign. The earliest are two eyewitness accounts written by European adventurer-traders who met Shaka during the last four years of his reign. Nathaniel Isaacs published his \"Travels and Adventures in Eastern Africa\" in 1836, creating a picture of Shaka as a degenerate and pathological monster, which survives in modified forms to this day. Isaacs was aided in this by Henry Francis Fynn, whose diary (actually a rewritten collage of various papers) was edited by James Stuart only in 1950. Their accounts may be balanced by the rich resource of oral histories collected around 1900 by the same James Stuart, now published in six volumes as \"The James Stuart Archive\". Stuart's early 20th century work was continued by D. McK. Malcolm in 1950. These and other sources such as A.T. Bryant gives us a more Zulu-centered picture. Most popular accounts are based on E.A. Ritter's novel \"Shaka Zulu\" (1955), a pot boiling romance that was re-edited into something more closely resembling a history. John Wright (history professor at University of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg), Julian Cobbing and Dan Wylie (Rhodes University, Grahamstown) are among a number of writers who have modified these stories.\nVarious modern historians writing on Shaka and the Zulu point to the uncertain nature of Fynn and Isaac's accounts of Shaka's reign. A general reference work in the field is Donald Morris's \"The Washing of The Spears\", which notes that the sources, as a whole, for this historical era are not the best. Morris references a large number of sources, including Stuart, and A. T. Bryant's \"Olden Times in Zululand and Natal\", which is based on four decades of interviews of tribal sources. After sifting through these sources and noting their strengths and weaknesses, Morris generally credits Shaka with a large number of military and social innovations. This is the general consensus in the field.\nA 1998 study by historian Carolyn Hamilton summarizes much of the scholarship on Shaka towards the dawn of the 21st century in areas ranging from ideology, politics and culture, to the use of his name and image in a popular South African theme park, \"Shakaland.\" It argues that in many ways, the image of Shaka has been \"invented\" in the modern era according to whatever agenda persons hold. This \"imagining of Shaka\" it is held, should be balanced by a sober view of the historical record, and allow greater scope for the contributions of indigenous African discourse.\nMilitary historians of the Zulu War describe Zulu fighting methods and tactics, including authors Ian Knight and Robert Edgerton. General histories of Southern Africa include Noel Mostert's \"Frontiers\" and a detailed account of the results from the Zulu expansion, J.D. Omer-Cooper's \"The Zulu Aftermath\", which advances the traditional Mfecane/Difaqane theory.\nThe Mfecane.\nHistory and legacy.\nThe increased military efficiency led to more and more clans being incorporated into Shaka's Zulu empire, while other tribes moved away to be out of range of Shaka's \"impis\". The ripple effect caused by these mass migrations would become known (though only in the twentieth century) as the \"Mfecane/Difaqane\" (annihilation).\nShaka's army set out on a massive programme of expansion &amp; killing those who resisted in the territories he conquered. His \"impis\" (armies) were rigorously disciplined: failure in battle meant death.\nAt the time of his death, Shaka ruled over 250,000 people and could muster more than 50,000 warriors. His 12-year-long kingship resulted in a massive number of deaths, mostly due to the disruptions the Zulu caused in neighbouring tribes, although the exact death toll is a matter of scholarly dispute. Further unquantifiable deaths occurred during mass tribal migrations to escape his armies.\nThe Mfecane produced Mzilikazi of the Khumalo, a general of Shaka's. He fled Shaka's employ, and in turn conquered an empire in present-day Zimbabwe, after clashing with European groups like the Boers. The settling of Mzilikazi's people, the Ama Ndebele or Matabele, in the south of Zimbabwe with the concomitant driving of the Mashona into the north caused a tribal conflict that still resonates today. Other notable figures to arise from the Mfecane/Difaqane include Soshangane, who expanded from the Zulu area into what is now Mozambique, and Zwangendaba.\nDisruptions of the Mfecane/Difaqane.\nThe theory of the Mfecane holds that the aggressive expansion of Shaka's armies caused a brutal chain reaction across the southern areas of the continent, as dispossessed tribe after tribe turned on their neighbours in a deadly cycle of fight and conquest. Some scholars contend that this theory must be treated with caution as it generally neglects several other factors such as the impact of European encroachment, slave trading and expansion in that area of Southern Africa around the same time. Normal estimates for the death toll range from 1 million to 2 million. These numbers are, however, controversial.\nAccording to Julian Cobbing, the development of the view that Shaka was the monster responsible for the devastation is based on the need of apartheid era historians to justify the apartheid regime's racist policies. Other scholars acknowledge distortion of the historical record by apartheid supporters and shady European traders seeking to cover their tracks, but dispute the revisionist approach, noting that stories of cannibalism, raiding, burning of villages, or mass slaughter were not developed out of thin air but based on the clearly documented accounts of hundreds of black victims and refugees. Confirmation of such accounts can also be seen in modern archaeology of the village of Lepalong, an entire settlement built underground to shelter remnants of the Kwena people from 1827 to 1836 against the tide of disruption that engulfed the region during Shakan times.\nWilliam Rubinstein wrote that \"Western guilt over colonialism, have also accounted for much of this distortion of what pre-literate societies actually were like, as does the wish to avoid anything which smacks of racism, even when this means distorting the actual and often appalling facts of life in many pre-literate societies\". Rubinstein also notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One element in Shaka's destruction was to create a vast artificial desert around his domain... 'to make the destruction complete, organized bands of Zulu murderers regularly patrolled the waste, hunting for any stray men and running them down like wild pig'... An area to the north of the center of the state, to the west, and to the south was ravaged and depopulated...\nSouth African historian Dan Wylie has expressed skepticism of the portrayal of Shaka as a pathological monster destroying everything within reach. He argues that attempts to distort his life and image have been systematic\u2014 beginning with the first European visitors to his kingdom. One visitor, Nathaniel Isaacs, wrote to Henry Fynn, a white adventurer, trader and quasi-local chieftain:\nHere you are about to publish. Do make Shaka out to be as bloodthirsty as you can; it helps swell out the work and make it interesting.\nFynn, according to Wylie, complied with the request, and Wylie notes that he had an additional motive to distort Shaka's image\u2014 he applied for a huge grant of land\u2014 an area allegedly depopulated by Shaka's savagery.\n[Fynn] stated that Shaka had killed 'a million people.' You will still find this figure, and higher, repeated in today's literature. However, Fynn had no way of knowing any such thing: it was a thumb-suck based in a particular view of Shaka\u2014Shaka as a kind of genocidal maniac, an unresting killing-machine. But why the inventive lie? ... Fynn was bidding for a stretch of land, which allegedly had been depopulated by Shaka.. [he insinuated], Shaka didn't deserve that land anyway because he was such a brute, while he\u2014Fynn\u2014 was a lonely, morally upright pioneer of civilization.\nMichal Lesniewski has criticised Wylie for some of his attempts to revise Western thinking about Shaka.\nPhysical descriptions.\nThough much remains unknown about Shaka's personal appearance, sources tend to agree he had a strong, muscular body. He was tall and his skin tone was dark brown.\nShaka's enemies described him as ugly in some respects. He had a big nose, according to Baleka of the Qwabe, as told by her father. He also had two prominent front teeth. Her father also told Baleka that Shaka spoke as though \"his tongue were too big for his mouth.\" Many said that he spoke with a speech impediment.\nThere is an anecdote that Shaka joked with one of his friends, Magaye, that he could not kill Magaye because he would be laughed at. Supposedly if he killed Magaye, it would appear to be out of jealousy because Magaye was so handsome and \"Shaka himself was ugly, with a protruding forehead\".\nIn Zulu culture.\nThe figure of Shaka still sparks interest among not only the contemporary Zulu but many worldwide who have encountered the tribe and its history. The current tendency appears to be to lionise him; popular film and other media have certainly contributed to his appeal. Certain traditional Zulu cultural forms are still used to express reverence for the dead monarch. The praise song is one of the most widely used poetic forms in Africa, applying not only to spirits but to men, animals, plants and even towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;He is Shaka the unshakeable,\nThunderer-while-sitting, son of Menzi\nHe is the bird that preys on other birds,\nThe battle-axe that excels over other battle-axes in sharpness,\nHe is the long-strided pursuer, son of Ndaba,\nWho pursued the sun and the moon.\nHe is the great hubbub like the rocks of Nkandla\nWhere elephants take shelter\nWhen the heavens frown...&lt;/poem&gt;\nTraditional Zulu praise song, English translation by Ezekiel Mphahlele\nOther Zulu sources are sometimes critical of Shaka, and numerous negative images abound in Zulu oral history. When Shaka's mother Nandi died for example, the monarch ordered a massive outpouring of grief including mass executions, forbidding the planting of crops or the use of milk, and the killing of all pregnant women and their husbands. Oral sources record that in this period of devastation, a single Zulu, a man named \"Gala\", eventually stood up to Shaka and objected to these measures, pointing out that Nandi was not the first person to die in Zululand. Taken aback by such candid talk, the Zulu king is supposed to have called off the destructive edicts, rewarding the blunt teller-of-truths with a gift of cattle.\nThe figure of Shaka thus remains an ambiguous one in African oral tradition, defying simplistic depictions of the Zulu king as a heroic, protean nation builder on one hand, or a depraved monster on the other. This ambiguity continues to lend the image of Shaka its continued power and influence, almost two centuries after his death.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28598", "revid": "42528017", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28598", "title": "Sinusitis", "text": "Inflammation of the sinus' membranes\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nSinusitis, also known as rhinosinusitis and commonly known as a sinus infection, is an inflammation of the mucous membranes that line the sinuses resulting in symptoms that may include production of thick nasal mucus, nasal congestion, facial congestion, facial pain, facial pressure, loss of smell, or fever.\nSinusitis is a condition that affects both children and adults. It is caused by a combination of environmental factors and a person's health factors. It can occur in individuals with allergies, exposure to environmental irritants, structural abnormalities of the nasal cavity and sinuses and poor immune function. Most cases are caused by a viral infection. Recurrent episodes are more likely in people with asthma, cystic fibrosis, and immunodeficiency.\nThe diagnosis of sinusitis is based on the symptoms and their duration along with signs of disease identified by endoscopic and/or radiologic criteria. Sinusitis is classified into acute sinusitis, subacute sinusitis, and chronic sinusitis. In acute sinusitis, symptoms last for less than four weeks, and in subacute sinusitis, they last between 4 and 12 weeks. In chronic sinusitis, symptoms must be present for at least 12 weeks. In the initial evaluation of sinusitis an otolaryngologist, also known as an ear, nose and throat (ENT) doctor, may confirm sinusitis using nasal endoscopy. Diagnostic imaging is not usually needed in the acute stage unless complications are suspected. In chronic cases, confirmatory testing is recommended by use of computed tomography.\nPrevention of sinusitis focuses on regular hand washing, staying up-to-date on vaccinations, and avoiding smoking. Pain killers such as naproxen, nasal steroids, and nasal irrigation may be used to help with symptoms. Recommended initial treatment for acute sinusitis is watchful waiting. If symptoms do not improve in 7\u201310 days or worsen, then an antibiotic may be implemented or changed. In those in whom antibiotics are indicated, either amoxicillin or amoxicillin/clavulanate is recommended first line, with amoxicillin/clavulanate being superior to amoxicillin alone but with more side effects. Surgery may be recommended in those with chronic disease who have failed medical management.\nSinusitis is a common condition. It affects between about 10 and 30 percent of people each year in the United States and Europe. The management of sinusitis in the United States results in more than US$11 billion in costs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nAcute sinusitis can present as facial pain and tenderness that may worsen on standing up or bending over, headache, cough, bad breath, nasal congestion, ear pain, ear pressure or nasal discharge that is usually green in color, and may contain pus or blood.Dental pain can also occur. A way to distinguish between toothache and sinusitis is that sinusitis-related pain is usually worsened by tilting the head forward or performing the Valsalva maneuver.\nChronic sinusitis presents with more subtle symptoms of nasal obstruction, with less fever and pain. Symptoms include facial pain, headache, night-time coughing, an increase in previously minor or controlled asthma symptoms, general malaise, thick green or yellow nasal discharge, feeling of facial fullness or tightness that may worsen when bending over, dizziness, aching teeth, and bad breath. Often, chronic sinusitis can lead to anosmia, the loss of the sense of smell.\nA 2005 review suggested that most \"sinus headaches\" are migraines. The confusion occurs in part because migraine involves activation of the trigeminal nerves, which innervate both the sinus region and the meninges surrounding the brain. As a result, accurately determining the site from which the pain originates is difficult. People with migraines do not typically have the thick nasal discharge that is a common symptom of a sinus infection.\nBy location.\nThe four paired paranasal sinuses are the frontal, ethmoidal, maxillary, and sphenoidal sinuses. The ethmoidal sinuses are further subdivided into anterior and posterior ethmoid sinuses, the division of which is defined as the basal lamella of the middle nasal concha. In addition to the severity of disease, discussed below, sinusitis can be classified by the sinus cavity it affects:\nComplications.\nComplications are thought to be rare (1 case per 10,000). Infectious complications of acute bacterial sinusitis include eye, brain and bone complications.\nOrbital complications.\nThe Chandler classification is used to group orbital complications into five stages based on their severity. Stage I, known as preseptal cellulitis, occurs when an infection develops in front of the orbital septum. It is thought to result from restricted venous drainage from the sinuses and affects the soft tissue of the eyelids and other superficial structures. Stage II, known as orbital cellulitis, occurs when infection develops behind the orbital septum and affects the orbits. This can result in impaired eye movement, protrusion of the eye, and eye swelling. Stage III, known as subperiosteal abscess, occurs when pus collects between walls of the orbit and the surrounding periosteal structures. This can result in impaired eye movement and acuity. Stage IV, known as orbital abscess, occurs when an abscess forms within the orbital tissue. This can result in severe vision impairment. Stage V, known as cavernous sinus thrombosis, is considered an intracranial complication. It can occur as bacterial spread progresses, triggering blood clots that become trapped within the cavernous sinus. This can result in previously described symptoms within the opposite eye and, in severe cases, meningitis.\nIntracranial complications.\nThe proximity of the sinuses to the brain makes brain infections one of the most dangerous complications of acute bacterial sinusitis, especially when the frontal and sphenoid sinuses are involved. These infections can result from invasion of anaerobic bacteria through the bones or blood vessels. Abscesses, meningitis, and other life-threatening conditions may occur. In rare cases, mild personality changes, headache, altered consciousness, visual problems, seizures, coma, and even death may occur.\nOsseous complications.\nA rare complication of acute sinusitis is a bone infection, known as osteomyelitis, which affects the frontal and other facial bones. Specifically, the combination of frontal sinusitis, osteomyelitis and subperiosteal abscess formation is referred to as Pott's puffy tumor.\nOther complications\nWhen an infection originating from a tooth or dental procedure affects the maxillary sinus it can lead to odontogenic sinusitis (ODS). Odontogenic sinusitis can often spread to nearby sinuses including the ethmoid, frontal, sphenoid sinuses, and the contralateral nasal cavity. In rare instances, these infections may spread to the orbit, leading to orbital cellulitis.\nCauses.\nAcute.\nAcute sinusitis is usually precipitated by an earlier upper respiratory tract infection, generally of viral origin, mostly caused by rhinoviruses (with RVA and RVC giving more severe infection than RVB), coronaviruses, and influenza viruses, others caused by adenoviruses, human parainfluenza viruses, human respiratory syncytial virus, enteroviruses other than rhinoviruses, and metapneumovirus. If the infection is of bacterial origin, the most common three causative agents are \"Streptococcus pneumoniae (38%)\", \"Haemophilus influenzae (36%)\", and \"Moraxella catarrhalis (16%)\". Until recently, \"H. influenzae\" was the most common bacterial agent to cause sinus infections. However, introduction of the \"H. influenzae\" type B (Hib) vaccine has dramatically decreased these infections, and now non-typable \"H. influenzae\" (NTHI) is predominantly seen in clinics. Other sinusitis-causing bacterial pathogens include \"S. aureus\" and other streptococci species, anaerobic bacteria and, less commonly, Gram-negative bacteria. Viral sinusitis typically lasts for 7 to 10 days.\nAcute episodes of sinusitis can also result from fungal invasion. These infections are typically seen in people with diabetes or other immune deficiencies (such as AIDS or transplant on immunosuppressive antirejection medications) and can be life-threatening. In type I diabetics, ketoacidosis can be associated with sinusitis due to mucormycosis.\nChronic.\nDefinition and nomenclature.\nBy definition, chronic sinusitis lasts longer than 12 weeks and can be caused by many different diseases that share chronic inflammation of the sinuses as a common symptom. It is subdivided into cases with and without polyps. When polyps are present, the condition is called chronic hyperplastic sinusitis; however, the causes are poorly understood. It may develop with anatomic derangements, including deviation of the nasal septum and the presence of concha bullosa (pneumatization of the middle concha) that inhibit the outflow of mucus, or with allergic rhinitis, asthma, cystic fibrosis, and dental infections.\nChronic rhinosinusitis represents a multifactorial inflammatory disorder, rather than simply a persistent bacterial infection. The medical management of chronic rhinosinusitis is now focused upon controlling the inflammation that predisposes people to obstruction, reducing the incidence of infections. Surgery may be needed if medications are not working.\nDuring nasal endoscopy, an accessory maxillary ostium can sometimes be observed in the middle meatus. While not all are functionally active, in certain cases, mucus exiting the natural maxillary ostium may re-enter the sinus through the accessory ostium. This mucus recirculation may be associated with chronic maxillary sinusitis.\nAttempts have been made to provide a more consistent nomenclature for subtypes of chronic sinusitis. The presence of eosinophils in the mucous lining of the nose and paranasal sinuses has been demonstrated in many people, and this has been termed eosinophilic mucin rhinosinusitis (EMRS). Cases of EMRS may be related to an allergic response, but allergy is not often documented, resulting in further subcategorization into allergic and nonallergic EMRS.\nFungi.\nA more recent, and still debated, development in chronic sinusitis is the role that fungi play in this disease. Whether fungi are a definite factor in the development of chronic sinusitis remains unclear, and if they are, what is the difference between those who develop the disease and those who remain free of symptoms. Trials of antifungal treatments have had mixed results.\nOne airway theory.\nRecent theories of sinusitis indicate that it often occurs as part of a spectrum of diseases that affect the respiratory tract (\"i.e.\", the \"one airway\" theory) and is often linked to asthma.\nSmoking.\nBoth smoking and secondhand smoke are associated with chronic rhinosinusitis.\nAir pollution.\nExposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5), which consists of particles with a diameter of less than 2.5 micrometers, has been associated with an increased risk of developing rhinosinusitis. PM2.5 particles can penetrate deep into the respiratory tract, reaching the nasal and sinus mucosa, leading to inflammation and impaired mucociliary clearance. Individuals living in areas with higher concentrations of PM2.5 experience increased symptoms and exacerbations of chronic rhinosinusitis. The fine particles cause oxidative stress and inflammation, contributing to the pathogenesis of rhinosinusitis.\nWhile both PM10 (particles less than 10 micrometers) and PM2.5 can affect the respiratory system, PM2.5 particles are more closely associated with rhinosinusitis due to their ability to reach deeper into the sinus cavities. These smaller particles bypass the nasal hair filtering mechanism and deposit in the mucous membranes of the sinuses, leading to greater inflammatory responses.\nThe World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that annual mean concentrations of PM2.5 should not exceed 5\u00a0\u03bcg/m3, and 24-hour mean exposures should not exceed 15\u00a0\u03bcg/m3 to minimize health risks. Exposure to concentrations above these thresholds has been linked to an increased incidence and severity of rhinosinusitis and other respiratory diseases.\nOther diseases.\nOther diseases such as cystic fibrosis and granulomatosis with polyangiitis can also cause chronic sinusitis.\nMaxillary sinus.\nMaxillary sinusitis may also develop from dental problems. These cases were calculated to be about 40% in one study and 50% in another. The cause of this situation is usually a periapical or periodontal infection of a maxillary posterior tooth, where the inflammatory exudate has eroded through the bone superiorly to drain into the maxillary sinus.\nAn estimated 0.5 to 2.0% of viral rhinosinusitis (VRS) cases in adults and 5 to 10% in children develop superimposed bacterial infections.\nPathophysiology.\nChronic rhinosinusitis is a multifactorial process hypothesized to be caused by inflammatory processes driven by dysfunction between local host and environmental interactions. It is divided into two phenotypes that depend on the presence or absence of nasal polyps. Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps and chronic rhinosinusitis without nasal polyps are thought to have two different inflammatory pathways, with the latter form driven by a Th1 response and the former driven by a Th2 response. Both pathways result in an increase in inflammatory molecules (cytokines). The Th1 response is characterized by secretion of interferon gamma. The Th2 response is characterized by secretion of interleukin-4 receptor, interleukin 5, and interleukin 13. Both forms of chronic rhinosinusitis are considered to be highly heterogeneous, each with the ability to demonstrate three inflammatory endotypes, the third being a Th17 response.\nDiagnosis.\nClassification.\nSinusitis (or rhinosinusitis) is defined as an inflammation of the mucous membrane that lines the paranasal sinuses and is classified chronologically into several categories:\nRoughly 90% of adults have had sinusitis at some point in their lives.\nAcute.\nHealth care providers distinguish bacterial and viral sinusitis by watchful waiting. If a person has had sinusitis for fewer than 10 days without the symptoms becoming worse, then the infection is presumed to be viral. When symptoms last more than 10 days or get worse during that time, then the infection is considered bacterial sinusitis. Pain in the teeth and bad breath are also more indicative of bacterial disease.\nImaging by either X-ray, CT, or MRI is generally not recommended unless complications develop. Pain caused by sinusitis is sometimes confused for pain caused by pulpitis (toothache) of the maxillary teeth, and vice versa. Classically, the increased pain when tilting the head forwards separates sinusitis from pulpitis.\nFor cases of maxillary sinusitis, limited field CBCT imaging, as compared to periapical radiographs, improves the ability to detect the teeth as the sources for sinusitis. A coronal CT picture may also be useful.\nChronic.\nFor sinusitis lasting more than 12 weeks, a CT scan is recommended. On a CT scan, acute sinus secretions have a radiodensity of 10 to 25 Hounsfield units (HU). In a more chronic state, they become more viscous, with a radiodensity of 30 to 60 HU.\nNasal endoscopy and clinical symptoms are also used to make a positive diagnosis. A tissue sample for histology and cultures can also be collected and tested. Nasal endoscopy involves inserting a flexible fiber-optic tube with a light and camera at its tip into the nose to examine the nasal passages and sinuses.\nSinus infections, if they result in tooth pain, usually present with pain involving more than one of the upper teeth, whereas a toothache usually involves a single tooth. Dental examination and appropriate radiography help rule out pain arising from a tooth.\nTreatment.\nRecommended treatments for most cases of sinusitis include rest and drinking enough water to thin the mucus. Antibiotics are not recommended for most cases.\nBreathing high-temperature steam, such as from a hot shower or gargling, can relieve symptoms. There is tentative evidence for nasal irrigation in acute sinusitis, for example during upper respiratory infections. Decongestant nasal sprays containing oxymetazoline may provide relief, but these medications should not be used for more than the recommended period. Longer use may cause rebound sinusitis. It is unclear if nasal irrigation, antihistamines, or decongestants work in children with acute sinusitis. There is no clear evidence that plant extracts such as \"Cyclamen europaeum\" are effective as an intranasal wash to treat acute sinusitis. Evidence is inconclusive on whether anti-fungal treatments improve symptoms or quality of life.\nAntibiotics.\nMost cases of sinusitis are caused by viruses and resolve without antibiotics. However, if symptoms do not resolve within 10 days, either amoxicillin or amoxicillin/clavulanate are reasonable antibiotics for first treatment with amoxicillin/clavulanate being slightly superior to amoxicillin alone but with more side effects. A 2018 Cochrane review, however, found no evidence that people with symptoms lasting seven days or more before consulting their physician are more likely to have bacterial sinusitis as one study found that about 80% of patients have symptoms lasting more than 7 days and another about 70%. Antibiotics are specifically not recommended in those with mild / moderate disease during the first week of infection due to risk of adverse effects, antibiotic resistance, and cost.\nFluoroquinolones, and a newer macrolide antibiotic such as clarithromycin or a tetracycline like doxycycline, are used in those who have severe allergies to penicillins. Because of increasing resistance to amoxicillin the 2012 guideline of the Infectious Diseases Society of America recommends amoxicillin-clavulanate as the initial treatment of choice for bacterial sinusitis. The guidelines also recommend against other commonly used antibiotics, including azithromycin, clarithromycin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, because of growing antibiotic resistance. The FDA recommends against the use of fluoroquinolones when other options are available due to higher risks of serious side effects.\nA short course (3\u20137 days) of antibiotics appears to be as effective as the typical longer course (10\u201314 days) of antibiotics for those with clinically diagnosed acute bacterial sinusitis without any other severe disease or complicating factors. The IDSA guideline suggest five to seven days of antibiotics is long enough to treat a bacterial infection without encouraging resistance. The guidelines still recommend that children receive antibiotic treatment for ten days to two weeks.\nCorticosteroids.\nFor unconfirmed acute sinusitis, nasal sprays using corticosteroids are not better than a placebo either alone or in combination with antibiotics. For cases confirmed by radiology or nasal endoscopy, treatment with intranasal corticosteroids alone or in combination with antibiotics is supported. The benefit, however, is small.\nFor confirmed chronic rhinosinusitis, there is limited evidence that intranasal steroids improve symptoms and insufficient evidence that one type of steroid is more effective.\nThere is only limited evidence to support short treatment with corticosteroids by mouth for chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps. There is limited evidence to support corticosteroids by mouth in combination with antibiotics for acute sinusitis; it has only short-term effect improving the symptoms.\nSurgery.\nFor sinusitis of dental origin, treatment focuses on removing the infection and preventing reinfection by removing the microorganisms, their byproducts, and pulpal debris from the infected root canal. Systemic antibiotics are ineffective as a definitive solution. They may afford temporary relief of symptoms by improving sinus clearing. They may be appropriate for rapidly spreading infections, but debridement and disinfection of the root canal system at the same time are necessary. Treatment options include non-surgical root canal treatment, periradicular surgery, tooth replantation, or extraction of the infected tooth.\nFor chronic or recurring sinusitis, referral to an otolaryngologist may be indicated, and treatment options may include nasal surgery. Surgery should only be considered for those people who do not benefit with medication or have non-invasive fungal sinusitis. It is unclear how benefits of surgery compare to medical treatments in those with nasal polyps as this has been poorly studied.\nSeveral surgical approaches can be used to access the sinuses, and these have generally shifted from external/extranasal approaches to intranasal endoscopic ones. The benefit of functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) is its ability to allow for a more targeted approach to the affected sinuses, reducing tissue disruption and minimizing post-operative complications. However, if a traditional FESS with Messerklinger technique is followed the success rate will be as low as 30%, 70% of the patients tend to have recurrence within 3 years. On the other hand with use of TFSE technique along with navigation system, debriders and balloon sinuplasty or EBS can give a success rate of over 99.9%. The use of drug eluting stents such as propel mometasone furoate implant may help in recovery after surgery.\nAnother recently developed treatment is balloon sinuplasty. This method, similar to balloon angioplasty used to \"unclog\" arteries of the heart, utilizes balloons in an attempt to expand the openings of the sinuses in a less invasive manner. The effectiveness of the functional endoscopic balloon dilation approach compared to conventional FESS is not known.\nHistopathology of sinonasal contents removed from surgery can be diagnostically valuable:\nTreatments directed to rhinovirus infection.\nA study has shown that patients given a spray formulation of 0.73\u00a0mg of Tremacamra (a soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1 [ICAM-1] receptor) reduced the severity of illness.\nPrognosis.\nA 2018 review has found that without the use of antibiotics, about 46% were cured after one week and 64% after two weeks.\nEpidemiology.\nSinusitis is a common condition, with an estimated 24 to 31 million cases occurring annually in the United States. Chronic sinusitis affects approximately 12.5% of people.\nResearch.\nBased on recent theories on the role that fungi may play in the development of chronic sinusitis, antifungal treatments have been used, on a trial basis. These trials have had mixed results.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28601", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28601", "title": "Aos S\u00ed", "text": "Supernatural race in Irish and Scottish mythology\n (; English approximation: ; older form: ) is the Irish name for a supernatural race in Gaelic folklore, similar to elves. They are said to descend from the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann or the gods of Irish mythology.\nThe name \"aos s\u00ed\" means \"folk of the \"s\u00ed\"\"; these are the burial mounds in which they are said to dwell, which are seen as portals to an Otherworld. Such abodes are referred to in English as 'shee', 'fairy mounds', 'elf mounds' or 'hollow hills'. The \"aos s\u00ed\" interact with humans and the human world. They are variously said to be the ancestors, the spirits of nature, or goddesses and gods.\nIn modern Irish, they are also called daoine s\u00ed; in Scottish Gaelic daoine s\u00ecth ('folk of the fairy mounds').\nEtymology.\nIn the Irish language, \"aos s\u00ed\", earlier \"aes s\u00eddhe\", means \"folk of the fairy mounds\". In Old Irish, it was \"\u00e1es s\u00edde\". The word \"s\u00ed\" or \"s\u00eddh\" in Irish means a fairy mound or ancient burial mound, which were seen as portals to an Otherworld. It is derived from proto-Celtic \"*s\u012bdos\" ('abode'), and is related to the English words 'seat' and 'settle'.\nDavid Fitzgerald conjectured that the word \"s\u00eddh\" was synonymous with \"immortal\" and is compared with words such as \"s\u00eddsat\" (\"they wait/remain\"), \"s\u00edthbeo\" (\"lasting\"), \"s\u00eddhbuan\" (\"perpetual\"), and \"s\u00eddhbe\" (\"long life\"). In most of the tales concerning the \"s\u00ed\", a great age or long life is implied.\nIn medieval literature.\nIn medieval Irish literature, the names \"aes s\u00edde\" and \"f\u00edr s\u00edde\" (folk of the \"s\u00edd\") are equivalent to the terms \"Tuath D\u00e9\" and \"Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann\". The only difference is that \"Tuath D\u00e9\" tends to be used in contexts of legendary history and mythology.\nWriting in the 7th century, the Irish bishop T\u00edrech\u00e1n described the \"s\u00eddh\" folk as \"earthly gods\" (). The 8th century \"Fiacc's Hymn\" says that the Irish adored the \"s\u00eddh\" folk before the coming of Saint Patrick.\nIn Irish folklore.\nDue to the oral nature of Irish folklore, the exact origins of the fairies are not well defined. There are enough stories to support two possible origins. The fairies could either be fallen angels or the descendants of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann; in the latter case, this is equivalent with \"aos s\u00ed\". In the former case, it is said that the fairies are angels who have fallen from heaven, but whose sins were not great enough to warrant hell.\nIn many Gaelic tales, the \"aos s\u00ed\" are later literary versions of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann (\"People of the Goddess Danu\")\u2014the deities and deified ancestors of Irish mythology. Some sources describe them as the survivors of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann who retreated into the Otherworld when fleeing the mortal Sons of M\u00edl Esp\u00e1ine who, like many other early invaders of Ireland, came from Iberia. As part of the terms of their surrender to the Milesians, the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann agreed to retreat and dwell underground.\nIn folk belief and practice, the \"aos s\u00ed\" are often appeased with offerings and care is taken to avoid angering or insulting them. Often, they are not named directly, but rather spoken of as \"The Good Neighbours\", \"The Fair Folk\", or simply \"The Folk\". The most common names for them, \"aos s\u00ed\", \"aes s\u00eddhe\", \"daoine s\u00eddhe\" (singular \"duine s\u00eddhe\") and \"daoine s\u00ecth\" mean, literally, \"people of the mounds\" (referring to the \"s\u00eddhe\"). The \"aos s\u00ed\" are generally described as stunningly beautiful, though they can also be terrible and hideous.\n\"Aos s\u00ed\" are seen as fierce guardians of their abodes\u2014whether a fairy hill, a fairy ring, a special tree (often a whitethorn) or a particular loch or wood. It is believed that infringing on these spaces will cause the \"aos s\u00ed\" to retaliate in an effort to remove the people or objects that invaded their homes. Many of these tales contribute to the changeling myth in west European folklore, with the \"aos s\u00ed\" kidnapping trespassers or replacing their children with changelings as a punishment for transgressing. The \"aos s\u00ed\" are often connected to certain times of year and hours; as the Gaelic Otherworld is believed to come closer to the mortal world at the times of dusk and dawn, the \"aos s\u00ed\" correspondingly become easier to encounter. Some festivals such as Samhain, Bealtaine and Midsummer are also associated with the \"aos s\u00ed.\"\nThe \"s\u00eddhe\".\nA \"s\u00eddh\" (anglicized 'shee') is burial mound (tumuli) associated with the \"aos s\u00ed\". In modern Irish, the word is \"s\u00ed\" (plural \"s\u00edthe\"); in Scottish Gaelic it is \"s\u00ecth\" (plural \"s\u00ecthean\"); in Old Irish it is \"s\u00edd\" (plural \"s\u00edde\"). These \"s\u00eddhe\" are referred to in English as 'fairy mounds', 'elf mounds' or 'hollow hills'. \nIn some later English-language texts, the word \"s\u00eddhe\" is incorrectly used both for the mounds and the people of the mounds. For example, W. B. Yeats, writing in 1908, referred to the \"aos s\u00ed\" simply as \"the \"s\u00eddhe\"\". However, \"sidh\" in older texts refers specifically to \"the palaces, courts, halls or residences\" of the otherworldly beings that supposedly inhabit them.\nOther names in Irish folklore.\nThe \"Aos s\u00ed\" are known by many names in Ireland, among them:\nTypes.\nThe banshee or \"bean s\u00eddhe\" (from ), which means \"woman of the \"s\u00eddhe\"\", has come to indicate any supernatural woman of Ireland who announces a coming death by wailing and keening. Her counterpart in Scottish mythology is the \"bean s\u00ecth\" (sometimes spelled \"bean-s\u00ecdh\"). Other varieties of \"aos s\u00ed\" and \"daoine s\u00ecth\" include the Scottish \"bean-nighe\" (the washerwoman who is seen washing the bloody clothing or armour of the person who is doomed to die), the \"leanan s\u00eddhe\" (the \"fairy lover\"), the \"cat-s\u00ecth\" (a fairy cat), and the \"c\u00f9-s\u00ecth\" (a fairy dog).\nThe \"sluagh s\u00eddhe\"\u2014\"the fairy host\"\u2014is sometimes depicted in Irish and Scottish lore as a crowd of airborne spirits, perhaps the cursed, evil or restless dead. The \"siabhra\" (anglicised as \"sheevra\"), may be a type of these lesser spirits, prone to evil and mischief. However, an Ulster folk song also uses \"sheevra\" simply to mean \"spirit\" or \"fairy\".\nList.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Creideamh S\u00ed\".\n\"Creideamh S\u00ed\" is Irish for the \"Fairy Faith\", a term for the collection of beliefs and practices observed by those who wish to keep good relationships with the \"aos s\u00ed\" and avoid angering them. General belief in the Celtic otherworld, the existence of \"aos s\u00ed\" and the ability of the \"aos s\u00ed\" to influence the local area and its people are all beliefs characteristic of the \"Creideamh S\u00ed\". It is characterised as an aspect of Irish popular religion and exists syncretically with folk Christianity.\nEffort is made by those who believe to appease local \"aos s\u00ed\" through food and drink. The custom of offering milk and traditional foods\u2014such as baked goods, apples or berries\u2014to the \"aos s\u00ed\" has survived through the Christian era into the present day in parts of Ireland, Scotland and the diaspora. Those who maintain some degree of belief in the \"aos s\u00ed\" also are careful to leave their sacred places alone and protect them from damage through road or housing construction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28602", "revid": "880534544", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28602", "title": "Sunspots", "text": ""}
{"id": "28603", "revid": "1318979360", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28603", "title": "Star cluster", "text": "Group of stars\nA star cluster is a group of stars held together by self-gravitation. Two main types of star clusters can be distinguished: globular clusters, tight groups of ten thousand to millions of old stars which are gravitationally bound; and open clusters, less tight groups of stars, generally containing fewer than a few hundred members.\nAs they move through the galaxy, over time, open clusters become disrupted by the gravitational influence of giant molecular clouds, so that the clusters we observe are often young. Even though they are no longer gravitationally bound, they will continue to move in broadly the same direction through space and are then known as stellar associations, sometimes referred to as \"moving groups\". Globular clusters, with more members and more mass, remain intact for far longer and the globular clusters observed are usually billions of years old.\nStar clusters visible to the naked eye include the Pleiades and Hyades open clusters, and the globular cluster 47 Tucanae.\nOpen cluster.\nOpen clusters are very different from globular clusters. Unlike the spherically distributed globulars, they are confined to the galactic plane, and are almost always found within spiral arms. They are generally young objects, up to a few tens of millions of years old, with a few rare exceptions as old as a few billion years, such as Messier 67 (the closest and most observed old open cluster) for example. They form in H II regions such as the Orion Nebula.\nOpen clusters typically have a few hundred members and are located in an area up to 30 light-years across. Being much less densely populated than globular clusters, they are much less tightly gravitationally bound, and over time, are disrupted by the gravity of giant molecular clouds and other clusters. Close encounters between cluster members can also result in the ejection of stars, a process known as \"evaporation\".\nThe most prominent open clusters are the Pleiades and Hyades in Taurus. The Double Cluster of h+Chi Persei can also be prominent under dark skies. Open clusters are often dominated by hot young blue stars, because although such stars are short-lived in stellar terms, only lasting a few tens of millions of years, open clusters tend to have dispersed before these stars die.\nA subset of open clusters constitute a binary or aggregate cluster. New research indicates Messier 25 may constitute a ternary star cluster together with NGC 6716 and Collinder 394.\nEstablishing precise distances to open clusters enables the calibration of the period-luminosity relationship shown by Cepheids variable stars, which are then used as standard candles. Cepheids are luminous and can be used to establish both the distances to remote galaxies and the expansion rate of the Universe (Hubble constant). Indeed, the open cluster NGC 7790 hosts three classical Cepheids which are critical for such efforts.\nEmbedded cluster.\nEmbedded clusters are groups of very young stars that are partially or fully encased in interstellar dust or gas which is often impervious to optical observations. Embedded clusters form in molecular clouds, when the clouds begin to collapse and form stars. There is often ongoing star formation in these clusters, so embedded clusters may be home to various types of young stellar objects including protostars and pre-main-sequence stars. An example of an embedded cluster is the Trapezium Cluster in the Orion Nebula. In \u03c1 Ophiuchi cloud (L1688) core region there is an embedded cluster.\nThe embedded cluster phase may last for several million years, after which gas in the cloud is depleted by star formation or dispersed through radiation pressure, stellar winds and outflows, or supernova explosions. In general less than 30% of cloud mass is converted to stars before the cloud is dispersed, but this fraction may be higher in particularly dense parts of the cloud. With the loss of mass in the cloud, the energy of the system is altered, often leading to the disruption of a star cluster. Most young embedded clusters disperse shortly after the end of star formation.\nThe open clusters found in the Galaxy are former embedded clusters that were able to survive early cluster evolution. However, nearly all freely floating stars, including the Sun, were originally born into embedded clusters that disintegrated.\nGlobular cluster.\nGlobular clusters are roughly spherical groupings ranging from 10\u00a0thousand to several million stars packed into regions ranging from 10 to 30\u00a0light-years across. They commonly consist of very old Population\u00a0II stars \u2013 just a few hundred million years younger than the universe itself \u2013 which are mostly yellow and red, with masses less than two solar masses. Such stars predominate within clusters because hotter and more massive stars have exploded as supernovae, or evolved through planetary nebula phases to end as white dwarfs. Yet a few rare blue stars exist in globulars, thought to be formed by stellar mergers in their dense inner regions; these stars are known as blue stragglers.\nIn the Milky Way galaxy, globular clusters are distributed roughly spherically in the galactic halo, around the Galactic Center, orbiting the center in highly elliptical orbits. In 1917, the astronomer Harlow Shapley made the first respectable estimate of the Sun's distance from the Galactic Center, based on the distribution of globular clusters.\nUntil the mid-1990s, globular clusters were the cause of a great mystery in astronomy, as theories of stellar evolution gave ages for the oldest members of globular clusters that were greater than the estimated age of the universe. However, greatly improved distance measurements to globular clusters using the Hipparcos satellite and increasingly accurate measurements of the Hubble constant resolved the paradox, giving an age for the universe of about 13\u00a0billion years and an age for the oldest stars of a few hundred million years less.\nOur Galaxy has about 150\u00a0globular clusters, some of which may have been captured cores of small galaxies stripped of stars previously in their outer margins by the tides of the Milky Way, as seems to be the case for the globular cluster M79. Some galaxies are much richer in globulars than the Milky Way: The giant elliptical galaxy M87 contains over a thousand.\nA few of the brightest globular clusters are visible to the naked eye; the brightest, Omega Centauri, was observed in antiquity and catalogued as a star, before the telescopic age. The brightest globular cluster in the northern hemisphere is M13 in the constellation of Hercules.\nSuper star cluster.\nSuper star clusters are very large regions of recent star formation, and are thought to be the precursors of globular clusters. Examples include Westerlund 1 in the Milky Way.\nIntermediate forms.\nIn 2005, astronomers discovered a new type of star cluster in the Andromeda Galaxy, which is, in several ways, very similar to globular clusters although less dense. No such clusters (which also known as \"extended globular clusters\") are known in the Milky Way. The three discovered in Andromeda Galaxy are M31WFS C1 M31WFS C2, and M31WFS C3.\nThese new-found star clusters contain hundreds of thousands of stars, a similar number to globular clusters. The clusters also share other characteristics with globular clusters, \"e.g.\" the stellar populations and metallicity. What distinguishes them from the globular clusters is that they are much larger \u2013 several hundred light-years across \u2013 and hundreds of times less dense. The distances between the stars are thus much greater. The clusters have properties intermediate between globular clusters and dwarf spheroidal galaxies.\nHow these clusters are formed is not yet known, but their formation might well be related to that of globular clusters. Why M31 has such clusters, while the Milky Way has not, is not yet known. It is also unknown if any other galaxy contains this kind of clusters, but it would be very unlikely that M31 is the sole galaxy with extended clusters.\nAnother type of cluster are \"faint fuzzies\" which so far have only been found in lenticular galaxies like NGC 1023 and NGC 3384. They are characterized by their large size compared to globular clusters and a ringlike distribution around the centres of their host galaxies. As the latter they seem to be old objects.\nAstronomical significance.\nStar clusters are important in many areas of astronomy. The reason behind this is that almost all the stars in old clusters were born at roughly the same time. Various properties of all the stars in a cluster are a function only of mass, and so stellar evolution theories rely on observations of open and globular clusters. This is primarily true for old globular clusters. In the case of young (age &lt; 1Gyr) and intermediate-age (1 &lt; age &lt; 5 Gyr), factors such as age, mass, chemical compositions may also play vital roles. Based on their ages, star clusters can reveal a lot of information about their host galaxies. For example, star clusters residing in the Magellanic Clouds can provide essential information about the formation of the Magellanic Clouds dwarf galaxies. This, in turn, can help us understand many astrophysical processes happening in our own Milky Way Galaxy. These clusters, especially the young ones can explain the star formation process that might have happened in our Milky Way Galaxy.\nClusters are also a crucial step in determining the distance scale of the universe. A few of the nearest clusters are close enough for their distances to be measured using parallax. A Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram can be plotted for these clusters which has absolute values known on the luminosity axis. Then, when similar diagram is plotted for a cluster whose distance is not known, the position of the main sequence can be compared to that of the first cluster and the distance estimated. This process is known as main-sequence fitting. Reddening and stellar populations must be accounted for when using this method.\nNearly all stars in the Galactic field, including the Sun, were initially born in regions with embedded clusters that disintegrated. This means that properties of stars and planetary systems may have been affected by early clustered environments. This appears to be the case for our own Solar System, in which chemical abundances point to the effects of a supernova from a nearby star early in our Solar System's history.\nStar cloud.\nTechnically not star clusters, star clouds are large groups of many stars within a galaxy, spread over very many light-years of space. Often they contain star clusters within them. The stars appear closely packed, but are not usually part of any structure. Within the Milky Way, star clouds show through gaps between dust clouds of the Great Rift, allowing deeper views along our particular line of sight. Star clouds have also been identified in other nearby galaxies. Examples of star clouds include the Large Sagittarius Star Cloud, Small Sagittarius Star Cloud, Scutum Star Cloud, Cygnus Star Cloud, Norma Star Cloud, and NGC 206 in the Andromeda Galaxy.\nNomenclature.\nIn 1979, the International Astronomical Union's 17th general assembly recommended that newly discovered star clusters, open or globular, within the Galaxy have designations following the convention \"Chhmm\u00b1ddd\", always beginning with the prefix \"C\", where \"h\", \"m\", and \"d\" represent the approximate coordinates of the cluster centre in hours and minutes of right ascension, and degrees of declination, respectively, with leading zeros. The designation, once assigned, is not to change, even if subsequent measurements improve on the location of the cluster centre. The first of such designations were assigned by Gosta Lynga in 1982.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28604", "revid": "3965251", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28604", "title": "Scarlatti", "text": "Scarlatti is an Italian surname. Notable people with this surname include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname Scarlatti. "}
{"id": "28606", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28606", "title": "Seinfeld", "text": "American television sitcom (1989\u20131998)\nSeinfeld ( ) is an American television sitcom created by Larry David and Jerry Seinfeld that originally aired on NBC from July 5, 1989, to May 14, 1998, with a total of nine seasons consisting of 180 episodes. Its ensemble cast stars Seinfeld as a fictionalized version of himself and focuses on his personal life with three of his friends: best friend George Costanza (Jason Alexander), former girlfriend Elaine Benes (Julia Louis-Dreyfus), and eccentric neighbor from across the hall Cosmo Kramer (Michael Richards).\n\"Seinfeld\" is set mostly in and around the titular character's apartment in Manhattan's Upper West Side in New York City. It has been described as \"a show about nothing\", often focusing on the minutiae of daily life. Interspersed in all episodes of the first seven seasons are moments of stand-up comedy from the fictional Jerry Seinfeld, frequently related to the episode's events.\nAs a rising comedian in the late 1980s, Jerry Seinfeld was presented with an opportunity to create a show with NBC. He asked Larry David, a fellow comedian and friend, to help create a premise for a sitcom. The series was produced by West/Shapiro Productions and Castle Rock Entertainment and is distributed in syndication by Sony Pictures Television. It was largely written by David and Seinfeld along with scriptwriters. A favorite among critics, the series led the Nielsen ratings in Seasons 6 and 9 and finished among the top two (along with \"ER\" of the same network) every year from 1994 to 1998. Only two other shows\u2014\"I Love Lucy\" and \"The Andy Griffith Show\"\u2014finished their runs at the top of the ratings.\n\"Seinfeld\" is universally regarded as one of the greatest and most influential American shows of all time. Its most renowned episodes include \"The Chinese Restaurant\", \"The Soup Nazi\", \"The Parking Garage\", \"The Marine Biologist\", \"The Contest\", and \"The Strike\", which introduced the December 23rd holiday of Festivus. E! named the series the \"Number 1 reason [why] the '90s ruled\". Quotes from numerous episodes have become catchphrases in popular culture.\nProduction.\nConception.\n\"Seinfeld\" began as a 23-minute pilot titled \"The Seinfeld Chronicles\". Created by Jerry Seinfeld and Larry David, developed by NBC executive Rick Ludwin, and produced by Castle Rock Entertainment, it was a mix of Seinfeld's stand-up comedy routines and idiosyncratic, conversational scenes focusing on mundane aspects of everyday life like laundry, the buttoning of the top button on one's shirt, and the effort by men to interpret the intent of women spending the night in Seinfeld's apartment.\nThe pilot was filmed at Stage 8 of Desilu Cahuenga studios, the same studio where \"The Dick Van Dyke Show\" was filmed (seen by the crew as a good omen), and was recorded at Ren-Mar Studios in Hollywood. The pilot was first screened to a group of two dozen NBC executives in Burbank, California, in early 1989. This one, however, did not yield the explosion of laughter garnered by the pilots for the decade's previous NBC successes like \"The Cosby Show\" and \"The Golden Girls.\" Brandon Tartikoff was not convinced the show would work. A Jewish man from New York himself, Tartikoff characterized it as \"Too New York, too Jewish\". Test audiences were even harsher. NBC's practice at the time was to recruit 400 households by phone to ask them to evaluate pilots it aired on an unused channel on its cable system. An NBC research department memo summarized the pilot's performance among the respondents as \"weak\", which Warren Littlefield, then second-in-command in NBC's entertainment division, called \"a dagger to the heart\". Comments included, \"You can't get too excited about two guys going to the laundromat\", \"Jerry's loser friend George isn't a forceful character\", \"Jerry needs a stronger supporting cast\", and \"Why are they interrupting the stand-up for these stupid stories?\" Seinfeld and David did not see the memo for several years, but after they became aware of it, they hung it in a bathroom on the set. Seinfeld comments, \"We thought, if someone goes in to use this bathroom, this is something they should see. It fits that moment.\"\nAround the time the show's pilot was filmed, Castle Rock Entertainment had also produced another pilot for NBC that featured Ann Jillian in her almost-similarly eponymous TV series. When \"The Seinfeld Chronicles\" tested poorly with audiences, Castle Rock focused on Jillian's series, which tested better with audiences and received a full-season order. \"Ann Jillian\" lasted only a single season of 13 episodes and was off the air by the end of 1990.\nFirst seasons.\nWhen NBC announced its 1989\u201390 (primetime) schedule in May 1989, \"The Seinfeld Chronicles\" was not included, but the show's supporters did not give up. The pilot first aired on July 5, 1989, and finished second in its time slot against the CBS police drama \"Jake and the Fatman\", receiving a Nielsen rating of 10.9/19. The ratings did not exhibit the regional skew Tartikoff predicted, much to the encouragement of the show's supporters. Ludwin canceled one of the Bob Hope specials budgeted for that season so the entertainment division had the money to order four more episodes of \"The Seinfeld Chronicles\", which formed the rest of the show's first season (the series was by then retitled to \"Seinfeld\")\u2014a move without which \"Chicago Tribune\" columnist Phil Rosenthal later said there \"would be no \"Seinfeld\"\". Although this was a very low order number for a new series\u2014and the smallest sitcom order in TV history\u2014Castle Rock failed to find any other buyers when it shopped the show to other networks, and accepted the order. \"Seinfeld\" did not return to the airwaves until May 30, 1990, and it was another three years before it became a Top 5-rated show. Preston Beckman, in charge of NBC's research department at the time, reminisced, \"The show was different. Nobody had seen anything like it. It wasn't unusual for poor-testing shows to get on the air, but it was very rare that they became hits.\"\nWhen the program was first repeated on July 5, 1990, it received a rating of 13.9/26. These ratings were high enough to secure a second season. NBC research showed that the show was popular with young male adults, a demographic sought after by advertisers. This gave NBC an incentive to keep broadcasting the show. One DVD reviewer, Britt Gillette, wrote that \"this initial episode exhibits the flashes of brilliance that made \"Seinfeld\" a cultural phenomenon.\"\nFilming.\nThe show was written by David and Seinfeld, along with writers who included Larry Charles, Peter Mehlman, Gregg Kavet, Carol Leifer, David Mandel, Jeff Schaffer, Steve Koren, Jennifer Crittenden, Tom Gammill, Max Pross, Dan O'Keefe, Charlie Rubin, Marjorie Gross, Alec Berg, Elaine Pope, and Spike Feresten.\nOther than the pilot, the series was filmed at CBS Studio Center in Studio City, Los Angeles. The first three seasons were filmed on Soundstage 19; it then moved to the larger Stage 9 for the remainder of its production. Despite numerous establishing shots taken in New York City, all scenes of the actors walking in New York were also filmed at CBS Studio Center, on their New York Street backlot. Street scenes and park scenes were filmed in the CBS Studio Centre's New York Street and Central Park backlots, respectively.\nA source of problems for the cast was the small sets, especially that of Jerry's apartment; Alexander noted, \"If you knew you were doing a series for nine years, you would never build that set.\" Adding to the problem was that the scripts contained only minimal physical direction, leaving the actors needing help to come up with actions to perform while speaking. Eventually, they got into a routine of directing each other on how to make their movements look natural. Alexander said this helped them build chemistry with each other.\nFilming usually went long, as the cast and Larry David were perfectionists. If a joke did not elicit the desired reaction, they rewrote it and performed it again. In at least one case, \"The Marine Biologist,\" this led to David writing an entirely new scene requiring Alexander to memorize a monologue in only a matter of minutes. Laugh tracks were used only for matching shots, not for artificially adding laughter.\nVarious locations used for establishing shots included Tom's Restaurant at 112th Street and Broadway (Monk's Cafe), Midtown West's Roosevelt Hospital (recurring exterior emergency room scene and indoor scenes in 'The Junior Mint' and 'The Bris'), Cornell Medical Centre at 525 East 68th Street, 22-39 37th Street, Queens (The Costanzas' house), the Taconic State Parkway exit to the Hopewell Junction, Dutchess County, New York (driving scene in 'The Bubble Boy'), and the Amagansett farmers market, Long Island ('The Hamptons'). The exterior shot used for Jerry's New York apartment building was actually located at 757 S New Hampshire Avenue, Los Angeles. The real-life exterior of Pendant Publishing, Elaine's workplace, is located at 1325 Ave of the Americas, New York. The live stand-up comedy performed by Seinfeld at the beginning of most episodes was truly filmed at The Improv, a comedy club at 358 West 44th Street, Manhattan; though it closed in 1993, another comedy club operates at the site today. The Yankee Stadium exterior seen in the show has now been demolished. Most office building establishing shots are real businesses and locations. Various real street locations can be gleaned from the car windows during driving scenes. By the final season, each episode of the series cost $3 million to $3.5 million.\nMore than 120 episodes make reference to the \"Superman\" franchise. Teri Hatcher, who played Lois Lane on \"\", plays Jerry's girlfriend Sidra. Paula Marshall, who played Christina Riley on the \"Superboy\" TV series, portrays the journalist Sharon, who Jerry says reminds him of Lois Lane. Sherman Howard, who played Lex Luthor on \"Superboy\", portrays Roy. Superman logos and figurines frequently appear in Jerry's apartment. Seinfeld and Superman later appeared in an American Express commercial.\nSeries overview.\nPlotlines.\nMany \"Seinfeld\" episodes are based on the writers' real-life experiences, with the experiences reinterpreted for the characters' storylines. For example, George's storyline in \"The Revenge\" is based on Larry David's experience at \"Saturday Night Live\". \"The Contest\" is also based on David's experiences. \"The Smelly Car\" storyline is based on Peter Mehlman's lawyer friend, who could not get a bad smell out of his car. \"The Strike\" is based on Dan O'Keefe's dad, who made up his own holiday: Festivus. Other stories take a variety of turns. \"The Chinese Restaurant\" consists of George, Jerry, and Elaine waiting for a table throughout the entire episode. \"The Boyfriend\", revolving around Keith Hernandez, extends through two episodes. \"The Betrayal\" is famous for using reverse chronology and was inspired by a similar plot device in a Harold Pinter play, \"Betrayal\". Some stories were inspired by headlines and rumors, as explained in the DVD features \"Notes About Nothing\", \"Inside Look\" and \"Audio Commentary.\" In \"The Maestro\", Kramer's lawsuit is roughly similar to the McDonald's coffee case. \"The Outing\" is based primarily on rumors that Larry Charles heard about Jerry Seinfeld's sexuality.\nThemes.\nThe series was often described as \"a show about nothing\". However, in 2014, Seinfeld stated: \"The pitch for the show, the real pitch, when Larry and I went to NBC in 1988, was [that] we want to show how a comedian gets his material. The show \"about nothing\" was just a joke in an episode many years later, and Larry and I to this day are surprised that it caught on as a way that people describe the show because, to us, it's the opposite of that.\" David similarly commented: \"I like taking the worst qualities that a person has and trying to make something funny out of it. Doesn't everybody do terrible things and have terrible thoughts? Just by trying to be as funny, you're going to deal with a lot of things that are real, so the show's really about something. The whole thing about the show being about nothing is ridiculous.\"\nMuch of the show's humor is based upon repeated use of irony, incongruity, and (oftentimes unfortunate) coincidences. Additionally, guest characters are frequently introduced with little to no context, with a humorous focus on the atypical names of these characters, which often contain alliteration. In keeping with Seinfeld's reputation as a clean comedian, though the show frequently contains dialogue around sexual themes, the show notably avoids using almost all explicit sexual terminology. Notably, in the popular episode \"The Contest\", whose plot line concerns a contest amongst the main characters to see which one can go the longest without masturbating, the word 'masturbation' is never mentioned. \"Seinfeld\" broke several conventions of mainstream television. David is credited with refusing to follow a predictable sitcom formula that would have a romantic relationship develop between Jerry and Elaine.\nThe show offers no growth or reconciliation to its characters and eschews sentimentality. An episode is typically driven by humor interspersed with the superficial conflicts of characters with peculiar dispositions. Many episodes revolve around the characters' involvement in the lives of others, with typically disastrous results. On the set, the notion that the characters should not develop or improve throughout the series was expressed as the \"no hugging, no learning\" rule. Larry David was adamant from the beginning that he did not want the characters to mature, grow or learn from their past mistakes. The characters are \"thirty-something singles with vague identities, no roots, and conscious indifference to morals.\" Also unlike most sitcoms, there are no moments of pathos; the audience is never made to feel sorry for any of the characters. Even Susan's death in \"The Invitations\" elicits no genuine emotions from anybody in the show. \"Seinfeld\" does not shy away from making light of tough topics, from death to illness to disability.\nThe show frequently engages in fourth-wall-breaking humor and self-satire. One such example is the story arc, where the characters promote a TV sitcom series named \"Jerry\". The show within a show, \"Jerry\" was much like \"Seinfeld\" in that it was \"about nothing,\" and Seinfeld played himself. The fictional \"Jerry\" was launched in the Season 4 finale, but unlike \"Seinfeld\", it was not picked up as a series. \"Jerry\" is one of many examples of metafiction in the show. There are no fewer than 22 fictional movies featured, like \"Rochelle, Rochelle\". Because of these several elements, \"Seinfeld\" became the first TV series since \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" to be widely described as postmodern.\nSeinfeld is an avid Abbott and Costello fan and has cited \"The Abbott and Costello Show\" as an influence on \"Seinfeld\": \"Everybody on the show knows I'm a fan. We're always joking about how we do stuff from their show. George and I will often get into a riff that has the rhythm from the old Abbott and Costello shows. And sometimes, I'll hit George in the chest the way Abbott would hit Costello\". The series includes numerous references to the team. George Costanza's middle name is \"Louis\", after Costello. \"The Old Man\" episode features a cantankerous character named \"Sid Fields\" as a tribute to the landlord on the team's TV show. Kramer's friend is named Mickey Abbott. A copywriter for the J. Peterman catalog is named Eddie Sherman, after the team's longtime agent. In Episode 30, Kramer hears the famous Abbott and Costello line, \"His father was a mudder. His mother was a mudder.\"\nCatchphrases.\nMany terms were coined, popularized, or re-popularized in the series' run and have become part of popular culture, including \"Yada, yada, yada\", \"No soup for you!\", \"Master of my domain\", \"That's a shame\", and \"Not that there's anything wrong with that.\" The lexicon of Seinfeldian code words and recurring phrases that evolved around particular episodes is referred to as Seinlanguage, which is also the title of Jerry Seinfeld's best-selling book on humor. These terms include \"man hands\", \"shrinkage\", \"regift\", and \"double dip\". \nConsumer products.\nA recurring feature of \"Seinfeld\" was its inclusion of specific products, especially candy, as plot points. These might be a central feature of a plot (e.g., Junior Mints, Twix, Chuckles, Jujyfruits, bite-size Three Musketeers, Snickers, Chunky, Oh Henry!, Drake's Coffee Cake and PEZ), or an association of candy with a guest character (e.g. Oh Henry! bars) or simply a conversational aside (e.g., Chuckles, Clark Bar, Twinkies). A large number of non-candy products were also featured throughout the series.\nThe show's creators claim that they weren't engaging in a product placement strategy for commercial gain. One motivation for the use of real-world products, entirely unrelated to commercial considerations, is the comedy value of funny-sounding phrases and words. \"I knew I wanted Kramer to think of watching the operation like going to see a movie,\" explained \"Seinfeld\" writer/producer Andy Robin in an interview published in \"The Hollywood Reporter\". \"At first, I thought maybe a piece of popcorn falls into the patient. I ran that by my brother, and he said, 'No, Junior Mints are just funnier.'\"\nMany advertisers capitalized on the popularity of \"Seinfeld\". American Express created a webisode where Jerry Seinfeld and an animated Superman (voiced by Patrick Warburton, who played the role of Puddy) starred in its commercial. The makers of the Today Sponge created the \"Spongeworthy\" game on their website, inspired by \"The Sponge.\" An advertisement featured Jason Alexander in a Chrysler commercial. In this, Alexander acts much like his character George, and his relationship with Lee Iacocca plays on George's relationship with Steinbrenner. Similarly, Michael Richards was the focus of a series of advertisements for Vodafone, which ran in Australia, where he dressed and acted precisely like Kramer, including the trademark bumbling pratfalls. In addition, the show occasionally incorporated fictional products like a Scotch brand called \"Hennigan's\" (a blend of \"Hennessy\" and \"Brannigans\") and a canned meat product called \"Beef-a-reeno\" (a parody of \"Beef-a-roni\").\nMusic.\nThe \"Seinfeld\" music was composed by Jonathan Wolff, who had previously composed for sitcoms including \"Who's the Boss?\" and \"Married with Children.\" The pilot episode had a theme composed by a different composer, but Seinfeld felt it interfered with his standup sequences. Whereas previous sitcoms had been melodic and lyrical, Wolff did not want to create a typical theme and instead wanted to create an instantly recognizable \"audio signature\". He composed a theme comprising samples of slap bass taken from multiple sources, edited and processed with compression, equalized and other effects. He added percussion with finger snaps and mouth noises to create an organic \"percolating energy\" and blend with the \"quirky\" patterns of Seinfeld's speech. When the network asked for a more conventional theme for the second season, David refused. Wolff composed variations on the theme to match the rhythms and dialogue of each episode.\nIn \"The Note\", the first episode of Season 3, the bumper music featured scatting female backup singers who sang a phrase that sounded like the tune \"Easy to Beat\". Jerry Seinfeld and executive producer Larry David both liked Wolff's additions, and three episodes were produced with this new style of music. However, they had neglected to inform NBC and Castle Rock executives of the change, and when the season premiere aired, the executives were surprised and unimpressed and requested that they return to the original style. The subsequent two episodes were redone, leaving this episode as the only one with additional music elements. In the commentary of \"The Note,\" Louis-Dreyfus facetiously suggests it was removed because the perceived lyric related closely to the low ratings at the time. The soundtrack was given a digital release on July 2, 2021.\nCast and characters.\nRecurring characters.\nMany characters have made multiple appearances, notably Jerry's parents, Morty and Helen Seinfeld, who reside in Florida; George's parents, the overbearing Frank and Estelle Costanza; George's on-again, off-again fianc\u00e9e Susan Ross; Jerry's Uncle Leo; Elaine's variety of bosses, Mr. Lippman, Mr. Pitt and J. Peterman; Elaine's on-again, off-again boyfriend David Puddy; and Kramer's friend, Newman, a mail carrier who lives in the same building and is Jerry's nemesis. In addition to recurring characters, \"Seinfeld\" features numerous celebrities who appear as themselves or as girlfriends, boyfriends, bosses, and other acquaintances.\nA number of actresses made guest appearances as Seinfeld's love interests in single episodes:\nEpisodes.\nCompared to other family and group sitcoms of the era, \"Seinfeld\" stood out. The principal characters are not related by family or work-associated connections but remain distinctly close friends throughout the series. Many characters were based primarily on Seinfeld's and David's real-life acquaintances. Two prominent recurring characters were fictional depictions of actual well-known people: Jacopo Peterman of the J. Peterman catalog (based on John Peterman) and George Steinbrenner, owner of the New York Yankees. Many characters were introduced as new writers got involved with \"Seinfeld\". Other characters based on real people include the Soup Nazi and Jackie Chiles, who was based on Johnnie Cochran.\nEpisodes have separate plot strands, but the characters' stories often intertwine at the end. The narratives reveal the creators' \"consistent efforts to maintain the intimacy\" among the small cast of characters.\nThe show maintains a strong sense of continuity, as characters and plots from past episodes are often referenced or expanded on. Occasionally, story arcs span multiple episodes or entire seasons, such as Season 4, which revolves around the pilot pitch to NBC by Jerry and George. Another example is Jerry's girlfriend Vanessa, who appears in \"The Stake Out\" and with whom he ends the relationship when things do not work out in \"The Stock Tip\". Larry David, the head writer and executive producer for the first seven seasons, was praised for keeping a close eye on minor details and ensuring the main characters' lives remained consistent and believable. \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\", David's later comedy series, also had an overarching plot for all but the first season.\nA major difference between \"Seinfeld\" and the sitcoms that preceded it is that the principal characters never learn from their mistakes. In effect, they are indifferent and even callous toward the outside world and sometimes one another. A mantra of the show's producers was \"No hugging, no learning.\" \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s TV critic Ken Tucker has described them as \"a group dynamic rooted in jealousy, rage, insecurity, despair, hopelessness, and a touching lack of faith in one's fellow human beings.\" This leads to very few happy endings, except at somebody else's expense. More often in every episode, situations resolve with characters getting a justly deserved comeuppance.\nSeasons 1\u20133.\nThe show premiered as \"The Seinfeld Chronicles\" on July 5, 1989. After it aired, a pickup by NBC seemed unlikely, and the show was offered to Fox, which declined to pick it up. Rick Ludwin, head of late night and special events for NBC, however, diverted money from his budget by canceling a Bob Hope television special, and the next four episodes were filmed. These episodes were highly rated as they followed summer re-runs of \"Cheers\" on Thursdays at 9:30\u00a0p.m., and the series was finally picked up. At one point, NBC considered airing these episodes on Saturdays at 10:30\u00a0p.m. but gave the slot to a short-lived sitcom called \"FM\" instead. The series was renamed simply \"Seinfeld\" as a precautionary measure due to the failure of the short-lived 1990 ABC series with a similarly sounding title, \"The Marshall Chronicles\". After airing the remaining four episodes of its first season the summer of 1990, NBC ordered 13 more episodes. David believed that he and Seinfeld had no more stories to tell and advised Seinfeld to turn down the order, but Seinfeld agreed to the additional episodes. Season 2 was bumped off its scheduled premiere of January 16, 1991, due to the outbreak of the Persian Gulf War. It settled into a regular time slot on Wednesdays at 9:30\u00a0p.m. and eventually flipped with veteran series \"Night Court\" to 9 p.m.\nTV critics championed \"Seinfeld\" in its early seasons, even as it was slow to cultivate a substantial audience. For the first three seasons, Jerry's stand-up comedy act would bookend at the beginning and end of each episode, even functioning as transitions during the show. A few episodes set a benchmark for later seasons. \"The Deal\" establishes Jerry and Elaine's relationship by setting rules about having sex while remaining friends. \"The Parking Garage\" was the first episode shot with no audience for the episode and, after \"The Chinese Restaurant\", to not show Jerry's apartment. \"The Keys\" contains a crossover to CBS show \"Murphy Brown\", marking the first such cooperation between rival networks. \"The Busboy\" introduces George, Kramer and Elaine as having their own storylines for the first time. Although Castle Rock Entertainment's Glenn Padnick thought Seinfeld was too generous, showcasing his co-stars' comedic talent became a trademark throughout the series.\nLarry Charles wrote an episode for Season 2, \"The Bet,\" in which Elaine buys a gun from Kramer's friend. This episode was not filmed because the content was deemed unacceptable, and it was replaced by the episode \"The Phone Message\". \"The Stranded,\" which aired during Season 3, was initially intended for Season 2. At the beginning of this episode, Jerry clears up the continuity error over George's real estate job.\nSeasons 4\u20135.\nSeason 4 marked the sitcom's entry into the Nielsen ratings Top 30. It contains several of the most popular episodes, such as \"The Bubble Boy\", in which George and the bubble boy argue over \"Trivial Pursuit\", and \"The Junior Mint\" in which Jerry and Kramer accidentally fumble a mint in the operating room. This was the first season to use a story arc of Jerry and George creating their own sitcom, \"Jerry\". Also, at this time, the use of Jerry's stand-up act slowly declined, and the stand-up segment in the middle of \"Seinfeld\" episodes was cut.\nMuch publicity followed the controversial episode \"The Contest\", an Emmy Award-winning episode written by David, whose subject matter was considered inappropriate for prime-time network TV. To circumvent this taboo, the word \"masturbation\" was never used in the script, instead substituted for by a variety of oblique references. Midway through that season, \"Seinfeld\" was moved from its original 9:00\u00a0p.m. time slot on Wednesdays to 9:30\u00a0p.m. on Thursdays, following \"Cheers\" again, which gave the show even more popularity. Ratings also sparked the move, as Tim Allen's sitcom \"Home Improvement\" on ABC had aired at the same time, and \"Home Improvement\" kept beating \"Seinfeld\" in the ratings. NBC moved the series after Ted Danson announced the end of \"Cheers\" and \"Seinfeld\" quickly surpassed the ratings of the 9:00\u00a0p.m. \"Cheers\" reruns that spring. The show won an Emmy Award for \"Outstanding Comedy Series\" in 1993, beating out its family-oriented, time-slot competitor \"Home Improvement\", which was only in its second season on rival network ABC.\nSeason 5 was an even bigger ratings hit, consisting of popular episodes, such as \"The Puffy Shirt\", in which Jerry feels embarrassed wearing a \"pirate\" shirt on \"The Today Show\", \"The Non-Fat Yogurt\" featuring Rudy Giuliani, the Republican then-mayor-elect of New York, and \"The Opposite\" in which George, doing the opposite of what his instincts tell him he should do, lands a job with the New York Yankees and Elaine leaves \"Pendant Publishing\" because of a comedy of errors that led to its demise. Another story arc has George returning to live with his parents. Amid the story arc, Kramer creates and promotes his coffee table book. The show was again nominated for Outstanding Comedy Series, but lost to the \"Cheers\" spin-off \"Frasier\", then in its first season. \"Seinfeld\" was nominated for the same award every year for its entire run but, after its win at the 45th Primetime Emmy Awards in 1994, always lost to \"Frasier\", which went on to win a record 39 Emmy Awards in its 11-season run.\nSeasons 6\u20137.\nIn Season 6, Andy Ackerman replaced Tom Cherones as director of the show. The series remained well regarded and produced some of its most famous episodes, such as \"The Beard\", in which Jerry is put through a lie detector test to make him admit that he watched \"Melrose Place\"; \"The Switch\", in which Kramer's mom, Babs, reveals that his first name is Cosmo; and \"The Understudy\", in which Elaine meets J. Peterman for the first time. Story arcs used in this season were Elaine working as a personal assistant to her eccentric boss Justin Pitt and George's parents' temporary separation. This was the first season in which \"Seinfeld\" reached No. 1 in the Nielsen Ratings. The use of Jerry's stand-up act declined, and the end stand-up segment no longer appeared because the storylines for all four characters grew denser.\nIn Season 7, a story arc involved George getting engaged to his ex-girlfriend, Susan Ross, after the pilot \"Jerry\" proved unsuccessful. In it, George spends most of the season regretting and trying to get out of the engagement. Along with the regular half-hour episodes, two notable one-hour episodes were \"The Cadillac\", in which George plans to date award-winning actress Marisa Tomei, and \"The Bottle Deposit,\" with Elaine and Sue Ellen Mischke participating in a bidding war to buy JFK's golf clubs in an auction.\nSeasons 8\u20139.\n\"Seinfeld\"'s final two seasons were considered distinct from the earlier seasons. Most noticeably, David left the writing crew (but returned to write \"The Finale\" in 1998), resulting in Seinfeld taking over David's duties as showrunner, and, under the direction of a new writing staff, \"Seinfeld\" became a faster-paced show. The show no longer contained extracts of Jerry performing stand-up comedy\u2014Jerry had no time or energy for this with his new responsibilities\u2014and storylines occasionally delved into fantasy and broad humor. For example, in \"The Bizarro Jerry\", Elaine is torn between exact opposites of her friends and Jerry dates a woman who has the now-famous \"man hands\". Some notable episodes from Season 8 include \"The Little Kicks\", showing Elaine's horrible dancing, and \"The Chicken Roaster\", which portrays the \"Kenny Rogers Roasters\" chicken restaurant, which opened during that time. A story arc in this season involves Peterman going to Burma in \"The Foundation\" until he recovered from a nervous breakdown in \"The Money\", followed by Elaine writing Peterman's biography in \"The Van Buren Boys\", which leads to Kramer's parody of Kenny Kramer's Reality Tour seen in \"The Muffin Tops\".\nThe final season included episodes like \"The Merv Griffin Show\", in which Kramer converts his apartment into a talk-show studio and plays the character of talk-show host, \"The Betrayal\" that presents in reverse chronological order what happened to Sue Ellen's wedding in India, and \"The Frogger\" in which George pushes a \"Frogger\" machine across the street, mimicking the action of the game itself. The last season included a story arc in which Elaine has an on/off relationship with Puddy. Despite the enormous popularity and willingness of the cast to return for a tenth season, Seinfeld decided to end the show after Season 9, believing he would thereby be able to ensure the show would maintain its quality and go out on top. NBC offered Seinfeld $110 million\u2014a record $5 million an episode for a 22-episode tenth season\u2014but he declined.\nA major controversy caused in the ninth season was the accidental burning of a Puerto Rican flag by Kramer in \"The Puerto Rican Day\". This scene caused a furor among Puerto Ricans, and as a result, NBC showed this episode only once. Seinfeld defused the protestors by not letting this episode continue in syndication, as revealed in \"Inside Look\" on DVD. However, the episode would be added to the syndicated rerun package several years later uncut.\nSeries finale.\nAfter nine years on the air, NBC and Seinfeld announced on December 25, 1997, that the series would end production the following spring in 1998. The announcement made the front page of the major New York newspapers, including \"The New York Times\". Seinfeld was featured on the cover of \"Time\" magazine's first issue of 1998. The series ended with a 75-minute episode (cut to 60 minutes in syndication, in two parts) written by co-creator and ex-executive producer Larry David, which aired on May 14, 1998. Before the finale, a 45-minute retrospective clip show, \"The Chronicle\", was aired. The retrospective was expanded to an hour after the original airing and aired again on NBC as an hour-long episode, and has since aired in syndication.\nIt was the first episode since the finale of season 7, \"The Invitations\", to feature opening and closing stand-up comedy acts by Seinfeld. The finale was filmed before an audience of NBC executives and friends of the show. The press and public were shut out of the taping to keep its plot secret; those who attended the shoot of the final episode were required to sign written \"vows of silence\". The secrecy only seemed to increase speculation about how the series would end. The episode's producers gave false information to the media, spreading a rumor about Newman ending up in the hospital and Jerry and Elaine sitting in a chapel, presumably to marry.\nThe final episode enjoyed a historic audience, estimated at 76.3 million viewers (58% of all viewers that night) making it the fourth-most watched regular series finale in U.S. TV history, behind \"M*A*S*H\", \"Cheers\" and \"The Fugitive\". However, the finale received mixed reviews from critics and fans of the show. The finale poked fun at the many rumors that were circulating, seeming to move into multiple supposed plots before settling on its actual storyline\u2014a lengthy trial where the gang is prosecuted for violating a \"Duty to Rescue\" law and sentenced to prison terms.\nAccording to \"Forbes\" magazine, Seinfeld's earnings from the show in 1998 came to US$267 million, including syndication earnings. He refused NBC's offer of $5 million per episode, or over $100 million total, to continue into a tenth season. The offer NBC made to Seinfeld was over three times higher per episode than anyone on TV had ever been offered before. Seinfeld told the network that he was not married nor had children, and wished to focus on his personal life. As reported in July 2007, he was the second-highest earner in the TV industry, earning at the time $60 million a year. The episode became the first to command over $1 million a minute for advertising\u2014a mark previously attained only by the Super Bowl.\nReception and legacy.\nElizabeth Magnotta and Alexandra Strohl analyze the success of \"Seinfeld\" with recourse to the incongruity theory of humor: \"The Incongruity Theory claims that humor is created out of a violation of an expectation. For humor to result from this unexpected result, the event must have an appropriate emotional climate, comprisedof the setting, characters, prior discourse, relationships of the characters, and the topic.\" Specifically, Magnotta and Strohl focus on \"The Marine Biologist\", where George is embroiled in yet another lie, and on \"The Red Dot,\" where George tries to save a few dollars at Elaine's expense by giving her a marked-down cashmere sweater.\nIn \"Translating \"Seinfeld\"\", Jennifer Armstrong observes that \"Seinfeld\" is less famous among non-English speakers as its unique style of humor is \"too cultural and word-based to make for easy translation\". Carol Iannone sums up the legacy of this American hit in her \"Modern Age\" article \"\"Seinfeld\": The Politically Incorrect Comedy\" when she says, \"It may be the first situation comedy truly to achieve the status of art.\" Nod Miller, of the University of East London, has discussed the self-referential qualities of the show:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Seinfeld\" is suffused with postmodern themes. To begin with, the boundary between reality and fiction is frequently blurred: this is illustrated in the central device of having Jerry Seinfeld play the character Jerry Seinfeld. In the show's fourth season, several episodes revolved around the narrative of Jerry and George (whose character is co-creator Larry David's alter ego) pitching 'a show about nothing' based on the everyday life of a stand-up comedian to NBC. The reaction of the fictional NBC executives, by all accounts, mirrored the initial responses of those who eventually commissioned \"Seinfeld\". The fourth season ends with \"The Pilot\", an episode focusing on the casting, taping and screening of the show-within-the-show, \"Jerry\". This episode also illustrates neatly the self-referential quality which is one of \"Seinfeld\"'s hallmarks. The series finale was so replete with references to earlier shows as to render it largely incomprehensible to those not already well-versed in the personae and preoccupations of the \"Seinfeld\" universe.\nWilliam Irwin has edited an anthology of scholarly essays on philosophy in \"Seinfeld and Philosophy: A Book about Everything and Nothing\". Some entries include \"The Jerry Problem and the Socratic Problem\", \"George's Failed Quest for Happiness: An Aristotelian Analysis\", \"Elaine's Moral Character\", \"Kramer the 'Seducer'\", \"Making Something Out of Nothing: Seinfeld, Sophistry and the Tao\", \"Seinfeld, Subjectivity, and Sartre\", \"Mr. Peterman, the Wicked Witch of the West, and Me\" and \"Minimally Decent Samaritans and Uncommon Law\".\nAwards and honors.\n\"Seinfeld\" has received awards and nominations in various categories throughout the mid-1990s. It was awarded the Emmy for Outstanding Comedy Series in 1993, Golden Globe Award for Best TV Series (Comedy) in 1994, and Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series in 1995, 1997 and 1998. Apart from these, the show was also nominated for an Emmy award from 1992 to 1998 for Outstanding Comedy Series, Golden Globe award from 1994 to 1998 for Best TV-Series (Comedy), and Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series from 1995 to 1998. The show even received the Peabody Award in 1993.\n\"TV Guide\" named it the greatest TV show of all time in 2002, and in 2013, the magazine ranked it as the second-greatest TV show. A 2015 \"The Hollywood Reporter\" survey of 2,800 actors, producers, directors, and other industry people named \"Seinfeld\" as their #5 favorite show. In 2022, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked \"Seinfeld\" as the sixth-greatest TV show of all time. In 2023, \"Variety\" ranked \"Seinfeld\" as the eighth-greatest TV show of all time.\nDistribution.\nFree streaming service Channel 4 has been running \"Seinfeld\" in its original 4:3 format since February 2020. On April 29, 2015, it was officially announced, during Hulu's upfronts presentation in New York, that all nine seasons of \"Seinfeld\" would stream on the platform starting in June 2015. The deal was for around $130 million to $180 million. On May 20, 2015, Hulu announced that every episode would be available starting June 24, 2015. Hulu's streaming rights for the series expired on June 23, 2021. In January 2017, Amazon acquired the UK rights to all seasons of \"Seinfeld\" for its Amazon Prime Video streaming service.\nOn November 8, 2016, the Australian streaming service Stan announced via Twitter that later in the week all episodes would be available to stream for the first time in Australia. All episodes were available from November 11, 2016, with the remastered versions of all episodes on the service featuring HD and Widescreen enhancements. The widescreen offered was cropped from the original 4:3 format negatives, thus resulting in better visual quality than the previously available DVD version, however, the top and bottom portions of the frame were cut out to achieve the widescreen aspect ratio. In April 2020, all seasons of \"Seinfeld\" were also made available on-demand via pay television service Foxtel, as well as its internet-based alternative Foxtel Now.\nIn September 2019, Netflix and Sony Pictures announced that Netflix had acquired the exclusive global streaming rights for \"Seinfeld\", starting on October 1, 2021, superseding the above Hulu and Amazon rights. As of 2023, Netflix's version of \"Seinfeld\" is available in 4K resolution. The transition was criticized as the show, initially displayed in 4:3 aspect ratio, had been converted to 16:9, resulting in some gags getting cropped, similarly to how \"The Simpsons\" was initially rendered on Disney+. Netflix has yet to comment on this situation.\nHome media releases.\nThe hour-long, two-part clip show episode \"The Highlights of 100\" became the first \"Seinfeld\" episode available on home video when it was released on VHS in 1995 by food company General Mills. Sony Pictures Home Entertainment (formerly Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment) released all nine seasons of \"Seinfeld\" on DVD in Regions 1, 2 and 4 between 2004 and 2007. On November 6, 2007, \"Seinfeld: The Complete Series\" was released on DVD. The complete series box set includes a 2007 \"roundtable\" reunion of the four main cast members and Larry David; only highlights of this were also included in the Season 9 set.\nThe first complete series box set in Australia (Region 4) was released on October 24, 2007. The second boxset was released on December 2, 2008, and was a Collectible Fridge design packaging. On August 5, 2009, another Limited-Edition boxset was released, similar to the first boxset but does not include the book and the packaging was slightly different. On November 23, 2011, an additional Limited-Edition boxset was released. On November 14, 2018, a \"Festivus Celebration Edition\" was released which contained napkins and cups, playing cards and thumb wrestle gadgets. On August 12, 2020, yet another \"Complete Series\" boxset was released.\nThe entire series was released on Blu-ray (in the cropped 16:9 aspect ratio) and 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray (in the original 4:3 aspect ratio) on December 17, 2024.\nSyndication.\nAccording to Barry Meyer, chairman of Warner Bros. Entertainment (parent company of Castle Rock Entertainment), \"Seinfeld\" made $2.7 billion through June 2010 through off-network syndication and cable syndication. As of \u00a02017[ [update]] the show had made an estimated $4.06 billion in syndication. Steve Bannon, who invested in the show, later said, \"We calculated what it would get us if it made it to syndication. We were wrong by a factor of five\". In September 2019, it was announced that Viacom (now Paramount Global) had acquired cable syndication rights to the series from TBS, with it airing on Comedy Central from October 2021, to July 2025, Nick at Nite from May 31, 2022, until November 12, 2022, and TV Land since February 11, 2023.\nHigh-definition versions.\nThere are two high-definition versions of \"Seinfeld\". The first is that of the network television (non-syndicated) versions in the original aspect ratio of 4:3 that were downscaled for the DVD releases. Clips from this high-definition version in its upscale were seen on NBC during \"The 'Seinfeld' Story\" special. Syndicated broadcast stations and the cable networks TBS and Comedy Central (and also Fox) began airing the syndicated version of \"Seinfeld\" in HD. Unlike the version used for the DVD, Sony Pictures cropped the top and bottom parts of the frame while restoring previously cropped images on the sides from the 35mm film source to use the entire 16:9 frame.\nAfter \"Seinfeld\".\nAnother scene.\nOn the November 1, 2007, episode of \"The Daily Show with Jon Stewart\", Jerry Seinfeld mentioned the possibility of shooting one last scene after the characters leave jail. He mentioned that he was too busy to do it at the time, but did not announce what the scene would entail, as its production is not a certainty. In a commentary from the final season DVD, Seinfeld outlines that he and Jason Alexander spoke about this scene being in Monk's Cafe, with George saying \"That was brutal\" about the foursome's stint in prison.\nOn an episode of \"Saturday Night Live\" that Jerry Seinfeld hosted on October 2, 1999, a sketch was produced that showed what life was like for Jerry behind bars after being transferred to the fictional prison portrayed on the HBO series \"Oz\". The roughly four-minute sketch shows the opening credits for the HBO series with clips of Jerry mixed in doing various activities around the prison. The sketch continues and mixes in different storylines from both \"Oz\" and \"Seinfeld\" and has Jerry interacting with various characters from the show in his typical quick-witted, sarcastic way.\nThe \"Seinfeld\" \"curse\".\nLouis-Dreyfus, Alexander, and Richards have all tried to launch new sitcoms as title-role characters. Almost every show was canceled quickly, usually within the first season. This gave rise to the term \"Seinfeld curse\": the failure of a sitcom starring one of the three, despite the conventional wisdom that each person's \"Seinfeld\" popularity should almost guarantee a strong, built-in audience for the actor's new show. Shows specifically cited regarding the \"Seinfeld curse\" are Julia Louis-Dreyfus's \"Watching Ellie\", Jason Alexander's \"Bob Patterson\" and \"Listen Up\", and Michael Richards's \"The Michael Richards Show\". This phenomenon was mentioned throughout the second season of Larry David's HBO program \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\", which aired in 2001. In real life, David has repeatedly dismissed the idea of a curse, saying, \"It's so completely idiotic. It's very hard to have a successful sitcom.\"\nThe success of Louis-Dreyfus in the 2006\u20132010 CBS sitcom \"The New Adventures of Old Christine\", which included winning the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series in 2006, led many to believe that she had broken the curse. In her acceptance speech, Louis-Dreyfus held up her award and exclaimed, \"I'm not somebody who really believes in curses, but curse this, baby!\" The show produced enough episodes to air in reruns in syndication for several years, something the other shows did not achieve. The \"Saturday Night Live\" episode hosted by Louis-Dreyfus made references to the curse. Nevertheless, the series' ratings declined soon after, and it was canceled after the fifth season. She went on to win six further Emmys (for Lead Actress in a Comedy Series) for her acclaimed performance as Vice President Selina Meyer in the HBO comedy series \"Veep\".\n\"Curb Your Enthusiasm\".\nEarly in March 2009, it was announced that the \"Seinfeld\" cast would reunite for season seven of \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\". The cast first appeared in the third episode of the season, all playing fictional versions of themselves. The season-long story is that Larry David tries to initiate a \"Seinfeld\" reunion show as a ploy to win back his ex-wife, Cheryl. Along with the four main characters, some \"Seinfeld\" supporting actors like Wayne Knight, Estelle Harris and Steve Hytner appeared in the ninth episode at a table read for the reunion show. Although much dialogue in \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\" is improvised, the plot was scripted, and the \"Seinfeld\" special that aired within the show was scripted and directed by \"Seinfeld\" regular Andy Ackerman, making this the first time since \"Seinfeld\" went off the air that the central cast appeared together in a scripted show.\n\"Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee\".\nJerry Seinfeld, Jason Alexander, and Wayne Knight, playing their respective \"Seinfeld\" characters, appeared in a spot presented during halftime of Super Bowl XLVIII on February 2, 2014. Fox came up with the idea of doing such a spot, due in part to the Super Bowl's location being New York City adjacent that year. An uncut version appeared on Crackle.com immediately afterward, as an episode of \"Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee\" titled \"The Over-Cheer,\" establishing Seinfeld's character on the series as an older version of his \"Seinfeld\" character. Although the spot was used to advertise Seinfeld's web series, it was not considered a commercial, as Sony, which produces the series, did not pay for it. While Seinfeld indicated that the webisode would probably be the last cast reunion, saying, \"I have a feeling you've seen the final coda on that very unique experience,\" since then, Michael Richards and Julia Louis-Dreyfus have also appeared in episodes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28607", "revid": "1315745243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28607", "title": "Sergei Diaghilev", "text": "Russian art critic and impresario (1872\u20131929)\nSergei Pavlovich Diaghilev ( ; Russian: , ; 31\u00a0March\u00a0[O.S. 19 March]\u00a01872\u00a0\u2013 19 August 1929), also known as Serge Diaghilev, was a Russian art critic, patron, ballet impresario and founder of the Ballets Russes, from which many famous dancers and choreographers would arise.\nDiaghilev's career can be divided into two periods: in Saint\u00a0Petersburg (1898\u20131906) and while as an emigrant (1906\u20131929).\nBiography.\nSergei Diaghilev was born in Selishchi to a noble officer Pavel Diaghilev. His mother died from childbed fever soon after his birth. In 1873, Pavel met and married Elena Panaeva, who loved Sergei and raised him as her own child. The House of Diaghilev in Perm was a local cultural centre, and the Diaghilevs hosted a musical evening every second Thursday, Modest Mussorgsky being one of the most frequent guests. Sergei Diaghilev composed his first romance at the age of 15. When he entered the Saint Petersburg Imperial University, he also had private music lessons with Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov. Instead of the usual four, it took him six years to graduate. By his own admission, Diaghilev used his student years \u2018to look around\u2019 and find his true interests in life. Seven months after graduation he opened his first exhibition.\nLife in Saint Petersburg.\nDuring his years at University, Diaghilev's cousin Dmitry Filosofov introduced him to a circle of art-loving friends who called themselves The Nevsky Pickwickians. They included Alexandre Benois, Walter Nouvel, Konstantin Somov, and L\u00e9on Bakst. Although not instantly received into the group, Diaghilev was aided by Benois in developing his knowledge of Russian and Western art. In two years, he had voraciously absorbed this new obsession (even travelling abroad to further his studies) and came to be respected as one of the most learned of the group.\nIn the late 1890s, Diaghilev created several art exhibitions that were intended to introduce the contemporary artists to the local public and, later, to the Europeans. The exposition of British and German watercolorists in 1897 at the Imperial Society for the Encouragement of the Arts became a huge success\u2014one which Diaghilev repeated in 1898 with the exhibition of the Russian and Finnish artists at the Stieglitz Academy with the works of those such as Mikhail Vrubel, Valentin Serov, and Isaac Levitan. In the same year he opened an exhibition of young Russian painters in Germany. Though the young art connoisseur had no private fortune, he managed to gain the protection and support of such high nobility as the\nGrand Duke Vladimir Alexandrovich and later even Nicholas II.\nThe Russian-Finnish exhibition of 1898 became the first action of the recently formed society \u2018Mir iskusstva\u2019, established by Benois and Diaghilev earlier that year. The group also included Konstantin Somov, Dmitry Filosofov, L\u00e9on Bakst, and Eugene Lansere. Soon, with the help of Savva Mamontov (the director of the Russian Private Opera Company) and Princess Maria Tenisheva, the group founded the journal \"Mir iskusstva\" (World of Art). The magazine was intended to serve \u2018the god Apollo\u2019 and promote modern art. The first issue was released in February 1898. As recalled by Benois, Diaghilev, as the art director, created the style and designed the publication, wrote critical essays, and, in 1904, published a monograph on Dmitry Levitzky. Nevertheless, Benois remembered him as the member of \"Mir iskusstva\" least interested in philosophy and literature, frequently revealing huge gaps in his knowledge of the classics.\nOn 6 March 1905, he opened an exhibition of the \u2018Russian portraits of the 18th and 19th centuries\u2019 at the Tauride Palace with more than 4000 paintings collected from 450 owners. Diaghilev himself travelled to acquire the portraits and wrote a catalogue of 2300 art works with information on the artists, models, and other relevant data. The exposition, designed by Benois, was an innovative example of art synthesis and greatly impressed the visitors. The paintings were combined into groups and accompanied with notes, and the interiors were decorated differently in order to emphasize their meanings and double the effect. The exhibition enjoyed enormous success and raised Diaghilev to the top of art and society elite.\nPassionate to promote Russian art abroad, in 1906, Diaghilev organized and opened the \u2018Two Centuries of the Russian art and Sculpture\u2019 exposition at Salon d'Automne. It included 750 works from 103 authors, from modern artists to the ancient icons. The exhibition was designed by L\u00e9on Bakst and occupied 12 rooms in the Grand Palais. It, too, enjoyed enormous success and in many ways paved the way for the future success of the Ballet Russe. France was soon immersed in fashion \u00e0 la russe. Diaghilev was offered the Legion of Honour award, but refused in honour of Bakst.\nImperial Theaters.\nIn 1899, Prince Serge Wolkonsky received directorship of all Imperial theaters. On 10 September 1899, he gave Diaghilev the post of officer on special duty. The post was usually a nominal one, but since Diaghilev managed to actively engage into the theatrical world, he was soon made responsible for the production of the Annual of the Imperial Theaters. As editor-in-chief, he reformed the edition and converted it into a full-scale luxurious magazine with critical essays, playbills, articles about artists and lots of pictures. Diaghilev even changed the paper to print the issues. He invited many of his fellow members in \"Mir iskusstva\" to work on the magazine, design fonts and create illustrations. He also showed himself as a successful promoter by finding sponsors, advertisers, and new distribution channels. As recalled by Benois, the success of the magazine went to Sergey\u2019s head and very soon he was thinking about himself as \u2018the only one, without whom nothing can be done.\nAt that time Diaghilev started frequent visits to repetitions of the Imperial Ballet. His appearance as a dandy with a grey lock amazed the ballerinas, who soon nicknamed him \u2018Chinchilla\u2019. He was especially interested in young Mathilde Kschessinska, who was flattered by the attention of an already famous art connoisseur. Even though they would fight later and temporarily break contact, the friendship would last through all their lives.\nDiaghilev brought the members of \"Mir iskusstva\" with him to the Imperial theatres. Apollinary Vasnetsov, Alexandre Benois, L\u00e9on Bakst, Valentin Serov, Eugene Lansere and other contemporary artists began working on decorations and costumes. In 1900, Prince Serge Wolkonsky entrusted Diaghilev with the staging of L\u00e9o Delibes' ballet Sylvia, a favorite of Benois. The two collaborators concocted an elaborate production plan that startled the established personnel of the Imperial Theatres. After several increasingly antagonistic differences of opinion, Diaghilev refused to go on editing the Annual of the Imperial Theatres and was discharged by Volkonsky in 1901. However, the scandal also ruined Wolkonsky\u2019s career; in a week, he was similarly fired. By that time, even the Emperor, persuaded by Kschessinska, took Diaghilev\u2019s side. Sergei didn\u2019t think much of a civil servant career, so he went abroad and immersed in his other plans.\nBallets Russes.\nConcerts historiques russes.\nThe success of the 1906 exhibition inspired Diaghilev to present Russian music to the world\u2019s culture capitals such as Paris. In 1907, he organised \u2018Concerts historiques russes\u2019 with famous composers like Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, Sergei Rachmaninoff, Alexander Glazunov, Feodor Chaliapin, and F\u00e9lia Litvinne. The tour was supported and sponsored by Diaghilev\u2019s royal patrons Grand Duke Andrei Vladimirovich of Russia and Duchess Marie of Mecklenburg-Schwerin. In the spring of 1908, Diaghilev mounted a production of Mussorgsky's Boris Godunov, starring Feodor Chaliapin, at the Paris Op\u00e9ra. Boris Anisfeld created the sets, designed by Bakst and Benois. To maximize authenticity, one of the artists Ivan Bilibin even travelled to Arkhangelsk Oblast to purchase the costumes. The tour became a sensation and the success was overwhelming, however, financially, it was unprofitable and ended with a loss of 85,000 francs.\nBallets Russes.\nBy 1909, Diaghilev was at odds with Kschessinska, and the Russian state treasury refused to finance the future tours. Sergei turned for help to his other friend, Misia Sert. Due to her efforts, the company ended up being able to rent the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Ch\u00e2telet, which was less prestigious than the Palais Garnier. At that time, Diaghilev was rather skeptical about ballet; he said that \u2018anyone with no special wit can enjoy it, there is no sense or subject in ballet\u2019. Serge Lifar recalled that to the end of his days Diaghilev referred to the corps-de-ballet dancers as \u2018a herd of cattle\u2019. Nevertheless, in 1909 the very first ballet Saison Russe took place and its success overwhelmed even the artists themselves. The first season included Le Pavillon d'Armide, Polovtsian Dances, Nuit d\u2019Egypte, Les Sylphides, and operas Boris Godunov, The Maid of Pskov and the first part of the Ruslan and Lyudmila. The ballets followed the operas and were performed after the second intermission. Leading dancers Vaslav Nijinsky, Anna Pavlova, Tamara Karsavina, Ida Rubinstein, Mikhail Mordkin immediately became world-known stars. Diaghilev\u2019s innovation was to synthesize dance, music and visual arts with set decorations and costumes into a single performance.\nDuring these years, Diaghilev's stagings included several compositions by the late Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, such as the operas \"The Maid of Pskov\", \"May Night\", and \"The Golden Cockerel\". His balletic adaptation of the orchestral suite \"Sheherazade\", staged in 1910, drew the ire of the composer's widow, Nadezhda Rimskaya-Korsakova, who protested in open letters to Diaghilev published in the periodical \"Rech.\" Diaghilev commissioned ballet music from composers such as Nikolai Tcherepnin (\"Narcisse et Echo\", 1911), Claude Debussy (\"Jeux\", 1913), Maurice Ravel (\"Daphnis et Chlo\u00e9\", 1912), Erik Satie (\"Parade\", 1917), Manuel de Falla (\"El Sombrero de Tres Picos\", 1917), Richard Strauss (\"Josephslegende\", 1914), Sergei Prokofiev (\"Ala and Lolli\", 1915, rejected by Diaghilev and turned into the \"Scythian Suite\"; \"Chout\", 1915 revised 1920; \"Le pas d'acier\", 1926; and \"The Prodigal Son\", 1929); Ottorino Respighi (\"La Boutique fantasque\", 1919); Francis Poulenc (\"Les biches\", 1923) and others. His choreographer Michel Fokine often adapted the music for ballet. Diaghilev also worked with dancer and ballet master L\u00e9onide Massine. He played a decisive role in the career of Sergey Prokofiev.\nThe artistic director for the Ballets Russes was L\u00e9on Bakst. Together they developed a more complicated form of ballet with show-elements intended to appeal to the general public, rather than solely the aristocracy. The exotic appeal of the Ballets Russes had an effect on Fauvist painters and the nascent Art Deco style. Coco Chanel is said to have stated that \"Diaghilev invented Russia for foreigners\".\nPerhaps Diaghilev's most notable composer-collaborator, however, was Igor Stravinsky. Diaghilev heard Stravinsky's early orchestral works \"Fireworks\" and \"Scherzo fantastique\", and was impressed enough to ask Stravinsky to arrange some pieces by Chopin for the Ballets Russes. In 1910, he commissioned his first score from Stravinsky, \"The Firebird\". \"Petrushka\" (1911) and \"The Rite of Spring\" (1913) followed shortly afterwards, and the two also worked together on \"Les noces\" (1923) and \"Pulcinella\" (1920) together with Picasso, who designed the costumes and the set.\nLate years.\nAfter the Russian Revolution of 1917, Diaghilev stayed abroad. Once it became obvious that he could not be lured back, the new Soviet regime condemned him in perpetuity as an especially insidious example of \"bourgeois decadence\". Soviet art historians wrote him out of the picture for more than 60 years.\nDiaghilev made Boris Kochno his secretary in 1920 and staged Tchaikovsky's \"The Sleeping Beauty\" in London in 1921; it was a production of remarkable magnificence in both settings and costumes, but, despite being well received by the public, it was a financial disaster for Diaghilev and Oswald Stoll, the theatre-owner who had backed it. The first cast included the legendary ballerina Olga Spessivtseva and Lubov Egorova in the role of Aurora. Diaghilev insisted on calling the ballet \"The Sleeping Princess\". When asked why, he quipped, \"Because I have no beauties!\" The later years of the Ballets Russes were often considered too \"intellectual\", too \"stylish\" and seldom had the unconditional success of the first few seasons, although younger choreographers like George Balanchine hit their stride with the Ballets Russes.\nThe start of the 20th century brought a development in the handling of tonality, harmony, rhythm and meter towards more freedom. Until that time, rigid harmonic schemes had forced rhythmic patterns to stay fairly uncomplicated. Around the turn of the century, however, harmonic and metric devices became either more rigid, or much more unpredictable, and each approach had a liberating effect on rhythm, which also affected ballet. Diaghilev was a pioneer in adapting these new musical styles to modern ballet. When Ravel used a time in the final part of his ballet \"Daphnis and Chloe\" (1912), dancers of the Ballets Russes sang \"Ser-gei-dia-ghi-lev\" during rehearsals to keep the correct rhythm.\nMembers of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes later went on to found ballet traditions in the United States (George Balanchine) and England (Ninette de Valois and Marie Rambert). Ballet master Serge Lifar went on a technical revival at the Paris Opera Ballet, enhanced by Claude Bessy and Rudolf Nureyev in the 1980s. Lifar is credited for saving many Jewish and other minority dancers from the Nazi concentration camps during World War II. After dancing with the Ballets Russes in 1925, Ruth Page emerged as a founder of her own ballet troupes based in Chicago, including the Chicago Opera Ballet.\nPersonal life.\nDiaghilev's life and the Ballets Russes were inextricably entwined. His most famous lover was Vaslav Nijinsky. However, according to Serge Lifar, of all Diaghilev's lovers, only L\u00e9onide Massine, who replaced Nijinsky, provided him with \"so many moments of happiness or anguish\". Diaghilev's other lovers included Anton Dolin, Serge Lifar and his secretary and librettist Boris Kochno.\nNijinsky's later bitter comments about Diaghilev inspired a mention in W. H. Auden's poem \"September 1, 1939\":\n&lt;poem&gt;\nWhat mad Nijinsky wrote\nAbout Diaghilev\nIs true of the normal heart;\nFor the error bred in the bone\nOf each woman and each man\nCraves what it cannot have,\nNot universal love\nBut to be loved alone.&lt;/poem&gt;\nDiaghilev dismissed Nijinsky summarily from the Ballets Russes after the dancer's marriage to Romola de Pulszky in 1913. Nijinsky appeared again with the company, but the old relationship between the men was never re-established; moreover, Nijinsky's magic as a dancer was much diminished by incipient mental illness. Their last meeting was after Nijinsky's mind had given way, and he appeared not to recognise his former lover.\nDiaghilev was known as a hard, demanding, even frightening taskmaster. Ninette de Valois, no shrinking violet, said she was too afraid to ever look him in the face. George Balanchine said Diaghilev carried around a cane during rehearsals, and banged it angrily when he was displeased. Other dancers said he would shoot them down with one look, or a cold comment. On the other hand, he was capable of great kindness, and when stranded with his bankrupt company in Spain during the 1914\u201318 war, gave his last bit of cash to Lydia Sokolova to buy medical care for her daughter. Alicia Markova was very young when she joined the Ballets Russes and would later say that she had called Diaghilev \"Sergypops\", and that he had said he would take care of her like a daughter.\nDancers such as Alicia Markova, Tamara Karsavina, Serge Lifar, and Lydia Sokolova remembered Diaghilev fondly as a stern but kind father-figure who put the needs of his dancers and company above his own. He lived from paycheck to paycheck to finance his company, and though he spent considerable amounts of money on a splendid collection of rare books at the end of his life, many people noticed that his impeccably cut suits had frayed cuffs and trouser-ends. Several sources have cited Diaghilev and the Ballets Russes as inspiration for the 1948 film \"The Red Shoes\".\nDeath and legacy.\nThroughout his life, Diaghilev was severely afraid of dying in water, and avoided traveling by boat. He died of diabetes in Venice on 19 August 1929, and his tomb is on the nearby island of San Michele, near to the grave of Stravinsky, in the Orthodox section.\nThe Ekstrom Collection of the Diaghilev and Stravinsky Foundation is held by the Department of Theatre and Performance of the Victoria and Albert Museum.\nDiaghilev was played by Alan Bates in the 1980 movie \"Nijinsky\", and the Contemporary Art Museum in Saint Petersburg State University is named after him.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28608", "revid": "48366681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28608", "title": "Soong Mei-ling", "text": "First Lady of the Republic of China (1898\u20132003)\nSoong Mei-ling (also spelled Soong May-ling; March 4, 1898 \u2013 October 23, 2003), also known as Madame Chiang (), was a Chinese politician and socialite. The youngest of the Soong sisters, she married Chiang Kai-shek and played a prominent role in Chinese politics and foreign relations in the first half of the 20th century.\nEarly life.\nSoong Mei-ling was born in the Song family home, a traditional house called Neishidi (\u5167\u53f2\u7b2c), in Pudong, Shanghai, China. Her passport issued by the Qing government showed that she was born on March 4, 1898. Some sources said she was born on March 5, 1898, at St. Luke's Hospital in Shanghai, while others gave the year as 1897, since Chinese tradition considers one to be a year old at birth.\nShe was the fourth of six children of Charlie Soong, a wealthy businessman and former Methodist missionary from Hainan, and his wife Ni Kwei-tseng (). Mei-ling's siblings were eldest sister Ai-ling, second sister Ching-ling, who later became Madame Sun Yat-sen, elder brother Tse-ven, usually known as T. V. Soong, and younger brothers Tse-liang (T.L.) and Tse-an (T.A.).\nEducation.\nIn Shanghai, Mei-ling attended the McTyeire School for Girls with her sister, Ching-ling. Their father, who had studied in the United States, arranged to have them continue their education in the US in 1907. Mei-ling and Ching-ling attended a private school in Summit, New Jersey. In 1908, Ching-ling was accepted by her sister Ai-ling's alma mater, Wesleyan College, at age 15 and both sisters moved to Macon, Georgia, to join Ai-ling. Mei-ling insisted she have her way and be allowed to accompany her older sister though she was only ten, which she did. Mei-ling spent the year in Demorest, Georgia, with Ai-ling's Wesleyan friend, Blanche Moss, who enrolled Mei-ling as an 8th grader at Piedmont College. In 1909, Wesleyan's newly appointed president, William Newman Ainsworth, gave her permission to stay at Wesleyan and assigned her tutors. She briefly attended Fairmount College in Monteagle, Tennessee in 1910.\nMei-ling was officially registered as a freshman at Wesleyan in 1912 at the age of 15. She then transferred to Wellesley College two years later to be closer to her older brother, T. V., who, at the time, was studying at Harvard.47 By then, both her sisters had graduated and returned to Shanghai. She graduated from Wellesley as one of the 33 \"Durant Scholars\" on June 19, 1917, with a major in English literature and minor in philosophy. She was also a member of Tau Zeta Epsilon, Wellesley's Arts and Music Society. As a result of her American education, she spoke excellent English, with a southern accent which helped her connect with American audiences.\nMadame Chiang.\nSoong Mei-ling met Chiang Kai-shek in 1920. Since he was eleven years her elder, already married, and a Buddhist, Mei-ling's mother vehemently opposed the marriage between the two, but finally agreed after Chiang showed proof of his divorce and promised to convert to Christianity. Chiang told his future mother-in-law that he could not convert immediately, because religion needed to be gradually absorbed, not swallowed like a pill. They married in Shanghai on December 1, 1927. Although biographers regard the marriage with varying appraisals of partnership, love, politics and competition, it lasted 48 years. The couple had no children.\nMadame Chiang initiated the New Life Movement and became actively engaged in Chinese politics. As her husband rose to become generalissimo and leader of the Kuomintang, Madame Chiang acted as his English translator, secretary and advisor. In 1928, she was made a member of the Committee of Yuans by Chiang. She was a member of the Legislative Yuan from 1930 to 1932 and Secretary-General of the Chinese Aeronautical Affairs Commission from 1936 to 1938. In 1937 she led appeals to women to support the Second Sino-Japanese War, which led to the establishment of women's battalions, such as the Guangxi Women's Battalion.\nIn 1934, Soong Mei-ling was given a villa in Kuling town, Mount Lu. Chiang Kai-shek named the villa \"Mei Lu Villa\" to symbolize the beauty of the mountain. The couple usually stayed at this villa in summertime, so the mountain is called Summer Capital, and the villa is called the Summer Palace.\nDuring World War II, Madame Chiang promoted the Chinese cause and tried to build a legacy for her husband. Well versed in both Chinese and Western culture, she became popular both in China and abroad.\nIn 1945 she became a member of the Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang.\n\"Warphans\".\nAlthough Soong Mei-ling initially avoided the public eye after marrying Chiang, she soon began an ambitious social welfare project to establish schools for the orphans of Chinese soldiers. The orphanages were well-appointed: with playgrounds, hotels, swimming pools, a gymnasium, model classrooms, and dormitories. Soong Mei-ling was deeply involved in the project and even picked all of the teachers herself. There were two schools \u2013 one for boys and one for girls\u2014built on a site at the foot of Purple Mountain, in Nanjing. She referred to these children as her \"warphans\" and made them a personal cause. The fate of the children of fallen soldiers became a much more important issue in China after the beginning of the war with Japan in 1937. In order to better provide for these children she established the Chinese Women's National War Relief Society.\nVisits to the U.S..\nSoong Mei-ling made several tours to the United States to lobby support for the Nationalists' war effort. She drew crowds as large as 30,000 people and in 1943 made the cover of \"Time\" magazine for a third time. She had earlier appeared on the October 26, 1931, cover alongside her husband and on the January 3, 1937, cover, with her husband as \"Man and Wife of the Year\".\nSoong dressed ostentatiously during her tours to seek foreign aid, bringing dozens of suitcases filled with Chanel handbags, pearl-decorated shoes, and other luxury garments on a visit to the White House.100 Soong's approach shocked United States First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt and prompted resentment from many officials in the Republic of China government.100\nArguably showing the impact of her visits, in 1943, the United States Women's Army Corps recruited a unit of Chinese-American women to serve with the Army Air Forces as \"Air WACs\", referred to as the \"Madame Chiang Kai-Shek Air WAC unit\".\nBoth Soong Mei-ling and her husband were on good terms with \"Time\" magazine senior editor and co-founder Henry Luce, who frequently tried to rally money and support from the American public for the Republic of China. On February 18, 1943, she became the first Chinese national and the second woman to address both houses of the US Congress. After the defeat of her husband's government in the Chinese Civil War in 1949, Madame Chiang followed her husband to Taiwan, while her sister Soong Ching-ling stayed in mainland China, siding with the communists. Madame Chiang continued to play a prominent international role. She was a Patron of the International Red Cross Committee, honorary chair of the British United Aid to China Fund, and First Honorary Member of the Bill of Rights Commemorative Society.\nAllegations of corruption.\nThroughout the 1930s and 1940s, Soong's family embezzled $20 million.40 During this period, the Nationalist Government's revenues were less than $30 million per year.40 One of the key reasons was that Soong Mei-ling ignored her family's involvement in corruption. The Soong family's eldest son, T.V. Soong, was the Chinese premier finance minister, and the eldest daughter, Soong Ai-ling, was the wife of Kung Hsiang-hsi, the wealthiest man in China. The second daughter, Soong Ching-ling, was the wife of Sun Yat-sen, China's founding father. The youngest daughter, Soong Mei-ling, married Chiang in 1927, and following the marriage, the two families became intimately connected, creating the \"Soong dynasty\" and the \"Four Families\". However, Soong was also credited for her campaign for women's rights in China, including her attempts to improve the education, culture, and social benefits of Chinese women. Critics have said that the \"Four Families\" monopolized the regime and looted it. The US sent considerable aid to the Nationalist government but soon realized the widespread corruption. Military supplies that were sent appeared on the black market. Large sums of money that had been transmitted through T. V. Soong, China's finance minister, soon disappeared. President Truman famously referred to the Nationalist leaders, \"They're thieves, every damn one of them.\" He also said, \"They stole $750 million out of the billions that we sent to Chiang. They stole it, and it's invested in real estate down in S\u00e3o Paolo and some right here in New York.\" Soong Mei-ling and Soong Ai-ling lived luxurious lifestyles and held millions in property, clothes, art, and jewelry. Soong Ai-ling and Soong Mei-ling were also the two richest women in China. Despite living a luxurious life for almost her entire life, Soong Mei-ling left only a $120,000 inheritance, and the reason, according to her niece, was that she donated most of her wealth when she was still alive.\nDuring Chiang Ching-kuo's enforcement campaign in Shanghai after the war, Chiang Ching-kuo arrested her nephew David Kung and several employees of the Yangtze Development Corporation on allegations of holding foreign exchange. Mei-ling called Chiang Kai-shek to complain and also called Chiang Ching-Kuo directly.181\u2013183 Kung was eventually freed after negotiations.\nAlleged tryst with Wendell Willkie.\nThere were allegations that Mei-ling had a tryst with Wendell Willkie, who had been the Republican candidate for president in 1940 and came to Chongqing on a world tour in 1942. The two are said to have left an official reception and gone to one of her private apartments. When Chiang Kai-shek noticed their absence, he gathered his bodyguards, who were armed with machine-guns, marched through the streets, and ransacked her apartment without finding the couple. She is said to have passionately kissed Willkie at the airport the next day and offered to come with him to the United States.\nScholars dismiss the allegations as weakly sourced, implausible, and even impossible. Jay Taylor's biography of Chiang points out that this infidelity was uncharacteristic of Mei-ling, and that it would have been unlikely for such a major commotion to go unnoticed. In a 2016 review of the evidence Perry Johansson dismisses the allegation entirely, as it was based on the later memory of one person, and he further cites the work of China historian Yang Tianshi. Yang reviewed the official schedules and newspaper accounts of Willkie's visit and found that there was no time or place where the alleged events could have taken place. He also found no mention of it in Chiang's detailed private diaries.\nLater life.\nAfter the death of her husband in 1975, Madame Chiang assumed a low profile. She was first diagnosed with breast cancer in 1975 and would undergo two mastectomies in Taiwan. She also had an ovarian tumor removed in 1991.\nChang Hsien-yi claimed that Soong Mei-ling and military officials loyal to her expedited the development of nuclear weapons and even set up a parallel chain of command to further their agenda.\nChiang Kai-shek was succeeded to power by his eldest son Chiang Ching-kuo, from a previous marriage, with whom Madame Chiang had rocky relations. In 1975, she emigrated from Taiwan to her family's 36-acre (14.6-hectare) estate in Lattingtown, New York, where she kept a portrait of her late husband in full military regalia in her living room. She kept a residence in Wolfeboro, New Hampshire, where she vacationed in the summer. Madame Chiang returned to Taiwan upon Chiang Ching-kuo's death in 1988, to shore up support among her old allies. However, Chiang Ching-kuo's successor, Lee Teng-hui, proved more adept at politics than she was, and consolidated his position. She again returned to the U.S. and made a rare public appearance in 1995 when she attended a reception held on Capitol Hill in her honor in connection with celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II. Madame Chiang made her last visit to Taiwan in 1995. In the 2000 presidential election in Taiwan, the Kuomintang produced a letter from her in which she purportedly supported the KMT candidate Lien Chan over independent candidate James Soong (no relation). James Soong never disputed the authenticity of the letter. Soong sold her Long Island estate in 2000 and spent the rest of her life in the 10 Gracie Square apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan owned by her niece. An open house viewing of the estate drew many Taiwanese expatriates. When Madame Chiang was 103 years old, she had an exhibition of her Chinese paintings in New York.\nDeath.\nMadame Chiang died in her sleep in New York City, in her Manhattan apartment on October 23, 2003, at the age of 105. Her remains were interred at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York, pending an eventual burial with her late husband who was entombed in Cihu, Taiwan. The stated intention is to have them both buried in mainland China once political differences are resolved.\nUpon her death, the White House released a statement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Madame Chiang was a close friend of the United States throughout her life, and especially during the defining struggles of the last century. Generations of Americans will always remember and respect her intelligence and strength of character. On behalf of the American people, I extend condolences to Madame Chiang's family members and many admirers around the world.\u2014\u200a\nJia Qinglin, chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), sent a message to Soong's relatives to mourn her death.\nAppraisals by the international press.\nThe \"New York Times\" obituary wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As a fluent English speaker, as a Christian, as a model of what many Americans hoped China to become, Madame Chiang struck a chord with American audiences as she traveled across the country, starting in the 1930s, raising money and lobbying for support of her husband's government. She seemed to many Americans to be the very symbol of the modern, educated, pro-American China they yearned to see emerge\u2014even as many Chinese dismissed her as a corrupt, power-hungry symbol of the past they wanted to escape.\n\"Life\" magazine called Madame the \"most powerful woman in the world\" while \"Liberty\" magazine described her as \"the real brains and boss of the Chinese government.\" Writer and diplomat Clare Boothe Luce, wife of \"Time\" publisher Henry Luce, once compared her to Joan of Arc and Florence Nightingale. Author Ernest Hemingway called her the \"empress\" of China.\nIn popular culture.\nHer tour to San Francisco is mentioned (under the name Madame Chiang) in \"Last Night at the Telegraph Club\", a 2021 novel by Malinda Lo. She also appears in \"Cooking for Madame Chiang\" in \"Dear Chrysanthemums\" (Scribner, 2023), a novel in stories by Fiona Sze-Lorrain.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28609", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28609", "title": "Soong sisters", "text": "Powerful siblings in 20th century China\nThe Soong sisters were three prominent women in modern Chinese history. All three sisters, from eldest to youngest, Soong Ai-ling, Soong Ching-ling, and Soong Mei-ling, married powerful men, respectively, H. H. Kung, Sun Yat-sen, and Chiang Kai-shek. Along with their husbands, they played major roles in China's politics and foreign relations in the early 20th century. \nOf Hakka descent, with ancestral roots in Wenchang, Hainan, the sisters were born to American-educated Methodist minister Charlie Soong, who made a fortune in banking and printing, and Ni Kwei-tseng, also a Methodist who came from an Episcopalian family. The sisters were raised as Christians in Shanghai and educated in the United States, where they all attended Wesleyan College; Mei-ling, however, left Wesleyan and eventually graduated from Wellesley College. Their three brothers were all high-ranking officials in the Republic of China government, one of whom was T. V. Soong.\nTheir life stories have been summarized in a saying: \"One loved money, one loved power, one loved her country\", referring to Ai-ling, Mei-ling, and Ching-ling in that order.\nHistory.\nEarly life.\nCharlie Soong, the father of the Soong sisters, was born in Wenchang, Hainan, in 1866, with the birth name Han Chiao Shun. He initially traveled to Java with his brother before being adopted by his uncle, who took them to Boston, United States, where Charlie worked as a shop assistant. His name was misunderstood by Americans as Charlie Soon and later became Charlie Soong.\nIn Boston, Charlie met New Shan-chow and Wen Bingzhong, frequent visitors to the shop, who encouraged him to pursue further education. In 1879, he fled the store and boarded the USS \"Albert Gallatin\" of the United States Revenue Cutter Service, where he was adopted by Captain Eric Gabrielson. Charlie became a Christian in Wilmington in 1880, becoming the first baptised Chinese person in North Carolina. With the support of a local church, he studied at Trinity College and later Vanderbilt University.\nHe returned to China as a missionary in 1885 and later married Ni Kwei-tseng, a match arranged by Wen Bing-chung. The couple initially engaged in missionary work and business in Kunshan, later continuing their missionary efforts in Chuansha. Their first daughter, Ai-ling, was born on 15 July 1889 in Kunshan, followed by two more daughters, Ching-ling and Mei-ling, as well as three sons, Tse-ven (T. V.), Tse-liang (T. L.) and Tse-an (T. A.). Charlie resigned from the mission in 1892, due to insufficient fund to support his family and became a successful businessperson for printing the Bible.\nEducation.\nCharlie was deeply committed to education in the United States for his daughters. He wanted them to receive a Methodist education, so he enrolled them at McTyeire School for Girls in Shanghai, where Ching-ling studied from 1904 to 1907. Acting on the advice of his missionary friend William Burke, who had ties to the Mulberry Street United Methodist Church in Macon, Charlie sent his eldest daughter Ai-ling to Wesleyan College in 1904.\nChing-ling and Mei-ling was among the first government-funded female Chinese students to study in the United States. The group, consisting of ten male and four female students, departed from Shanghai on 1 August 1907 and arrived in Seattle on 28 August, under the escort of Wen Bingzhong, the director of the Foreign Office of the Viceroy of Liangjiang. Ching-ling first attended school in Summit, New Jersey, to study Latin and French to fulfil Wesleyan's entrance requirements. She joined Ai-ling as a full-time college student at Wesleyan in the autumn of 1908, with their youngest sister Mei-ling accompanying them despite being only ten years old.\nAlthough the Soong sisters spent most of their time on campus, they also travelled across the United States, navigating the prevailing anti-Chinese sentiments of the time. They were warmly received by local communities in the American South. In the summer of 1910, Ching-ling and Mei-ling attended summer school together at Fairmount College. In the summer of 1912, they participated in a church-sponsored YMCA conference in Montreat, North Carolina. During several Christmas holidays, they visited Washington, D.C., where they were hosted as guests of the Chinese ambassador.\nMarriage.\nAfter graduating, Ching-ling's elder sister, Ai-ling, returned to Shanghai in 1908 and became the secretary to Sun Yat-sen. Sun became fascinated with Ai-ling, constantly gazing at her, although Ai-ling did not reciprocate his feelings in the same way. Ching-ling graduated from Wesleyan in 1913, and returned to China via Yokohama, Japan, where she met Sun. Ai-ling resigned in 1914 to marry H. H. Kung, passing the position on to Ching-ling, who admired Sun as the hero who founded the Chinese Republic. In the summer of 1915, Ching-ling returned to Shanghai, asking her parents for their permission to marry Sun, which shocked the family. Ching-ling was confined at home in Shanghai, during which Sun divorced with his wife Lu Mu-zhen.\nDespite objections from her father, Ching-ling married Sun Yat-sen on 25 October 1915. There were limited witnesses in their wedding ceremony in Tokyo, which included Wada Mizu, who provided his home for the wedding, \u00a0Liao Zhong-kai and Liao's 11-year-old daughter Cynthia. The Soong family chased Ching-ling to Tokyo, attempting to dissuade her from the marriage, with her father Charlie even appealing to the Japanese government to denounce Sun. Additionally, many of Sun\u2019s colleagues did not acknowledge Ching-ling as his wife, referring to her as Miss Soong rather than Mrs Sun. \nDuring a visit to Sun's residence in Shanghai, Chiang Kai-shek encountered Ching-ling's younger sister, Mei-ling, for the first time and became enamoured with her. Subsequently, Chiang divorced his wife in Fenghua and sought Sun's counsel on pursuing Mei-ling. When Sun consulted Ching-ling on the matter, she expressed her strong disapproval. Sun then advised Chiang to wait, and Chiang obeyed. In 1927, Mei-ling married Chiang, who was about to launch a purge against the CCP. Ching-ling protested and left China after the purge.\nReunion in the war.\nIn 1937, when the Second Sino-Japanese war broke out, all three of them got together after a 10-year separation in an effort to unite the Kuomintang and Communists against the Imperial Japanese army. Soong Ai-ling devoted herself to social work such as helping wounded soldiers, refugees and orphans. She donated five ambulances and 37 trucks to the army in Shanghai and the air force, along with 500 leather uniforms. When the Japanese occupied Nanjing and Wuhan, the three sisters moved to Hong Kong. In 1940, they returned to Chongqing and established the Chinese Industrial Cooperatives, which opened job opportunities for people through weaving, sewing and other crafts. The sisters frequently visited schools, hospitals, orphanages, air raid shelters and aided war torn communities along the way.\nBreak-up and deaths.\nIn 1944, Soong Ai-ling left China for Brazil to receive medical treatment and later settled in the United States in 1946. In November 1948, Soong Mei-ling travelled to the United States to seek support for her husband, Chiang Kai-shek, and the Kuomintang. In May 1949, she wrote to Soong Ching-ling, asking if there was anything she could do for her sister in China. This letter marked the last communication between Mei-ling and Ching-ling. Following the Kuomintang's defeat in the Chinese Civil War, Mei-ling arrived in Taipei, Taiwan, in 1950, while Ching-ling remained on the mainland and joined the Communist-led government. In 1957, Ching-ling wrote to Ai-ling, requesting her to return to China.\nIn 1969, Ai-ling and Mei-ling attended the funeral of their brother T. A. Soong in San Francisco, but Ching-ling was absent. In 1971, T. V. Soong died in San Francisco, and his funeral was scheduled to take place in New York. Mei-ling flew from Taiwan to Hawaii for a stopover, during which Chiang Kai-shek urged her to cancel her trip. She later learned that the Communist Chinese government had informed the U.S. government of Ching-ling\u2019s intention to attend the funeral in New York. Consequently, Mei-ling and Ai-ling both cancelled their trips, and none of the sisters attended their brother's funeral. Ai-ling died in New York in 1973. Ching-ling had planned to reunite with Mei-ling in Japan before her death, which never happened.\nIn 1981, Ching-ling fell critically ill. Her family sent a telegram to Mei-ling, hoping for a reunion. Mei-ling responded, suggesting that Ching-ling be sent to New York, United States instead, as a potential family reunion in Beijing was seen as a threat to the legitimacy of her stepson, Taiwanese President Chiang Ching-kuo. Xinhua noted that although other family members were present at the time of Soong's passing, she did not reunite with her sister. She was later invited by the Communist Chinese government for the funeral, but she told Chiang Ching-kuo, her stepson, that she would not go. Deng Xiaoping mentioned that Soong, the aunt of Chiang Ching-kuo, had expressed hope for reunification talks between the governments of Beijing and Taipei in the near future.\nChing-ling was buried in the Soong family graveyard in June. In January 1984, the cemetery was re-organised as the \"Mausoleum of Soong Ching Ling, Honorary Chairman of the People's Republic of China\", which came under state protection in February 1982. Before Mei-ling died in 2003, she had refused to be buried in Taiwan and hoped to be buried with her parents in Shanghai, which was not acceptable for the Kuomintang. As a result, she was buried in the United States instead.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28610", "revid": "748161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28610", "title": "2nd Timothy", "text": ""}
{"id": "28611", "revid": "44260906", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28611", "title": "Second Epistle of Peter", "text": "Book of the New Testament\n2 Peter, also known as the Second Epistle of Peter and abbreviated as 2 Pet., is an epistle of the New Testament written in Koine Greek. It identifies the author as \"Simon Peter\" (in some translations, 'Simeon' or 'Shimon'), a bondservant and apostle of Jesus Christ\" (). The epistle is traditionally attributed to Peter the Apostle, but most critical scholars consider the epistle pseudepigraphical (i.e., authored by one or more of Peter's followers, using Peter as a pseudonym). Scholars estimate the date of authorship anywhere from AD 60 to 150.\nAuthorship and date.\nAccording to the Epistle itself, it was composed by the Apostle Peter, an eyewitness to Jesus' ministry. says \"This is now the second letter I have written to you\"; if this is an allusion to 1 Peter, then the audience of the epistle may have been the same as it was for 1 Peter, namely, various churches in Asia Minor (see ).\nThe date of composition has proven to be difficult to determine. Taken literally, it would have been written around AD 64\u201368, as Christian tradition holds Peter was martyred in the 60s by Nero, and also because Peter references his approaching death in (\"since I know that the putting off of my body will be soon, as our Lord Jesus Christ made clear to me\").\nThe questions of authorship and date are closely related. Scholars consider the epistle to have been written anywhere between c. AD 60\u2013150, with \"some reason to favour\" a date between 80 and 90. Dates suggested by various authors include:\nThe scholarly debate can be divided into two parts: external and internal evidence. The external evidence for its authenticity, although feasible, remains open to criticism. (There is debate as to whether 2 Peter is being quoted or the other way around.) Much of this debate derives from Professor Robert E. Picirilli's article \"Allusion to 2 Peter in the Apostolic Fathers,\" which compiles many of the allusions by the Apostolic Fathers of the late first and early second centuries, thus demonstrating that 2 Peter is not to be considered a second-century document. Despite this effort, scholars such as Michael J. Gilmour, who consider Picirilli's evidences to be correct, disagree with classifying the work as authentic but rather as a pseudepigrapha, arguing among many other things that Paul () had to warn against contemporary pseudo-Pauline writers.\nThe internal debate focuses more on its style, its ideology, and its relationship to the other works and stories. Some of the internal arguments against the authenticity of 2 Peter have gained significant popularity since the 1980s. One such argument is the argument that the scholar Bo Reicke first formulated in 1964, where he argued that 2 Peter is clearly an example of an ancient literary genre known as a 'testament', which originally arose from Moses' farewell discourse in Deuteronomy. Richard J. Bauckham, who popularized this argument, wrote that the 'testament' genre contains two main elements: ethical warnings to be followed after the death of the writer and revelations of the future. The significant fact about the 'testament' genre was not in its markers but in its nature; it is argued that a piece of 'testament' literature is meant to \"be a completely transparent fiction.\" This argument has its detractors, who classify it as a syllogism. Others characterize the writing as a 'farewell speech' because it lacks any semblance of final greetings or ties with recipients.\nOne of the questions to be resolved is 2 Peter's relationship with the Pauline letters since it refers to the Pauline epistles and so must postdate at least some of them, regardless of authorship. Thus, a date before AD 60 is improbable. Further, it goes as far as to name the Pauline epistles as \"scripture\"\u2014one of only two times a New Testament work refers to another New Testament work in this way\u2014implying that it postdates them by some time. Various hypotheses have been put forward to improve or resolve this issue; one notable hypothesis is that the First Epistle of Clement (c. AD 96), by citing as Scripture several of the Pauline letters, was inspired by 2 Peter because it was considered authentic. This would mean that even the recipients of 1 Clement, the inhabitants of Corinth, would have also considered it authentic, which would indicate that the letter must have been in circulation long before that time. The earliest reference to a Pauline collection is probably found in Ignatius of Antioch around AD 108.\nAnother debate is about its linguistic complexity and its relationship with 1 Peter. According to the scholar Bart D. Ehrman, the historical Peter could not have written any works, either because he was \"unlettered\" () or because he was a fisherman from Capernaum, a comparatively small and probably monolingual town, in a time and province where there was little literacy. Bauckham addresses the statistical differences in the vocabulary of the two writings, using the data given by U. Holzmeister's 1949 study; 38.6 percent of the words are common to 1 and 2 Peter. 61.4 percent peculiar to 2 Peter, while of the words used in 1 Peter, 28.4 percent are common to 1 and 2 Peter, 71.6 percent are peculiar to 1 Peter. However, these figures can be compared with other epistles considered authentic, showing that pure statistical analysis of this type is a weak way of showing literary relationship. Bauckham also notes that \"the Greek style of Second Peter is not to the taste of many modern readers, at times pretentiously elaborate, with an effort at pompous phrasing, a somewhat artificial piece of rhetoric, and 'slimy Greek'\"; contrary to the style of the first epistle, \"2 Peter must relate to the 'Asiatic Greek.'\" The crux of the matter is how these differences are explained. Those who deny the Petrine authorship of the epistle, such as, for example, Kelly, insist that the differences show that First and Second Peter were not written by the same person. Others add that 2 Peter was a specific type of pseudepigraphy common and morally accepted at the time, either because it was a testamentary genre or because the works of the disciples could bear the names of their masters without any inconvenience.\nThose who defend Petrine authorship often appeal to the different amanuenses or secretaries Peter used to write each letter, as first suggested by Jerome. Thomas R. Schreiner criticizes people who regard arguments in favor of the authenticity of 2 Peter as mere arguments of religious conservatives who impotently try to invent arguments to support authenticity. People of this mindset, according to Schreiner, object to the claim that different secretaries may have been used but then claim that the corpus of the two letters is too small to establish stylistic variation. Schreiner states: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When we examine historical documents, we are not granted exhaustive knowledge of the circumstances in which the document came into being. Therefore, we must postulate probabilities, and in some cases, of course, more than one scenario is likely. Moreover, in some cases the likely scenarios are not internally contradictory, but both constitute plausible answers to the problem posed. Suggesting more than one solution is not necessarily an appeal to despair, but can be a sign of humility.\nThe scholar Simon J. Kistemaker believes that linguistically \"the material presented in both documents provides substantial evidence to indicate that these letters are the product of a single author.\" However, this view is very much in the minority. Most biblical scholars have concluded Peter is not the author, considering the epistle pseudepigraphal. Reasons for this include its linguistic differences from 1 Peter, its apparent use of Jude, possible allusions to second-century gnosticism, encouragement in the wake of a delayed parousia, and weak external support.\nEarly surviving manuscripts.\nSome early manuscripts containing the text of this chapter are:\nRelationship with the Epistle of Jude.\nThere is an obvious relationship between the texts of 2 Peter and the Epistle of Jude, to the degree that one of them clearly had read the other and copied phrases, or both had read some lost common source. The shared passages are:\nIn general, most scholars believe that Jude was written first, and 2 Peter shows signs of adapting phrases from Jude for its specific situation.\nCanonical acceptance.\nThe earliest undisputed mention of 2 Peter is by the theologian Origen (c. 185\u2013254) in his \"Commentary on the Gospel of John\", in which he states: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Peter, on whom the Church of Christ was built, against which the gates of Hades shall not prevail, left only one epistle of aknowledged genuinenness. Suppose we allow that he left a second, which is doubtful.\nOrigen mentioned no explanation for the doubts, nor did he give any indication concerning the extent or location. According to Donald Guthrie this means that Origen \"saw no reason to treat these doubts as serious, and this would mean to imply that in his time the epistle was widely regarded as canonical.\" Acceptance of the letter into the canon did not occur without some difficulty; however, \"nowhere did doubts about the letter's authorship take the form of definitive rejection.\"\nOrigen, in another passage, has been interpreted as considering the letter to be Petrine in authorship. Before Origen's time, the evidence is inconclusive; there is a lack of definite early quotations from the letter in the writings of the Apostolic Fathers, though possible use or influence has been located in the works of Clement of Alexandria (d. c. 211), Theophilius (d. c. 183), Aristides (d. c. 134), Polycarp (d. 155), and Justin (d. 165).\nRobert E. Picirilli observed that Clement of Rome linked James 1:8, 2 Peter 3:4, and Mark 4:26 in 1 Clement 23:3. Richard Bauckham and Peter H. Davids also noted the reference to \u201cScripture\u201d in 1 Clement 23:3 matched 2 Peter 3:4, but make it dependent on a common apocalyptic source, which was also used in 2 Clement 11:2.\nCarsten Peter Thiede adds to Picirilli's work authors such as Justin and Minucius Felix who would use 2 Peter directly and a new reference in Clement of Rome (1 Clem. 9.2 = 2 Pet. 1.17).\n2 Peter seems to be quoted amongst apocryphal literature in Shepherd of Hermas (AD 95\u2013160), Apocalypse of Peter (c. AD 125\u2013135), the Gospel of Truth (AD 140\u2013170), and the Apocryphon of John (AD 120\u2013180).\nEusebius (c. 275\u2013339) professed his own doubts (see also Antilegomena), and is the earliest direct testimony of such, though he stated that the majority supported the text, and by the time of Jerome (c. 346\u2013420) it had been mostly accepted as canonical.\nThe Peshitta, the standard version of the Bible for churches in the Syriac tradition, does not contain the Second Epistle of Peter and thus rejects its canonical status.\nContent.\nIn both content and style this letter is very different from 1 Peter. Its author, like the author of the Gospel of Luke and the Acts of the Apostles, is familiar with literary conventions, writing in a more elevated Koine Greek than, for example, Paul's writings or the Gospel of Mark. Gorgianic figures are used which are characteristic of Asian rhetoric (Asianism), with style similar to that of Ignatius and the Epistle to Diognetus. This leads some scholars to think that, like 1 Peter, the letter is addressed to Gentile Christians in Asia Minor.\nThe epistle presciently declares that it is written shortly before the apostle's death (1:14), an assertion that may not have been part of the original text. Arguments for and against the assertion being original are based largely on the acceptance or rejection of supernatural intervention in the life of the writer.\nThe epistle contains eleven references to the Old Testament. In 3:15-16 a reference is made to one of Paul's epistles, which some have identified as \"3:10a\" with 1 Thess. 5:2; \"3:14\" with 1 Thess. 5:23.\nThe author of 2 Peter had a relationship with the Gospel tradition, mainly in the Transfiguration of Jesus, \"1:4\" with Mark 9:1; \"1:11\" with Mark 9:1; \"1:16,18\" with Mark 9:2-10; \"1:17\" with Matthew 17:5; \"1:19\" with Mark 9:4; and in the promise of the Second Coming, \"3:10b\" with Mark 13:31 or Luke 21:33.\nThe book also shares a number of passages with the Epistle of Jude, \"1:5\" with Jude 3; \"1:12\" with Jude 5; \"2:1\" with Jude 4; \"2:4\" with Jude 6; \"2:5\" with Jude 5; \"2:6\" with Jude 7; \"2:10\u201311\" with Jude 8\u20139; \"2:12\" with Jude 10; \"2:13\u201317\" with Jude 11\u201313; \"2:18\" with Jude 16; \"3:2f\" with Jude 17f; \"3:3\" with Jude 18; \"3:14\" with Jude 24; and \"3:18\" with Jude 25. Because the Epistle of Jude is much shorter than 2 Peter, and due to various stylistic details, the scholarly consensus is that Jude was the source for the similar passages of 2 Peter.\nTartarus is mentioned in 2 Peter 2:4 as devoted to the holding of certain fallen angels. It is elaborated on in Jude 6. Jude 6, however, is a clear reference to the Book of Enoch. Bauckham suggests that 2 Peter 2:4 is partially dependent on Jude 6 but is independently drawing on paraenetic tradition that also lies behind Jude 5\u20137. The paraenetic traditions are found in Sirach 16:7\u201310, Damascus Document 2:17\u20133:12, 3 Maccabees 2:4\u20137, Testament of Naphtali 3:4\u20135, and Mishna Sanhedrin 10:3.\nOutline.\nChapter 1.\nThe chapters of this epistle show a triangular relationship between Christology (chapter 1), ethics (chapter 2) and eschatology (chapter 3).\nAt the beginning of chapter 1, the author calls himself \"Simeon Peter\" (see Acts 15:14). This detail, for the scholar Rob. van Houwelingen, is evidence of the authenticity of the letter. The letter gives a list of seven virtues in the form of a ladder: Love, Brotherly affection, Godliness, Steadfastness, Self-control, Knowledge, and Excellence. Through the memory of Peter (1:12\u201315), the author encourages the addressees to lead holy and godly lives (11b); in verse 13 the author speaks of righteousness (being just) in a moral sense, and in verse 14 his line of argument reaches a climax as the addressees are encouraged to do all they can to be found blameless (1 Thess 5:23). In short, the author's concern is to encourage his addressees to behave ethically without reproach (1:5\u20137; 3:12\u201314), probably because of the impending parousia (Second Coming), which will come like a thief in the night (3:10; 1 Thess 5:2).\nChapter 2.\nIn this chapter, the author affirms that false teachers have arisen among the faithful to lead them astray with \"destructive heresies\" and \"exploit people with false words\" (2:1\u20132). Just as there were false prophets in ancient times, so there would be false teachers, false prophets and sheep's clothing were one of the prophecies of Jesus [Matt. 7:15], to which the author of this letter together with the author of 1 John refers [1 John 4:1]. False teachers are accused of \"denying the Lord who bought them\" and promoting licentiousness (2:1\u20132). The author classifies false teachers as \"irrational animals, instinctive creatures, born to be caught and destroyed\" (2:12). They are \"spots and stains, delighting in their dissipation\" with \"eyes full of adultery, insatiable for sin\u2026 hearts trained in covetousness\" (2:13\u201314). As a solution, 2 Peter proposes in the following chapter tools such as penance, aimed at purging sins, and the reactualization of the eschatological hope, to be expected with attention, service and perseverance. This chapter in all likelihood adapts significant portions of the Epistle of Jude.\nThe ethical goal is not to fall into that debauchery, and errors, and to have hope. This is promoted with many stories of how God rescues the righteous while holding back the unrighteous for the day of judgment, and the stories of Noah, the story of Lot in Sodom and Gomorrah (2:6\u20138) and the story Balaam, son of Bosor (2:15\u201316) are used as a warning.\n quotes : \"As a dog returns to his vomit, so a fool repeats his folly.\"\nChapter 3.\nThe fundamental of this chapter is the authoritative Christian revelation. The revelation is found in a two-part source (3:2). There is little doubt that the \"words spoken beforehand by the holy prophets\" refers to the OT writings, either in part or in whole. Then the author mentions the second source of revelation, the \"commandment of the Lord\" spoken by \"your apostles.\" It is remarkable that this two-part authority includes an obvious older means \"words spoken beforehand\" as well as an obvious newer half, the apostolically mediated words (words about Jesus). One could be forgiven if he sees here a precursor to a future \"old\" and \"new\" Testament. This juxtaposition of prophet and apostle as a two-part revelatory source is not first found in 3:1\u20132, but in 1:16\u201321.\nAnother remarkable feature of this chapter is that the author presupposes that his audience is familiar with a plurality of apostles (\"how many\" is unclear), and, moreover, that they have had (and perhaps still have) access to the teaching of these apostles. One cannot \"remember\" teaching that they have not received. Of course, this raises difficult questions about the precise medium (oral or written) by which the public received this apostolic teaching. However, near the end of this chapter, the means by which the audience at least received the apostle Paul's teaching is expressly stated. We are told that the audience knew the teachings of \"our beloved brother Paul\" (3:15) and that they knew them in written form: \"Paul also wrote to you according to wisdom as he does in all his letters\" (3:16), the \"also\" being the key word since in the first verse of the chapter the author referred to another written apostolic text, namely his first epistle (1 Peter): considering part of the \"Scriptures\" not only the OT prophets, but also Paul and the author himself, from the Pauline corpus the author may have known 1 and 2 Thessalonians, Romans, Galatians, and possibly Ephesians and Colossians. Thought on Christian revelation is also located in other early authors, namely Clement of Rome, Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin Martyr, and in the work 2 Clement.\nIn the middle of the chapter is the explanation for the delay in Jesus' return (3:9); Jesus' delay is only to facilitate the salvation of the \"already faithful\" who may at times waver in their faith or have been led astray by false teachers (2:2\u20133). God is delaying to make sure that \"all\" have had sufficient time to secure their commitment (or return) to the gospel, including the false teachers. The remaining verses provide details about the coming day of the Lord along with the exhortation that flows seamlessly into the conclusion of the letter. The instruction offered here (3:11\u201313) echoes that of Jesus who called his disciples to await the consummation of his kingdom with attention, service and perseverance (Mt 24\u201325; Mk 13:3\u201313, 32\u201337; Lk 18:1\u201330; 21:1\u201338). Taken together with the final verses (3:14\u201318), here again the author expresses the concern that believers secure their eternal place in God's new creation by embracing lives that foster blessing and even hasten God's coming day.\n quotes .\n quotes Psalm 90, specifically .\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28612", "revid": "40211325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28612", "title": "Second Epistle of John", "text": "Book of the New Testament\nThe Second Epistle of John is a book of the New Testament attributed to John the Evangelist, traditionally thought to be the author of the other two epistles of John, and the Gospel of John (though this is disputed). Most modern scholars believe this is not John the Apostle, but in general there is no consensus as to the identity of this person or group. (See Authorship of the Johannine works.)\nComposition.\nThe language of this epistle is remarkably similar to 3 John. It is therefore suggested by a few that a single author composed both of these letters. The traditional view contends that all the letters are by the hand of John the Apostle, and the linguistic structure, special vocabulary, and polemical issues all lend toward this theory.\nAlso significant is the clear warning against paying heed to those who say that Jesus was not a flesh-and-blood figure: \"For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh.\" This establishes that, from the time the epistle was first written, there were those who had docetic Christologies, believing that the human person of Jesus was actually pure spirit or did not come at all.\nAlternatively, the letter's acknowledgment and rejection of gnostic theology may reveal a later date of authorship than orthodox Christianity claims. This can not be assured by a simple study of the context. Gnosticism's beginnings and its relationship to Christianity are poorly dated, due to an insufficient corpus of literature relating the first interactions between the two religions. It vehemently condemns such anti-corporeal attitudes, which also indicates that those taking such unorthodox positions were either sufficiently vocal, persuasive, or numerous enough to warrant rebuttal in this form. Adherents of gnosticism were most numerous during the second and third centuries.\nInterpretation of \"The Lady\".\nThe text is addressed \"to the elect lady\" and her children (; some interpretations translate this phrase as \"elder lady,\" \"a very special woman,\" \"chosen lady,\" \"dear Lady\" etc.), and closes with the words, \"The children of thy elect sister greet thee.\" The person addressed is commended for her piety, and is warned against false teachers.\nThe lady has often been seen as a metaphor for the church, the church being the body of believers as a whole and as local congregations. The children would be members of that local congregation. The writer also includes a greeting from another church in the final verse, \"The children of thy elect sister greet thee.\" The term \"the elect\" (\u1f10\u03ba\u03bb\u03b5\u03ba\u03c4\u03bf\u03af, \"eklektoi\") was a fairly common term for those who believe in the gospel and follow Christ. Scholar Amos Wilder supports this view, saying the content of the epistle itself shows it was addressed to the church as a whole rather than a single person.\nAnother interpretation holds that the letter is addressed to a specific individual. Athanasius proposed that Kyria, the Greek word used here which means lady, was actually a name. The Young's Literal Translation of the Bible translates it this way. It is also possible it refers to an individual but simply does not use her name. One theory is that the letter refers to Mary, mother of Jesus; Jesus had entrusted his \"beloved disciple\" with Mary's life when Jesus was on the cross (John 19:26\u201327). The children would thus refer to the brothers of Jesus: James, Joses, Simon and Jude, and the sister to Mary's sister mentioned in . Mary was likewise never referred to by name in John's gospel. Such an interpretation would assume a much earlier date of composition than modern scholars have suggested.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOnline translations of the Second Epistle of John:\nOnline articles on the Second Epistle of John:"}
{"id": "28613", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28613", "title": "Saloth Sar", "text": ""}
{"id": "28615", "revid": "8660314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28615", "title": "Sequencing", "text": "In genetics and biochemistry, determining the structure of an unbranched biopolymer\nIn genetics and biochemistry, sequencing means to determine the primary structure (sometimes incorrectly called the primary sequence) of an unbranched biopolymer. Sequencing results in a symbolic linear depiction known as a sequence which succinctly summarizes much of the atomic-level structure of the sequenced molecule.\nDNA sequencing.\nDNA sequencing is the process of determining the nucleotide order of a given DNA fragment. So far, most DNA sequencing has been performed using the chain termination method developed by Frederick Sanger. This technique uses sequence-specific termination of a DNA synthesis reaction using modified nucleotide substrates. However, new sequencing technologies such as pyrosequencing are gaining an increasing share of the sequencing market. More genome data are now being produced by pyrosequencing than Sanger DNA sequencing. Pyrosequencing has enabled rapid genome sequencing. Bacterial genomes can be sequenced in a single run with several times coverage with this technique. This technique was also used to sequence the genome of James Watson recently.\nThe sequence of DNA encodes the necessary information for living things to survive and reproduce. Determining the sequence is therefore useful in fundamental research into why and how organisms live, as well as in applied subjects. Because of the key importance DNA has to living things, knowledge of DNA sequences is useful in practically any area of biological research. For example, in medicine it can be used to identify, diagnose, and potentially develop treatments for genetic diseases. Similarly, research into pathogens may lead to treatments for contagious diseases. Biotechnology is a burgeoning discipline, with the potential for many useful products and services.\nThe Carlson curve is a term coined by \"The Economist\" to describe the biotechnological analog of Moore's law, and is named after author Rob Carlson. Carlson accurately predicted the doubling time of DNA sequencing technologies (measured by cost and performance) would be at least as fast as Moore's law. Carlson curves illustrate the rapid (in some cases hyperexponential) decrease in cost and increase in performance of a variety of technologies, including DNA sequencing, DNA synthesis, and a range of physical and computational tools used in protein expression and in determining protein structures.\nSanger sequencing.\nIn chain terminator sequencing (Sanger sequencing), extension is initiated at a specific site on the template DNA by using a short oligonucleotide 'primer' complementary to the template at that region. The oligonucleotide primer is extended using a DNA polymerase, an enzyme that replicates DNA. Included with the primer and DNA polymerase are the four deoxynucleotide bases (DNA building blocks), along with a low concentration of a chain terminating nucleotide (most commonly a di-deoxynucleotide). The deoxynucleotides lack in the OH group both at the 2' and at the 3' position of the ribose molecule, therefore once they are inserted within a DNA molecule they prevent it from being further elongated. In this sequencer four different vessels are employed, each containing only of the four dideoxyribonucleotides; the incorporation of the chain terminating nucleotides by the DNA polymerase in a random position results in a series of related DNA fragments, of different sizes, that terminate with a given dideoxiribonucleotide. The fragments are then size-separated by electrophoresis in a slab polyacrylamide gel, or more commonly now, in a narrow glass tube (capillary) filled with a viscous polymer.\nAn alternative to the labelling of the primer is to label the terminators instead, commonly called 'dye terminator sequencing'. The major advantage of this approach is the complete sequencing set can be performed in a single reaction, rather than the four needed with the labeled-primer approach. This is accomplished by labelling each of the dideoxynucleotide chain-terminators with a separate fluorescent dye, which fluoresces at a different wavelength. This method is easier and quicker than the dye primer approach, but may produce more uneven data peaks (different heights), due to a template dependent difference in the incorporation of the large dye chain-terminators. This problem has been significantly reduced with the introduction of new enzymes and dyes that minimize incorporation variability.\nThis method is now used for the vast majority of sequencing reactions as it is both simpler and cheaper. The major reason for this is that the primers do not have to be separately labelled (which can be a significant expense for a single-use custom primer), although this is less of a concern with frequently used 'universal' primers. This is changing rapidly due to the increasing cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generation systems from Illumina, 454, ABI, Helicos, and Dover.\nPyrosequencing.\nThe pyrosequencing method is based on the detection of the pyrophosphate release on nucleotide incorporation. Before performing pyrosequencing, the DNA strand to sequence has to be amplified by PCR. Then the order in which the nucleotides have to be added in the sequencer is chosen (i.e. G-A-T-C). When a specific nucleotide is added, if the DNA polymerase incorporates it in the growing chain, the pyrophosphate is released and converted into ATP by ATP sulfurylase. ATP powers the oxidation of luciferase through the luciferase; this reaction generates a light signal recorded as a pyrogram peak. In this way, the nucleotide incorporation is correlated to a signal. The light signal is proportional to the amount of nucleotides incorporated during the synthesis of the DNA strand (i.e. two nucleotides incorporated correspond to two pyrogram peaks). When the added nucleotides aren't incorporated in the DNA molecule, no signal is recorded; the enzyme apyrase removes any unincorporated nucleotide remaining in the reaction.\nThis method requires neither fluorescently-labelled nucleotides nor gel electrophoresis.\nPyrosequencing, which was developed by P\u00e5l Nyr\u00e9n and Mostafa Ronaghi DNA, has been commercialized by Biotage (for low-throughput sequencing) and 454 Life Sciences (for high-throughput sequencing). The latter platform sequences roughly 100 megabases [now up to 400 megabases] in a seven-hour run with a single machine. In the array-based method (commercialized by 454 Life Sciences), single-stranded DNA is annealed to beads and amplified via EmPCR. These DNA-bound beads are then placed into wells on a fiber-optic chip along with enzymes which produce light in the presence of ATP. When free nucleotides are washed over this chip, light is produced as ATP is generated when nucleotides join with their complementary base pairs. Addition of one (or more) nucleotide(s) results in a reaction that generates a light signal that is recorded by the CCD camera in the instrument. The signal strength is proportional to the number of nucleotides, for example, homopolymer stretches, incorporated in a single nucleotide flow. https://\nLarge-scale sequencing.\nWhereas the methods above describe various sequencing methods, separate related terms are used when a large portion of a genome is sequenced. Several platforms were developed to perform exome sequencing (a subset of all DNA across all chromosomes that encode genes) or whole genome sequencing (sequencing of the all nuclear DNA of a human).\nRNA sequencing.\nRNA is less stable in the cell, and also more prone to nuclease attack experimentally. As RNA is generated by transcription from DNA, the information is already present in the cell's DNA. However, it is sometimes desirable to sequence RNA molecules. While sequencing DNA gives a genetic profile of an organism, sequencing RNA reflects only the sequences that are actively expressed in the cells. To sequence RNA, the usual method is first to reverse transcribe the RNA extracted from the sample to generate cDNA fragments. This can then be sequenced as described above.\nThe bulk of RNA expressed in cells are ribosomal RNAs or small RNAs, detrimental for cellular translation, but often not the focus of a study. This fraction can be removed \"in vitro\", however, to enrich for the messenger RNA, also included, that usually is of interest. Derived from the exons these mRNAs are to be later translated to proteins that support particular cellular functions. The expression profile therefore indicates cellular activity, particularly desired in the studies of diseases, cellular behaviour, responses to reagents or stimuli. Eukaryotic RNA molecules are not necessarily co-linear with their DNA template, as introns are excised. This gives a certain complexity to map the read sequences back to the genome and thereby identify their origin.\nFor more information on the capabilities of next-generation sequencing applied to whole transcriptomes see: RNA-Seq and MicroRNA Sequencing.\nProtein sequencing.\nMethods for performing protein sequencing\ninclude:\nIf the gene encoding the protein is known, it is currently much easier to sequence the DNA and infer the protein sequence. Determining part of a protein's amino-acid sequence (often one end) by one of the above methods may be sufficient to identify a clone carrying this gene.\nPolysaccharide sequencing.\nThough polysaccharides are also biopolymers, it is not so common to talk of 'sequencing' a polysaccharide, for several reasons. Although many polysaccharides are linear, many have branches. Many different units (individual monosaccharides) can be used, and bonded in different ways. However, the main theoretical reason is that whereas the other polymers listed here are primarily generated in a 'template-dependent' manner by one processive enzyme, each individual join in a polysaccharide may be formed by a different enzyme. In many cases the assembly is not uniquely specified; depending on which enzyme acts, one of several different units may be incorporated. This can lead to a family of similar molecules being formed. This is particularly true for plant polysaccharides. Methods for the structure determination of oligosaccharides and polysaccharides include NMR spectroscopy and methylation analysis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28616", "revid": "50186754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28616", "title": "Shotgun sequencing", "text": "Method used for sequencing random DNA strands\nIn genetics, shotgun sequencing is a method used for sequencing random DNA strands. It is named by analogy with the rapidly expanding, quasi-random shot grouping of a shotgun.\nThe chain-termination method of DNA sequencing (\"Sanger sequencing\") can only be used for short DNA strands of 100 to 1000 base pairs. Due to this size limit, longer sequences are subdivided into smaller fragments that can be sequenced separately, and these sequences are assembled to give the overall sequence.\nIn shotgun sequencing, DNA is broken up randomly into numerous small segments, which are sequenced using the chain termination method to obtain \"reads\". Multiple overlapping reads for the target DNA are obtained by performing several rounds of this fragmentation and sequencing. Computer programs then use the overlapping ends of different reads to assemble them into a continuous sequence.\nShotgun sequencing was one of the precursor technologies that was responsible for enabling whole genome sequencing.\nExample.\nFor example, consider the following two rounds of shotgun reads:\nIn this extremely simplified example, none of the reads cover the full length of the original sequence, but the four reads can be assembled into the original sequence using the overlap of their ends to align and order them. In reality, this process uses enormous amounts of information that are rife with ambiguities and sequencing errors. Assembly of complex genomes is additionally complicated by the great abundance of repetitive sequences, meaning similar short reads could come from completely different parts of the sequence.\nMany overlapping reads for each segment of the original DNA are necessary to overcome these difficulties and accurately assemble the sequence. For example, to complete the Human Genome Project, most of the human genome was sequenced at 12X or greater \"coverage\"; that is, each base in the final sequence was present on average in 12 different reads. Even so, current methods have failed to isolate or assemble reliable sequence for approximately 1% of the (euchromatic) human genome, as of 2004.\nWhole genome shotgun sequencing.\nHistory.\nWhole genome shotgun sequencing for small (4000- to 7000-base-pair) genomes was first suggested in 1979. The first genome sequenced by shotgun sequencing was that of cauliflower mosaic virus, published in 1981.\nPaired-end sequencing.\nBroader application benefited from pairwise end sequencing, known colloquially as \"double-barrel shotgun sequencing\". As sequencing projects began to take on longer and more complicated DNA sequences, multiple groups began to realize that useful information could be obtained by sequencing both ends of a fragment of DNA. Although sequencing both ends of the same fragment and keeping track of the paired data was more cumbersome than sequencing a single end of two distinct fragments, the knowledge that the two sequences were oriented in opposite directions and were about the length of a fragment apart from each other was valuable in reconstructing the sequence of the original target fragment.\nHistory. The first published description of the use of paired ends was in 1990 as part of the sequencing of the human HGPRT locus, although the use of paired ends was limited to closing gaps after the application of a traditional shotgun sequencing approach. The first theoretical description of a pure pairwise end sequencing strategy, assuming fragments of constant length, was in 1991. At the time, there was community consensus that the optimal fragment length for pairwise end sequencing would be three times the sequence read length. In 1995 Roach et al. introduced the innovation of using fragments of varying sizes, and demonstrated that a pure pairwise end-sequencing strategy would be possible on large targets. The strategy was subsequently adopted by The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR) to sequence the genome of the bacterium \"Haemophilus influenzae\" in 1995, and then by Celera Genomics to sequence the \"Drosophila melanogaster\" (fruit fly) genome in 2000, and subsequently the human genome.\nApproach.\nTo apply the strategy, a high-molecular-weight DNA strand is sheared into random fragments, size-selected (usually 2, 10, 50, and 150 kb), and cloned into an appropriate vector. The clones are then sequenced from both ends using the chain termination method yielding two short sequences. Each sequence is called an \"end-read\" or \"read 1 and read 2\" and two reads from the same clone are referred to as \"mate pairs\". Since the chain termination method usually can only produce reads between 500 and 1000 bases long, in all but the smallest clones, mate pairs will rarely overlap.\nAssembly.\nThe original sequence is reconstructed from the reads using sequence assembly software. First, overlapping reads are collected into longer composite sequences known as \"contigs\". Contigs can be linked together into \"scaffolds\" by following connections between mate pairs. The distance between contigs can be inferred from the mate pair positions if the average fragment length of the library is known and has a narrow window of deviation. Depending on the size of the gap between contigs, different techniques can be used to find the sequence in the gaps. If the gap is small (5-20kb) then the use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify the region is required, followed by sequencing. If the gap is large (&gt;20kb) then the large fragment is cloned in special vectors such as bacterial artificial chromosomes (BAC) followed by sequencing of the vector.\nPros and cons.\nProponents of this approach argue that it is possible to sequence the whole genome at once using large arrays of sequencers, which makes the whole process much more efficient than more traditional approaches. Detractors argue that although the technique quickly sequences large regions of DNA, its ability to correctly link these regions is suspect, particularly for eukaryotic genomes with repeating regions. As sequence assembly programs become more sophisticated and computing power becomes cheaper, it may be possible to overcome this limitation.\nCoverage.\nCoverage (read depth or depth) is the average number of reads representing a given nucleotide in the reconstructed sequence. It can be calculated from the length of the original genome (\"G\"), the number of reads(\"N\"), and the average read length(\"L\") as formula_1. For example, a hypothetical genome with 2,000 base pairs reconstructed from 8 reads with an average length of 500 nucleotides will have 2x redundancy. This parameter also enables one to estimate other quantities, such as the percentage of the genome covered by reads (sometimes also called coverage). A high coverage in shotgun sequencing is desired because it can overcome errors in base calling and assembly. The subject of DNA sequencing theory addresses the relationships of such quantities.\nSometimes a distinction is made between \"sequence coverage\" and \"physical coverage\". Sequence coverage is the average number of times a base is read (as described above). Physical coverage is the average number of times a base is read or spanned by mate paired reads.\nHierarchical shotgun sequencing.\nAlthough shotgun sequencing can in theory be applied to a genome of any size, its direct application to the sequencing of large genomes (for instance, the human genome) was limited until the late 1990s, when technological advances made practical the handling of the vast quantities of complex data involved in the process. Historically, full-genome shotgun sequencing was believed to be limited by both the sheer size of large genomes and by the complexity added by the high percentage of repetitive DNA (greater than 50% for the human genome) present in large genomes. It was not widely accepted that a full-genome shotgun sequence of a large genome would provide reliable data. For these reasons, other strategies that lowered the computational load of sequence assembly had to be utilized before shotgun sequencing was performed.\nIn hierarchical sequencing, also known as top-down sequencing, a low-resolution physical map of the genome is made prior to actual sequencing. From this map, a minimal number of fragments that cover the entire chromosome are selected for sequencing. In this way, the minimum amount of high-throughput sequencing and assembly is required.\nThe amplified genome is first sheared into larger pieces (50-200kb) and cloned into a bacterial host using BACs or P1-derived artificial chromosomes (PAC). Because multiple genome copies have been sheared at random, the fragments contained in these clones have different ends, and with enough coverage (see section above) finding the smallest possible scaffold of BAC contigs that covers the entire genome is theoretically possible. This scaffold is called the minimum tiling path. Once a tiling path has been found, the BACs that form this path are sheared at random into smaller fragments and can be sequenced using the shotgun method on a smaller scale.\nAlthough the full sequences of the BAC contigs is not known, their orientations relative to one another are known. There are several methods for deducing this order and selecting the BACs that make up a tiling path. The general strategy involves identifying the positions of the clones relative to one another and then selecting the fewest clones required to form a contiguous scaffold that covers the entire area of interest. The order of the clones is deduced by determining the way in which they overlap. Overlapping clones can be identified in several ways. A small radioactively or chemically labeled probe containing a sequence-tagged site (STS) can be hybridized onto a microarray upon which the clones are printed. In this way, all the clones that contain a particular sequence in the genome are identified. The end of one of these clones can then be sequenced to yield a new probe and the process repeated in a method called chromosome walking.\nAlternatively, the BAC library can be restriction-digested. Two clones that have several fragment sizes in common are inferred to overlap because they contain multiple similarly spaced restriction sites in common. This method of genomic mapping is called restriction or BAC fingerprinting because it identifies a set of restriction sites contained in each clone. Once the overlap between the clones has been found and their order relative to the genome known, a scaffold of a minimal subset of these contigs that covers the entire genome is shotgun-sequenced.\nBecause it involves first creating a low-resolution map of the genome, hierarchical shotgun sequencing is slower than whole-genome shotgun sequencing, but relies less heavily on computer algorithms than whole-genome shotgun sequencing. The process of extensive BAC library creation and tiling path selection, however, make hierarchical shotgun sequencing slow and labor-intensive. Now that the technology is available and the reliability of the data demonstrated, the speed and cost efficiency of whole-genome shotgun sequencing has made it the primary method for genome sequencing.\nNewer sequencing technologies.\nThe classical shotgun sequencing was based on the Sanger sequencing method: this was the most advanced technique for sequencing genomes from about 1995\u20132005. The shotgun strategy is still applied today, however using other sequencing technologies, such as short-read sequencing and long-read sequencing.\nShort-read or \"next-gen\" sequencing produces shorter reads (anywhere from 25\u2013500bp) but many hundreds of thousands or millions of reads in a relatively short time (on the order of a day).\nThis results in high coverage, but the assembly process is much more computationally intensive. These technologies are vastly superior to Sanger sequencing due to the high volume of data and the relatively short time it takes to sequence a whole genome.\nMetagenomic shotgun sequencing.\nHaving reads of 400-500 base pairs length is sufficient to determine the species or strain of the organism where the DNA comes from, provided its genome is already known, by using for example a \"k\"-mer based taxonomic classifier software. With millions of reads from next generation sequencing of an environmental sample, it is possible to get a complete overview of any complex microbiome with thousands of species, like the gut flora. Advantages over 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing are: not being limited to bacteria; strain-level classification where amplicon sequencing only gets the genus; and the possibility to extract whole genes and specify their function as part of the metagenome. The sensitivity of metagenomic sequencing makes it an attractive choice for clinical use. It however emphasizes the problem of contamination of the sample or the sequencing pipeline.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28617", "revid": "458237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28617", "title": "Statue of Liberty", "text": "Colossal sculpture in New York Harbor\nThe Statue of Liberty (Liberty Enlightening the World; ) is a colossal neoclassical sculpture of a robed and crowned female on Liberty Island in New York Harbor, within New York City. The copper-clad statue, a gift to the United States from the people of France, was designed by French sculptor Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Auguste Bartholdi, and its metal framework built by Gustave Eiffel. The statue was dedicated on October 28, 1886.\nThe statue is a figure of a classically draped woman, likely inspired by the Roman goddess of liberty, Libertas. In a contrapposto pose, she holds a torch above her head with her right hand, and in her left hand carries a \"tabula ansata\" inscribed (July 4, 1776, in Roman numerals), the date of the U.S. Declaration of Independence. With her left foot she steps on a broken chain and shackle, commemorating the national abolition of slavery following the American Civil War. After its dedication, the statue became an icon of freedom and of the United States, seen as a symbol of welcome to immigrants arriving by sea.\nThe idea for the statue was conceived in 1865, when the French historian and abolitionist \u00c9douard de Laboulaye proposed a monument to commemorate the upcoming centennial of U.S. independence (1876), the perseverance of American democracy and the liberation of the nation's slaves. The Franco-Prussian War delayed progress until 1875, when Laboulaye proposed that the people of France finance the statue and the United States provide the site and build the pedestal. Bartholdi completed the head and the torch-bearing arm before the statue was fully designed, and these pieces were exhibited for publicity at international expositions.\nThe torch-bearing arm was displayed at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia in 1876, and in Madison Square Park in Manhattan from 1876 to 1882. Fundraising proved difficult, especially for the Americans, and by 1885 work on the pedestal was threatened by lack of funds. Publisher Joseph Pulitzer, of the \"New York World\", started a drive for donations to finish the project and attracted more than 120,000\u00a0contributors, most of whom gave less than a dollar (). The statue was built in France, shipped overseas in crates, and assembled on the completed pedestal on what was then called Bedloe's Island. The statue's completion was marked by New York's first ticker-tape parade and a dedication ceremony presided over by President Grover Cleveland.\nThe statue was administered by the United States Lighthouse Board until 1901 and then by the Department of War; since 1933, it has been maintained by the National Park Service as part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument, and is a major tourist attraction. Limited numbers of visitors can access the rim of the pedestal and the interior of the statue's crown from within; public access to the torch has been barred since 1916.\nDevelopment.\nOrigin.\nAccording to the National Park Service, the idea of a monument presented by the French people to the United States was first proposed by \u00c9douard Ren\u00e9 de Laboulaye, president of the French Anti-Slavery Society and a prominent and important political thinker of his time. The project is traced to a mid-1865 conversation between Laboulaye, a staunch abolitionist, and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Auguste Bartholdi, a sculptor. In after-dinner conversation at his home near Versailles, Laboulaye, an ardent supporter of the Union in the American Civil War, is supposed to have said: \"If a monument should rise in the United States, as a memorial to their independence, I should think it only natural if it were built by united effort\u2014a common work of both our nations.\" The National Park Service, in a 2000 report, however, deemed this a legend traced to an 1885 fundraising pamphlet, and that the statue was most likely conceived in 1870. In another essay on their website, the Park Service suggested that Laboulaye was minded to honor the Union victory and its consequences, \"With the abolition of slavery and the Union's victory in the Civil War in 1865, Laboulaye's wishes of freedom and democracy were turning into a reality in the United States. In order to honor these achievements, Laboulaye proposed that a gift be built for the United States on behalf of France. Laboulaye hoped that by calling attention to the recent achievements of the United States, the French people would be inspired to call for their own democracy in the face of a repressive monarchy.\"\nAccording to sculptor Bartholdi, who later recounted the story, Laboulaye's alleged comment was not intended as a proposal, but it inspired Bartholdi. Given the repressive nature of the regime of Napoleon III, Bartholdi took no immediate action on the idea except to discuss it with Laboulaye. Bartholdi was in any event busy with other possible projects. In 1856, he traveled to Egypt to study ancient works. In the late 1860s, he approached Isma'il Pasha, Khedive of Egypt, with a plan to build \"Progress\" or \"Egypt Carrying the Light to Asia\", a huge lighthouse in the form of an ancient Egyptian female \"fellah\" or peasant, robed and holding a torch aloft, at the northern entrance to the Suez Canal in Port Said. Sketches and models were made of the proposed work, though it was never erected. There was a classical precedent for the Suez proposal, the Colossus of Rhodes: an ancient bronze statue of the Greek god of the sun, Helios. This statue is believed to have been over high, and it similarly stood at a harbor entrance and carried a light to guide ships. Both the khedive and Ferdinand de Lesseps, developer of the Suez Canal, declined the proposed statue from Bartholdi, citing the high cost. The Port Said Lighthouse was built instead, by Fran\u00e7ois Coignet in 1869.\nUpon his return from Egypt, Bartholdi visited Giovanni Battista Crespi's sculpture \"Sancarlone\", a 76-foot statue of St Charles Borromeo in repouss\u00e9 copper covering an iron armature at Lago Maggiore in Italy. He was also familiar with the similar construction of the Vercing\u00e9torix monument by Aim\u00e9 Millet; the restoration of Millet's statue a century later would call international attention to the Statue of Liberty's own poor state of preservation. Bartholdi chose copper over bronze or stone due to its lower cost, weight, and ease of transportation.\nAny large project was further delayed by the Franco-Prussian War, in which Bartholdi served as a major of militia. In the war, Napoleon III was captured and deposed. Bartholdi's home province of Alsace was lost to the Prussians, and a more liberal republic was installed in France. As Bartholdi had been planning a trip to the United States, he and Laboulaye decided the time was right to discuss the idea with influential Americans. In June 1871, Bartholdi crossed the Atlantic, with letters of introduction signed by Laboulaye.\nArriving at New York Harbor, Bartholdi focused on Bedloe's Island (now named Liberty Island) as a site for the statue, struck by the fact that vessels arriving in New York had to sail past it. He was delighted to learn that the island was owned by the United States government\u2014it had been ceded by the New York State Legislature in 1800 for harbor defense. It was thus, as he put it in a letter to Laboulaye: \"land common to all the states.\" As well as meeting many influential New Yorkers, Bartholdi visited President Ulysses S. Grant, who assured him that it would not be difficult to obtain the site for the statue. Bartholdi crossed the United States twice by rail, and met many Americans whom he thought would be sympathetic to the project. But he remained concerned that popular opinion on both sides of the Atlantic was insufficiently supportive of the proposal, and he and Laboulaye decided to wait before mounting a public campaign.\nBartholdi had made a first model of his concept in 1870. The son of a friend of Bartholdi's, artist John LaFarge, later maintained that Bartholdi made the first sketches for the statue during his visit to La Farge's Rhode Island studio. Bartholdi continued to develop the concept following his return to France. He also worked on a number of sculptures designed to bolster French patriotism after the defeat by the Prussians. One of these was the \"Lion of Belfort\", a monumental sculpture carved in sandstone below the fortress of Belfort, which during the war had resisted a Prussian siege for over three months. The defiant lion, long and half that in height, displays an emotional quality characteristic of Romanticism, which Bartholdi would later bring to the Statue of Liberty.\nDesign, style, and symbolism.\nBartholdi and Laboulaye considered how best to express the idea of American liberty. In early American history, two female figures were frequently used as cultural symbols of the nation. One of these symbols, the personified Columbia, was seen as an embodiment of the United States in the manner that Britannia was identified with the United Kingdom, and Marianne came to represent France. Columbia had supplanted the traditional European Personification of the Americas as an \"Indian princess\", which had come to be regarded as uncivilized and derogatory toward Americans. The other significant female icon in American culture was a representation of Liberty, derived from Libertas, the goddess of freedom widely worshipped in ancient Rome, especially among emancipated slaves. A Liberty figure adorned most American coins of the time, and representations of Liberty appeared in popular and civic art, including Thomas Crawford's \"Statue of Freedom\" (1863) atop the dome of the United States Capitol Building.\nThe statue's design evokes iconography evident in ancient history including the Egyptian goddess Isis, the ancient Greek deity of the same name, the Roman Columbia and the Christian iconography of the Virgin Mary.\nArtists of the 18th and 19th centuries striving to evoke republican ideals commonly used representations of Libertas as an allegorical symbol. A figure of Liberty was also depicted on the Great Seal of France. However, Bartholdi and Laboulaye avoided an image of revolutionary liberty such as that depicted in Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix's famed \"Liberty Leading the People\" (1830). In this painting, which commemorates France's July Revolution, a half-clothed Liberty leads an armed mob over the bodies of the fallen. Laboulaye had no sympathy for revolution, and so Bartholdi's figure would be fully dressed in flowing robes. Instead of the impression of violence in the Delacroix work, Bartholdi wished to give the statue a peaceful appearance and chose a torch, representing progress, for the figure to hold. Its second toe on both feet is longer than its big toe, a condition known as Morton's toe or 'Greek foot'. This was an aesthetic staple of ancient Greek art and reflects the classical influences on the statue.\nCrawford's statue was designed in the early 1850s. It was originally to be crowned with a \"pileus\" or \"liberty cap\", the cap given to emancipated slaves in ancient Rome. Secretary of War Jefferson Davis, a Southerner who would later serve as President of the Confederate States of America, was concerned that the \"pileus\" would be taken as an abolitionist symbol. He ordered that it be changed to a helmet. Delacroix's figure wears a \"pileus\", and Bartholdi at first considered placing one on his figure as well. Instead, he used a radiate halo, nimbus, to top its head. In so doing, he avoided a reference to Marianne, who invariably wears a \"pileus\". Many believed they evoke the sun, the seven seas, and the seven continents, and represent another means, besides the torch, whereby Liberty enlightens the world, but research has not confirmed this.\nBartholdi's early models were all similar in concept: a female figure in neoclassical style representing liberty, wearing a \"stola\" and \"pella\" (gown and cloak, common in depictions of Roman goddesses) and holding a torch aloft. According to popular accounts, the face was modeled after that of Augusta Charlotte Beysser Bartholdi, the sculptor's mother, but Regis Huber, the curator of the Bartholdi Museum is on record as saying that this, as well as other similar speculations, have no basis in fact. He designed the figure with austere face and a strong, uncomplicated silhouette, which would be set off well by its dramatic harbor placement and allow passengers on vessels entering New York Bay to experience a changing perspective on the statue as they proceeded toward Manhattan. He gave it bold classical contours and applied simplified modeling, reflecting the huge scale of the project and its solemn purpose. Bartholdi wrote of his technique:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBartholdi made alterations in the design as the project evolved. Bartholdi considered having Liberty hold a broken chain, but decided this would be too divisive in the days after the Civil War. The erected statue does stride over a broken chain, half-hidden by her robes and difficult to see from the ground. Her right foot is raised and set back, in a classical contrapposto pose that looks stationary when viewed from the front, but dynamic when viewed from the side, signifying a solid footing and a posture more relaxed than that of two feet set side by side, and introducing a sense of tension between standing and moving forward, both physically and mentally. The upright form and outstretched leg may have also helped to stabilize the statue. Bartholdi was initially uncertain of what to place in Liberty's left hand; he settled on a \"tabula ansata\", used to evoke the concept of law. Though Bartholdi greatly admired the United States Constitution, he chose to inscribe on the tablet, thus associating the date of the country's Declaration of Independence with the concept of liberty.\nBartholdi interested his friend and mentor, architect Eug\u00e8ne Viollet-le-Duc, in the project. As chief engineer, Viollet-le-Duc proposed designing a brick pier filled with sand within the statue up to the hips, with iron bars like veins of a leaf to which the skin would be anchored.\nAfter consultations with the metalwork foundry Gaget, Gauthier &amp; Co., Viollet-le-Duc chose the metal which would be used for the skin, copper sheets, and the method used to shape it, repouss\u00e9, in which the sheets were heated and then struck with wooden hammers. An advantage of this choice was that the entire statue would be light for its volume, as the copper need be only thick. Bartholdi had decided on a height of just over for the statue, double that of Italy's Sancarlone and the German statue of Arminius, both made with the same method. Viollet le Duc also designed the pleats of the dress.\nAnnouncement and early work.\nBy 1875, France was enjoying improved political stability and a recovering postwar economy. Growing interest in the upcoming Centennial Exposition to be held in Philadelphia led Laboulaye to decide it was time to seek public support. In September 1875, he announced the project and the formation of the Franco-American Union as its fundraising arm. With the announcement, the statue was given a name, \"Liberty Enlightening the World\". The French people were to finance the statue (contrary to the common misconception of it being funded by the French national government); and Americans would be expected to pay for the pedestal. The announcement provoked a generally favorable reaction in France, though many Frenchmen resented the United States for not coming to their aid during the war with Prussia. French monarchists opposed the statue, if for no other reason than it was proposed by the liberal Laboulaye, who had recently been elected a senator for life. Laboulaye arranged events designed to appeal to the rich and powerful, including a special performance at the Paris Opera on April 25, 1876, that featured a new cantata by the composer Charles Gounod. The piece was titled \"La Libert\u00e9 \u00e9clairant le monde\", the French version of the statue's announced name.\nInitially focused on the elites, the Union was successful in raising funds from across French society. Schoolchildren and ordinary citizens gave, as did 181\u00a0French municipalities. Laboulaye's political allies supported the call, as did descendants of the French contingent in the American Revolutionary War. Less idealistically, contributions came from those who hoped for American support in the French attempt to build the Panama Canal. The copper may have come from multiple sources and some of it is said to have come from a mine in Visnes, Norway, though this has not been conclusively determined after testing samples. According to Cara Sutherland in her book on the statue for the Museum of the City of New York, was needed to build the statue, and the French copper industrialist Eug\u00e8ne Secr\u00e9tan donated of copper.\nAlthough plans for the statue had not been finalized, Bartholdi moved forward with fabrication of the right arm, bearing the torch, and the head. Work began at the Gaget, Gauthier &amp; Co. workshop. In May 1876, Bartholdi traveled to the United States as a member of a French delegation to the Centennial Exhibition, and arranged for a huge painting of the statue to be shown in New York as part of the Centennial festivities. The arm did not arrive in Philadelphia until August; because of its late arrival, it was not listed in the exhibition catalogue, and while some reports correctly identified the work, others called it the \"Colossal Arm\" or \"Bartholdi Electric Light\". The exhibition grounds contained a number of monumental artworks to compete for fairgoers' interest, including an outsized fountain designed by Bartholdi. Nevertheless, the arm proved popular in the exhibition's waning days, and visitors would climb up to the balcony of the torch to view the fairgrounds. After the exhibition closed, the arm was transported to New York City, where it remained on display in Madison Square Park for several years before it was returned to France to join the rest of the statue.\nDuring his second trip to the United States, Bartholdi addressed a number of groups about the project, and urged the formation of American committees of the Franco-American Union. Committees to raise money to pay for the foundation and pedestal were formed in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia. The New York group eventually took on most of the responsibility for American fundraising and is often referred to as the \"American Committee\". One of its members was 19-year-old Theodore Roosevelt, the future governor of New York and president of the United States. On March 3, 1877, on his final full day in office, President Grant signed a joint resolution that authorized the President to accept the statue when it was presented by France and to select a site for it. President Rutherford B. Hayes, who took office the following day, selected the Bedloe's Island site that Bartholdi had proposed.\nConstruction in France.\nOn his return to Paris in 1877, Bartholdi concentrated on completing the head, which was exhibited at the 1878 Paris World's Fair. Fundraising continued, with models of the statue put on sale. Tickets to view the construction activity at the Gaget, Gauthier &amp; Co. workshop were also offered. The French government authorized a lottery; among the prizes were valuable silver plate and a terracotta model of the statue. By the end of 1879, about 250,000\u00a0francs had been raised.\nThe head and arm had been built with assistance from Viollet-le-Duc, who fell ill in 1879. He soon died, leaving no indication of how he intended to transition from the copper skin to his proposed masonry pier. The following year, Bartholdi was able to obtain the services of the innovative designer and builder Gustave Eiffel. Eiffel and his structural engineer, Maurice Koechlin, decided to abandon the pier and instead build an iron truss tower. Eiffel opted not to use a completely rigid structure, which would force stresses to accumulate in the skin and lead eventually to cracking. A secondary skeleton was attached to the center pylon, then, to enable the statue to move slightly in the winds of New York Harbor, and, since the metal would expand on hot summer days, he loosely connected the support structure to the skin using flat iron bars or springs, which culminated in a mesh of metal straps, known as \"saddles\", that were riveted to the skin, providing firm support. In a labor-intensive process, each saddle had to be crafted individually. To prevent galvanic corrosion between the copper skin and the iron support structure, Eiffel insulated the skin with asbestos impregnated with shellac.\nEiffel's design made the statue one of the earliest examples of curtain wall construction, in which the exterior of the structure is not load bearing, but is instead supported by an interior framework. He included two interior spiral staircases, to make it easier for visitors to reach the observation point in the crown. Access to an observation platform surrounding the torch was also provided, but the narrowness of the arm allowed for only a single ladder, long. As the pylon tower arose, Eiffel and Bartholdi coordinated their work carefully so that completed segments of skin would fit exactly on the support structure. The components of the pylon tower were built in the Eiffel factory in the nearby Parisian suburb of Levallois-Perret.\nThe change in structural material from masonry to iron allowed Bartholdi to change his plans for the statue's assembly. He had originally expected to assemble the skin on-site as the masonry pier was built; instead, he decided to build the statue in France and have it disassembled and transported to the United States for reassembly in place on Bedloe's Island.\nIn a symbolic act, the first rivet placed into the skin, fixing a copper plate onto the statue's big toe, was driven by United States Ambassador to France Levi P. Morton. The skin was not, however, crafted in exact sequence from low to high; work proceeded on a number of segments simultaneously in a manner often confusing to visitors. Some work was performed by contractors\u2014one of the fingers was made to Bartholdi's exacting specifications by a coppersmith in the southern French town of Montauban. By 1882, the statue was complete up to the waist, an event Bartholdi celebrated by inviting reporters to lunch on a platform built within the statue. Laboulaye died in 1883. He was succeeded as chairman of the French committee by Lesseps. The completed statue was formally presented to Ambassador Morton at a ceremony in Paris on July 4, 1884, and Lesseps announced that the French government had agreed to pay for its transport to New York. The statue remained intact in Paris pending sufficient progress on the pedestal; by January 1885, this had occurred and the statue was disassembled and crated for its ocean voyage.\nThe committees in the United States faced great difficulties in obtaining funds for the construction of the pedestal. The Panic of 1873 had led to an economic depression that persisted through much of the decade. The Liberty statue project was not the only such undertaking that had difficulty raising money: construction of the obelisk later known as the Washington Monument sometimes stalled for years; it would ultimately take over three-and-a-half decades to complete. There was criticism both of Bartholdi's statue and of the fact that the gift required Americans to foot the bill for the pedestal. In the years following the Civil War, most Americans preferred realistic artworks depicting heroes and events from the nation's history, rather than allegorical works like the Liberty statue. There was also a feeling that Americans should design American public works\u2014the selection of Italian-born Constantino Brumidi to decorate the Capitol had provoked intense criticism, even though he was a naturalized U.S. citizen. \"Harper's Weekly\" declared its wish that \"M. Bartholdi and our French cousins had 'gone the whole figure' while they were about it, and given us statue and pedestal at once.\" \"The New York Times\" stated that \"no true patriot can countenance any such expenditures for bronze females in the present state of our finances.\" Faced with these criticisms, the American committees took little action for several years.\nDesign.\nThe foundation of Bartholdi's statue was to be laid inside Fort Wood, a disused army base on Bedloe's Island constructed between 1807 and 1811. Since 1823, it had rarely been used, though during the Civil War, it had served as a recruiting station. The fortifications of the structure were in the shape of an eleven-point star. The statue's foundation and pedestal were aligned so that it would face southeast, greeting ships entering the harbor from the Atlantic Ocean.\nIn 1881, the New York committee commissioned Richard Morris Hunt to design the pedestal. Within months, Hunt submitted a detailed plan, indicating that he expected construction to take about nine months. He proposed a pedestal in height; faced with money problems, the committee reduced that to .\nHunt's pedestal design contains elements of classical architecture, including Doric portals, as well as some elements influenced by Aztec architecture. The large mass is fragmented with architectural detail, in order to focus attention on the statue. In form, it is a truncated pyramid, square at the base and at the top. The four sides are identical in appearance. Above the door on each side, there are ten disks upon which Bartholdi proposed to place the coats of arms of the states (between 1876 and 1889, there were 38 of them), although this was not done. Above that, a balcony was placed on each side, framed by pillars. Bartholdi placed an observation platform near the top of the pedestal, above which the statue itself rises. According to author Louis Auchincloss, the pedestal \"craggily evokes the power of an ancient Europe over which rises the dominating figure of the Statue of Liberty\". The committee hired former army General Charles Pomeroy Stone to oversee the construction work. Construction on the foundation began in 1883, and the pedestal's cornerstone was laid in 1884. In Hunt's original conception, the pedestal was to have been made of solid granite. Financial concerns again forced him to revise his plans; the final design called for poured concrete walls, up to thick, faced with granite blocks. This Stony Creek granite came from the Beattie Quarry in Branford, Connecticut. The concrete mass was the largest poured to that time.\nNorwegian immigrant civil engineer Joachim Goschen Gi\u00e6ver designed the structural framework for the Statue of Liberty. His work involved design computations, detailed fabrication and construction drawings, and oversight of construction. In completing his engineering for the statue's frame, Gi\u00e6ver worked from drawings and sketches produced by Gustave Eiffel.\nFundraising.\nFundraising in the U.S. for the pedestal had begun in 1882. The committee organized a large number of money-raising events. As part of one such effort, an auction of art and manuscripts, poet Emma Lazarus was asked to donate an original work. She initially declined, stating she could not write a poem about a statue. At the time, she was also involved in aiding refugees to New York who had fled antisemitic pogroms in eastern Europe. These refugees were forced to live in conditions that the wealthy Lazarus had never experienced. She saw a way to express her empathy for these refugees in terms of the statue. The resulting sonnet, \"The New Colossus\", including the lines \"Give me your tired, your poor/Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free\", is uniquely identified with the Statue of Liberty in American culture and is inscribed on a plaque in its museum. Lazarus's poem contrasted the classical Colossus of Rhodes as a frightening symbol, with the new \"American colossus\" as a \"beacon to the lost and hopeless\".\nEven with these efforts, fundraising lagged. Grover Cleveland, the governor of New York, vetoed a bill to provide $50,000 for the statue project in 1884. An attempt the next year to have Congress provide $100,000, sufficient to complete the project, also failed. The New York committee, with only $3,000 in the bank, suspended work on the pedestal. With the project in jeopardy, groups from other American cities, including Boston and Philadelphia, offered to pay the full cost of erecting the statue in return for relocating it.\nJoseph Pulitzer, publisher of the \"New York World\", a New York newspaper, announced a drive to raise $100,000 (). Pulitzer pledged to print the name of every contributor, no matter how small the amount given. The drive captured the imagination of New Yorkers, especially when Pulitzer began publishing the notes he received from contributors. \"A young girl alone in the world\" donated \"60\u00a0cents, the result of self denial.\" One donor gave \"five cents as a poor office boy's mite toward the Pedestal Fund.\" A group of children sent a dollar as \"the money we saved to go to the circus with.\" Another dollar was given by a \"lonely and very aged woman.\" Residents of a home for alcoholics in New York's rival city of Brooklyn\u2014the cities would not merge until 1898\u2014donated $15; other drinkers helped out through donation boxes in bars and saloons. A kindergarten class in Davenport, Iowa, mailed the \"World\" a gift of $1.35. As the donations flooded in, the committee resumed work on the pedestal. France raised about $250,000 to build the statue, while the United States had to raise up to $300,000 to build the pedestal.\nConstruction.\nOn June 17, 1885, the French steamer \"Is\u00e8re\" arrived in New York with the crates holding the disassembled statue on board. New Yorkers displayed their newfound enthusiasm for the statue. Two hundred thousand people lined the docks and hundreds of boats put to sea to welcome the ship. After five months' daily calls to donate to the statue fund, on August 11, 1885, the \"World\" announced that $102,000 had been raised from 120,000\u00a0donors, and that 80 percent of the total had been received in sums of less than one dollar ().\nEven with the success of the fund drive, the pedestal was not completed until April 1886. Immediately thereafter, reassembly of the statue began. Eiffel's iron framework was anchored to steel I-beams within the concrete pedestal and assembled. Once this was done, the sections of skin were carefully attached. Due to the width of the pedestal, it was not possible to erect scaffolding, and workers dangled from ropes while installing the skin sections. Bartholdi had planned to put floodlights on the torch's balcony to illuminate it; a week before the dedication, the Army Corps of Engineers vetoed the proposal, fearing that ships' pilots passing the statue would be blinded. Instead, Bartholdi cut portholes in the torch\u2014which was covered with gold leaf\u2014and placed the lights inside them. A power plant was installed on the island to light the torch and for other electrical needs. After the skin was completed, landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, co-designer of Manhattan's Central Park and Brooklyn's Prospect Park, supervised a cleanup of Bedloe's Island in anticipation of the dedication. General Charles Stone claimed on the day of dedication that no man had died during the construction of the statue; this was not true, as Francis Longo, a thirty-nine-year-old Italian laborer, had been killed when an old wall fell on him. When built, the statue was reddish-brown and shiny, but within twenty years it had oxidized to its current green color through reactions with air, water and acidic pollution, forming a layer of verdigris which protects the copper from further corrosion.\nDedication.\nA ceremony of dedication was held on the afternoon of October 28, 1886. President Grover Cleveland, the former New York governor, presided over the event. On the morning of the dedication, a parade was held in New York City; estimates of the number of people who watched it ranged from several hundred thousand to a million. President Cleveland headed the procession, then stood in the reviewing stand to see bands and marchers from across America. General Stone was the grand marshal of the parade. The route began at Madison Square, once the venue for the arm, and proceeded to the Battery at the southern tip of Manhattan by way of Fifth Avenue and Broadway, with a slight detour so the parade could pass in front of the \"World\" building on Park Row. As the parade passed the New York Stock Exchange, traders threw ticker tape from the windows, beginning the New York tradition of the ticker-tape parade.\nA nautical parade began at 12:45\u00a0p.m., and President Cleveland embarked on a yacht that took him across the harbor to Bedloe's Island for the dedication. Lesseps made the first speech, on behalf of the French committee, followed by the chairman of the New York committee, Senator William M. Evarts. A French flag draped across the statue's face was to be lowered to unveil the statue at the close of Evarts's speech, but Bartholdi mistook a pause as the conclusion and let the flag fall prematurely. The ensuing cheers put an end to Evarts's address. President Cleveland spoke next, stating that the statue's \"stream of light shall pierce the darkness of ignorance and man's oppression until Liberty enlightens the world\". Bartholdi, observed near the dais, was called upon to speak, but he declined. Orator Chauncey M. Depew concluded the speechmaking with a lengthy address.\nNo members of the general public were permitted on the island during the ceremonies, which were reserved entirely for dignitaries. The only women granted access were Bartholdi's wife and Lesseps's granddaughter; officials stated that they feared women might be injured in the crush of people. The restriction offended area suffragists, who chartered a boat and got as close as they could to the island. The group's leaders made speeches applauding the embodiment of Liberty as a woman and advocating women's right to vote. A scheduled fireworks display was postponed until November 1 because of poor weather.\nShortly after the dedication, \"The Cleveland Gazette\", an African American newspaper, suggested that the statue's torch not be lit until the United States became a free nation \"in reality\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Liberty enlightening the world,\" indeed! The expression makes us sick. This government is a howling farce. It can not or rather \"does not\" protect its citizens within its \"own\" borders. Shove the Bartholdi statue, torch and all, into the ocean until the \"liberty\" of this country is such as to make it possible for an inoffensive and industrious colored man to earn a respectable living for himself and family, without being ku-kluxed, perhaps murdered, his daughter and wife outraged, and his property destroyed. The idea of the \"liberty\" of this country \"enlightening the world,\" or even Patagonia, is ridiculous in the extreme.\nAfter dedication.\nLighthouse Board and War Department (1886\u20131933).\nWhen the torch was illuminated on the evening of the statue's dedication, it produced only a faint gleam, barely visible from Manhattan. The \"World\" characterized it as \"more like a glowworm than a beacon.\" Bartholdi suggested gilding the statue to increase its ability to reflect light, but this proved too expensive. The United States Lighthouse Board took over the Statue of Liberty in 1887 and pledged to install equipment to enhance the torch's effect; in spite of its efforts, the statue remained virtually invisible at night. When Bartholdi returned to the United States in 1893, he made additional suggestions, all of which proved ineffective. He did successfully lobby for improved lighting within the statue, allowing visitors to better appreciate Eiffel's design. In 1901, President Theodore Roosevelt, once a member of the New York committee, ordered the statue's transfer to the War Department, as it had proven useless as a lighthouse. A unit of the Army Signal Corps was stationed on Bedloe's Island until 1923, after which military police remained there while the island was under military jurisdiction.\nWars and other upheavals in Europe prompted large-scale emigration to the United States in the late 19th and early 20th century; many entered through New York and saw the statue not as a symbol of enlightenment, as Bartholdi had intended, but as a sign of welcome to their new home. The association with immigration only became stronger when an immigrant processing station was opened on nearby Ellis Island. This view was consistent with Lazarus's vision in her sonnet\u2014she described the statue as \"Mother of Exiles\"\u2014but her work had become obscure. In 1903, the sonnet was engraved on a plaque that was affixed to the base of the statue.\nOral histories of immigrants record their feelings of exhilaration on first viewing the Statue of Liberty. One immigrant who arrived from Greece recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I saw the Statue of Liberty. And I said to myself, \"Lady, you're such a beautiful! [\"sic\"] You opened your arms and you get all the foreigners here. Give me a chance to prove that I am worth it, to do something, to be someone in America.\" And always that statue was on my mind.\nThe statue rapidly became a landmark. Originally, it was a dull copper color, but shortly after 1900 a green patina, also called verdigris, caused by the oxidation of the copper skin, began to spread. As early as 1902 it was mentioned in the press; by 1906 it had entirely covered the statue. Believing that the patina was evidence of corrosion, Congress authorized US$ for various repairs, and to paint the statue both inside and out. There was considerable public protest against the proposed exterior painting. The Army Corps of Engineers studied the patina for any ill effects to the statue and concluded that it protected the skin, \"softened the outlines of the Statue and made it beautiful.\" The statue was painted only on the inside. The Corps of Engineers also installed an elevator to take visitors from the base to the top of the pedestal.\nOn July 30, 1916, during World War I, German saboteurs set off a disastrous explosion on the Black Tom peninsula in Jersey City, New Jersey, in what is now part of Liberty State Park, close to Bedloe's Island. Carloads of dynamite and other explosives that were being sent to Russia for its war efforts were detonated. The statue sustained minor damage, mostly to the torch-bearing right arm, and was closed for ten days. The cost to repair the statue and buildings on the island was about $. The narrow ascent to the torch was closed for public-safety reasons, and it has remained closed ever since.\nThat same year, Ralph Pulitzer, who had succeeded his father Joseph as publisher of the \"World\", began a drive to raise $ for an exterior lighting system to illuminate the statue at night. He claimed over 80,000 contributors, but failed to reach the goal. The difference was quietly made up by a gift from a wealthy donor\u2014a fact that was not revealed until 1936. An underwater power cable brought electricity from the mainland and floodlights were placed along the walls of Fort Wood. Gutzon Borglum, who later sculpted Mount Rushmore, redesigned the torch, replacing much of the original copper with stained glass. On December 2, 1916, President Woodrow Wilson pressed the telegraph key that turned on the lights, successfully illuminating the statue.\nAfter the United States entered World War I in 1917, images of the statue were heavily used in both recruitment posters and the Liberty bond drives that urged American citizens to support the war financially. This impressed upon the public the war's stated purpose\u2014to secure liberty\u2014and served as a reminder that embattled France had given the United States the statue.\nIn 1924, President Calvin Coolidge used his authority under the Antiquities Act to declare the statue a national monument. A suicide occurred five years later when a man climbed out of one of the windows in the crown and jumped to his death.\nEarly National Park Service years (1933\u20131982).\nIn 1933, President Franklin Roosevelt ordered the statue to be transferred to the National Park Service (NPS). In 1937, the NPS gained jurisdiction over the rest of Bedloe's Island. With the Army's departure, the NPS began to transform the island into a park. The Works Progress Administration (WPA) demolished most of the old buildings, regraded and reseeded the eastern end of the island, and built granite steps for a new public entrance to the statue from its rear. The WPA also carried out restoration work within the statue, temporarily removing the rays from the statue's halo so their rusted supports could be replaced. Rusted cast-iron steps in the pedestal were replaced with new ones made of reinforced concrete; the upper parts of the stairways within the statue were replaced, as well. Copper sheathing was installed to prevent further damage from rainwater that had been seeping into the pedestal. The statue was closed to the public from May until December 1938.\nDuring World War II, the statue remained open to visitors, although it was not illuminated at night due to wartime blackouts. It was lit briefly on December 31, 1943, and on D-Day, June 6, 1944, when its lights flashed \"dot-dot-dot-dash\", the Morse code for V, for victory. New, powerful lighting was installed in 1944\u20131945, and beginning on V-E Day, the statue was once again illuminated after sunset. The lighting was for only a few hours each evening, and it was not until 1957 that the statue was illuminated every night, all night. In 1946, the interior of the statue within reach of visitors was coated with a special plastic so that graffiti could be washed away.\nIn 1956, an Act of Congress officially renamed Bedloe's Island as Liberty Island, a change advocated by Bartholdi generations earlier. The act also mentioned the efforts to found an American Museum of Immigration on the island, which backers took as federal approval of the project, though the government was slow to grant funds for it. Nearby Ellis Island was made part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument by the proclamation of President Lyndon Baines Johnson in 1965. In 1972, the immigration museum in the statue's base was finally opened in a ceremony led by President Richard Nixon. The museum's backers never provided it with an endowment to secure its future and it closed in 1991 after the opening of an immigration museum on Ellis Island.\nIn 1970, Ivy Bottini led a demonstration at the statue where she and others from the National Organization for Women's New York chapter draped an enormous banner over a railing which read \"\" Beginning December 26, 1971, fifteen anti-Vietnam War veterans occupied the statue, flying a US flag upside down from her crown. They left on December 28 following a federal court order. The statue was also several times taken over briefly by demonstrators who were publicizing causes such as Puerto Rican independence, opposition to abortion, and opposition to US intervention in Grenada. Demonstrations with the permission of the Park Service included a Gay Pride Parade rally and the annual Captive Baltic Nations rally.\nA powerful new lighting system was installed in advance of the American Bicentennial in 1976. The statue was the focal point for Operation Sail, a regatta of tall ships from all over the world that entered New York Harbor on July 4, 1976, and sailed around Liberty Island. The day concluded with a spectacular display of fireworks near the statue.\nRenovation and rededication (1982\u20132000).\nThe statue was examined in great detail by French and American engineers as part of the planning for its centennial in 1986. In 1982, it was announced that the statue was in need of considerable restoration. The engineers were faced with a lack of detailed drawings and documentation, as well as major structural changes in prior decades. A careful study had revealed that the right arm had been improperly attached to the main structure. It was swaying more and more when strong winds blew and there was a significant risk of structural failure. In addition, the head had been installed off center, and one of the rays was wearing a hole in the right arm when the statue moved in the wind. The armature structure was badly corroded, and about two percent of the exterior plates needed to be replaced. Although problems with the armature had been recognized as early as 1936, when cast iron replacements for some of the bars had been installed, much of the corrosion had been hidden by layers of paint applied over the years.\nIn May 1982, President Ronald Reagan announced the formation of the Statue of Liberty\u2013Ellis Island Centennial Commission, led by Chrysler Corporation chair Lee Iacocca, to raise the funds needed to complete the work. Through its fundraising arm, the Statue of Liberty\u2013Ellis Island Foundation, Inc., the group raised more than $350\u00a0million in donations for the renovations of both the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island. The Statue of Liberty was one of the earliest beneficiaries of a cause marketing campaign. A 1983 promotion advertised that for each purchase made with an American Express card, the company would contribute one cent to the renovation of the statue. The campaign generated contributions of $1.7\u00a0million to the restoration project.\nIn 1984, the statue was closed to the public for the duration of the renovation. Workers erected the world's largest free-standing scaffold, which obscured the statue from view. Liquid nitrogen was used to remove layers of paint that had been applied to the interior of the copper skin over decades, leaving two layers of coal tar, originally applied to plug leaks and prevent corrosion. Blasting with baking soda powder removed the tar without further damaging the copper. The restorers' work was hampered by the asbestos-based substance that Bartholdi had used\u2014ineffectively, as inspections showed\u2014to prevent galvanic corrosion. Workers within the statue had to wear protective gear, dubbed \"Moon suits\", with self-contained breathing circuits. Larger holes in the copper skin were repaired, and new copper was added where necessary. The replacement skin was taken from a copper rooftop at Bell Labs, which had a patina that closely resembled the statue's; in exchange, the laboratory was provided some of the old copper skin for testing. The torch, found to have been leaking water since the 1916 alterations, was replaced with an exact replica of Bartholdi's unaltered torch. Consideration was given to replacing the arm and shoulder; the National Park Service insisted that they be repaired instead. The original torch was removed and replaced in 1986 with the current one, whose flame is covered in 24-karat gold. The torch reflects the Sun's rays in daytime and is lighted by floodlights at night.\nThe entire puddled iron armature designed by Gustave Eiffel was replaced. Low-carbon corrosion-resistant stainless steel bars that now hold the staples next to the skin are made of Ferralium, an alloy that bends slightly and returns to its original shape as the statue moves. To prevent the ray and arm making contact, the ray was realigned by several degrees. The lighting was again replaced\u2014night-time illumination subsequently came from metal-halide lamps that send beams of light to particular parts of the pedestal or statue, showing off various details. Access to the pedestal, which had been through a nondescript entrance built in the 1960s, was renovated to create a wide opening framed by a set of monumental bronze doors with designs symbolic of the renovation. A modern elevator was installed, allowing disability access to the observation area of the pedestal. An emergency elevator was installed within the statue, reaching up to the level of the shoulder.\nJuly 3\u20136, 1986, was designated \"Liberty Weekend\", marking the centennial of the statue and its reopening. President Reagan presided over the rededication, with French President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand in attendance. July 4 saw a reprise of Operation Sail, and the statue was reopened to the public on July 5. In Reagan's dedication speech, he stated, \"We are the keepers of the flame of liberty; we hold it high for the world to see.\"\nClosures and reopenings (2001\u2013present).\nImmediately following the September 11 attacks, the statue and Liberty Island were closed to the public. The island reopened at the end of 2001, while the pedestal and statue remained off-limits. The pedestal reopened in August 2004, but the National Park Service announced that visitors could not safely be given access to the statue due to the difficulty of evacuation in an emergency. The Park Service adhered to that position through the remainder of the Bush administration. New York Congressman Anthony Weiner made the statue's reopening a personal crusade. On May 17, 2009, President Barack Obama's Secretary of the Interior, Ken Salazar, announced that as a \"special gift\" to America, the statue would be reopened to the public as of July 4, but that only a limited number of people would be permitted to ascend to the crown each day.\nThe statue, including the pedestal and base, closed on October 29, 2011, for installation of new elevators and staircases and to bring other facilities, such as restrooms, up to code. The statue was reopened on October 28, 2012, but then closed again a day later in advance of Hurricane Sandy. Although the storm did not harm the statue, it destroyed some of the infrastructure on both Liberty and Ellis Islands, including the dock used by the ferries that ran to Liberty and Ellis Islands. On November 8, 2012, a Park Service spokesperson announced that both islands would remain closed for an indefinite period for repairs to be done. Since Liberty Island had no electricity, a generator was installed to power temporary floodlights to illuminate the statue at night. The superintendent of Statue of Liberty National Monument, David Luchsinger\u2014whose home on the island was severely damaged\u2014stated that it would be \"optimistically\u00a0... months\" before the island was reopened to the public. The statue and Liberty Island reopened to the public on July 4, 2013. Ellis Island remained closed for repairs for several more months but reopened in late October 2013.\nThe Statue of Liberty has also been closed due to government shutdowns and protests, as well as for disease pandemics. During the October 2013 United States federal government shutdown, Liberty Island and other federally funded sites were closed. In addition, Liberty Island was briefly closed on July 4, 2018, after a woman protesting against American immigration policy climbed onto the statue. However, the island remained open during the 2018\u201319 United States federal government shutdown because the Statue of Liberty\u2013Ellis Island Foundation had donated funds. It closed beginning on March 16, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On July 20, 2020, the Statue of Liberty reopened partially under New York City's Phase IV guidelines, with Ellis Island remaining closed. The crown did not reopen until October 2022.\nOn October 7, 2016, construction started on the new Statue of Liberty Museum on Liberty Island. The new $70\u00a0million, museum may be visited by all who come to the island, as opposed to the museum in the pedestal, which only 20% of the island's visitors had access to. The new museum, designed by FXFOWLE Architects, is integrated with the surrounding parkland. Diane von F\u00fcrstenberg headed the fundraising for the museum, and the project received over $40\u00a0million in fundraising by groundbreaking. The museum opened on May 16, 2019.\nAccess and attributes.\nLocation and access.\nThe statue is situated in Upper New York Bay on Liberty Island south of Ellis Island, which together comprise the Statue of Liberty National Monument. Both islands were ceded by New York to the federal government in 1800. As agreed in an 1834 compact between New York and New Jersey that set the state border at the bay's midpoint, the original islands remain New York territory though located on the New Jersey side of the state line. Liberty Island is one of the islands that are part of the borough of Manhattan in New York. Land created by reclamation added to the original island at Ellis Island is New Jersey territory.\nNo charge is made for entrance to the national monument, but there is a cost for the ferry service that all visitors must use, as private boats may not dock at the island. A concession was granted in 2007 to Statue Cruises to operate the transportation and ticketing facilities, replacing Circle Line, which had operated the service since 1953. The ferries, which depart from Liberty State Park in Jersey City and the Battery in Lower Manhattan, also stop at Ellis Island when it is open to the public, making a combined trip possible. All ferry riders are subject to security screening, similar to airport procedures, prior to boarding.\nVisitors intending to enter the statue's base and pedestal must obtain pedestal access for a nominal fee when purchasing their ferry ticket. Those wishing to climb the staircase within the statue to the crown must purchase a special ticket departing from either Battery Park or Liberty State Park, which may be reserved up to five months in advance for groups of up to four people. About 425 people per day may purchase tickets for the combined ferry, pedestal, and crown.\nClimbers may bring only medication, plastic water bottles, phones, and cameras\u2014lockers are provided for other items\u2014and must undergo a second security screening. The balcony around the torch was closed to the public following the munitions explosion on Black Tom Island in 1916. The balcony can however be seen live via webcam.\nInscriptions, plaques, and dedications.\nThere are several plaques and dedicatory tablets on or near the Statue of Liberty.\nA group of statues stands at the western end of the island, honoring those closely associated with the Statue of Liberty. Two Americans\u2014Pulitzer and Lazarus\u2014and three Frenchmen\u2014Bartholdi, Eiffel, and Laboulaye\u2014are depicted. They are the work of Maryland sculptor Phillip Ratner.\nHistorical designations.\nPresident Calvin Coolidge officially designated the Statue of Liberty as part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument in 1924. The monument was expanded to also include Ellis Island in 1965. The following year, the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island were jointly added to the National Register of Historic Places, and the statue individually in 2017. On the sub-national level, the Statue of Liberty National Monument was added to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places in 1971, and was made a New York City designated landmark in 1976.\nIn 1984, the Statue of Liberty was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The UNESCO \"Statement of Significance\" describes the statue as a \"masterpiece of the human spirit\" that \"endures as a highly potent symbol\u2014inspiring contemplation, debate and protest\u2014of ideals such as liberty, peace, human rights, abolition of slavery, democracy and opportunity.\"\nDepictions.\nHundreds of replicas of the Statue of Liberty are displayed worldwide. A smaller version of the statue, one-fourth the height of the original, was given by the American community in Paris to that city. It now stands on the \u00cele aux Cygnes, facing west toward her larger sister. A replica tall stood atop the Liberty Warehouse on West 64th\u00a0Street in Manhattan for many years; it now resides at the Brooklyn Museum. In a patriotic tribute, the Boy Scouts of America, as part of their Strengthen the Arm of Liberty campaign in 1949\u20131952, donated about two hundred replicas of the statue, made of stamped copper and in height, to states and municipalities across the United States. Though not a true replica, the statue known as the Goddess of Democracy temporarily erected during the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 was similarly inspired by French democratic traditions\u2014the sculptors took care to avoid a direct imitation of the Statue of Liberty. Among other recreations of New York City structures, a replica of the statue is part of the exterior of the New York-New York Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas.\nAs an American icon, the Statue of Liberty has been depicted on the country's coinage and stamps. It appeared on commemorative coins issued to mark its 1986 centennial, and on New York's 2001 entry in the state quarters series. An image of the statue was chosen for the American Eagle platinum bullion coins in 1997, and it was placed on the reverse, or tails, side of the Presidential Dollar series of circulating coins. Two images of the statue's torch appear on the current ten-dollar bill. The statue's intended photographic depiction on a 2010 forever stamp proved instead to be of the replica at the Las Vegas casino.\nDepictions of the statue have been used by many regional institutions. Between 1986 and 2000, New York State issued license plates with an outline of the statue. The Women's National Basketball Association's New York Liberty use both the statue's name and its image in their logo, in which the torch's flame doubles as a basketball. The New York Rangers of the National Hockey League depicted the statue's head on their third jersey, beginning in 1997. The National Collegiate Athletic Association's 1996 Men's Basketball Final Four, played at New Jersey's Meadowlands Sports Complex, featured the statue in its logo. The Libertarian Party of the United States uses the statue in its emblem.\nThe statue is a frequent subject in popular culture. In music, it has been evoked to indicate support for American policies, as in Toby Keith's 2002 song \"Courtesy of the Red, White and Blue (The Angry American)\", and in opposition, appearing on the cover of the Dead Kennedys' album \"Bedtime for Democracy\", which protested the Reagan administration. In film, the torch is the setting for the climax of director Alfred Hitchcock's 1942 movie \"Saboteur\". The statue makes one of its most famous cinematic appearances in the 1968 picture \"Planet of the Apes\", in which it is seen half-buried in sand. It is knocked over in the science-fiction film \"Independence Day\" and in \"Cloverfield\" the head is ripped off. In Jack Finney's 1970 time-travel novel \"Time and Again\", the right arm of the statue, on display in the early 1880s in Madison Square Park, plays a crucial role. Robert Holdstock, consulting editor of \"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\", wondered in 1979:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Where would science fiction be without the Statue of Liberty? For decades it has towered or crumbled above the wastelands of deserted Earth\u2014giants have uprooted it, aliens have found it curious\u00a0... the symbol of Liberty, of optimism, has become a symbol of science fiction's pessimistic view of the future.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28618", "revid": "50926134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28618", "title": "Speech coding", "text": "Lossy audio compression applied to human speech\nSpeech coding is an application of data compression to digital audio signals containing speech. Speech coding uses speech-specific parameter estimation using audio signal processing techniques to model the speech signal, combined with generic data compression algorithms to represent the resulting modeled parameters in a compact bitstream.\nCommon applications of speech coding are mobile telephony and voice over IP (VoIP). The most widely used speech coding technique in mobile telephony is linear predictive coding (LPC), while the most widely used in VoIP applications are the LPC and modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT) techniques.\nThe techniques employed in speech coding are similar to those used in audio data compression and audio coding where appreciation of psychoacoustics is used to transmit only data that is relevant to the human auditory system. For example, in voiceband speech coding, only information in the frequency band 400 to 3500\u00a0Hz is transmitted but the reconstructed signal retains adequate intelligibility.\nSpeech coding differs from other forms of audio coding in that speech is a simpler signal than other audio signals, and statistical information is available about the properties of speech. As a result, some auditory information that is relevant in general audio coding can be unnecessary in the speech coding context. Speech coding stresses the preservation of intelligibility and \"pleasantness\" of speech while using a constrained amount of transmitted data. In addition, most speech applications require low coding delay, as latency interferes with speech interaction.\nCategories.\nSpeech coders are of two classes:\nSample companding viewed as a form of speech coding.\nThe A-law and \u03bc-law algorithms used in G.711 PCM digital telephony can be seen as an earlier precursor of speech encoding, requiring only 8 bits per sample but giving effectively 12 bits of resolution. Logarithmic companding are consistent with human hearing perception in that a low-amplitude noise is heard along a low-amplitude speech signal but is masked by a high-amplitude one. Although this would generate unacceptable distortion in a music signal, the peaky nature of speech waveforms, combined with the simple frequency structure of speech as a periodic waveform having a single fundamental frequency with occasional added noise bursts, make these very simple instantaneous compression algorithms acceptable for speech.\nA wide variety of other algorithms were tried at the time, mostly delta modulation variants, but after careful consideration, the A-law/\u03bc-law algorithms were chosen by the designers of the early digital telephony systems. At the time of their design, their 33% bandwidth reduction for a very low complexity made an excellent engineering compromise. Their audio performance remains acceptable, and there was no need to replace them in the stationary phone network.\nIn 2008, G.711.1 codec, which has a scalable structure, was standardized by ITU-T. The input sampling rate is 16\u00a0kHz.\nModern speech compression.\nMuch of the later work in speech compression was motivated by military research into digital communications for secure military radios, where very low data rates were used to achieve effective operation in a hostile radio environment. At the same time, far more processing power was available, in the form of VLSI circuits, than was available for earlier compression techniques. As a result, modern speech compression algorithms could use far more complex techniques than were available in the 1960s to achieve far higher compression ratios.\nThe most widely used speech coding algorithms are based on linear predictive coding (LPC). In particular, the most common speech coding scheme is the LPC-based code-excited linear prediction (CELP) coding, which is used for example in the GSM standard. In CELP, the modeling is divided in two stages, a linear predictive stage that models the spectral envelope and a code-book-based model of the residual of the linear predictive model. In CELP, linear prediction coefficients (LPC) are computed and quantized, usually as line spectral pairs (LSPs). In addition to the actual speech coding of the signal, it is often necessary to use channel coding for transmission, to avoid losses due to transmission errors. In order to get the best overall coding results, speech coding and channel coding methods are chosen in pairs, with the more important bits in the speech data stream protected by more robust channel coding.\nThe modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT) is used in the LD-MDCT technique used by the AAC-LD format introduced in 1999. MDCT has since been widely adopted in voice-over-IP (VoIP) applications, such as the G.729.1 wideband audio codec introduced in 2006, Apple's FaceTime (using AAC-LD) introduced in 2010, and the CELT codec introduced in 2011.\nOpus is a free software audio coder. It combines the speech-oriented LPC-based SILK algorithm and the lower-latency MDCT-based CELT algorithm, switching between or combining them as needed for maximal efficiency. It is widely used for VoIP calls in WhatsApp. The PlayStation 4 video game console also uses Opus for its PlayStation Network system party chat.\nA number of codecs with even lower bit rates have been demonstrated. Codec 2, which operates at bit rates as low as 450 bit/s, sees use in amateur radio. NATO currently uses MELPe, offering intelligible speech at 600 bit/s and below. Neural vocoder approaches have also emerged: Lyra by Google gives an \"almost eerie\" quality at 3 kbit/s. Microsoft's Satin also uses machine learning, but uses a higher tunable bitrate and is wideband.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28620", "revid": "44230401", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28620", "title": "1985 Helsinki Protocol on the Reduction of Sulphur Emissions", "text": "Protocol to reduce sulfur emissions\nThe Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution on the Reduction of Sulphur Emissions or their Transboundary Fluxes by at least 30 per cent is a 1985 protocol to the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution agreement that provided for a 30 per cent reduction in sulphur emissions or transboundary fluxes by 1993. The protocol has been supplemented by the 1994 Oslo Protocol on Further Reduction of Sulphur Emissions. By 1993, most of the countries that participated in the agreement reported reaching the goal and some countries reported even greater sulphur reductions. \n\"opened for signature\" - July 8, 1985\n\"entered into force\" - September 2, 1987\n\"parties\" - (25) Albania, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Russia, Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28621", "revid": "48176176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28621", "title": "Stalinism", "text": "Political and economic policies implemented by Joseph Stalin\nStalinism is the means of governing and Marxist\u2013Leninist policies implemented in the Soviet Union (USSR) from 1927 to 1953 by Joseph Stalin. It included the creation of a one-party totalitarian police state, rapid industrialization, the theory of socialism in one country (until 1939), collectivization of agriculture, intensification of class conflict, a cult of personality, and subordination of the interests of foreign communist parties to those of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, deemed by Stalinism to be the leading vanguard party of communist revolution at the time. After Stalin's death and the Khrushchev Thaw, a period of de-Stalinization began in the 1950s and 1960s, which caused the influence of Stalin's ideology to begin to wane in the USSR.\nStalin's regime forcibly purged society of what it saw as threats to itself and its brand of communism (so-called \"enemies of the people\"), which included political dissidents, non-Soviet nationalists, the bourgeoisie, better-off peasants (\"kulaks\"), and those of the working class who demonstrated \"counter-revolutionary\" sympathies. This resulted in mass repression of such people and their families, including mass arrests, show trials, executions, and imprisonment in forced labour camps known as gulags. The most notorious examples were the Great Purge and the Dekulakization campaign. Stalinism was also marked by militant atheism, mass anti-religious persecution, and ethnic cleansing through forced deportations. However, there was a short era of reconciliation between the Orthodox Church and the state authorities in WW2. Some historians, such as Robert Service, have blamed Stalinist policies, particularly the collectivization policies, for causing famines such as the Holodomor. Other historians and scholars disagree on the role of Stalinism.\nOfficially designed to accelerate development towards communism, the need for industrialization in the Soviet Union was emphasized because the Soviet Union had previously fallen behind economically compared to Western countries and that socialist society needed industry to face the challenges posed by internal and external enemies of communism. Rapid industrialization was accompanied by mass collectivization of agriculture and rapid urbanization, which converted many small villages into industrial cities. To accelerate the development of industrialization, Stalin imported materials, ideas, expertise, and workers from western Europe and the United States, pragmatically setting up joint-venture contracts with major American private enterprises such as the Ford Motor Company, which, under state supervision, assisted in developing the basis of the industry of the Soviet economy from the late 1920s to the 1930s. After the American private enterprises had completed their tasks, Soviet state enterprises took over.\nHistory.\nStalinism is used to describe the period during which Joseph Stalin was the leader of the Soviet Union while serving as General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 3 April 1922 to his death on 5 March 1953. It was a development of Leninism, and while Stalin avoided using the term \"Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism\", he allowed others to do so. Following Lenin's death, Stalin contributed to the theoretical debates within the Communist Party, namely by developing the idea of \"Socialism in One Country\". This concept was intricately linked to factional struggles within the party, particularly against Trotsky. He first developed the idea in December 1924, and elaborated upon it in his writings of 1925\u201326.\nStalin's doctrine held that socialism could be completed in Russia but that its final victory could not be guaranteed because of the threat from capitalist intervention. For this reason, he retained the Leninist view that world revolution was still a necessity to ensure the ultimate victory of socialism. Although retaining the Marxist belief that the state would wither away as socialism transformed into pure communism, he believed that the Soviet state would remain until the final defeat of international capitalism. This concept synthesised Marxist and Leninist ideas with nationalist ideals, and served to discredit Trotsky\u2014who promoted the idea of \"permanent revolution\"\u2014by presenting the latter as a defeatist with little faith in Russian workers' abilities to construct socialism.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Stalinism\" came into prominence during the mid-1930s when Lazar Kaganovich, a Soviet politician and associate of Stalin, reportedly declared: \"Let's replace Long Live Leninism with Long Live Stalinism!\" Stalin dismissed this as excessive and contributing to a cult of personality he thought might later be used against him by the same people who praised him excessively, one of those being Khrushchev\u2014a prominent user of the term during Stalin's life who was later responsible for de-Stalinization and the beginning of the Khrushchev Thaw era.\nStalinist policies.\nSome historians view Stalinism as a reflection of the ideologies of Leninism and Marxism, but some argue that it is separate from the socialist ideals it stemmed from. After a political struggle that culminated in the defeat of the Bukharinists (the \"Party's Right Tendency\"), Stalinism was free to shape policy without opposition, ushering in an era of harsh totalitarianism that worked toward rapid industrialization regardless of the human cost.\nFrom 1917 to 1924, though often appearing united, Stalin, Vladimir Lenin, and Leon Trotsky had discernible ideological differences. In his dispute with Trotsky, Stalin de-emphasized the role of workers in advanced capitalist countries (e.g., he considered the U.S. working class \"bourgeoisified\" labor aristocracy).\nAll other October Revolution 1917 Bolshevik leaders regarded their revolution more or less as just the beginning, with Russia as the springboard on the road toward worldwide revolution. Stalin introduced the idea of socialism in one country by the autumn of 1924, a theory standing in sharp contrast to Trotsky's permanent revolution and all earlier socialistic theses. The revolution did not spread outside Russia as Lenin had assumed it soon would. The revolution had not succeeded even within other former territories of the Russian Empire\u2015such as Poland, Finland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia. On the contrary, these countries had returned to capitalist bourgeois rule.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe is an unprincipled intriguer, who subordinates everything to the preservation of his own power. He changes his theory according to whom he needs to get rid of.\nBukharin on Stalin's theoretical position, 1928.\nDespite this, by the autumn of 1924, Stalin's notion of socialism in Soviet Russia was initially considered next to blasphemy by other Politburo members, including Zinoviev and Kamenev to the intellectual left; Rykov, Bukharin, and Tomsky to the pragmatic right; and the powerful Trotsky, who belonged to no side but his own. None would even consider Stalin's concept a potential addition to communist ideology. Stalin's socialism in one-country doctrine could not be imposed until he had come close to being the Soviet Union's autocratic ruler around 1929. Bukharin and the Right Opposition expressed their support for imposing Stalin's ideas, as Trotsky had been exiled, and Zinoviev and Kamenev had been expelled from the party. In a 1936 interview with journalist Roy W. Howard, Stalin articulated his rejection of world revolution and said, \"We never had such plans and intentions\" and \"The export of revolution is nonsense\".\nProletarian state.\nTraditional communist thought holds that the state will gradually \"wither away\" as the implementation of socialism reduces class distinction. But Stalin argued that the proletarian state (as opposed to the bourgeois state) must become stronger before it can wither away. In Stalin's view, counter-revolutionary elements will attempt to derail the transition to full communism, and the state must be powerful enough to defeat them. For this reason, communist regimes influenced by Stalin are totalitarian. Other leftists, such as anarcho-communists, have criticized the party-state of the Stalin-era Soviet Union, accusing it of being bureaucratic and calling it a reformist social democracy rather than a form of revolutionary communism.\nSheng Shicai, a Chinese warlord with Communist leanings, invited Soviet intervention and allowed Stalinist rule to extend to Xinjiang province in the 1930s. In 1937, Sheng conducted a purge similar to the Great Purge, imprisoning, torturing, and killing about 100,000 people, many of them Uyghurs.\nIdeological repression and censorship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCybernetics: a reactionary pseudoscience that appeared in the U.S.A. after World War II and also spread through other capitalist countries. Cybernetics clearly reflects one of the basic features of the bourgeois worldview\u2014its inhumanity, striving to transform workers into an extension of the machine, into a tool of production, and an instrument of war. At the same time, for cybernetics an imperialistic utopia is characteristic\u2014replacing living, thinking man, fighting for his interests, by a machine, both in industry and in war. The instigators of a new world war use cybernetics in their dirty, practical affairs.\n\"Cybernetics\" in the \"Short Philosophical Dictionary\", 1954\nUnder Stalin, repression was extended to academic scholarship, the natural sciences, and literary fields. In particular, Einstein's theory of relativity was subject to public denunciation, many of his ideas were rejected on ideological grounds and condemned as \"bourgeois idealism\" in the Stalin era.\nA policy of ideological repression impacted various disciplinary fields such as genetics, cybernetics, biology, linguistics, physics, sociology, psychology, pedology, mathematical logic, economics and statistics.\nPseudoscientific theories of Trofim Lysenko were favoured over scientific genetics during the Stalin era. Soviet scientists were forced to denounce any work that contradicted Lysenko. Over 3,000 biologists were imprisoned, fired, or executed for attempting to oppose Lysenkoism and genetic research was effectively destroyed until the death of Stalin in 1953. Due to the ideological influence of Lysenkoism, crop yields in the USSR declined.\nOrthodoxy was enforced in the cultural sphere. Prior to Stalin's rule, literary, religious and national representatives had some level of autonomy in the 1920s but these groups were later rigorously repressed during the Stalinist era. Socialist realism was imposed in artistic production and other creative industries such as music, film and sport were subject to extreme levels of political control.\nHistorical falsification of political events such as the October Revolution and the Brest-Litovsk Treaty became a distinctive element of Stalin's regime. A notable example is the 1938 publication, , in which the history of the governing party was significantly altered and revised including the importance of the leading figures during the Bolshevik revolution. Retrospectively, Lenin's primary associates such as Zinoviev, Trotsky, Radek and Bukharin were presented as \"vacillating\", \"opportunists\" and \"foreign spies\" whereas Stalin was depicted as the chief discipline during the revolution. However, in reality, Stalin was considered a relatively unknown figure with secondary importance at the time of the event.\nIn his book, \"The Stalin School of Falsification\", Leon Trotsky argued that the Stalinist faction routinely distorted political events, forged a theoretical basis for irreconcilable concepts such as the notion of \"Socialism in One Country\" and misrepresented the views of opponents through an array of employed historians alongside economists to justify policy manoeuvering and safeguarding its own set of material interests. He cited a range of historical documents such as private letters, telegrams, party speeches, meeting minutes, and suppressed texts such as Lenin's Testament. British historian Orlando Figes argued that \"The urge to silence Trotsky, and all criticism of the Politburo, was in itself a crucial factor in Stalin's rise to power\".\nCinematic productions served to foster the cult of personality around Stalin with adherents to the party line receiving Stalin prizes. However, film directors and their assistants were still liable to mass arrests during the Great Terror.\nCensorship of films contributed to a mythologizing of history as seen with the films \"First Cavalry Army\" (1941) and \"Defence of Tsaritsyn\" (1942) in which Stalin was glorified as a central figure to the October Revolution. Conversely, the roles of other Soviet figures such as Lenin and Trotsky were diminished or misrepresented.\nCult of personality.\nIn the aftermath of the succession struggle, in which Stalin had defeated both Left and Right Opposition, a cult of Stalin had materialised. From 1929 until 1953, there was a proliferation of architecture, statues, posters, banners and iconography featuring Stalin in which he was increasingly identified with the state and seen as an emblem of Marxism. In July 1930, a state decree instructed 200 artists to prepare propaganda posters for the Five Year Plans and collectivsation measures. Historian Anita Pisch drew specific focus to the various manifestations of the personality cult in which Stalin was associated with the \"Father\", \"Saviour\" and \"Warrior\" cultural archetypes with the latter imagery having gained ascendency during the Great Patrotic War and Cold War.\nSome scholars have argued that Stalin took an active involvement with the construction of the cult of personality with writers such as Isaac Deutscher and Erik van Ree noting that Stalin had absorbed elements from the cult of Tsars, Orthodox Christianity and highlighting specific acts such as Lenin's embalming. Yet, other scholars have drawn on primary accounts from Stalin's associates such as Molotov which suggested he took a more critical and ambivalent attitude towards his cult of personality.\nThe cult of personality served to legitimate Stalin's authority, and establish continuity with Lenin as his \"discipline, student and mentee\" in the view of his wider followers. His successor, Nikita Khrushchev, would later denounce the cult of personality around Stalin as contradictory to Leninist principles and party discourse.\nClass-based violence.\nStalin blamed the kulaks for inciting reactionary violence against the people during the implementation of agricultural collectivization. In response, the state, under Stalin's leadership, initiated a violent campaign against them. This kind of campaign was later known as \"classicide\", though several international legislatures have passed resolutions declaring the campaign a genocide. Some historians dispute that these social-class actions constitute genocide.\nPurges and executions.\nAs head of the Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Stalin consolidated nearly absolute power in the 1930s with a Great Purge of the party that claimed to expel \"opportunists\" and \"counter-revolutionary infiltrators\". Those targeted by the purge were often expelled from the party; more severe measures ranged from banishment to the Gulag labor camps to execution after trials held by NKVD troikas.\nIn the 1930s, Stalin became increasingly worried about Leningrad party head Sergei Kirov's growing popularity. At the 1934 Party Congress, where the vote for the new Central Committee was held, Kirov received only three negative votes (the fewest of any candidate), while Stalin received over 100. After Kirov's assassination, which Stalin may have orchestrated, Stalin invented a detailed scheme to implicate opposition leaders in the murder, including Trotsky, Lev Kamenev, and Grigory Zinoviev. Thereafter, the investigations and trials expanded. Stalin passed a new law on \"terrorist organizations and terrorist acts\" that were to be investigated for no more than ten days, with no prosecution, defense attorneys, or appeals, followed by a sentence to be imposed \"quickly.\" Stalin's Politburo also issued directives on quotas for mass arrests and executions. Under Stalin, the death penalty was extended to adolescents as young as 12 years old in 1935.\nAfter that, several trials, known as the Moscow Trials, were held, but the procedures were replicated throughout the country. Article 58 of the legal code, which listed prohibited anti-Soviet activities as a counter-revolutionary crime, was applied most broadly. Many alleged anti-Soviet pretexts were used to brand individuals as \"enemies of the people\", starting the cycle of public persecution, often proceeding to interrogation, torture, and deportation, if not death. The Russian word \"troika\" thereby gained a new meaning: a quick, simplified trial by a committee of three subordinated to the NKVD troika\u2014with sentencing carried out within 24 hours. Stalin's hand-picked executioner Vasili Blokhin was entrusted with carrying out some of the high-profile executions in this period.\nMany military leaders were convicted of treason, and a large-scale purge of Red Army officers followed. The repression of many formerly high-ranking revolutionaries and party members led Trotsky to claim that a \"river of blood\" separated Stalin's regime from Lenin's. In August 1940, Trotsky was assassinated in Mexico, where he had lived in exile since January 1937. This eliminated the last of Stalin's opponents among the former Party leadership.\nMass operations of the NKVD also targeted \"national contingents\" (foreign ethnicities) such as Poles, ethnic Germans, and Koreans. A total of 350,000 (144,000 of them Poles) were arrested and 247,157 (110,000 Poles) were executed. Many Americans who had emigrated to the Soviet Union during the worst of the Great Depression were executed, while others were sent to prison camps or gulags. Concurrent with the purges, efforts were made to rewrite the history in Soviet textbooks and other propaganda materials. Notable people executed by NKVD were removed from the texts and photographs as though they had never existed.\nIn light of revelations from Soviet archives, historians now estimate that nearly 700,000 people (353,074 in 1937 and 328,612 in 1938) were executed in the course of the terror, the great mass of them ordinary Soviet citizens: workers, peasants, homemakers, teachers, priests, musicians, soldiers, pensioners, ballerinas, and beggars. Scholars estimate the total death toll for the Great Purge (1936\u20131938) including fatalities attributed to imprisonment to be roughly 700,000-1.2 million. Many of the executed were interred in mass graves, with some significant killing and burial sites being Bykivnia, Kurapaty, and Butovo.\nSome Western experts believe the evidence released from the Soviet archives is understated, incomplete or unreliable. Conversely, historian Stephen G. Wheatcroft, who spent much of his career researching the archives, contends that, before the collapse of the Soviet Union and the opening of the archives for historical research, \"our understanding of the scale and the nature of Soviet repression has been extremely poor\" and that some specialists who wish to maintain earlier high estimates of the Stalinist death toll are \"finding it difficult to adapt to the new circumstances when the archives are open and when there are plenty of irrefutable data\" and instead \"hang on to their old Sovietological methods with round-about calculations based on odd statements from emigres and other informants who are supposed to have superior knowledge.\"\nStalin personally signed 357 proscription lists in 1937 and 1938 that condemned 40,000 people to execution, about 90% of whom are confirmed to have been shot. While reviewing one such list, he reportedly muttered to no one in particular: \"Who's going to remember all this riff-raff in ten or twenty years? No one. Who remembers the names now of the boyars Ivan the Terrible got rid of? No one.\" In addition, Stalin dispatched a contingent of NKVD operatives to Mongolia, established a Mongolian version of the NKVD \"troika\", and unleashed a bloody purge in which tens of thousands were executed as \"Japanese spies\", as Mongolian ruler Khorloogiin Choibalsan closely followed Stalin's lead. Stalin had ordered for 100,000 Buddhist lamas in Mongolia to be liquidated, but the political leader Peljidiin Genden resisted the order.\nUnder Stalinist influence in the Mongolian People's Republic, an estimated 17,000 monks were killed, official figures show. Stalinist forces also oversaw purges of anti-Stalinist elements among the Spanish Republican insurgents, including the Trotskyist allied POUM faction and anarchist groups, during the Spanish Civil War.\nDuring the 1930s and 1940s, the Soviet leadership sent NKVD squads into other countries to murder defectors and opponents of the Soviet regime. Victims of such plots included Trotsky, Yevhen Konovalets, Ignace Poretsky, Rudolf Klement, Alexander Kutepov, Evgeny Miller, and the Workers' Party of Marxist Unification (POUM) leadership in Catalonia (e.g., Andr\u00e9u Nin P\u00e9rez). Joseph Berger-Barzilai, co-founder of the Communist Party of Palestine, spent twenty five years in Stalin's prisons and concentrations camps after the purges in 1937.\nThe Great Terror.\nThe Great Terror (September 1936 \u2013 December 1938) is the term used by Western scholars to describe the peak of Stalinist political repression, during which Nikolai Yezhov headed the NKVD and oversaw mass arrests and executions on an unprecedented scale. Hundreds of thousands of party officials, military officers, intellectuals, and ordinary citizens were sentenced in show trials and either executed or sent to Gulag camps. The NKVD operated under centrally planned quotas that set numbers of people to be executed or imprisoned in each republic. \nAs an example, in the Kyrgyz SSR \u2013 then a small republic of just 1.5 million people \u2013 the directive for the first quarter of 1938 ordered 35 executions, 1,250 sentences of 25 years\u2019 imprisonment, and 3,740 ten-year sentences. Local NKVD officials cynically referred to this as the \u201charvest of the crop.\u201d Failure to fulfil these quotas could result in the arrest or even execution of the NKVD personnel themselves. The removal of several thousand able-bodied people within such a short period dealt a severe blow to the republic\u2019s economy, yet quotas continued to be issued in subsequent quarters. Oral history accounts further describe the dramatic arrests of Kyrgyz elites, public trials staged as mass spectacles, and the devastating effects on families of those branded \u201cenemies of the people.\u201d\nDeportations.\nShortly before, during, and immediately after World War II, Stalin conducted a series of deportations that profoundly affected the ethnic map of the Soviet Union. Separatism, resistance to Soviet rule, and collaboration with the invading Germans were the official reasons for the deportations. Individual circumstances of those spending time in German-occupied territories were not examined. After the brief Nazi occupation of the Caucasus, the entire population of five of the small highland peoples and the Crimean Tatars\u2014more than a million people in total\u2014were deported without notice or any opportunity to take their possessions.\nAs a result of Stalin's lack of trust in the loyalty of particular ethnicities, groups such as the Soviet Koreans, Volga Germans, Crimean Tatars, Chechens, and many Poles, were forcibly moved out of strategic areas and relocated to places in the central Soviet Union, especially Kazakhstan. By some estimates, hundreds of thousands of deportees may have died en route. It is estimated that between 1941 and 1949, nearly 3.3 million people were deported to Siberia and the Central Asian republics. By some estimates, up to 43% of the resettled population died of diseases and malnutrition.\nAccording to official Soviet estimates, more than 14 million people passed through the gulags from 1929 to 1953, with a further 7 to 8 million deported and exiled to remote areas of the Soviet Union (including entire nationalities in several cases). The emergent scholarly consensus is that from 1930 to 1953, around 1.5 to 1.7 million perished in the gulag system. In February 1956, Nikita Khrushchev condemned the deportations as a violation of Leninism and reversed most of them, although it was not until 1991 that the Tatars, Meskhetians, and Volga Germans were allowed to return \"en masse\" to their homelands.\nEconomic policy.\nAt the start of the 1930s, Stalin launched a wave of radical economic policies that completely overhauled the industrial and agricultural face of the Soviet Union. This became known as the Great Turn as Russia turned away from the mixed-economic type New Economic Policy (NEP) and adopted a planned economy. Lenin implemented the NEP to ensure the survival of the socialist state following seven years of war (World War I, 1914\u20131917, and the subsequent Civil War, 1917\u20131921) and rebuilt Soviet production to its 1913 levels. But Russia still lagged far behind the West, and Stalin and the majority of the Communist Party felt the NEP not only to be compromising communist ideals but also not delivering satisfactory economic performance or creating the envisaged socialist society.\nAccording to historian Sheila Fitzpatrick, the scholarly consensus was that Stalin appropriated the position of the Left Opposition on such matters as industrialisation and collectivisation. Trotsky maintained that the disproportions and imbalances which became characteristic of Stalinist planning in the 1930s such as the underdeveloped consumer base along with the priority focus on heavy industry were due to a number of avoidable problems. He argued that the industrial drive had been enacted under more severe circumstances, several years later and in a less rational manner than originally conceived by the Left Opposition.\nOfficially designed to accelerate development toward communism, the need for industrialization in the Soviet Union was emphasized because the Soviet Union had previously fallen behind economically compared to Western countries and also because socialist society needed industry to face the challenges posed by internal and external enemies of communism. Rapid industrialization was accompanied by mass collectivization of agriculture and rapid urbanization, which converted many small villages into industrial cities. To accelerate industrialization's development, Stalin imported materials, ideas, expertise, and workers from western Europe and the United States, pragmatically setting up joint-venture contracts with major American private enterprises such as the Ford Motor Company, which, under state supervision, assisted in developing the basis of the industry of the Soviet economy from the late 1920s to the 1930s. After the American private enterprises had completed their tasks, Soviet state enterprises took over.\nFredric Jameson has said that \"Stalinism was\u2026a success and fulfilled its historic mission, socially as well as economically\" given that it \"modernized the Soviet Union, transforming a peasant society into an industrial state with a literate population and a remarkable scientific superstructure.\" Robert Conquest disputes that conclusion, writing, \"Russia had already been fourth to fifth among industrial economies before World War I\", and that Russian industrial advances could have been achieved without collectivization, famine, or terror. According to Conquest, the industrial successes were far less than claimed, and the Soviet-style industrialization was \"an anti-innovative dead-end.\" Stephen Kotkin said those who argue collectivization was necessary are \"dead wrong\", writing that it \"only seemed necessary within the straitjacket of Communist ideology and its repudiation of capitalism. And economically, collectivization failed to deliver.\" Kotkin further claimed that it decreased harvests instead of increasing them, as peasants tended to resist heavy taxes by producing fewer goods, caring only about their own subsistence.5\nAccording to several Western historians, Stalinist agricultural policies were a key factor in the Soviet famine of 1930\u20131933; some scholars believe that Holodomor, which started near the end of 1932, was when the famine turned into an instrument of genocide; the Ukrainian government now recognizes it as such. Some scholars dispute the intentionality of the famine.\nSocial issues.\nThe Stalinist era was largely regressive on social issues. Despite a brief period of decriminalization under Lenin, the 1934 Criminal Code re-criminalized homosexuality. Abortion was made illegal again in 1936 after controversial debate among citizens, and women's issues were largely ignored.\nRelationship to Leninism.\nStalin considered the political and economic system under his rule to be Marxism\u2013Leninism, which he considered the only legitimate successor of Marxism and Leninism. The historiography of Stalin is diverse, with many different aspects of continuity and discontinuity between the regimes Stalin and Lenin proposed. Some historians, such as Richard Pipes, consider Stalinism the natural consequence of Leninism: Stalin \"faithfully implemented Lenin's domestic and foreign policy programs.\" Robert Service writes that \"institutionally and ideologically Lenin laid the foundations for a Stalin [...] but the passage from Leninism to the worse terrors of Stalinism was not smooth and inevitable.\" Likewise, historian and Stalin biographer Edvard Radzinsky believes that Stalin was a genuine follower of Lenin, exactly as he claimed. Another Stalin biographer, Stephen Kotkin, wrote that \"his violence was not the product of his subconscious but of the Bolshevik engagement with Marxist\u2013Leninist ideology.\"\nDmitri Volkogonov, who wrote biographies of both Lenin and Stalin, wrote that during the 1960s through 1980s, an official patriotic Soviet de-Stalinized view of the Lenin\u2013Stalin relationship (during the Khrushchev Thaw and later) was that the overly autocratic Stalin had distorted the Leninism of the wise \"dedushka\" Lenin. But Volkogonov also lamented that this view eventually dissolved for those like him who had the scales fall from their eyes immediately before and after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. After researching the biographies in the Soviet archives, he came to the same conclusion as Radzinsky and Kotkin (that Lenin had built a culture of violent autocratic totalitarianism of which Stalinism was a logical extension). \nProponents of continuity cite a variety of contributory factors, such as that Lenin, not Stalin, introduced the Red Terror with its hostage-taking and internment camps, and that Lenin developed the infamous Article 58 and established the autocratic system in the Communist Party. They also note that Lenin put a ban on factions within the Russian Communist Party and introduced the one-party state in 1921\u2014a move that enabled Stalin to get rid of his rivals easily after Lenin's death and cite Felix Dzerzhinsky, who, during the Bolshevik struggle against opponents in the Russian Civil War, exclaimed: \"We stand for organized terror\u2014this should be frankly stated.\"\nOpponents of this view include revisionist historians and many post\u2013Cold War and otherwise dissident Soviet historians, including Roy Medvedev, who argues that although \"one could list the various measures carried out by Stalin that were actually a continuation of anti-democratic trends and measures implemented under Lenin\u2026in so many ways, Stalin acted, not in line with Lenin's clear instructions, but in defiance of them.\" In doing so, some historians have tried to distance Stalinism from Leninism to undermine the totalitarian view that Stalin's methods were inherent in communism from the start. Other revisionist historians such as Orlando Figes, while critical of the Soviet era, acknowledge that Lenin actively sought to counter Stalin's growing influence, allying with Trotsky in 1922\u201323, opposing Stalin on foreign trade, and proposing party reforms including the democratization of the Central Committee and recruitment of 50-100 ordinary workers into the party's lower organs.\nCritics include anti-Stalinist communists such as Trotsky, who pointed out that Lenin attempted to persuade the Communist Party to remove Stalin from his post as its General Secretary. Trotsky also argued that he and Lenin had intended to lift the ban on the opposition parties such as the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries as soon as the economic and social conditions of Soviet Russia had improved. Lenin's Testament, the document containing this order, was suppressed after Lenin's death. Various historians have cited Lenin's proposal to appoint Trotsky as a Vice-chairman of the Soviet Union as evidence that he intended Trotsky to be his successor as head of government. In his biography of Trotsky, British historian Isaac Deutscher writes that, faced with the evidence, \"only the blind and the deaf could be unaware of the contrast between Stalinism and Leninism.\" Similarly, historian Moshe Lewin writes, \"The Soviet regime underwent a long period of 'Stalinism,' which in its basic features was diametrically opposed to the recommendations of [Lenin's] testament\". French historian Pierre Broue disputes the historical assessments of the early Soviet Union by modern historians such as Dmitri Volkogonov, which Broue argues falsely equate Leninism, Stalinism and Trotskyism to present the notion of ideological continuity and reinforce the position of counter-communism.\nSome scholars have attributed the establishment of the one-party system in the Soviet Union to the wartime conditions imposed on Lenin's government; others have highlighted the initial attempts to form a coalition government with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries. According to historian Marcel Liebman, Lenin's wartime measures such as banning opposition parties was prompted by the fact that several political parties either took up arms against the new Soviet government, participated in sabotage, collaborated with the deposed Tsarists, or made assassination attempts against Lenin and other Bolshevik leaders. Liebman also argues that the banning of parties under Lenin did not have the same repressive character as later bans enforced by Stalin's regime. Several scholars have highlighted the socially progressive nature of Lenin's policies, such as universal education, healthcare, and equal rights for women. Conversely, Stalin's regime reversed Lenin's policies on social matters such as sexual equality, legal restrictions on marriage, rights of sexual minorities, and protective legislation. Historian Robert Vincent Daniels also views the Stalinist period as a counterrevolution in Soviet cultural life that revived patriotic propaganda, the Tsarist programme of Russification and traditional, military ranks that Lenin had criticized as expressions of \"Great Russian chauvinism\". Daniels also regards Stalinism as an abrupt break with the Leninist period in terms of economic policies in which a deliberated, scientific system of economic planning that featured former Menshevik economists at Gosplan was replaced by a hasty version of planning with unrealistic targets, bureaucractic waste, bottlenecks and shortages.\nIn his \"Secret Speech\", delivered in 1956, Nikita Khrushchev, Stalin's successor, argued that Stalin's regime differed profusely from the leadership of Lenin. He was critical of the cult of the individual constructed around Stalin whereas Lenin stressed \"the role of the people as the creator of history\". He also emphasized that Lenin favored a collective leadership that relied on personal persuasion and recommended Stalin's removal as General Secretary. Khrushchev contrasted this with Stalin's \"despotism\", which required absolute submission to his position, and highlighted that many of the people later annihilated as \"enemies of the party ... had worked with Lenin during his life\". He also contrasted the \"severe methods\" Lenin used in the \"most necessary cases\" as a \"struggle for survival\" during the Civil War with the extreme methods and mass repressions Stalin used even when the revolution was \"already victorious\". In his memoirs, Khrushchev argued that his widespread purges of the \"most advanced nucleus of people\" among the Old Bolsheviks and leading figures in the military and scientific fields had \"undoubtedly\" weakened the nation. According to Stalin's secretary, Boris Bazhanov, Stalin was jubilant over Lenin's death while \"publicly putting on the mask of grief\".\nSome Marxist theoreticians have disputed the view that Stalin's dictatorship was a natural outgrowth of the Bolsheviks' actions, as Stalin eliminated most of the original central committee members from 1917. George Novack stressed the Bolsheviks' initial efforts to form a government with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries and bring other parties such as the Mensheviks into political legality. Tony Cliff argued the Bolshevik-Left Socialist Revolutionary coalition government dissolved the Constituent Assembly for several reasons. They cited the outdated voter rolls, which did not acknowledge the split among the Socialist Revolutionary party, and the assembly's conflict with the Congress of the Soviets as an alternative democratic structure.\nA similar analysis is present in more recent works, such as those of Graeme Gill, who argues that Stalinism was \"not a natural flow-on of earlier developments; [it formed a] sharp break resulting from conscious decisions by leading political actors.\" But Gill adds that \"difficulties with the use of the term reflect problems with the concept of Stalinism itself. The major difficulty is a lack of agreement about what should constitute Stalinism.\" Revisionist historians such as Sheila Fitzpatrick have criticized the focus on the upper levels of society and the use of Cold War concepts such as totalitarianism, which have obscured the reality of the system.\nRussian historian Vadim Rogovin writes, \"Under Lenin, the freedom to express a real variety of opinions existed in the party, and in carrying out political decisions, consideration was given to the positions of not only the majority, but a minority in the party\". He compared this practice with subsequent leadership blocs, which violated party tradition, ignored opponents' proposals, and expelled the Opposition from the party on falsified charges, culminating in the Moscow Trials of 1936\u20131938. According to Rogovin, 80-90% of the members of the Central Committee elected at the Sixth through the Seventeenth Congresses were killed. The Right and Left Opposition have been held by some scholars as representing political alternatives to Stalinism despite their shared beliefs in Leninism due to their policy platforms which were at variance with Stalin. This ranged from areas related to economics, foreign policy and cultural matters.\nLegacy.\nIn Western historiography, Stalin is considered one of the worst and most notorious figures in modern history. Biographer and historian Isaac Deutscher highlighted the totalitarian character of Stalinism and its suppression of \"socialist inspiration\". \nSeveral scholars have derided Stalinism for fostering anti-intellectual, antisemitic and chauvinistic attitudes within the Soviet Union. According to Marxist philosopher Helena Sheehan, his philosophical legacy is almost universally rated negatively with most Soviet sources considering his influence to have negatively impacted the creative development of Soviet philosophy. Sheehan discussed omissions in his views on dialectics and noted that most Soviet philosophers rejected his characterization of Hegel's philosophy.\nPierre du Bois argues that the cult of personality around Stalin was elaborately constructed to legitimize his rule. Many deliberate distortions and falsehoods were used. The Kremlin refused access to archival records that might reveal the truth, and critical documents were destroyed. Photographs were altered and documents were invented. People who knew Stalin were forced to provide \"official\" accounts to meet the ideological demands of the cult, especially as Stalin presented it in 1938 in \"Short Course on the History of the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks)\", which became the official history. Historian David L. Hoffmann sums up the consensus of scholars: \"The Stalin cult was a central element of Stalinism, and as such, it was one of the most salient features of Soviet rule. [...] Many scholars of Stalinism cite the cult as integral to Stalin's power or as evidence of Stalin's megalomania.\"\nBut after Stalin died in 1953, Khrushchev repudiated his policies and condemned his cult of personality in his Secret Speech to the Twentieth Party Congress in 1956, instituting de-Stalinization and relative liberalization, within the same political framework. Consequently, the world's communist parties that previously adhered to Stalinism, except the German Democratic Republic and the Socialist Republic of Romania, abandoned it and, to a greater or lesser degree, adopted Khrushchev's positions. The Chinese Communist Party chose to split from the Soviet Union, resulting in the Sino-Soviet split.\nMaoism and Hoxhaism.\nMao Zedong famously declared that Stalin was 70% good and 30% bad. Maoists criticized Stalin chiefly for his view that bourgeois influence within the Soviet Union was primarily a result of external forces, to the almost complete exclusion of internal forces, and his view that class contradictions ended after the basic construction of socialism. Mao also criticized Stalin's cult of personality and the excesses of the great purge. But Maoists praised Stalin for leading the Soviet Union and the international proletariat, defeating fascism in Germany, and his anti-revisionism.\nTaking the side of the Chinese Communist Party in the Sino-Soviet split, the People's Socialist Republic of Albania remained committed, at least theoretically, to its brand of Stalinism (Hoxhaism) for decades under the leadership of Enver Hoxha. Despite their initial cooperation against \"revisionism\", Hoxha denounced Mao as a revisionist, along with almost every other self-identified communist organization worldwide, resulting in the Sino-Albanian split. This effectively isolated Albania from the rest of the world, as Hoxha was hostile to both the pro-American and pro-Soviet spheres of influence and the Non-Aligned Movement under the leadership of Josip Broz Tito, whom Hoxha had also previously denounced.\nTrotskyism.\nLeon Trotsky always viewed Stalin as the \"candidate for grave-digger of our party and the revolution\" during the succession struggle. American historian Robert Vincent Daniels viewed Trotsky and the Left Opposition as a critical alternative to the Stalin-Bukharin majority in a number of areas. Daniels stated that the Left Opposition would have prioritised industrialisation but never contemplated the \"violent uprooting\" employed by Stalin and contrasted most directly with Stalinism on the issue of party democratization and bureaucratization. \nTrotsky and Trotskyists (Fourth International) differed markedly from Marxist-Leninists (Stalinists) in their support for political pluralism, worker\u2019s participation and a greater degree of decentralisation in economic planning. Trotsky also opposed the policy of forced collectivisation under Stalin and favoured a voluntary, gradual approach towards agricultural production with greater tolerance for the rights of Soviet Ukrainians.\nTrotskyists argue that the Stalinist Soviet Union was neither socialist nor communist but a bureaucratized degenerated workers' state\u2014that is, a non-capitalist state in which exploitation is controlled by a ruling caste that, although not owning the means of production and not constituting a social class in its own right, accrues benefits and privileges at the working class's expense. Trotsky believed that the Bolshevik Revolution must be spread all over the globe's working class, the proletarians, for world revolution. But after the failure of the revolution in Germany, Stalin reasoned that industrializing and consolidating Bolshevism in Russia would best serve the proletariat in the long run. The dispute did not end until Trotsky was murdered in his Mexican villa in 1940 by Stalinist assassin Ram\u00f3n Mercader. Max Shachtman, a principal Trotskyist theorist in the U.S., argued that the Soviet Union had evolved from a degenerated worker's state to a new mode of production called \"bureaucratic collectivism\", whereby orthodox Trotskyists considered the Soviet Union an ally gone astray. Shachtman and his followers thus argued for the formation of a Third Camp opposed to the Soviet and capitalist blocs equally. By the mid-20th century, Shachtman and many of his associates, such as Social Democrats, USA, identified as social democrats rather than Trotskyists, while some ultimately abandoned socialism altogether and embraced neoconservatism. In the U.K., Tony Cliff independently developed a critique of state capitalism that resembled Shachtman's in some respects but retained a commitment to revolutionary communism. Similarly, American Trotskyist David North drew attention to the fact that the generation of bureaucrats that rose to power under Stalin's tutelage presided over the Soviet Union's stagnation and breakdown.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAt a time when hundreds of thousands and millions of workers, especially in Germany, are departing from Communism, in part to fascism and in the main into the camp of indifferentism, thousands and tens of thousands of Social Democratic workers, under the impact of the self-same defeat, are evolving into the left, to the side of Communism. There cannot, however, even be talk of their accepting the hopelessly discredited Stalinist leadership.\n\u2014Trotsky's writings on Stalinism and fascism in 1933\nTrotskyist historian Vadim Rogovin believed Stalinism had \"discredited the idea of socialism in the eyes of millions of people throughout the world\". Rogovin also argued that the Left Opposition, led by Trotsky, was a political movement that \"offered a real alternative to Stalinism, and that to crush this movement was the primary function of the Stalinist terror\". According to Rogovin, Stalin had destroyed thousands of foreign communists capable of leading socialist change in their respective countries. He cited 600 active Bulgarian communists who perished in his prison camps along with the thousands of German communists whom Stalin handed over to the Gestapo after the signing of the German-Soviet pact. Rogovin further noted that 16 members of the Central Committee of the German Communist Party became victims of Stalinist terror. Repressive measures were also enforced upon the Hungarian, Yugoslav and other Polish Communist parties. British historian Terence Brotherstone argued that the Stalin era had a profound effect on those attracted to Trotsky's ideas. Brotherstone described figures who emerged from the Stalinist parties as miseducated, which he said helped to block the development of Marxism.\nOther interpretations.\nSome historians and writers, such as Dietrich Schwanitz, draw parallels between Stalinism and the economic policy of Tsar Peter the Great; Schwanitz in particular views Stalin as \"a monstrous reincarnation\" of him. Both men wanted Russia to leave the western European states far behind in terms of development. Some reviewers have considered Stalinism a form of red fascism. Other fascist regimes ideologically opposed the Soviet Union, but some regarded Stalinism favorably for evolving Bolshevism into a form of fascism. Benito Mussolini saw Stalinism as having transformed Soviet Bolshevism into a Slavic fascism.\nBritish historian Michael Ellman writes that mass deaths from famines are not a \"uniquely Stalinist evil\", noting that famines and droughts have been a common occurrence in Russian history, including the Russian famine of 1921\u201322, which occurred before Stalin came to power. He also notes that famines were widespread worldwide in the 19th and 20th centuries in countries such as India, Ireland, Russia, and China. Ellman compares the Stalinist regime's behavior vis-\u00e0-vis the Holodomor to that of the British government (toward Ireland and India) and the G8 in contemporary times, arguing that the G8 \"are guilty of mass manslaughter or mass deaths from criminal negligence because of their not taking obvious measures to reduce mass deaths\" and that Stalin's \"behaviour was no worse than that of many rulers in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries\".\nDavid L. Hoffmann questions whether Stalinist practices of state violence derive from socialist ideology. Placing Stalinism in an international context, he argues that many forms of state interventionism the Stalinist government used, including social cataloguing, surveillance and concentration camps, predate the Soviet regime and originated outside of Russia. He further argues that technologies of social intervention developed in conjunction with the work of 19th-century European reformers and greatly expanded during World War I, when state actors in all the combatant countries dramatically increased efforts to mobilize and control their populations. According to Hoffman, the Soviet state was born at this moment of total war and institutionalized state intervention practices as permanent features.\nIn \"The Mortal Danger: Misconceptions about Soviet Russia and the Threat to America\", anti-communist and Soviet dissident Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn argues that the use of the term \"Stalinism\" hides the inevitable effects of communism as a whole on human liberty. He writes that the concept of Stalinism was developed after 1956 by Western intellectuals to keep the communist ideal alive. But \"Stalinism\" was used as early as 1937, when Trotsky wrote his pamphlet \"Stalinism and Bolshevism\".\nIn two \"Guardian\" articles in 2002 and 2006, British journalist Seumas Milne wrote that the impact of the post\u2013Cold War narrative that Stalin and Hitler were twin evils, equating communism's evils with those of Nazism, \"has been to relativize the unique crimes of Nazism, bury those of colonialism and feed the idea that any attempt at radical social change will always lead to suffering, killing and failure.\"\nAccording to historian Eric D. Weitz, 60% of German exiles in the Soviet Union had been liquidated during the Stalinist terror and a higher proportion of the KPD Politburo membership had died in the Soviet Union than in Nazi Germany. Weitz also noted that hundreds of German citizens, most of them Communists, were handed over to the Gestapo by Stalin's administration.\nPublic opinion.\nIn modern Russia, public opinion of Stalin and the former Soviet Union has improved in recent years. Levada Center had found that favorability of the Stalinist era has increased from 18% in 1996 to 40% in 2016 which had coincided with his rehabilitation by the Putin government for the purpose of social patriotism and militarisation efforts. According to a 2015 Levada Center poll, 34% of respondents (up from 28% in 2007) say that leading the Soviet people to victory in World War II was such an outstanding achievement that it outweighed Stalin's mistakes. A 2019 Levada Center poll showed that support for Stalin, whom many Russians saw as the victor in the Great Patriotic War, reached a record high in the post-Soviet era, with 51% regarding him as a positive figure and 70% saying his reign was good for the country.\nLev Gudkov, a sociologist at the Levada Center, said, \"Vladimir Putin's Russia of 2012 needs symbols of authority and national strength, however controversial they may be, to validate the newly authoritarian political order. Stalin, a despotic leader responsible for mass bloodshed but also still identified with wartime victory and national unity, fits this need for symbols that reinforce the current political ideology.\"\nSome positive sentiments can also be found elsewhere in the former Soviet Union. A 2012 survey commissioned by the Carnegie Endowment found 38% of Armenians concurring that their country \"will always have need of a leader like Stalin\". A 2013 survey by Tbilisi University found 45% of Georgians expressing \"a positive attitude\" toward Stalin.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBooks\nScholarly articles.\nPrimary sources"}
{"id": "28622", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28622", "title": "Sukkot", "text": "Jewish harvest-related festival and holiday\nSukkot, also known as the Feast of Tabernacles or Feast of Booths, is a Torah-commanded Jewish holiday celebrated for seven days, beginning on the 15th day of the month of Tishrei. It is one of the Three Pilgrimage Festivals on which Israelites were commanded to make a pilgrimage to the Temple in Jerusalem. Biblically an autumn harvest festival and a commemoration of the Exodus from Egypt, Sukkot's modern observance is characterized by festive meals in a sukkah, a temporary wood-covered hut, and the taking of the four species.\nThe names used in the Torah are \"Festival of Ingathering\" (or \"Harvest Festival\", ) and \"Festival of Booths\" (). This corresponds to the double significance of Sukkot. The one mentioned in the Book of Exodus is agricultural in nature\u2014\"Festival of Ingathering at the year's end\" ()\u2014and marks the end of the harvest time and thus of the agricultural year in the Land of Israel. The more elaborate religious significance from the Book of Leviticus is that of commemorating the Exodus and the dependence of the Israelites on the will of God ().\nIn the Torah's description of the holiday, the idea of welcoming all guests and extending hospitality is intrinsic to the celebration. Actual and symbolic \"guests\" (Aramaic: \"ushpizin\") are invited to participate by visiting the sukkah. Specifically, according to the Zohar, seven \"forefathers\" of the Jewish people are to be welcomed during the seven days of the festival, in this order: Day 1: Abraham; Day 2: Isaac; Day 3: Jacob; Day 4: Moses; Day 5: Aaron; Day 6: Joseph; Day 7: David.\nThe holiday lasts seven days. The first day (and second day in the diaspora) is a Shabbat-like holiday when work is forbidden. This is followed by intermediate days called Chol HaMoed, during which certain work is permitted. The festival is closed with another Shabbat-like holiday called Shemini Atzeret (one day in the Land of Israel, two days in the diaspora, where the second day is called Simchat Torah).\nThe Hebrew word \"\" is the plural of \"sukkah\" ('booth' or 'tabernacle') which is a walled structure covered with \"s'chach\" (plant material, such as overgrowth or palm leaves). A sukkah is the name of the temporary dwelling in which farmers would live during harvesting, reinforcing agricultural significance of the holiday introduced in the Book of Exodus. As stated in Leviticus, it is also reminiscent of the type of fragile dwellings in which the Israelites dwelled during their 40 years of travel in the desert after the Exodus from slavery in Egypt. Throughout the holiday, meals are eaten inside the sukkah and many people sleep there as well.\nOn each day of the holiday it is a mitzvah, or commandment, to 'dwell' in the sukkah and to perform a shaking ceremony with a lulav (a palm frond, then bound with myrtle and willow), and an etrog (the fruit of a citron tree) (collectively known as the four species). The fragile shelter, the 'now-three-item' lulav, the etrog, the revived Simchat Beit HaShoeivah celebration's focus on water and rainfall and the holiday's harvest festival roots draw attention to people's dependence on the natural environment.\nOrigins.\nThe traditional origins of the holiday dates back to the Israelites' time in the desert, where they were told to commemorate God's protection and the harvest season that would happen when they would arrive in the land of Israel by building huts and taking the Four Species.\nAdditionally, Sukkot shares similarities with older Canaanite new-year/harvest festivals, which included a seven-day celebration with sacrifices reminiscent of those in and \"dwellings of branches\", as well as processions with branches. The earliest references in the Bible ( and ) make no mention of Sukkot, instead referring to it as \"the festival of ingathering (hag ha'asif) at the end of the year, when you gather in the results of your work from the field,\" suggesting an agricultural origin. (The Hebrew term \"asif\" is also mentioned in the Gezer calendar as a two-month period in the autumn.)\nThe booths aspect of the festival may come from the shelters that were built in the fields by those involved in the harvesting process. Alternatively, it may come from the booths which pilgrims would stay in when they came in for the festivities at the cultic sanctuaries. Finally, talks about the taking of various branches (and a fruit), this too is characteristic of ancient agricultural festivals, which frequently included processions with branches.https://\nLater, the festival was historicized by symbolic connection with the desert sojourn of exodus (). The narratives of the exodus trek do not describe the Israelites building booths,https:// but they indicate that most of the trek was spent encamped at oases rather than traveling, and \"sukkot\" roofed with palm branches were a popular and convenient form of housing at such Sinai desert oases.\nLaws and customs.\nSukkot is a seven-day festival. Inside the Land of Israel, the first day is celebrated as a full festival with special prayer services and holiday meals. Outside the Land of Israel, the first two days are celebrated as full festivals. The seventh day of Sukkot is called \"\" (\"Great Hoshana\", referring to the tradition that worshippers in the synagogue walk around the perimeter of the sanctuary during morning services) and has a special observance of its own. The intermediate days are known as \"Chol HaMoed\" (\"festival weekdays\"). According to Halakha, some types of work are forbidden during \"Chol HaMoed\". In Israel many businesses are closed during this time.\nThroughout the week of Sukkot, meals are eaten in the sukkah. If a brit milah (circumcision ceremony) or Bar Mitzvah rises during Sukkot, the seudat mitzvah (obligatory festive meal) is served in the sukkah. Similarly, the father of a newborn boy greets guests to his Friday-night Shalom Zachar in the sukkah. Males sleep in the sukkah, provided the weather is tolerable. If it rains, the requirement of eating and sleeping in the sukkah is waived, except for eating there on the first night where every effort needs to be made to at least say kiddush (the sanctification prayer on wine) and eat an egg-sized piece of bread before going inside the house to finish the meal if the rain does not stop. Every day except the Sabbath, a blessing is recited over the Lulav and the Etrog.\nKeeping of Sukkot is detailed in the Hebrew Bible (, and ); the Mishnah (Sukkah 1:1\u20135:8); the Tosefta (Sukkah 1:1\u20134:28); and the Jerusalem Talmud (Sukkah 1a\u2013) and Babylonian Talmud (Sukkah 2a\u201356b).\nSukkah.\nThe sukkah walls can be constructed of any material that blocks wind (wood, canvas, aluminum siding, sheets). The walls can be free-standing or include the sides of a building or porch. There must be at least three walls, with one permitted to be a partial wall. The roof must be of organic material, known as s'chach, such as leafy tree overgrowth, schach mats or palm fronds \u2013 plant material that is no longer connected with the earth. It is customary to decorate the interior of the sukkah with hanging decorations of the four species as well as with attractive artwork.\nThe Four Species.\nIn Leviticus 23:40, the Torah says to take four species and celebrate before God for seven days. Although the Torah only describes the species but does not identify all of them, the Talmud in Tractate Sukkah derives the identity of the four species as a Citron, a Palm branch, two Willow branches, and three Myrtle branches. These are referred to in Hebrew as the \"Lulav\" (palm branch) and \"Etrog\" (Citron) or just \"Lulav\". The palm branch, myrtle, and willows are tied together, usually with palm leaves, and the Citron is held next to the others.\nThese are taken all seven days of Sukkot except for Shabbat. The blessing is recited and the \"Lulav\" and \"Etrog\" are held together, and shaken in the four directions and up and down. They are also held during the Hallel prayer and during Hoshanot.\nIn 1953 the Lubavitcher Rebbe instituted the public Lulav campaign to encourage observance of this Mitzvah amongst all jews, regardless of religious affiliation. It soon spread into an international phenomenon, the Jewish person holding their \"Lulav\" and \"Etrog\", approaching complete strangers to offer to help them with the \"Mitzvah\" becoming an iconic sight in many large cities.\nTemple Offerings.\nEvery day of Sukkot, a special regimen of animals were sacrificed in honor of the holiday as prescribed in the Torah. One of the iconic parts of these sacrifices, known as the \"Mussaf\" offerings, was the daily offering of bulls. Starting at thirteen on the first day and subtracting by one daily until reaching seven on the seventh day, the total amount of bulls offered over the holiday was 70. The symbolism was that each bull was offered in honor of one of the nations listed in Genesis Chapter 10.\nPrayers.\nPrayers during Sukkot include the reading of the Torah every day, reciting the Mussaf (additional) service after morning prayers, reciting Hallel, and adding special additions to the Amidah and Grace after Meals. In addition, the service includes rituals involving the Four Species. The lulav and etrog are not used on the Sabbath.\nOn the Festival days, as well as the Sabbath of Chol Hamoed, some communities recite piyyutim.\n\"Hoshanot\".\nOn each day of the festival, worshippers walk around the synagogue carrying the Four Species while reciting special prayers known as \"Hoshanot\". This takes place either between Hallel and the morning's Torah reading or at the end of Mussaf. This ceremony commemorates the willow ceremony at the Temple in Jerusalem, in which willow branches were piled beside the altar with worshippers parading around the altar reciting prayers.\n\"Ushpizin\" and \"ushpizata\".\nA custom originating with Lurianic Kabbalah is to recite the \"ushpizin\" prayer to \"invite\" one of seven \"exalted guests\" into the sukkah. These \"ushpizin\" ( \"guests\", a loanword from Middle Persian \"\u0161pinza\" \"lodging\"), represent the \"seven shepherds of Israel\": Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Aaron, Joseph and David, each of whom correlates with one of the seven lower sefirot (this is why Joseph, associated with Yesod, follows Moses and Aaron, associated with Netzach and Hod respectively, even though he precedes them in the narrative). According to tradition, a different guest enters the sukkah each night, followed by the other six. Each \"ushpiz\" has a lesson to teach that parallels the spiritual focus of the day on which they visit based on the sefira associated with that character.\nSome streams of Reconstructionist Judaism also recognize a set of seven female shepherds of Israel, called variously (using the Modern Hebrew feminine plural), or (using the Aramaic feminine plural). Several lists of seven have been proposed. The Ushpizata are sometimes coidentified with the seven prophetesses of Judaism: Sarah, Miriam, Deborah, Hannah, Abigail, Hulda, and Esther. Some lists seek to relate each female leader to one of the sefirot to parallel their male counterparts. One such list in the order they would be invoked each evening is Ruth, Sarah, Rebecca, Miriam, Deborah, Tamar, and Rachel.\n\"Chol HaMoed\" intermediate days.\nThe second through seventh days of Sukkot (third through seventh days outside the Land of Israel) are called Chol HaMoed ( \u2013 lit. \"festival weekdays\"). These days are considered by halakha to be more than regular weekdays but less than festival days. In practice, this means that all activities that are needed for the holiday\u2014such as buying and preparing food, cleaning the house in honor of the holiday, or traveling to visit other people's sukkot or on family outings\u2014are permitted by Jewish law. Activities that will interfere with relaxation and enjoyment of the holiday\u2014such as laundering, mending clothes, engaging in labor-intensive activities\u2014are not permitted.\nReligious Jews often treat Chol HaMoed as a vacation period, eating nicer than usual meals in their sukkah, entertaining guests, visiting other families in their sukkot, and taking family outings. Many synagogues and Jewish centers also offer events and meals in their sukkot during this time to foster community and goodwill.\nOn the Shabbat which falls during the week of Sukkot (or in the event when the first day of Sukkot is on Shabbat in the Land of Israel), the Book of Ecclesiastes is read during morning synagogue services in Ashkenazic communities. (Diaspora Ashkenazic communities read it the second Shabbat {eighth day} when the first day of sukkot is on Shabbat.) This Book's emphasis on the ephemeralness of life (\"Vanity of vanities, all is vanity...\") echoes the theme of the sukkah, while its emphasis on death reflects the time of year in which Sukkot occurs (the \"autumn\" of life). The penultimate verse reinforces the message that adherence to God and His Torah is the only worthwhile pursuit. (Cf. Ecclesiastes 12:13,14.)\n\"Hakhel\" assembly.\nIn the days of the Temple in Jerusalem, all Israelite, and later Jewish men, women, and children on pilgrimage to Jerusalem for the festival would gather in the Temple courtyard on the first day of Chol HaMoed Sukkot to hear the Jewish king read selections from the Torah. This ceremony, which was mandated in Deuteronomy 31:10\u201313, was held every seven years, in the year following the Shmita (Sabbatical) year. This ceremony was discontinued after the destruction of the Temple, but it has been revived in Israel since 1952 on a smaller scale.\n\"Simchat Beit HaShoevah\" water-drawing celebration.\nThe \"Simchat Beit HaShoeivah\", meaning \u201cThe Celebration of the House of Drawing Water,\u201d was historically considered the most joyous event during the Second Temple period. It was such a renowned celebration that the Talmud states, \"One who never saw the Water-Drawing Celebration has never seen joy in his life\".\nThe celebration drew Jewish families, including scholars, farmers, and merchants, from distant lands such as Syria, Egypt, and Babylonia, who converged upon the Temple Mount for eight days of non-stop celebration. The festivities began on the close of the first day of Sukkot, following the afternoon offering, and lasted through the night until the morning offerings. To accommodate the crowds, Temple workers constructed large wooden bleachers on the courtyard walls, creating separation for women on the higher levels and men below. The celebration was famously lit by candelabras, whose enormous lanterns filled all of Jerusalem with light like day. The atmosphere was defined by loud music provided by Priests sounding trumpets and Levites playing instruments like lyres, flutes, and cymbals. A major spectacle involved distinguished elders, recognized by their long white beards, who sang, danced wildly, performed acrobatic feats, and juggled. The most illustrious sage, Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, who presided over the supreme court, would famously juggle eight flaming torches.\nThe actual water-drawing ritual that gave the celebration its name occurred at dawn. Fresh water was drawn from the Siloam Spring, located outside Jerusalem. As the flasks of water were brought into the Temple through the Water Gate, trumpets sounded fanfare. On Sukkot, a kohen (priest) would pour a flask of this freshly drawn water onto the corner of the altar, along with the regular morning offering.\nFollowing the Temple's destruction, Jews continued to remember the event by gathering to sing and tell stories. A powerful modern renewal began in Brooklyn, N.Y., in the fall of 1980, when the Lubavitcher Rebbe instructed that the celebration could start on the first night of Sukkot, accompanied by voices, since there was no Temple or Levite orchestra. This sparked a movement where hundreds of Jews danced and sang in the streets until dawn. The Rebbe endorsed the movement, establishing a new institution of Jewish life that continues yearly, providing a little taste of the celebration in the Temple.\n\"Hoshana Rabbah\" (Great Supplication).\nThe seventh day of Sukkot is known as \"Hoshana Rabbah\" (Great Supplication). This day is marked by a special synagogue service in which seven circuits are made by worshippers holding their Four Species, reciting additional prayers. In addition, a bundle of five willow branches is beaten on the ground.\nShemini Atzeret and Simchat Torah.\nThe holiday immediately following Sukkot is known as \"Shemini Atzeret\" (lit. \"Eighth [Day] of Assembly\"). Shemini Atzeret is usually viewed as a separate holiday. In the diaspora a second additional holiday, \"Simchat Torah\" (\"Joy of the Torah\"), is celebrated. In the Land of Israel, Simchat Torah is celebrated on Shemini Atzeret. On Shemini Atzeret people leave their sukkah and eat their meals inside the house. Outside the Land of Israel, many eat in the sukkah without making the blessing. The sukkah is not used on Simchat Torah.\nSymbolism of the holiday.\nProtection.\nThe symbolism of protection embedded in Sukkot finds its initial expression in the historical context of the Israelite exodus from Egypt, emphasizing the Divine watchfulness over the Jewish people even during their lowest spiritual state. The command to reside in the temporary sukkah for seven days is intended so that future generations know that God sheltered His people when they departed Egypt.\nThe sukkah structure itself serves as a crucial component of the protective symbolism, particularly in relation to the harvest season. During the precarious period when the harvest is still in the field and vulnerable to natural threats like frost, flooding, and heat, the need for Divine protection is easily recognized. However, once the fruits and grain are safely brought indoors, there is a risk that the farmer will lose awareness of God\u2019s constant involvement. To counteract this shift, Jews are commanded to forsake their solid, permanent residence and reside in the temporary sukkah. Unlike a house with a solid roof, a hut with a flimsy roof, through which the wind wafts and the stars are visible, forces the resident to be fully cognizant of God\u2019s Divine protection.\nUnity.\nOne of the core symbolisms of the festival of Sukkot centers on Jewish unity, a theme expressed through its three major precepts: the taking of the Four Kinds, dwelling in the sukkah, and joy. Sukkot is uniquely defined in prayer as \u201cThe Time of Our Joy,\u201d emphasizing a communal happiness that transcends selfish boundaries. The Torah commands one to rejoice with \"your son, your daughter, your servant, your maid, the Levite, the stranger, the orphan and the widow\". The joy is meant to unite all segments of society, connecting the wealthy and the pauper, or the master and the servant.\nTo inspire a deeper unity, the Jew acquires the Four Kinds, which symbolize four different spiritual classes within the community based on knowledge (taste) and good deeds (scent): the etrog (taste and scent), the lulav (taste but no scent), the hadas (scent but no taste), and the aravah (no taste and no scent). When these Four Kinds are bound together, they reiterate the underlying oneness of a diverse people, integrating the scholarly and the ignorant into a single entity, thereby moving unity beyond mere connection to integration.\nA yet higher form of unity is embodied by the sukkah itself. The Talmud states that \"The entire nation of Israel may, and ought to, dwell in a single sukkah,\" because the structure represents a oneness so deep that all distinctions pale into insignificance. The sukkah encompasses the entirety of a person, from their mind to their \"muddy boots,\" equally. When the whole nation dwells in a single sukkah, the unity expressed transcends individual differences and is deeper than the compassionate unity of joy or the complementary integration of the Four Kinds.\nSukkot in the generations of Israel.\nJeroboam's feast.\nAccording to , King Jeroboam, first king of the rebellious northern kingdom, instituted a feast on the fifteenth day of the eighth month in imitation of the feast of Sukkot in Judah, and pilgrims went to Bethel instead of Jerusalem to make thanksgiving offerings. Jeroboam feared that continued pilgrimages from the northern kingdom to Jerusalem could lead to pressure for reunion with Judah:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If these people go up to offer sacrifices in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, then the heart of this people will turn back to their lord, Rehoboam king of Judah, and they will kill me and go back to Rehoboam king of Judah.\nIn Christianity.\nSukkot is celebrated by a number of Christian denominations that observe holidays from the Old Testament. These groups base this on the belief that Jesus celebrated Sukkot (see the Gospel of John 7). The holiday is celebrated according to its Hebrew calendar dates. The first mention of observing the holiday by Christian groups dates to the 17th century, among the sect of the Subbotniks in Russia.\nAcademic views.\nDe Moor has suggested that there are links between Sukkot and the Ugaritic New Year festival, in particular the Ugaritic custom of erecting two rows of huts built of branches on the temple roof as temporary dwelling houses for their gods.\nSome have pointed out that the original Thanksgiving holiday had many similarities with Sukkot in the Bible.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28623", "revid": "6056090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28623", "title": "Sal\u00f2, or the 120 Days of Sodom", "text": "1975 film by Pier Paolo Pasolini\nSal\u00f2, or the 120 Days of Sodom (), billed on-screen as Pasolini's 120 Days of Sodom on English-language prints and commonly referred to as simply Sal\u00f2 (), is a 1975 political art horror film directed and co-written by Pier Paolo Pasolini. The film is a loose adaptation of the 1785 novel (first published in 1904) \"The 120 Days of Sodom\" by the Marquis de Sade, updating the story's setting to the World War II era. It was Pasolini's final film, released three weeks after his murder.\nThe film focuses on four wealthy, corrupt Italian libertines in the time of the fascist Republic of Sal\u00f2 (1943\u20131945). The libertines kidnap 18 teenagers and subject them to four months of extreme violence, sadism, genital torture and psychological torture. The film explores themes of political corruption, consumerism, authoritarianism, nihilism, morality, capitalism, totalitarianism, sadism, sexuality, and fascism. The story is in four segments, inspired by Dante's \"Divine Comedy\": the Anteinferno, the Circle of Manias, the Circle of Shit, and the Circle of Blood. The film also contains frequent references to and several discussions of Friedrich Nietzsche's 1887 book \"On the Genealogy of Morality\", Ezra Pound's poem \"The Cantos\", and Marcel Proust's novel sequence \"In Search of Lost Time\".\nPremiering at the Paris Film Festival on 23 November 1975, the film had a brief theatrical run in Italy before being banned in January 1976, and was released in the United States the following year on 3 October 1977. Because it depicts youths subjected to graphic violence, torture, sexual abuse, and murder, the film was controversial upon its release and has remained banned in many countries.\nThe confluence of thematic content in the film\u2014ranging from the political and socio-historical, to psychological and sexual\u2014has led to much critical discussion. It has been both praised and decried by various film historians and critics and was named the 65th-scariest film ever made by the Chicago Film Critics Association in 2006.\nPlot.\nThe film is separated into four segments with intertitles, inspired by Dante's \"Divine Comedy\":\nAnte Inferno/Antinferno.\nIn 1944, in the Republic of Sal\u00f2, the fascist and Nazi-controlled portion of Italy, four wealthy men of power\u2014the Duke, the Bishop, the Magistrate and the President\u2014agree to marry each other's daughters as the first step in a debauched ritual. They then recruit four teenage boys\u2014Bruno, Fabrizio, Claudio and Ezio\u2014as collaborators (guards) in the \"Decima Flottiglia MAS\" and four young men (Blackshirt soldiers), called \"studs\", who are chosen because of their large penises and good looks. The teenage guards and fascist secret police (OVRA) are sent out to capture young victims, of whom nine teenage boys and nine teenage girls are picked and brought to a villa near Marzabotto. One of the boys tries to escape but is shot dead.\nCircle of Manias/.\nAccompanying the libertines at the villa are four middle-aged prostitutes, also collaborators, whose job it is to orchestrate debauched interludes for the men. During the many days at the villa, the four men subject their victims to increasingly abhorrent tortures and humiliations for their own pleasure. During breakfast, the daughters enter the dining hall naked to serve food. One of the studs, Efisio, trips and rapes Liana, the Duke's elder daughter, in front of the fascists and collaborators, who laugh at her cries of pain, aside from Ezio, who is secretly distressed by the ordeal. The President prompts Efisio to penetrate him anally while the Duke sings \"\".\nAfter breakfast, one of the victims who had previously tried to escape is shown dead to the crowd. Later, two victims named Sergio and Renata are forced to get married after one of the studs, Guido, and Signora Vaccari forcefully masturbate them. The President and the Duke then rape Sergio and Renata, respectively, to stop them from having sex with each other, during which the Magistrate engages with the Duke in three-way intercourse.\nOn another day, the naked victims are forced to act like dogs. When one of the victims, Lamberto, refuses, the Magistrate whips him and feeds Susanna, the President's daughter, a slice of polenta filled with nails.\nCircle of Shit/.\nSignora Maggi relates her troubled childhood and her coprophilia. As she explains how she killed her mother over a dispute about her prostitution, Renata cries, remembering the murder of her own mother. The Duke, aroused by the sound of her cries, orders Efisio and the guards to undress her. Renata begs God for death and the Duke forces her to eat his feces with a spoon. Later, at a mock wedding reception for the Magistrate and Sergio, the victims are presented with a meal of human feces, which the studs, prostitutes and masters eat without question. During a search for the victim with the most beautiful buttocks, Franco is picked and promised instant death, though the Bishop spares him on the promise of a far more painful death in the near future.\nCircle of Blood/.\nA Black Mass-like wedding ensues between the studs and the libertines while the latter are dressed in drag. Afterwards, the Bishop examines the captives in their rooms, where they start betraying each other: Claudio reveals that Graziella is hiding a photograph, and Graziella reveals that Eva and Antiniska are having a secret affair. Victim Umberto is appointed to replace Ezio, who is shot to death for having sex with a black servant girl and revealing himself to be a communist.\nThe remaining victims are summoned to determine which of them will be punished. Graziella is spared due to her betrayal of Eva, and Rino is spared due to his submissive relationship with the Duke. Those who are called are given a blue ribbon and sentenced to a painful death, while those who have not been called, provided they keep collaborating with the libertines, can hope to return home. The victims are taken outside and raped, tortured and murdered through methods such as branding, hanging, scalping, burning and having their tongues and eyes cut out, as each libertine watches from the villa through binoculars. Horrified by the atrocities being committed, the Pianist jumps out of a window to her death.\nAs the torture continues, Bruno and Claudio dance a waltz together; Claudio asks the name of Bruno's girlfriend back at home, to which he replies \"Marguerita\".\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCharacter names.\nThe Masters are known only by their respective titles (Duke, Bishop, Magistrate, President), while the various youths are either unnamed or are referred to by their actors' real names. The exceptions are Maurizio Valaguzza (Bruno), Bruno Musso (Carlo Porro), Lamberto Book (Lamberto Gobbi), Gaspare di Jenno (Rino), Marco Lucantoni (Ferruccio Tonna), Faridah Malik (Fatimah), Olga Andreis (Eva), and Dorit Henke (Doris).\nProduction.\nConception.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I also realized that Sade, writing, was certainly thinking of Dante. So I began to restructure the film into three Dantesque ditches.\"\n\u2014Pier Paolo Pasolini about the film\nPasolini's writing collaborator Sergio Citti had originally been attached to direct the intended adaptation of the Marquis de Sade's \"The 120 Days of Sodom\". During the creation of the first drafts of the script, Pasolini appealed to several of his usual collaborators, among them Citti, Claudio Masenza, Antonio Troisi and specially Pupi Avati.\nWhile collaborating with Citti on the script, Pasolini was compelled to transpose the setting of \"Sal\u00f2\" from 18th-century France (as depicted in de Sade's original book) to the last days of Benito Mussolini's regime in the Republic of Sal\u00f2 in the spring of 1944. Sal\u00f2 is a toponymical metonymy for the Italian Social Republic (RSI) (because Mussolini ruled from this northern town rather than from Rome), which was a puppet state of Nazi Germany. While writing the script, it was decided between Citti and Pasolini that the latter would direct the project, as Citti had planned to write a separate project after completing \"Sal\u00f2\". Pasolini noted his main contribution to Citti's original screenplay as being its \"Dante-esque structure\", which Pasolini felt had been de Sade's original intention with the source material.\nIn the film, almost no background is given on the tortured subjects and, for the most part, they almost never speak. Pasolini's depiction of the victims in such a manner was intended to demonstrate the physical body \"as a commodity... the annulment of the personality of the Other.\" Specifically, Pasolini intended to depict what he described as an \"anarchy of power\", in which sexual acts and physical abuse functioned as metaphor for the relationship between power and its subjects. Aside from this theme, Pasolini also described the film as being about the \"nonexistence of history\" as it is seen from Western culture and Marxism. \nInterior design was chosen to feature paintings and art by artists such as Severini, Duchamp and Feininger. Pasolini also stated that the four fascist libertines were written as highly educated characters and were to refer to themes brought up by, among others, Blanchot, Nietzsche and Klossowski. \nTrilogy of death.\nIn contrast to his \"Trilogy of Life\" (\"Il Decameron\", \"I racconti di Canterbury\" and \"Il fiore delle Mille e una notte\"), Pasolini initially planned \"The 120 days of Sodom\" and \"Sal\u00f2\" as separate stories, but noting similarity between both concepts \u2013 and based on their experiences in the Republic of Sal\u00f2 \u2013 conceived the idea of \"Sal\u00f2 or the 120 Days of Sodom\". Pasolini established that the violent scenes in \"Sal\u00f2\" were symbolic and reduced the romanticism of his previous films, although knowing that once the film was premiered would be considered as damned. As a continuation, Pasolini planned to make a biographical film about the life of child murderer Gilles de Rais, but was murdered himself before \"Sal\u00f2\"'s release.\nCasting.\nInitially, Ninetto Davoli was chosen to play Claudio, a young collaborationist, but due to legal problems he had to decline, the role being replaced by Claudio Troccoli, a young man who had a similarity to Davoli in his first films. Pupi Avati, being the writer, is not officially accredited also due to legal problems. Most of the actors of the cast, although they were natural performers, were non-professionals with minimal or no prior on-camera acting experience. Many of them were models, cast for their willingness to appear naked on-screen.\nFranco Merli was considered like a prototype of the Pasolinian boy. Ezio Manni remembers during filming: \"The same with Franco Merli, the guy chosen for having the most beautiful butt. When they reward him by holding the gun to his head, he suddenly protested, he couldn\u2019t handle that scene. And the assistant director had to go and give him a hug.\"\nPasolini regular Franco Citti was to play one of the soldiers' studs, but he did not appear. Laura Betti was also going to play Signora Vaccari, but also because of legal problems and prior commitments to \"Novecento\" declined the role, though she doubled the voice of H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Surg\u00e8re in post-production.\nUberto Paolo Quintavalle (the Magistrate) was a writer; he knew Pasolini working on the newspaper \"Corriere della Sera\". He was chosen for the role because he had all \"the characteristics of a decadent intellectual\".\nAldo Valletti (the President) was a friend of Pasolini from the time of \"Accattone\". Giorgio Cataldi (the bishop), another friend of Pasolini, was a clothes seller in Rome.\nFilming.\nSeveral outdoor scenes were filmed in Villa Aldini, a neoclassical building on the hills of Bologna. The interiors were shot in Villa Sorra near Castelfranco Emilia. The noble hall of the building and the courtyard were filmed in the Cinecitt\u00e0 studios. The town on the Reno replaces the fictional location in Marzabotto. Other scenes were filmed in Grand Hotel a Villa Feltrinelli in Gargnano.\nThe shooting, carried out mainly in the 16th-century Villa Gonzaga-Zani in Villimpenta in the spring of 1975, was difficult and involved scenes of homophilia, coprophagia and sadomasochism. The acts of torture in the courtyard caused some of the actors to suffer abrasions and burns. Actress H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Surg\u00e8re described the film shoot as \"unusual\", with nearly 40 actors being on set at any given time, and Pasolini shooting \"enormous\" amounts of footage. She also noted the mood on the set as \"paradoxically jovial and immature\" in spite of the content. In-between working, the cast shared large meals of risotto and also had football games played against the crew of Bernardo Bertolucci's \"Novecento\", which was being filmed nearby. It also marked the reconciliation between the then 34-year-old Bertolucci and his old mentor after several disagreements following Pasolini's criticism of \"Last Tango in Paris\" (1972) and his failure to defend it from drastic censorship measures. During the soccer match against the crew of \"Novecento\" both directors supported their teams, except that while Bertolucci did it from the bench, Pasolini played directly on the field. The crew of \"Novecento\" wore a purple shirt with phosphorescent bands to distract the opponents and had lined up, passing them off as engineers, two players from the youth team of Calcio Parma. The \"Sal\u00f2\" crew lost 5 to 2 and Pasolini, furious, left the field before the end shouting: \"He doesn't read anything anymore, that guy!\" to Bertolucci.\nDuring production, some reels were stolen and the thieves demanded a ransom for their return. Using doubles, the same scenes were reshot but from a different angle. At the trial for Pasolini's murder, it was hypothesized that Pasolini was told the film reels were discovered in Ostia Lido. He was led there by Pelosi, the accused, and fell victim to an ambush, where he was murdered. However there is no concrete evidence for this theory.\nPost-production.\nMusical score.\nThe original music corresponds to Ennio Morricone interpreted at the piano by Arnaldo Graziosi. Other non-original music was Carl Orff's \"Carmina Burana\" in \"Veris leta facies\" at the nearly end of the film during \"Circle of Blood\". Other music was several Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin's pieces Preludes Op.28 n\u00ba 17 and n\u00ba4 and Valses Op. 34 n\u00ba 2 in La minor.\nDubbing.\nLike most Italian films of the time, \"Sal\u00f2\" was shot MOS (without direct sound), with all dialogue and foley effects dubbed in post-production. The controversy surrounding the production dissuaded the actors playing the Masters to return to loop their lines, so they were all re-dubbed by other (uncredited) actors. French actress H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Surg\u00e8re (Vaccari) had her dialogue dubbed by Laura Betti.\nAlternative endings.\nPasolini was undecided on what type of conclusion the film should have, to the point of having conceived and shot four different endings: the first was a shot of a red flag in the wind with the words \"Love You\", but it was abandoned by the director because he thought it \"too pompous\" and \"prone to the ethics of psychedelic youth\", which he detested. The second showed all the actors, other than the four gentlemen, the director and his troupe perform a wild dance in a room of the villa furnished with red flags and the scene was filmed with the purpose of using it as a background scene during the credits, but was discarded because it appeared, in the eyes of Pasolini, chaotic and unsatisfactory. Another final scene, discovered years later and which was only in the initial draft of the script, showed, after the torture's end, the four gentlemen walk out of the house and drawing conclusions about the morality of the whole affair. Finally, keeping the idea of dance as the summation of carnage, Pasolini chose to mount the so-called final \"Margherita\", with the two young blackshirts dancing.\nRelease.\n\"Sal\u00f2\" premiered at the Paris Film Festival on 23 November 1975, three weeks after Pasolini's death. In Italy, the film was initially rejected for screening by the Italian censorship, but received approval on 23 December 1975. The approval, however, was withdrawn three weeks after the film's Italian release in January 1976 and it was formally banned. Worldwide distribution for the film was supplied by United Artists. In the United States, however, the film was given a limited release via Zebra Releasing Corporation on 3 October 1977.\nCensorship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Sadomasochism is an eternal characteristic of man. It existed during de Sade's time, and it exists now. But that's not what matters most...The real meaning of the sex in my film is as a metaphor for the relationship between power and its subjects.\"\nPasolini on the film's depiction of sex, 1975.\n\"Sal\u00f2\" has been banned in several countries, because of its graphic portrayals of rape, torture and murder\u2014mainly of people thought to be younger than eighteen years of age. The film remains banned in several countries and sparked numerous debates among critics and censors about whether or not it constituted pornography due to its nudity and graphic depiction of sexual acts.\nThe film was rejected by the British Board of Film Censors (BBFC) in January 1976. It was first screened at the Old Compton Street Cinema Club in Soho, London in 1977, in an uncut form and without certification from BBFC secretary James Ferman; the premises were raided by the Metropolitan Police after a few days. A cut version prepared under Ferman's supervision, again without formal certification, was subsequently screened under cinema club conditions for some years. In 2000, in an uncut form, the film was finally passed for theatrical and video distribution in the United Kingdom.\nThe film was not banned in the United States and received a limited release in October 1977; it was, however, banned in Ontario, Canada. In 1994, an undercover policeman in Cincinnati, Ohio, rented the film from a local gay bookstore and then arrested the owners for \"pandering\". A large group of artists, including Martin Scorsese and Alec Baldwin, and scholars signed a legal brief arguing the film's artistic merit; the Ohio state court dismissed the case because the police violated the owners' Fourth Amendment rights, without reaching the question of whether the film was obscene.\nIt was banned in Australia in 1976 for reasons of indecency. After a 17-year-long ban, the Australian Classification Board passed the film with an R-18+ (for 18 and older only) uncut for theatrical release in July 1993. However, the Australian Classification Review Board overturned this decision in February 1998 and banned the film outright, for \"offensive cruelty with high impact, sexual violence and depictions of offensive and revolting fetishes\". The film was then pulled from all Australian cinemas. \"Sal\u00f2\" was resubmitted for classification in Australia in 2008, only to be rejected once again. The DVD print was apparently a modified version, causing outrage in the media over censorship and freedom of speech. In 2010, the film was submitted again and passed with an R18+ rating. According to the Australian Classification Board media release, the DVD was passed due to \"the inclusion of 176 minutes of additional material which provided a context to the feature film.\" The media release also stated that \"The Classification Board wishes to emphasise that this film is classified R18+ based on the fact that it contains additional material. Screening this film in a cinema without the additional material would constitute a breach of classification laws.\" The majority opinion of the board stated that the inclusion of additional material on the DVD \"facilitates wider consideration of the context of the film which results in the impact being no more than high.\" This decision came under attack by FamilyVoice Australia (formerly the Festival of Light Australia), the Australian Christian Lobby and Liberal Party of Australia Senator Julian McGauran, who tried to have the ban reinstated, but the Board refused. The film was released on Blu-ray Disc and DVD on 8 September 2010.\nIn New Zealand, the film was originally banned in 1976. The ban was upheld in 1993. In 1997, special permission was granted for the film to be screened uncut at a film festival. In 2001, the DVD was finally passed uncut with an 'R18' rating.\nReception.\nThe review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports a 70% approval rating based on 40 reviews, with an average rating of 6.70/10. The site's consensus reads, \"\"Sal\u00f2, or the 120 Days of Sodom\" will strike some viewers as irredeemably depraved, but its unflinching view of human cruelty makes it impossible to ignore.\"\nDirector Michael Haneke named the film his fourth-favorite film when he voted for the 2002 \"Sight and Sound\" poll. Director Catherine Breillat and critic Joel David also voted for the film. David Cross, Brady Corbet, Gaspar No\u00e9, and Korn frontman Jonathan Davis have named it one of their favorite films. Rainer Werner Fassbinder also cited it as one of his 10 favorite films. A 2000 poll of critics conducted by \"The Village Voice\" named it the 89th-greatest film of the 20th century. Director John Waters said, \"\"Salo\" is a beautiful film...it uses obscenity in an intelligent way...and it's about the pornography of power.\"\nJonathan Rosenbaum of the \"Chicago Reader\" wrote of the film: \"Roland Barthes noted that in spite of all its objectionable elements (he pointed out that any film that renders Sade real and fascism unreal is doubly wrong), this film should be defended because it 'refuses to allow us to redeem ourselves.' It's certainly the film in which Pasolini's protest against the modern world finds its most extreme and anguished expression. Very hard to take, but in its own way an essential work.\"\nThe film's reputation for pushing boundaries has led some critics to criticize or avoid it; the \"Time Out\" film guide, for example, deemed the film a \"thoroughly objectionable piece of work\", adding that it \"offers no insights whatsoever into power, politics, history or sexuality.\" \"TV Guide\" gave the film a mixed review awarding it a score of 2.5/4, stating, \"despite moments of undeniably brilliant insight, is nearly unwatchable, extremely disturbing, and often literally nauseous\".\nUpon the film's United States release, Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"\"Salo\" is, I think, a perfect example of the kind of material that, theoretically, anyway, can be acceptable on paper but becomes so repugnant when visualized on the screen that it further dehumanizes the human spirit, which is supposed to be the artist's concern.\" In 2011 Roger Ebert wrote that he owned the film since its release on LaserDisc but had not watched it, citing the film's transgressive reputation. In 2011, David Haglund of \"Slate\" surveyed five film critics and three of them said that it was required viewing for any serious critic or cinephile. Haglund concluded that he still would not watch the film.\nHome media.\nThe Criterion Collection first released the film in 1993 on LaserDisc, following with a DVD release in 1998. In 2011, The Criterion Collection released a newly restored version on Blu-ray and DVD in conjunction with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer as a two-disc release with multiple interviews collected on the accompanying second disc.\nCritical analysis.\n\"Sal\u00f2\" has received critical analysis from film scholars, critics and others for its converging depictions of sexual violence and cross-referencing of historical and sociopolitical themes. Commenting on the film's prevalent sexual themes, horror film scholar Stephen Barber writes: \"The core of \"Sal\u00f2\" is the anus, and its narrative drive pivots around the act of sodomy. No scene of a sex act has been confirmed in the film until one of the libertines has approached its participants and sodomized the figure committing the act. The filmic material of \"Sal\u00f2\" is one that compacts celluloid and feces, in Pasolini's desire to burst the limits of cinema, via the anally resonant eye of the film lens.\" Barber also notes that Pasolini's film reduces the extent of the storytelling sequences present in de Sade's \"The 120 Days of Sodom\" so that they \"possess equal status\" with the sadistic acts committed by the libertines.\nPasolini scholar Gian Annovi notes in the book \"Pier Paolo Pasolini: Performing Authorship\" (2007) that \"Sal\u00f2\" is stylistically and thematically marked by a \"link between Duchamp's Dada aesthetics and the perverse dynamics of desire\", which, according to Annovi, became artistic points of interest for Pasolini in the early developments of \"Sal\u00f2\".\nDallas Marshall for Film Inquiry wrote in an article from 2021 that \"\"Sal\u00f2\" is his [Pasolini's] strongest diatribe against consumerism\", and other critics have brought up that the film is to be seen as symbolism; a metaphor for the modern society, capitalism, and especially consumerism, i.e., how \"those in power can make people consume crap (ads, commercials, etc) and those of the people who resist die, and the majority passively obeys and goes along with the system, and a few will collaborate with the rulers\". The Film Inquiry article also mentions this metaphor: \n\"Much like the citizens of fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, the prisoners were eating up the bullshit of dictators. But it goes deeper than that because one of the aspects of modern society that Pasolini had a great disdain for was mass consumerism. The man viewed consumerism, especially that of processed foods, to be pesticide on the human soul and eating literal excrement. He yearned for the days of classical beauty and good food that nourished the body. He viewed the modern world as a perversion and was thoroughly disgusted with its trajectory.\" The BBFC notes that the film \"is intended as a critique of both fascism and consumerism\".\nLegacy.\n\"Sal\u00f2\" has earned a reputation among some film scholars for being the \"sickest film of all time,\" with some citing it as an early progenitor of the extreme cinema subgenre, alongside the American film \"The Last House on the Left\" (1972).\nFilm scholar Matthias Frey notes that the cross-section between the film's thematic content and graphic visuals has resulted in it being considered both a horror film as well as an art film:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Films like \"Sal\u00f2\"], which are usually considered by critics as 'works' by the 'artists'\u00a0... might be received in practice also by individuals who watch \"Saw\" or \"Hostel\" or any 'popular' or cult horror film.\nIn 2006, the Chicago Film Critics Association named it the 65th-scariest film ever made.\nIn 2008, Adam Chodzko, an English artist released a short film on Super 8 film called \"Reunion: Sal\u00f2, 1998\". Chodzko placed advertisements in newspapers and in hopes of reuniting the sixteen actors who had portrayed the roles of the adolescents who were tortured to death in \"Sal\u00f2\". Chodzko only found one of the actors, Antiniska Nemour, who was working in dentistry in Italy. Chodzko to make the film with Nemour as the \"guest of honor\" and the other actors porrayed by doubles who resembled the original cast members.\nIn 2010, the Toronto International Film Festival placed it at no. 47 on its list of \"The Essential 100 films.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nEssential bibliography"}
{"id": "28624", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28624", "title": "Selenocysteine", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nSelenocysteine (symbol Sec or U, in older publications also as Se-Cys) is the 21st proteinogenic amino acid. Selenoproteins contain selenocysteine residues. Selenocysteine is an analogue of the more common cysteine with selenium in place of the sulfur.\nSelenocysteine is present in several enzymes (for example glutathione peroxidases, tetraiodothyronine 5\u2032 deiodinases, thioredoxin reductases, formate dehydrogenases, glycine reductases, selenophosphate synthetase 2, methionine-\"R\"-sulfoxide reductase B1 (SEPX1), and some hydrogenases). It occurs in all three domains of life, including important enzymes (listed above) present in humans.\nSelenocysteine was discovered in 1974 by biochemist Thressa Stadtman at the National Institutes of Health.\nChemistry.\nSelenocysteine is the Se-analogue of cysteine. It is rarely encountered outside of living tissue (nor is it available commercially) because of its high susceptiblility to air-oxidation. More common is the oxidized derivative selenocystine, which has an Se-Se bond. Both selenocysteine and selenocystine are white solids. The Se-H group is more acidic (p\"K\"a = 5.43) than the thiol group; thus, it is deprotonated at physiological pH.\nStructure.\nSelenocysteine has the same structure as cysteine, but with an atom of selenium taking the place of the usual sulfur; it has a selenol group. Like other natural proteinogenic amino acids, cysteine and selenocysteine have L chirality in the older D/L notation based on homology to D- and L-glyceraldehyde. In the newer \"R\"/\"S\" system of designating chirality, based on the atomic numbers of atoms near the asymmetric carbon, they have \"R\" chirality, because of the presence of sulfur or selenium as a second neighbor to the asymmetric carbon. The remaining chiral amino acids, having only lighter atoms in that position, have \"S\" chirality.)\nProteins which contain a selenocysteine residue are called selenoproteins. Most selenoproteins contain a single selenocysteine residue. Selenoproteins that exhibit catalytic activity are called selenoenzymes.\nBiology.\nUnlike the other amino acids, no free pool of selenocysteine exists in the cell. Its high reactivity would cause damage to cells. Instead, cells store selenium in the less reactive oxidized form, selenocystine, or in methylated form, selenomethionine.\nProduction.\nSelenocysteine synthesis occurs on a specialized tRNA, which also functions to incorporate it into nascent polypeptides. The primary and secondary structure of selenocysteine-specific tRNA, tRNASec, differ from those of standard tRNAs in several respects, most notably in having an 8-base-pair (bacteria) or 10-base-pair (eukaryotes)[] acceptor stem, a long variable region arm, and substitutions at several well-conserved base positions. The selenocysteine tRNAs are initially charged with serine by seryl-tRNA ligase, but the resulting Ser-tRNASec is not used for translation because it is not recognised by the normal translation elongation factor (EF-Tu in bacteria, eEF1A in eukaryotes).[]\nRather, the tRNA-bound seryl residue is converted to a selenocysteine residue by the pyridoxal phosphate-containing enzyme selenocysteine synthase. In eukaryotes and archaea, two enzymes are required to convert tRNA-bound seryl residue into tRNA selenocysteinyl residue: PSTK (\"O\"-phosphoseryl-tRNA[Ser]Sec kinase) and selenocysteine synthase. Finally, the resulting Sec-tRNASec is specifically bound to an alternative translational elongation factor (SelB or mSelB (or eEFSec)), which delivers it in a targeted manner to the ribosomes translating mRNAs for selenoproteins. The specificity of this delivery mechanism is brought about by the presence of an extra protein domain (in bacteria, SelB) or an extra subunit (SBP2 for eukaryotic mSelB/eEFSec) which bind to the corresponding RNA secondary structures formed by the SECIS elements in selenoprotein mRNAs.\nSelenoproteins.\nSelenocysteine has a lower reduction potential than cysteine. These properties make it very suitable in proteins that are involved in antioxidant activity.\nAlthough it is found in the three domains of life, it is not universal in all organisms. Unlike other amino acids present in biological proteins, selenocysteine is not coded for directly in the genetic code. Instead, it is encoded in a special way by a UGA codon, which is normally the \"opal\" stop codon. Such a mechanism is called translational recoding and its efficiency depends on the selenoprotein being synthesized and on translation initiation factors. When cells are grown in the absence of selenium, translation of selenoproteins terminates at the UGA codon, resulting in a truncated, nonfunctional enzyme. The UGA codon is made to encode selenocysteine by the presence of a selenocysteine insertion sequence (SECIS) in the mRNA. The SECIS element is defined by characteristic nucleotide sequences and secondary structure base-pairing patterns. In bacteria, the SECIS element is typically located immediately following the UGA codon within the reading frame for the selenoprotein. In Archaea and in eukaryotes, the SECIS element is in the 3\u2032 untranslated region (3\u2032 UTR) of the mRNA and can direct multiple UGA codons to encode selenocysteine residues.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], 136 human proteins (in 37 families) are known to contain selenocysteine (selenoproteins).\nBreakdown.\nSelenocysteine is decomposed by the enzyme selenocysteine lyase into -alanine and selenide. This probably helps with the safe recycling of Sec during degradation of selenoproteins.\nToxicity.\nJust as selenomethionine can be randomly incorporated into proteins, selenocystine can also be mistakenly attached to tRNACys by cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase and incorporated into proteins in lieu of cystine. This causes considerable toxicity. A variant synthase that can distinguish between Cys and Sec helps reduce toxicity.\nDerivatives.\nSelenocysteine derivatives \u03b3-glutamyl-\"Se\"-methylselenocysteine and \"Se\"-methylselenocysteine occur naturally in plants of the genera \"Allium\" and \"Brassica\".\nApplications.\nBiotechnological applications of selenocysteine include use of 73Se-labeled Sec (half-life of 73Se = 7.2 hours) in positron emission tomography (PET) studies and 75Se-labeled Sec (half-life of 75Se = 118.5 days) in specific radiolabeling, facilitation of phase determination by multiwavelength anomalous diffraction in X-ray crystallography of proteins by introducing Sec alone, or Sec together with selenomethionine (SeMet), and incorporation of the stable 77Se isotope, which has a nuclear spin of and can be used for high-resolution NMR, among others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "28625", "revid": "49558687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28625", "title": "Supervolcano", "text": "Volcano that has had an eruption with a volcanic explosivity index (VEI) of 8\nA supervolcano is a volcano that has had an eruption with a volcanic explosivity index (VEI) of 8, the largest recorded value on the index. This means the volume of deposits for such an eruption is greater than .\nSupervolcanoes occur when magma in the mantle rises into the crust but is unable to break through it. Pressure builds in a large and growing magma pool until the crust is unable to contain the pressure and ruptures. This can occur at hotspots (for example, Yellowstone Caldera) or at subduction zones (for example, Toba).\nLarge-volume supervolcanic eruptions are also often associated with large igneous provinces, which can cover huge areas with lava and volcanic ash. These can cause long-lasting climate change (such as the triggering of a small ice age) and threaten species with extinction. The Oruanui eruption of New Zealand's Taup\u014d Volcano (about 25,600 years ago) was the world's most recent VEI-8 eruption.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"supervolcano\" was first used in a volcanic context in 1949.\n Its origins lie in an early 20th-century scientific debate about the geological history and features of the Three Sisters volcanic region of Oregon in the United States. In 1925, Edwin T. Hodge suggested that a very large volcano, which he named Mount Multnomah, had existed in that region. He believed that several peaks in the Three Sisters area were remnants of Mount Multnomah after it had been largely destroyed by violent volcanic explosions, similarly to Mount Mazama. In his 1948 book \"The Ancient Volcanoes of Oregon\", volcanologist Howel Williams ignored the possible existence of Mount Multnomah, but in 1949 another volcanologist, F. M. Byers Jr., reviewed the book, and in the review, Byers refers to Mount Multnomah as a \"supervolcano\".\nMore than fifty years after Byers' review was published, the term \"supervolcano\" was popularised by the BBC popular science television program \"Horizon\" in 2000, referring to eruptions that produce extremely large amounts of ejecta.\nThe term \"megacaldera\" is sometimes used for caldera supervolcanoes, such as the Blake River Megacaldera Complex in the Abitibi greenstone belt of Ontario and Quebec, Canada.\nThough there is no well-defined minimum explosive size for a \"supervolcano\", there are at least two types of volcanic eruptions that have been identified as supervolcanoes: large igneous provinces and massive eruptions.\nLarge igneous provinces.\nLarge igneous provinces, such as Iceland, the Siberian Traps, Deccan Traps, and the Ontong Java Plateau, are extensive regions of basalts on a continental scale resulting from flood basalt eruptions. When created, these regions often occupy several thousand square kilometres and have volumes on the order of millions of cubic kilometers. In most cases, the lavas are normally laid down over several million years. They release large amounts of gases.\nThe R\u00e9union hotspot produced the Deccan Traps about 66\u00a0million years ago, coincident with the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event. The scientific consensus is that an asteroid impact was the cause of the extinction event, but the volcanic activity may have caused environmental stresses on extant species up to the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene boundary. Some scientists have hypothesised that the volcanism around the Deccan Traps could have been intensified by the Chicxulub impact, which would have been close to the antipodal point of the Traps at that time.\nAdditionally, the largest flood basalt event (the Siberian Traps) occurred around 250\u00a0million years ago and was coincident with the largest mass extinction in history, the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event, although it is unknown whether it was solely responsible for the extinction event.\nSuch outpourings are not explosive, though lava fountains may occur. Many volcanologists consider Iceland to be a large igneous province that is currently being formed. The last major outpouring occurred in 1783\u201384 from the Laki fissure, which is approximately long. An estimated of basaltic lava was poured out during the eruption (VEI 4).\nThe Ontong Java Plateau has an area of about , and the province was at least 50% larger before the Manihiki and Hikurangi Plateaus broke away.\nMassive explosive eruptions.\nVolcanic eruptions are classified using the volcanic explosivity index. It is a logarithmic scale, and an increase of one in VEI number is equivalent to a tenfold increase in volume of erupted material. VEI 7 or VEI 8 eruptions are so powerful that they often form circular calderas rather than cones because the downward withdrawal of magma causes the overlying rock mass to collapse into the empty magma chamber beneath it.\nKnown super eruptions.\nBased on incomplete statistics, at least 60 VEI 8 eruptions have been identified.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28626", "revid": "33324359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28626", "title": "Single European Sky", "text": "European Commission air traffic project\nThe Single European Sky (SES) is a European Commission initiative that seeks to reform the European air traffic management system through a series of actions carried out in four different levels (institutional, operational, technological and control and supervision) with the aim of satisfying the needs of the European airspace in terms of capacity, safety, efficiency and environmental impact.\nBackground.\nAir traffic management in the European Union is currently undertaken by member states, co-operating through EUROCONTROL, an intergovernmental organisation that includes most of the European countries.\nEuropean air spaces are some of the busiest in the world, and the current system of air traffic management allegedly suffers from several parameters, such as using national borders in the sky, and having large areas of airspace reserved for national military use when in fact they may not be needed. This has created 'an outdated patchwork of airspace blocs and inefficient flight paths [which] impose significant financial and environmental costs on the sector.' For example, airplanes are often forced to 'circle the skies burning fuel when traffic controllers go on strike or are at capacity'. On average, planes fly 49 kilometres (30.4 miles) longer than strictly necessary.\nAdvantages.\nThe Single European Sky is hoped to benefit airspace users by ensuring the safe and efficient utilisation of airspace and the air traffic management system within and beyond the EU.\nHistory.\nOrigins (1999\u20132004).\nAfter the Prodi Commission took office in September 1999, Transport Commissioner Loyola de Palacio launched efforts to structurally reform air traffic management across Europe, as she and many others had concluded that Eurocontrol was incapable of effectively carrying out its duties, particularly its decision-making and its failure to implement agreements. By the end of 1999, the European Commission had obtained the consent of all EU Transport Ministers for the 'creation of a single European sky', encompassing structural ATM integration and reform, and established a high level group of senior civil and military air traffic authorities representing the member states to prepare concrete policy proposals.\nAfter the high level group had completed its report in late 2000, the Commission used its recommendations to develop legislative proposals for regulating the SES. In October 2001, the European Commission adopted proposals for a Single European Sky, to create a Union regulator for air traffic management within the countries forming the European Union, Norway and Switzerland. The European Union regulator was supposed to merge upper European airspaces, currently divided into national zones. It was proposed to organise this airspace uniformly, with air traffic control areas based on operational efficiency, instead of national borders. Also, there were plans to integrate civil and military air traffic management. The framework regulation that sketched the working methods of the SES, and specific regulations on air navigation, airspace and equipment, were adopted on 11 December 2003, and entered into force as Regulation (EC) No 550/2004 (Service Provision Regulation) on 20 April 2004.\nThere are discussions about enlarging the initiative to cover the Balkan and Mediterranean countries.\nGibraltar issue (2000\u20132020).\nOne report from the British Parliament, dated 2000, reported that Spain blocked the inclusion of Gibraltar Airport in the Single European Sky, meaning the whole package was suspended. Due to Brexit, formally completed on 31 January 2020, this stumbling block was removed.\nSES-I (2004\u20132009).\nThe first SES legislation (SES-I) has been viewed as 'a real breakthrough', as is stimulated progress in harmonisation in air navigation service providers (ANSPs), the establishment of national supervisory authorities and EU competences over certification of these services. However, progress was slow in the next two years; the establishment of functional airspace blocks (FABs) was disorganised, little progress was made in improving cost efficiency, growing air traffic threatened capacity, and with tackling climate change emerging as a political priority, European aviation's emissions had to be mitigated. In response to strong demands from the industry, EU member states and other stakeholders, the Barroso Commission appointed a new high level group to develop a more detailed regulatory framework in November 2006. The group published its report in July 2007; it contained 10 recommendations, including making the EU the primary regulator of European aviation in order to set performance targets, safety requirements, introduce economic regulation of ATM services, incentives for ANSPs to achieve their objectives, and streamlining the implementation of FABs. Eurocontrol would provide the EU with technical support for regulations, safety regulation would be delegated to the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), and member states would be urged to hurry up with their commitments to implement the defragmentation of airspaces.\nSES-II (2009\u20132012).\nOn 21 October 2009, a revision of the SES regulations called SES-II was adopted, which entered into force on 4 December 2009.\nFocus is here on four areas:\nThe SES-II aimed to merge 36 national airspaces into 9 Functional Airspace Block (FABs) in order to provide better performance, ultimately 3 years later on 4 December 2012.\nThe air travel disruption after the 2010 Eyjafjallaj\u00f6kull eruption caused an acceleration to merge member states' air traffic control systems into the Single European Sky, and the immediate creation of a crisis co-ordination group to handle future transport disruptions. On 2 December 2010, France, Germany, Switzerland and the Benelux countries agreed to form the FABEC (Functional Airspace Block Europe Central), the third FAB to be created after the Dano-Swedish and Anglo-Irish block. The FABs were supposed to enter into effect by 2012, but delays were expected due to protests from ATC labour unions. The FAB CE, consisting of Austria, Slovenia, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, was formed in 2011. By 26 October 2012, only the Anglo-Irish and Dano-Swedish FABs had been fully implemented, while the other 7 FABs were still in various stages of development; the deadline for the full realisation of the Single European Sky on 4 December 2012 was missed.\nSES 2+ (2013\u20132018).\nOn 10 June 2013, the European Commission presented its plan \"B\" to speed up the implementation process of SES. The so-called SES 2+ is a package of measure which aim at challenging the current situation with state owned monopolies responsible for providing air navigation services. At the same time, transport workers' union ETF announced mobilising its members to protest against the suggested package. Negotiations on SES 2+ stalled in the Council in 2015.\nIn 2017, the European Court of Auditors determined that the functional airspace blocks have failed to defragment European airspace as they have not been fully implemented, with aircraft still being serviced by a different air navigation provider in each member state with different rules and requirements. This was due to a \"lack of commitment on the part of the member states\".\nAmended SES 2+ (2019\u2013present).\nBy 2019, nothing of the plan had yet been officially realised, adding an extra 6 billion euros in costs, and 11.6 million megatonnes of excess CO2 emissions for that year alone. In September 2019, 21 aviation organisations including Airlines for Europe (A4E), AIRE, ACI Europe, CANSO, ERA and IATA, signed an agreement in Brussels to urge the creation of an SES, and to work together with EU institutions and member states to achieve it. The Commission appointed 15 experts in the field to form a Wise Person's Group to assess the current situation and future needs.\nAfter Brexit was formally completed on 31 January 2020 (eliminating UK objections and the Gibraltar issue), and the COVID-19 pandemic put the aviation sector into an existential crisis, the European Commission made a new proposal for a Single European Sky on 22 September 2020. It used the expert group's recommendations to amend the 2013 proposal's text, and introduced new measures; separately, it also drafted a proposal to amend the EASA Basic Regulation. Instead of relying on top-down regulation, which appeared not to have worked previously, the Commission stimulated voluntary alliances between so-called air traffic service providers. Airlines for Europe supported the proposal, but stressed the importance of 'enhanced governance structure' to ensure its success. Meanwhile, the FABEC and FAB CE zones, jointly accounting for 8.6 million flights (over 75% of all European air traffic) in 2019, agreed to formalise and intensify their cooperation in June 2020.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
