{"id": "26773", "revid": "50714273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26773", "title": "Stendhal", "text": "French writer (1783\u20131842)\nMarie-Henri Beyle (; 23 January 1783 \u2013 23 March 1842), better known by his pen name Stendhal (, , ), was a French writer. Best known for the novels \"Le Rouge et le Noir\" (\"The Red and the Black\", 1830) and \"La Chartreuse de Parme\" (\"The Charterhouse of Parma\", 1839), he is highly regarded for the acute analysis of his characters' psychology and considered one of the early and foremost practitioners of realism. A self-proclaimed egotist, the neologism for the same characteristic in his characters was \"Beylism\".\nLife.\nMarie-Henri Beyle was born in Grenoble, Is\u00e8re, on 23 January 1783, into the family of the advocate and landowner Ch\u00e9rubin Beyle and his wife Henriette Gagnon. He was an unhappy child, disliking his \"unimaginative\" father and mourning his mother, whom he loved fervently, and who died in childbirth in 1790, when he was seven. He spent his childhood at the Beyle country house in Claix near Grenoble. His closest friend was his younger sister, Pauline, with whom he maintained a steady correspondence throughout the first decade of the 19th century. His family was part of the bourgeois class of the Ancien Regime, which explains his ambiguous attitude toward Napoleon, the Bourbon Restoration, and the monarchy later\u00a0on.\nThe military and theatrical worlds of the First French Empire were a revelation to Beyle. As an assistant war commissioner, he served in the administration of the Kingdom of Westphalia, one of Napoleon's client states in Germany. From 1807 to 1808, Beyle lived in Braunschweig (Brunswick), where he fell in love with Wilhelmine von Griesheim, whom he called Minette, and for whose sake he remained in the city. \"I have no inclination, now, except for Minette, for this blonde and charming Minette, this soul of the north, such as I have never seen in France or Italy.\"\nHe was named an auditor with the Conseil d'\u00c9tat on 3 August 1810, and thereafter took part in the French administration and in the Napoleonic Wars in Italy. He travelled extensively in Germany and was part of Napoleon's army in the 1812 invasion of Russia. Upon arriving, Stendhal witnessed the burning of Moscow from just outside the city as well as the army's winter retreat. He was appointed Commissioner of War Supplies and sent to Smolensk to prepare provisions for the returning army. He crossed the Berezina River by finding a usable ford rather than the overwhelmed pontoon bridge, which probably saved his life and those of his companions. He arrived in Paris in 1813, largely unaware of the general fiasco that the retreat had become. Stendhal became known, during the Russian campaign, for keeping his wits about him, and maintaining his \"sang-froid and clear-headedness.\" He also maintained his daily routine, shaving each day during the retreat from Moscow.\nAfter the 1814 Treaty of Fontainebleau, and the fall of Napoleon, he left for Italy, where he settled in Milan. where he stayed until 1821; \"...only leaving after these, the happiest, years of his life, through fear of being implicated in the Carbonari troubles.\" In 1830, he was appointed as French consul at Trieste and Civitavecchia. He formed a particular attachment to Italy, where he spent much of the remainder of his career. His novel \"The Charterhouse of Parma\", written in 52 days, is set in Italy, which he considered a more sincere and passionate country than Restoration France. An aside in that novel, referring to a character who contemplates suicide after being jilted, speaks about his attitude towards his home country: \"To make this course of action clear to my French readers, I must explain that in Italy, a country very far away from us, people are still driven to despair by love.\"\nStendhal identified with the nascent liberalism and his sojourn in Italy convinced him that Romanticism was essentially the literary counterpart of liberalism in politics. When Stendhal was appointed to a consular post in Trieste in 1830, Metternich refused his \"exequatur\" on account of Stendhal's liberalism and anti-clericalism.\nStendhal was a dandy and wit about town in Paris, as well as an obsessive womaniser. His genuine empathy towards women is evident in his books; Simone de Beauvoir spoke highly of him in \"The Second Sex\". She credited him for perceiving a woman as not a woman but simply a human being. Citing Stendhal's rebellious heroines, she maintained that he was a feminist writer. One of his early works is \"On Love\", a rational analysis of romantic passion that was based on his unrequited love for Mathilde, Countess Dembowska, whom he met while living at Milan. Later, he would also suffer \"restlessness in spirit\" when one of his childhood friends, Victorine got married. In a letter to Pauline, he described her as the woman of his dreams and wrote that he would have discovered happiness if he became her husband. This fusion of, and tension between, clear-headed analysis and romantic feeling is typical of Stendhal's great novels; he could be considered a Romantic realist.\nStendhal suffered miserable physical disabilities in his final years as he continued to produce some of his most famous work. He contracted syphilis in December 1808. As he noted in his journal, he was taking iodide of potassium and quicksilver to treat his sexual disease, resulting in swollen armpits, difficulty swallowing, pains in his shrunken testicles, sleeplessness, giddiness, roaring in the ears, racing pulse and \"tremors so bad he could scarcely hold a fork or a pen\". Modern medicine has shown that his health problems were more attributable to his treatment than to his syphilis. He is said to have sought the best treatment in Paris, Vienna and Rome.\nStendhal died on 23 March 1842, a few hours after collapsing with a seizure in the street in Paris. He is interred in the Cimeti\u00e8re de Montmartre.\nPseudonyms.\nBefore settling on the pen name Stendhal, he published under many pen names, including \"Louis Alexandre Bombet\" and \"Anastasius Serpi\u00e8re\". The only book that Stendhal published under his own name was \"The History of Painting\" (1817). From the publication of \"Rome, Naples, Florence\" (September 1817) onwards, he published his works under the pseudonym \"M. de Stendhal, officier de cavalerie\". He borrowed this pen name from the German city of Stendal, birthplace of Johann Joachim Winckelmann, an art historian and archaeologist famous at the time. However, it is not clear whether he chose the name in honour of Winckelmann or simply knew the place as a centre of communications between Berlin and Hanover. Stendhal added an additional \"H\" to make the Germanic pronunciation more clear.\nStendhal used many aliases in his autobiographical writings and correspondence, and often assigned pseudonyms to friends, some of whom adopted the names for themselves. Stendhal used more than a hundred pseudonyms, which were astonishingly diverse. Some he used no more than once, while others he returned to throughout his life. \"Dominique\" and \"Salviati\" served as intimate pet names. He coins comic names \"that make him even more bourgeois than he really is: Cotonnet, Bombet, Chamier.\" He uses many ridiculous names: \"Don phlegm\", \"Giorgio Vasari\", \"William Crocodile\", \"Poverino\", \"Baron de Cutendre\". One of his correspondents, Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e, said: \"He never wrote a letter without signing a false name.\"\nStendhal's \"Journal\" and autobiographical writings include many comments on masks and the pleasures of \"feeling alive in many versions.\" \"Look upon life as a masked ball,\" is the advice that Stendhal gives himself in his diary for 1814. In \"Memoirs of an Egotist\" he writes: \"Will I be believed if I say I'd wear a mask with pleasure and be delighted to change my name?...for me the supreme happiness would be to change into a lanky, blonde German and to walk about like that in Paris.\"\nWorks.\nContemporary readers did not fully appreciate Stendhal's realistic style during the Romantic period in which he lived. He was not fully appreciated until the beginning of the 20th century. He dedicated his writing to \"the Happy Few\" (in English in the original). This can be interpreted as a reference to Canto 11 of Lord Byron's \"Don Juan\", which refers to \"the thousand happy few\" who enjoy high society, or to the \"we few, we happy few, we band of brothers\" line of William Shakespeare's \"Henry V\", but Stendhal's use more likely refers to \"The Vicar of Wakefield\" by Oliver Goldsmith, parts of which he had memorized in the course of teaching himself English.\nIn \"The Vicar of Wakefield\", \"the happy few\" refers ironically to the small number of people who read the title character's obscure and pedantic treatise on monogamy. As a literary critic, such as in \"Racine and Shakespeare\", Stendhal championed the Romantic aesthetic by unfavorably comparing the rules and strictures of Jean Racine's classicism to the freer verse and settings of Shakespeare, and supporting the writing of plays in prose.\nAccording to the literary theorist https://: \"In his novel \"The Red and the Black\", Stendhal refers to a novel as a mirror being carried in a basket. The metaphor of the realistic novel as a mirror of contemporary reality, accessible to the narrator, has certain limitations, which the artist is aware of. A valuable realistic work exceeds the Platonic meaning of art as a copy of reality. A mirror does not reflect reality in its entirety, nor is the artist's aim to document it fully. In \"The Red and the Black\", the writer emphasizes the significance of selection when it comes to describing reality, with a view to realizing the cognitive function of a work of art, achieved through the categories of unity, coherence and typicality\". Stendhal was an admirer of Napoleon and his novel \"Le Rouge et le Noir\" is considered his literary tribute to the emperor.\nToday, Stendhal's works attract attention for their irony and psychological and historical dimensions. Stendhal was an avid fan of music, particularly the works of the composers Domenico Cimarosa, Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Gioacchino Rossini. He wrote a biography of Rossini, \"Vie de Rossini\" (1824), now more valued for its wide-ranging musical criticism than for its historical content. He also idealized aristocracy, noting its antiegalitarianism but appreciating how it is liberal in its love of liberty.\nIn his works, Stendhal reprised excerpts appropriated from Giuseppe Carpani, Th\u00e9ophile Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Winckler, Sismondi and others.\nAutobiography.\nStendhal's brief memoir, \"Souvenirs d'\u00c9gotisme\" (\"Memoirs of an Egotist\"), was published posthumously in 1892. Also published was a more extended autobiographical work, thinly disguised as the \"Life of Henry Brulard\".\nNon-fiction.\nHis other works include short stories, journalism, travel books (\"A Roman Journal\"), a famous collection of essays on Italian painting, and biographies of several prominent figures of his time, including Napoleon, Haydn, Mozart, Rossini and Metastasio.\nCrystallization.\nIn Stendhal's 1822 classic \"On Love\" he describes or compares the \"birth of love\", in which the love object is 'crystallized' in the mind, as being a process similar or analogous to a trip to Rome. In the analogy, the city of Bologna represents \"indifference\" and Rome represents \"perfect love\":\nWhen we are in Bologna, we are entirely indifferent; we are not concerned to admire in any particular way the person with whom we shall perhaps one day be madly in love; even less is our imagination inclined to overrate their worth. In a word, in Bologna \"crystallization\" has not yet begun. When the journey begins, love departs. One leaves Bologna, climbs the Apennines, and takes the road to Rome. The departure, according to Stendhal, has nothing to do with one's will; it is an instinctive moment. This transformative process actuates in terms of four steps along a journey:\nThis journey or crystallization process (shown above) was detailed by Stendhal on the back of a playing card while speaking to Madame Gherardi, during his trip to the Salzburg salt mine.\nCritical appraisal.\nHippolyte Taine considered the psychological portraits of Stendhal's characters to be \"real, because they are complex, many-sided, particular and original, like living human beings.\" \u00c9mile Zola concurred with Taine's assessment of Stendhal's skills as a \"psychologist\", and although emphatic in his praise of Stendhal's psychological accuracy and rejection of convention, he deplored the various implausibilities of the novels and Stendhal's clear authorial intervention.\nThe German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche refers to Stendhal as \"France's last great psychologist\" in \"Beyond Good and Evil\" (1886). He also mentions Stendhal in the \"Twilight of the Idols\" (1889) during a discussion of Dostoevsky as a psychologist, saying that encountering Dostoevsky was \"the most beautiful accident of my life, more so than even my discovery of Stendhal\".\nFord Madox Ford, in \"The English Novel\", asserts that to Diderot and Stendhal \"the Novel owes its next great step forward...At that point it became suddenly evident that the Novel as such was capable of being regarded as a means of profoundly serious and many-sided discussion and therefore as a medium of profoundly serious investigation into the human case.\"\nErich Auerbach considers modern \"serious realism\" to have begun with Stendhal and Balzac. In \"\", he remarks of a scene in \"The Red and the Black\" that \"it would be almost incomprehensible without a most accurate and detailed knowledge of the political situation, the social stratification, and the economic circumstances of a perfectly definite historical moment, namely, that in which France found itself just before the July Revolution.\"\nIn Auerbach's view, in Stendhal's novels \"characters, attitudes, and relationships of the \"dramatis person\u00e6\", then, are very closely connected with contemporary historical circumstances; contemporary political and social conditions are woven into the action in a manner more detailed and more real than had been exhibited in any earlier novel, and indeed in any works of literary art except those expressly purporting to be politico-satirical tracts.\"\nSimone de Beauvoir uses Stendhal as an example of a feminist author. In \"The Second Sex\" de Beauvoir writes \"Stendhal never describes his heroines as a function of his heroes: he provides them with their own destinies.\" She furthermore points out that it \"is remarkable that Stendhal is both so profoundly romantic and so decidedly feminist; feminists are usually rational minds that adopt a universal point of view in all things; but it is not only in the name of freedom in general but also in the name of individual happiness that Stendhal calls for women's emancipation.\" Yet, Beauvoir criticises Stendhal for, although wanting a woman to be his equal, her only destiny he envisions for her remains a man.\nEven Stendhal's autobiographical works, such as \"The Life of Henry Brulard\" or \"Memoirs of an Egotist\", are \"far more closely, essentially, and concretely connected with the politics, sociology, and economics of the period than are, for example, the corresponding works of Rousseau or Goethe; one feels that the great events of contemporary history affected Stendhal much more directly than they did the other two; Rousseau did not live to see them, and Goethe had managed to keep aloof from them.\" Auerbach goes on to say: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVladimir Nabokov was dismissive of Stendhal, in \"Strong Opinions\" calling him \"that pet of all those who like their French plain\". In the notes to his translation of \"Eugene Onegin\", he asserts that \"Le Rouge et le Noir\" is \"much overrated\", and that Stendhal has a \"paltry style\". In \"Pnin\" Nabokov wrote satirically, \"Literary departments still labored under the impression that Stendhal, Galsworthy, Dreiser, and Mann were great writers.\"\nMichael Dirda considers Stendhal \"the greatest all round French writer \u2013 author of two of the top 20 French novels, author of a highly original autobiography (\"Vie de Henry Brulard\"), a superb travel writer, and as inimitable a presence on the page as any writer you'll ever meet.\"\nStendhal syndrome.\nIn 1817 Stendhal was reportedly overcome by the cultural richness of Florence he encountered when he first visited the Tuscan city. As he described in his book \"\":\nAs I emerged from the porch of Santa Croce, I was seized with a fierce palpitation of the heart (that same symptom which, in Berlin, is referred to as an attack of the nerves); the well-spring of life was dried up within me, and I walked in constant fear of falling to the ground.\nThe condition was diagnosed and named in 1979 by Italian psychiatrist Graziella Magherini, who had noticed similar psychosomatic conditions (racing heart beat, nausea and dizziness) amongst first-time visitors to the city.\nIn homage to Stendhal, Trenitalia named their overnight train service from Paris to Venice the Stendhal Express.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26775", "revid": "50850471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26775", "title": "Syndicalism", "text": "Form of revolutionary organisation\nSyndicalism is a labor movement within society that, through industrial unionism, seeks to unionize workers according to industry and advance their demands through strikes and other forms of direct action, with the eventual goal of gaining control over the means of production and the economy at large through social ownership. \nSyndicalist unions first emerged in Spain and North America in the 1870s, before rising to prominence in France and later emerging on other continents. Syndicalist movements were most predominant amongst the socialist movement during the interwar period that preceded the outbreak of World War II. Major syndicalist organizations included the General Confederation of Labor (CGT) in France, the Confederacion Nacional del Trabajo (CNT) in Spain, the Italian Syndicalist Union (USI), the Free Workers' Union of Germany (FAUD), and the Argentine Regional Workers' Federation (FORA). Although they did not regard themselves as syndicalists, the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) (nicknamed \"Wobblies\") in the United States, the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union (ITGWU), and the Canadian One Big Union (OBU) are considered by most historians to belong to this movement.\nThe International Workers' Association \u2013 Asociaci\u00f3n Internacional de los Trabajadores (IWA\u2013AIT), which was formed in 1922, is an international syndicalist federation of various labour unions from different countries. At its peak, it represented millions of workers and competed directly for the hearts and minds of the working class with social democratic unions and parties. A number of syndicalist organizations were and still are to this day linked in the IWA\u2013AIT; some of its member organizations left for the International Confederation of Labour (ICL\u2013CIT), which was formed in 2018.\nTerminology.\nThe word \"syndicalism\" has French origins. In French, a is a trade union, usually a local union. A syndicate is a self organizing group working towards a shared interest. The corresponding words in Spanish and Portuguese, , and Italian, , are similar. By extension, the French refers to trade unionism in general. The concept of or \"revolutionary syndicalism\" emerged in French socialist journals in 1903, and the French General Confederation of Labor (, CGT) came to use the term to describe its brand of unionism. \"Revolutionary syndicalism\", or more commonly \"syndicalism\" with the \"revolutionary\" implied, was then adapted to a number of languages by unionists following the French model.\nMany scholars, including Ralph Darlington, Marcel van der Linden, and Wayne Thorpe, apply \"syndicalism\" to a number of organizations or currents within the labor movement that did not identify as \"syndicalist\". They apply the label to one big unionists or industrial unionists in North America and Australia, Larkinists (named after the Irish ITGWU leader James Larkin) in Ireland, and groups that identify as revolutionary industrialists, revolutionary unionists, anarcho-syndicalists, or councilists. This includes the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) in the United States, which claimed its industrial unionism was \"a higher type of revolutionary labor organization than that proposed by the syndicalists\". Van der Linden and Thorpe use \"syndicalism\" to refer to \"all revolutionary, direct-actionist organizations\". Darlington proposes that syndicalism be defined as \"revolutionary trade unionism\". He and van der Linden argue that it is justified to group together such a wide range of organizations because their similar modes of action or practice outweigh their ideological differences.\nOthers, such as Larry Peterson and Erik Olssen, disagree with this broad definition. According to Olssen, this understanding has a \"tendency to blur the distinctions between industrial unionism, syndicalism, and revolutionary socialism\". Peterson gives a more restrictive definition of \"syndicalism\" based on five criteria:\nThis definition excludes the IWW and the Canadian One Big Union (OBU), which sought to unite all workers in one general organization. Peterson proposes the broader category \"revolutionary industrial unionism\" to encompass syndicalism, groups like the IWW and the OBU, and others.\nEmergence.\nRise.\nRevolutionary industrial unionism, part of syndicalism in the broader sense, originated with the IWW in the United States and then caught on in other countries. In a number of countries, certain syndicalist practices and ideas predate the coining of the term in France or the founding of the IWW. In Bert Altena's view, a number of movements in Europe can be called syndicalist, even before 1900. According to the English social historian E. P. Thompson and the anarcho-syndicalist theorist Rudolf Rocker, there were syndicalist tendencies in Britain's labor movement as early as the 1830s. Syndicalism's direct roots were in Pierre-Joseph Proudhon's mutualism, a form of socialism that focused on cooperation among the community of man. He coined \"capitalist\" to describe the political class granting itself monopolies on the use of capital, and wanted workers to oppose this state control through peaceful means, only using force defensively. Proudhon's ideas were popular in the anti-authoritarian wing of the early International Workingmen's Association (IWA), the first international socialist organization, formed in 1864. Its most successful early leader, Russian anarchist Mikhail Bakunin, came to believe that worker organizations should consider using force to advance their cause, when necessary. He and his followers advocated the general strike, rejected electoral politics, and anticipated workers' organizations replacing rule by the state, central syndicalist themes.\nAccording to Lucien van der Walt, the Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA, which was formed in 1870, was in fact syndicalist. Kenyon Zimmer sees a \"proto-syndicalism\" in the influence the anarchist-led International Working People's Association (IWPA) and Central Labor Union, which originated in the American section of the First International, had in the Chicago labor movement of the 1880s. They were involved in the nationwide struggle for an eight-hour day. On 3 May 1886, the police killed three striking workers at a demonstration in Chicago. Seven policemen and four workers were killed the following day when someone, possibly a police member, threw a bomb into the crowd. Four anarchists were eventually executed for allegedly conspiring to the events. The Haymarket Affair, as these events became known, led anarchists and labor organizers, including syndicalists, in both the United States and Europe to re-evaluate the revolutionary meaning of the general strike.\nAccording to \u00c9mile Pouget, a French anarchist and CGT leader, from \"the United States, the idea of the general strike\u00a0\u2013 fertilized by the blood of anarchists hanged in Chicago ...\u00a0\u2013 was imported to France\". In the 1890s, French anarchists, conceding that individual action such as assassinations had failed, turned their focus to the labor movement. They were able to gain influence, particularly in the , which served as labor exchanges, meeting places for unions, and trades councils and organized in a national federation in 1893. In 1895, the CGT was formed as a rival to the but was at first much weaker. From the start, it advocated the general strike and aimed to unite all workers. Pouget, who was active in the CGT, supported the use of sabotage and direct action. In 1902, the merged into the CGT. In 1906, the federation adopted the Charter of Amiens, which reaffirmed the CGT's independence from party politics and fixed the goal of uniting all French workers.\nIn 1905, the Industrial Workers of the World were formed in the United States by the Western Federation of Miners, the American Labor Union, and a broad coalition of socialists, anarchists, and labor unionists. Its base was mostly in the Western United States, where labor conflicts were most violent and workers therefore radicalized. Although the Wobblies insisted their union was a distinctly American form of labor organization and not an import of European syndicalism, the IWW was syndicalist in the broader sense of the word. According to Melvyn Dubofsky and most other IWW historians, the IWW's industrial unionism was the specifically American form of syndicalism. Nevertheless, the IWW also had a presence in Canada and Mexico nearly from its inception, as the United States economy and labor force was intertwined with those countries.\nFrench syndicalism and American industrial unionism influenced the rise of syndicalism elsewhere. Syndicalist movements and organizations in a number of countries were established by activists who had spent time in France. Ervin Szab\u00f3 visited Paris in 1904 and then established a Syndicalist Propaganda Group in his native Hungary in 1910. Several of the founders of the Spanish CNT had visited France. Alceste de Ambris and Armando Borghi, both leaders in Italy's USI, were in Paris for a few months from 1910 to 1911. French influence also spread through publications. Pouget's pamphlets could be read in Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, English, German, and Swedish translations. Journals and newspapers in a number of countries advocated syndicalism. For example, , a journal mainly for miners in Charleroi, Belgium, urged its readers to follow \"the example of our confederated friends of France\". The IWW's newspapers published articles on French syndicalism, particularly the tactic of sabotage and the CGT's carried articles about Britain's labor movement by the British syndicalist Tom Mann. Migration played a key role in spreading syndicalist ideas. The Argentine Regional Workers' Federation (, FORA), openly anarchist by 1905, was formed by Italian and Spanish immigrants in 1901. Many IWW leaders were European immigrants, including Edmondo Rossoni who moved between the United States and Italy and was active in both the IWW and USI. International work processes also contributed to the diffusion of syndicalism. For example, sailors helped establish IWW presences in port cities around the world.\nSyndicalists formed different kinds of organizations. Some like the French radicals worked within existing unions to infuse them with their revolutionary spirit. Some found existing unions entirely unsuitable and built federations of their own, a strategy known as \"dual unionism\". American syndicalists formed the IWW, although William Z. Foster later abandoned the IWW after a trip to France and set up the Syndicalist League of North America (SLNA), which sought to radicalize the established American Federation of Labor (AFL). In Ireland, the ITGWU broke away from a more moderate, and British-based, union. In Italy and Spain, syndicalists initially worked within the established union confederations before breaking away and forming USI and the CNT respectively. In Norway, there were both the Norwegian Trade Union Opposition (, NFO), syndicalists working within the mainstream Norwegian Confederation of Trade Unions ( in Norwegian, LO), and the Norwegian Syndicalist Federation ( in Norwegian, NSF), an independent syndicalist organization set up by the Swedish SAC. There was a similar conflict between the Industrial Syndicalist Education League and the Industrial Workers of Great Britain.\nBy 1914, there were syndicalist national labor confederations in Peru, Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, the Netherlands, Germany, Sweden, Spain, Italy, and France, while Belgian syndicalists were in the process of forming one. There were also groups advocating syndicalism in Russia, Japan, the United States, Portugal, Norway, Denmark, Hungary, and Great Britain. Outside of North America, the IWW also had organizations in Australia, New Zealand, where it was part of the Federation of Labour (FOL), Great Britain even though its membership had imploded by 1913, and South Africa. In Ireland, syndicalism took the form of the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union (ITGWU), which espoused a mix of industrial unionism and socialist Irish republicanism, and was labeled Larkinism.\nReasons.\nThere was a significant uptick in workers' radicalism in most developed capitalist states from 1911 to 1922, although it relented during World War I. Strikes increased in frequency, numbers of workers involved, and duration. According to van der Linden and Thorpe, syndicalism was only one way this radicalization expressed itself. In the United Kingdom, the period from 1910 to 1914 became known as the Great Labour Unrest. While many historians see syndicalism as a consequence of this unrest, Elie Hal\u00e9vy and the politician Lord Robert Cecil argue it was its cause. Employers in France likewise blamed an upsurge in workers' militancy in the same period on syndicalist leaders. Syndicalism was further encouraged by employers' hostility to workers' actions. The economist Ernesto Screpanti hypothesized that strike waves like the one from 1911 to 1922 generally occur during the upper turning-points of the periodic global long cycles of boom and bust known as Kondratieff waves. He argued that such waves of proletarian insurgency were global in reach, saw workers breaking free of the dynamics of the capitalist system, and aimed to overthrow that system.\nAccording to van der Linden and Thorpe, workers' radicalization manifested itself in their rejection of the dominant strategies in the labor movement, which was led by reformist trade unions and socialist parties. Vladimir Lenin posited that \"revolutionary syndicalism in many countries was a direct and inevitable result of opportunism, reformism and parliamentary cretinism.\" A feeling that ideological disputes were draining workers' power led Dutch, French, and American syndicalist organizations to declare themselves independent of any political groups. In countries like Italy, Spain, and Ireland, which was still under British rule, parliamentary politics were not seen as a serious means for workers to express their grievances. Most workers were disenfranchised, yet even in France or Britain, where most male workers had the right to vote, many workers did not trust party politics. The enormous numerical growth of well-organized socialist parties, such as in Germany and Italy, did not correlate with any real advance in the class struggle in the minds of many workers, as these parties were thought to be overly concerned with building the parties themselves and with electoral politics than with the class struggle, and had therefore lost their original revolutionary edge. The socialists preached the inevitability of socialism but were in practice bureaucratic and reformist. Similarly, the trade unions frequently allied with those parties, equally growing in numbers, were denounced for their expanding bureaucracies, their centralization, and for failing to represent workers' interests. Between 1902 and 1913, the German Free Trade Unions' membership grew by 350% but its bureaucracy by more than 1900%.\nAnother common explanation for the rise of syndicalism is that it was a result of the economic backwardness of the countries in which it emerged, particularly France. Newer studies have questioned this account. According to van der Linden and Thorpe, changes in labor processes contributed to the radicalization of workers and thereby to the rise of syndicalism. This rise took place during the Second Industrial Revolution. Two groups of workers were most attracted to syndicalism: casual or seasonal laborers who frequently changed jobs, and workers whose occupations were becoming obsolete as a result of technological advances. The first group included landless agricultural workers, construction workers, and dockers, all of whom were disproportionately represented in several countries' syndicalist movements. Because they frequently changed jobs, such workers did not have close relationships with their employers and the risk of losing one's job as a result of a strike was reduced. Moreover, because of the time constraints of their jobs they were forced to act immediately in order to achieve anything and could not plan for the long term by building up strike funds or powerful labor organizations or by engaging in mediation. Their working conditions gave them an inclination to engage in direct confrontation with employers and apply direct action. The second group included miners, railway employees, and certain factory workers. Their occupations were deskilled by technological and organizational changes. These changes made workers from the second group similar in some respects to the first group. They did not entirely result from the introduction of new technology but were also caused by changes in management methods. This included increased supervision of workers, piecework, internal promotions, all designed make workers docile and loyal and to transfer knowledge and control over the process of production from workers to employers. Frustration with this loss of power led to formal and informal resistance by workers. Altena disagrees with this explanation. According to him, it was workers with significant autonomy in their jobs and pride in their skills who were most attracted to syndicalism. Moreover, he argues that explanations based on workers' occupations cannot explain why only a minority of workers in those jobs became syndicalists or why in some professions workers in different locations had vastly different patterns of organization. The small size of many syndicalist unions also makes observations about which workers joined statistically irrelevant.\nSyndicalism came to be seen as a viable strategy because the general strike became a practical possibility. Although it had been advocated before, there were not sufficient numbers of wage workers to bring society to a standstill and they had not achieved a sufficient degree of organization and solidarity until the 1890s, according van der Linden and Thorpe. Several general or political strikes then took place before World War I: in 1893 and in 1902 in Belgium, in 1902 and in 1909 in Sweden, in 1903 in the Netherlands, and in 1904 in Italy, in addition to significant work stoppages during the Russian Revolution of 1905.\nDarlington cites the significance of the conscious intervention by syndicalist militants. The industrial unrest of the period created conditions which made workers receptive to syndicalist leaders' agitation. They spread their ideas through pamphlets and newspapers and had considerable influence in a number of labor disputes. Finally, van der Linden and Thorpe point to spatial and geographical factors that shaped the rise of syndicalism. Workers who would otherwise not have had an inclination to syndicalism joined because syndicalism was dominant in their locales. For example, workers in the Canadian and American West were generally more radical and drawn to the IWW and One Big Union than their counterparts in the East. Similarly, southern workers were more drawn to syndicalism in Italy. According to Altena, the emergence of syndicalism must be analyzed at the level of local communities. Only differences in local social and economic structures explain why some towns had a strong syndicalist presence, while others did not.\nPrinciples.\n\u00c9mile Pouget, a CGT leader, asserted: \"What sets syndicalism apart from the various schools of socialism\u00a0\u2013 and makes it superior\u00a0\u2013 is its doctrinal sobriety. Inside the unions, there is little philosophising. They do better than that: they act!\" Similarly, Andreu Nin of the Spanish CNT proclaimed in 1919: \"I am a fanatic of action, of revolution. I believe in actions more than in remote ideologies and abstract questions.\" Although workers' education was important at least to committed activists, syndicalists distrusted bourgeois intellectuals, wanting to maintain workers' control over the movement. Syndicalist thinking was elaborated in pamphlets, leaflets, speeches, and articles and in the movement's own newspapers. These writings consisted mainly in calls to action and discussions of tactics in class struggle. The philosopher Georges Sorel's \"Reflections on Violence\" introduced syndicalist ideas to a broader audience. Sorel presented himself as the premier theorist of syndicalism and was frequently thought of as such but was not a part of the movement, and his influence on syndicalism was insignificant, except in Italy and Poland.\nThe extent to which syndicalist positions reflected merely the views of leaders and to what extent those positions were shared by syndicalist organizations' rank-and-file is a matter of dispute. Commenting on French syndicalism, the historian Peter Stearns concludes that most workers did not identify with syndicalism's long-range goals, and that syndicalist hegemony accounts for the relatively slow growth of the French labor movement as a whole. He says that workers who joined the syndicalist movement were on the whole indifferent to doctrinal questions, their membership in syndicalist organizations was partly accidental, and leaders were unable to convert workers to syndicalist ideas. Frederick Ridley, a political scientist, is more equivocal. According to him, leaders were very influential in the drafting of syndicalist ideas. Syndicalism was more than a mere tool of a few leaders, and was a genuine product of the French labor movement. Darlington adds that most members in the Irish ITGWU were won over by the union's philosophy of direct action. Altena argues that, even though evidence of ordinary workers' convictions is scant, it indicates that they were aware of doctrinal differences between various currents in the labor movement and able to defend their own views. He observes that they likely understood syndicalist newspapers and debated political issues.\n\"Syndicalism\" is used by some interchangeably with \"anarcho-syndicalism\". This term was first used in 1907 by socialists criticizing the political neutrality of the CGT, although it was rarely used until the early 1920s when communists used it disparagingly. Only from 1922 was it used by self-avowed anarcho-syndicalists. Although syndicalism has traditionally been seen as a current within anarchism, it was dominated in some countries by Marxists rather than anarchists. This was the case in Italy and much of the Anglophone world, including Ireland where anarchists had no significant influence on syndicalism. The extent to which syndicalist doctrine was a product of anarchism is debated. The anarchist Iain McKay argues that \"syndicalism\" is but a new name for ideas and tactics developed by Bakunin and the anarchist wing of the First International, while it is wholly inconsistent with positions Marx and Engels took. According to him, the fact that many Marxists embraced syndicalism merely indicates that they abandoned Marx's views and converted to Bakunin's. Altena too views syndicalism as part of the broader anarchist movement but concedes there was a tension between this and the fact that it was also a labor movement. He also sees Marxist ideas reflected in the movement, as leading syndicalists, such as Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis and Christiaan Cornelissen, and much of the Australian syndicalist movement were influenced by them, as well as older socialist notions. According to Darlington, anarchism, Marxism, and revolutionary trade unionism equally contributed to syndicalism, in addition to various influences in specific countries, including Blanquism, anti-clericalism, republicanism, and agrarian radicalism.\nCritique of capitalism and the state.\nBill Haywood, an American syndicalist and leading figure in the IWW, defined the union's purpose at the First Convention of the Industrial Workers of the World as \"the emancipation of the working class from the slave bondage of capitalism\". Syndicalists held that society was divided into two great classes, the working class and the bourgeoisie. Their interests being irreconcilable, they must be in a constant state of class struggle. Tom Mann, a British syndicalist, declared that \"the object of the unions is to wage the Class War\". According to syndicalist doctrine, this war was aimed not just at gaining concessions such as higher wages or a shorter working day but at the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism.\nSyndicalists agreed with Karl Marx's characterization of the state as the \"executive committee of the ruling class\". They held that a society's economic order determined its political order and concluded that the former could not be overthrown by changes to the latter. Nevertheless, a number of leading syndicalist figures worked in political parties and some ran for elected office. Larkin was active in the Labour Party, while Haywood was part of the Socialist Party of America. Both of them saw the economic sphere as the primary arena for revolutionary struggle, and involvement in politics could at best be an echo of industrial struggle. They were skeptical of parliamentary politics. According to Thomas Hagerty, a Catholic priest and IWW leader, \"dropping pieces of paper into a hole in a box never did achieve emancipation for the working class, and to my thinking it will never achieve it.\" Syndicalist trade unions declared their political neutrality and autonomy from political parties. Syndicalists reasoned that political parties grouped people according to their political views, uniting members of different classes, while unions were to be purely working-class organizations, uniting the entire class, and could therefore not be divided on political grounds. The French syndicalist Pouget explained: \"The CGT embraces\u00a0\u2013 outside of all the schools of politics\u00a0\u2013 all workers cognisant of the struggle to be waged for the elimination of wage-slavery and the employer class.\" In practice, this neutrality was more ambiguous. For example, the CGT worked with the French Section of the Workers' International in the struggle against the Three-Year Law of 1913, which extended conscription. During the Spanish Civil War, the CNT, whose policy barred anyone who had been a candidate for political office or had participated in political endeavors from representing it, was intimately connected with the Iberian Anarchist Federation (, FAI).\nViews on class struggle.\nIn the syndicalist conception, unions played a dual role. They were organs of struggle within capitalism for better working conditions, and they were also to play a key role in the revolution to overthrow capitalism. Victor Griffuelhes expressed this at the CGT's 1906 congress in the following manner: \"In its day-to-day demands, syndicalism seeks the co-ordination of workers' efforts, the increase of workers' well-being by the achievement of immediate improvements, such as the reduction of working hours, the increase of wages, etc. But this task is only one aspect of the work of syndicalism; it prepares for complete emancipation, which can be realised only by expropriating the capitalist class.\" For unions to fulfill this role, it was necessary to prevent bureaucrats\u00a0\u2013 \"whose sole purpose in life seems to be apologising for and defending the capitalist system of exploitation\", according to Larkin\u00a0\u2013 from inhibiting workers' militant zeal. Battling bureaucracy and reformism within the labor movement was a major theme for syndicalists. One expression of this was many syndicalists' rejection of collective bargaining agreements, which were thought to force labor peace upon workers and break their solidarity. The Wobblie Vincent St. John declared: \"There is but one bargain that the Industrial Workers of the World will make with the employing class\u00a0\u2013 complete surrender of the means of production.\" The Argentine Regional Workers' Federation (, FORA) and the OBU accepted such deals, and others began accepting them eventually. Similarly, syndicalist unions did not work to build large strike funds, for fear that they would create bureaucracy separate from the rank-and-file and instill in workers the expectation that the union rather than they would wage the class struggle.\nSyndicalists advocated direct action, including working to rule, passive resistance, sabotage, and strikes, particularly the general strike, as tactics in the class struggle, as opposed to indirect action such as electoral politics. The IWW engaged in around 30 mostly successful civil disobedience campaigns they deemed free speech fights. Wobblies would defy laws restricting public speeches, in order to clog up prisons and court systems as a result of hundreds of arrests, ultimately forcing public officials to rescind such laws. Sabotage ranged from slow or inefficient work to destruction of machinery and physical violence. French railway and postal workers cut telegraph and signal lines during strikes in 1909 and 1910.\nThe final step towards revolution according to syndicalists would be a general strike. According to Griffuelhes, it would be \"the curtain drop on a tired old scene of several centuries, and the curtain raising on another\". Syndicalists remained vague about the society they envisioned to replace capitalism, stating that it was impossible to foresee in detail. Labor unions were seen as being the embryo of a new society in addition to being the means of struggle within the old. Syndicalists generally agreed that in a free society production would be managed by workers. The state apparatus would be replaced by the rule of workers' organizations. In such a society, individuals would be liberated in the economic sphere but also in their private and social lives.\nGender.\nSyndicalist policies on gender issues were mixed. The CNT did not admit women as members until 1918. The CGT dismissed feminism as a bourgeois movement. Syndicalists were mostly indifferent to the question of women's suffrage. Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, an IWW organizer, insisted that women \"find their power at the point of production where they work\" rather than at the ballot box. Of the 230 delegates present at the founding of Canada's One Big Union, a mere 3 were women. When a female radical criticized the masculinist atmosphere at the meeting, she was rebuffed by men who insisted that labor only concern itself with class rather than gender issues. The historian Todd McCallum concludes that syndicalists in the OBU advocated values of \"radical manhood\".\nFrancis Shor argues that the \"IWW promotion of sabotage represents a kind of masculine posturing which directly challenged the individualizing techniques of power mobilized by industrial capitalism\". Thus, \"the IWW's masculine identity incorporated features of working-class solidarity and protest ... through 'virile' syndicalism.\" For example, while defending a black fellow worker against a racist insult, an IWW organizer in Louisiana insisted that \"he is a man, a union man, an IWW\u2014a MAN! ... and he has proven it by his action.\" During World War I, one of the IWW's anti-war slogans was \"Don't Be a Soldier! Be a Man!\" In some cases, syndicalist attitudes towards women changed. In 1901, the CGT's agricultural union in southern France was hostile to women; by 1909, this had changed. The CNT, initially hostile to independent women's organizations, worked closely with the libertarian feminist organization during the Spanish Civil War. According to the historian Sharif Gemie, the male orientation of parts of the syndicalist labor movement reflected the ideas of the anarchist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, who defended patriarchy because women, of their own accord, are \"chained to nature\".\nHeyday.\nBefore World War I.\nSyndicalists were involved in a number of strikes, labor disputes, and other struggles. In the United States, the IWW was involved in at least 150 strikes including the Goldfield, Nevada, labor troubles of 1906\u20131907 by miners' strikes, the Pressed Steel Car strike of 1909, the 1912 Lawrence textile strike, the Brotherhood of Timber Workers' strikes in Louisiana and Arkansas in 1912\u20131913, and the 1913 Paterson silk strike. The most prominent was the struggle in Lawrence. Wobblie leaders brought together 23,000 mostly immigrant workers, many of whom did not speak English. They arranged for workers' children to be sent to live with sympathetic families outside of Lawrence for the duration of the strike so their parents could focus on the struggle. Unlike most IWW-led strikes, the struggle was successful. In Mexico, syndicalism first emerged in 1906 during the violent Cananea strike by miners and the even more violent R\u00edo Blanco strike by textile workers. In 1912, during the Mexican Revolution of 1910\u20131920, anarchists formed the syndicalist union House of the World Worker (). It led a series of successful strikes in 1913 in Mexico City and central Mexico. After the Constitutionalist Army occupied the capital in 1914, syndicalists allied with the government it established to defeat rural forces such as the Zapatistas and therefore received government support. Once those forces had been suppressed, this alliance broke apart and the campaigned for workers' control of factories and the nationalization of foreign capital. It contributed to a rise in labor unrest that began in mid-1915. It led general strikes in May and in July\u2013August 1916 in greater Mexico City. The latter was quelled by the army, marking the defeat of the , which was also suppressed.\nIn Portugal, the 5 October 1910 revolution that led to the deposition of the king was followed by a strike wave throughout the country. After the police occupied the offices of an agricultural union, syndicalists called for a general strike. During the strike, Lisbon was controlled by workers and there were armed uprisings in several other cities. In 1912, the strike wave ebbed off. Italian syndicalists successfully organized agricultural workers in the Po Valley by uniting different parts of agricultural working class. They were most successful in areas where the reformist union Federterra had been thwarted by employers. Syndicalists led large strikes by farm workers in Parma and Ferrara in 1907\u20131908; these strikes failed as a result of employers' strikebreaking tactics and infighting among workers. In 1911\u20131913, syndicalists played an important role in a large strike wave in Italy's industrial centers. The syndicalist union confederation USI was formed in 1912 by veterans of both strike movements.\nBritish Wobblies were involved in two major strikes in Scotland, one at Argyll Motor Works and the second at a Singer Corporation's sewing machine factory in Clydebank. In 1906, several industrial unionists began to spread their ideas and organize workers at Singer's. The organized the 1911 strike at Singer after a woman was fired for not working hard enough. The strike was cleverly defeated by management and most activists lost their jobs. The ISEL leader Tom Mann was also at the center of several labor disputes during the Great Labour Unrest, including the 1911 Liverpool general transport strike where he chaired the strike committee. In Ireland, Larkin and the ITGWU led 20,000 during the 1913 Dublin lockout. After the ITGWU attempted to unionize the Dublin United Tramway Company and tram workers went on strike, the city's employers threatened to fire any workers who did not sign a pledge to not support the ITGWU, thereby turning the dispute into a city-wide conflict in late September. Workers' resistance crumbled in January 1914.\nThere was no international syndicalist organization prior to World War I. In 1907, CGT activists presented the Charter of Amiens and syndicalism to an international audience a higher form of anarchism at the International Anarchist Congress of Amsterdam in 1907. Discussions at the Congress led to the formation of the international syndicalist journal . The CGT was affiliated with the International Secretariat of National Trade Union Centers (ISNTUC), which brought together reformist socialist unions. Both the Dutch NAS and the British ISEL attempted to remedy the lack of a syndicalist counterpart to ISNTUC in 1913, simultaneously publishing calls for an international syndicalist congress in 1913. The CGT rejected the invitation. Its leaders feared that leaving ISNTUC, which it intended to revolutionize from within, would split the CGT and harm working-class unity. The IWW also did not participate, as it considered itself an international in its own right. The First International Syndicalist Congress was held in London from 27 September to 2 October. It was attended by 38 delegates from 65 organizations in Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Cuba, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Discussions were contentious and did not lead to the founding of a syndicalist international. Delegates did agree on a declaration of principles describing syndicalism's core tenets. They also decided to launch an International Syndicalist Information Bureau and to hold another congress in Amsterdam. This congress did not take place due to the outbreak of World War I.\nWorld War I.\nSyndicalists had long opposed interventionism. Haywood held that \"it is better to be a traitor to your country than to your class\". French syndicalists viewed the French Army as the primary defender of the capitalist order. In 1901, the CGT published a manual for soldiers encouraging desertion. In 1911, British syndicalists distributed an \"Open Letter to British Soldiers\" imploring them not to shoot on striking workers but to join the working class's struggle against capital. Syndicalists argued that patriotism was a means of integrating workers into capitalist society by distracting them from their true class interest. In 1908, the CGT's congress invoked the slogan of the First International, proclaiming that the \"workers have no fatherland\".\nWhen World War I broke out in July 1914, socialist parties and trade unions\u00a0\u2013 both in neutral and belligerent countries\u00a0\u2013 supported their respective nations' war efforts or national defense, despite previous pledges to do the opposite. Socialists agreed to put aside class conflict and vote for war credits. German socialists argued that war was necessary to defend against what they termed Russia's \"barbaric Tsarism\", while their French counterparts pointed to the need to defend against Prussian militarism and the German \"instinct of domination and of discipline\". This collaboration between the socialist movement and the state was known as the in France, the in Germany, and \"godsvrede\" in the Netherlands. Moreover, a number of anarchists led by Peter Kropotkin, including the influential syndicalist Christiaan Cornelissen, issued the \"Manifesto of the Sixteen\", supporting the Allied cause in the war. Despite this, most syndicalists remained true to their internationalist and anti-militarist principles by opposing the war and their respective nation's participation in it.\nThe majority of the French CGT and a sizable minority in the Italian USI did not. The CGT had long had a moderate, reformist wing, which gained the upper hand. As a result, according to historians like Darlington or van der Linden and Thorpe, the CGT was no longer a revolutionary syndicalist organization after the start of World War I. It followed the French president's call for national unity by agreeing to a no-strike pledge and to resolve labor disputes through arbitration and by actively participating in the French war effort. Most of its members of military age were conscripted without resistance and its ranks shrank from 350,000 in 1913 to 49,000 dues-paying members in 1915. CGT leaders defended this course by arguing that France's war against Germany was a war between democracy and republicanism on the one side and barbaric militarism on the other. Italy did not initially participate in World War I, which was deeply unpopular in the country, when it broke out. The Italian Socialist Party and the reformist Italian General Confederation of Labour opposed intervention in the Great War. Once Italy became a participant, the socialists refused to support the war effort but also refrained from working against it. From the start of the war, even before Italy did so, a minority within USI, led by the most famous Italian syndicalist, Alceste De Ambris, called on the Italian state to take the Allies' side. As part of left-interventionism, the pro-war syndicalists saw Italian participation in the war as the completion of nationhood. They also felt compelled to oppose the socialists' neutrality and therefore support the war. Finally, they gave similar arguments as the French, warning of the dangers posed by the \"suffocating imperialism of Germany\", and felt obliged to follow the CGT's lead.\nUSI's pro-war wing had the support of less than a third of the organization's members and it was forced out in September 1914. Its anarchist wing, led by Borghi, was firmly opposed to the war, deeming it incompatible with workers' internationalism and predicting that it would only serve elites and governments. Its opposition was met with government repression, and Borghi and others were interned by the end of the war. Instead, the anti-war faction in the CGT was a small minority. It was led by the likes of Pierre Monatte and Alphonse Merrheim. They would link up with anti-war socialists from around Europe at the 1915 Zimmerwald conference. They faced considerable difficulties putting up meaningful resistance against the war. The government called up militants to the Army, including Monatte, who considered refusing the order and being summarily executed; he decided this would be futile. Syndicalist organizations in other countries nearly unanimously opposed the war. In neutral Spain, Jos\u00e9 Negre of the CNT declared: \"Let Germany win, let France win, it is all the same to the workers.\" The CNT insisted that syndicalists could support neither side in an imperialist conflict.\nA wave of pro-British sentiment swept Ireland during the war, although the ITGWU and the rest of the Irish labor movement opposed it, and half of the ITGWU's membership enlisted in the British military. The ITGWU had also been significantly weakened in 1913 in the Dublin Lockout. After Larkin left Ireland in 1914, James Connolly took over leadership of the union. Because of the organization's weakness, Connolly allied it along with its paramilitary force, the Irish Citizen Army, with the Irish Republican Brotherhood. Together, they instigated the Easter Rising, seeking to weaken the British Empire and hoping that the insurrection would spread throughout Europe. The uprising was quickly quelled by the British army and Connolly was executed. In Germany, the small Free Association of German Trade Unions (FVdG) opposed the socialists' and Germany's involvement in the war, challenging the claim that the country was waging a defensive war. Its journals were suppressed and a number of its members were arrested. The United States did not enter the war until the spring of 1917. The start of the war had induced an economic boom in the United States, tightening the labor market and thereby strengthening workers' bargaining position. The IWW profited from this, more than doubling its membership between 1916 and 1917. At the same time, the Wobblies fervently denounced the war and mulled calling an anti-war general strike. Once the United States became a combatant, the IWW maintained its anti-war stance, while its bitter rival, the AFL, supported the war; however, it did not launch an anti-war campaign, as it feared the government would crush it if it did, and wanted to focus on its economic struggles. The IWW's practical opposition to the war was limited, 95% of eligible IWW members registered for the draft, and most of those drafted served. Syndicalists in the Netherlands and Sweden, both neutral countries, criticized the truce socialists entered with their governments in order to shore up national defense. The Dutch NAS disowned Cornelissen, one of its founders, for his support for the war.\nSyndicalists from Spain, Portugal, Great Britain, France, Brazil, Argentina, Italy, and Cuba met at an anti-war congress in Ferrol, Spain, in April 1915. Although the congress was poorly planned and prohibited by the Spanish authorities, delegates managed to discuss resistance to the war and extending international cooperation between syndicalist groups. Argentine, Brazilian, Spanish, and Portuguese delegates later met in October in Rio de Janeiro to continue discussions and resolved to deepen cooperation between South American syndicalists. While syndicalists were only able to put up a rather limited practical struggle against World War I, they also looked to challenge the war on an ideological or cultural level. They pointed to the horrors of war and spurned efforts to legitimate it as something noble. German syndicalists drew attention to the death, injury, destruction, and misery that the war wrought. German, Swedish, Dutch, and Spanish syndicalists denounced nationalism with , a syndicalist journal in Barcelona, calling it a \"grotesque mentality\". The Dutch newspaper criticized nationalism, because \"it finds its embodiment in the state and is the denial of class antagonism between the haves and the have-nots\". German and Spanish syndicalists went further still by putting into question the concept of nationhood itself and dismissing it as a mere social construct. The Germans observed that most inhabitants of the German Empire identified not as Germans but in regional terms as Prussians or Bavarians and the like. Multilingual countries like Germany and Spain also could not claim a common language as a defining characteristic of the nation nor did members of the same nation share the same values or experiences, syndicalists in Spain and Germany argued. Syndicalists also argued against the notion that the war was a clash of different cultures or that it could be justified as a defense of civilization. They stated that various cultures were not mutually hostile, and the state should not be seen as the embodiment of culture, since culture was the product of the entire population, while the state acted in the interests of just a few. Moreover, they argued that if culture was to be understood as \"high culture\", the very workers dying in the war were denied access to that culture by capitalist conditions. Finally, syndicalists railed against religious justifications for war. Before the war, they had rejected religion as divisive at best; support for the war by both Catholic and Protestant clergy revealed their hypocrisy and disgraced the principles they and Christianity claimed to uphold.\nAs the war progressed, disaffection with worsening living conditions at home and a growing numbers of casualties at the front eroded the enthusiasm and patriotism the outbreak of war had aroused. Prices were on the rise, food was scarce, and it became increasingly clear that the war would not be short. In Germany, food shortages led to demonstrations and riots in a number of cities in the summer of 1916. At the same time, anti-war demonstrations started. Strikes picked up from around 1916 or 1917 on across Europe and soldiers began to mutiny. Workers distrusted their socialist leaders who had joined the war effort. Thanks in part to their fidelity to internationalism, syndicalist organizations profited from this development and expanded as the war drew to an end.\nRussian Revolution and post-war turmoil.\nDisaffection with the war condensed in the post-World War I revolutions that began with the Russian Revolution of 1917. In February 1917, strikes, riots, and troop mutinies broke out in Petrograd, forcing the Nicholas II to abdicate on 2 March in favor of the Russian Provisional Government. Immediately, anarchist groups emerged. Russian syndicalists organized around the journal (\"The Voice of Labor\"), which had a circulation of around 25,000, and the Union of Anarcho-Syndicalist Propaganda. Anarchists found themselves agreeing with the Bolsheviks led by Lenin, who returned to Russia in April, as both sought to bring down the provisional government. Lenin abandoned the theory of historical trajectory, which represented the idea that capitalism is a necessary stage on Russia's path to communism, dismissed the establishment of a parliament in favor of that power being taken by soviets, and called for the abolition of the police, the army, the bureaucracy, and finally the state\u00a0\u2013 all sentiments syndicalists shared. Although the syndicalists also welcomed the soviets, they were most enthusiastic about the factory committees and workers' councils that had emerged in all industrial centers in the course of strikes and demonstrations in the February Revolution. The committees fought for higher wages and shorter hours but above all for workers' control over production, which both the syndicalists and Bolsheviks supported. The syndicalists viewed the factory committees as the true form of syndicalist organization, not unions. Because they were better organized, the Bolsheviks were able to gain more traction in the committees, with six times as many delegates in a typical factory. Despite the goals they had in common, syndicalists became anxious about the Bolsheviks' growing influence, especially after they won majorities in the Petrograd and Moscow soviets in September.\nThe Petrograd Soviet established the 66-member Petrograd Military Revolutionary Committee, which included four anarchists, among them the syndicalist Shatov. On 25 October, this committee led the October Revolution; after taking control of the Winter Palace and key points in the capital with little resistance, it proclaimed a Soviet government. Anarchists were jubilant at the toppling of the provisional government. They were concerned about the proclamation of a new government, fearing a dictatorship of the proletariat, even more so after the Bolsheviks created the central Soviet of People's Commissars composed only of members of their party. They called for decentralization of power but agreed with Lenin's labor program, which endorsed workers' control in all enterprises of a certain minimum size. The introduction of workers' control led to economic chaos. Lenin turned to restoring discipline in the factories and order to the economy in December by putting the economy under state control. At the First All Russian Congress of Trade Unions in January, the syndicalists, who had paid little attention to the unions, only had 6 delegates, while the Bolsheviks had 273. No longer depending on their help in toppling the provisional government, the Bolsheviks were now in a position to ignore the syndicalists' opposition and outvoted them at this congress. They opted to disempower local committees by subordinating them to the trade unions, which in turn became organs of the state. The Bolsheviks argued that workers' control did not mean that workers controlled factories at the local level and that this control had to be centralized and put under a broader economic plan. The syndicalists criticized the Bolshevik regime bitterly, characterizing it as state capitalist. They denounced state control over the factories and agitated for decentralization of power in politics and the economy, and syndicalization of industry. The Russian Civil War against the White Army split anarchists. The syndicalists were criticized harshly because most supported the Bolshevik regime in the war even as they excoriated Bolshevik policy. They reasoned that a White victory would be worse and that the Whites had to be defeated before a third revolution could topple the Bolsheviks. Despite this, syndicalists were harassed and repeatedly arrested by the police, particularly the Cheka, from 1919 on. Their demands had some sway with workers and dissidents within the Bolshevik party and the Bolshevik leadership viewed them as the most dangerous part of the libertarian movement. After the Russian Civil War ended, workers and sailors, including both anarchists and Bolsheviks, rose up in what came to be known as the Kronstadt rebellion of 1921, with Kronstadt being a bastion of radicalism since 1905, against what they saw as the rule of a small number of bureaucrats. Anarchists hailed the rebellion as the start of the third revolution. The government reacted by having anarchists throughout the country arrested, including a number of syndicalist leaders. The Russian syndicalist movement was thereby defeated.\nSyndicalists in the West who had opposed World War I reacted gushingly to the Russian Revolution. Although they were still coming to grips with the evolving Bolshevik ideology and despite traditional anarchist suspicions of Marxism, they saw in Russia a revolution that had taken place against parliamentary politics and under the influence of workers' councils. At this point, they also had only limited knowledge of the reality in Russia. Augustin Souchy, a German anarcho-syndicalist, hailed it \"the great passion that swept us all along. In the East, so we believed, the sun of freedom rose.\" The Spanish CNT declared: \"Bolshevism is the name, but the idea is that of all revolutions: economic freedom. ... Bolshevism is the new life for which we struggle, it is freedom, harmony, justice, it is the life that we want and will enforce in the world.\" Borghi recalled: \"We exulted in its victories. We trembled at its risks. ... We made a symbol and an altar of its name, its dead, its living and its heroes.\" He called on Italians to \"do as they did in Russia\". Indeed, a revolutionary wave, inspired in part by Russia, swept Europe in the following years.\nIn Germany, strikes and protests against food shortage, mainly by women, escalated and by 1917 had eroded public confidence in the government. The abdication of Wilhelm II in November 1918 after the Kiel mutiny by sailors sparked an insurrectionary movement throughout the country that led to the German Revolution of 1918\u201319. The syndicalist FVdG, which had just 6,000 members before the war and was almost completely suppressed by the state during the war, regrouped at a conference in Berlin in December 1918. It was active in the revolutionary events of the following years, particularly in the Ruhr area. It supported spontaneous strikes and championed direct action and sabotage. The FVdG started to be held in high regard for its radicalism by workers, particularly miners, who appreciated the syndicalists' ability to theorize their struggles and their experience with direct action methods. Starting in the second half of 1919, workers disappointed by the socialist party's and unions' support for the war and previously non-unionized unskilled workers who were radicalized during the war flocked to the FVdG. The revolution also saw the introduction to Germany of industrial unionism along the lines of the IWW with some support from the American organization but also with links to the left wing of the Communist Party of Germany. In December 1919, the Free Workers' Union of Germany (Syndicalists) (, FAUD) was formed, claiming to represent over 110,000 workers, more than eighteen times the FVdG's pre-war membership. Most of the new organization came from the FVdG, although industrial unionists, whose influence was dwindling, were also involved. Rudolf Rocker, an anarchist recently returned to Germany after spending several years in London, wrote the FAUD's program.\nClass struggle peaked in Italy in the years 1919\u20131920, which became known as the or red biennium. Throughout this wave of labor radicalism, syndicalists, along with anarchists, formed the most consistently revolutionary faction on the left as socialists sought to rein in workers and prevent unrest. The Italian syndicalist movement had split during the war, as the syndicalist supporters of Italian intervention left USI. The interventionists, led by Alceste de Ambris and Edmondo Rossoni, formed the Italian Union of Labor (, UIL) in 1918. The UIL's national syndicalism emphasized workers' love of labor, self-sacrifice, and the nation rather than anti-capitalist class struggle. Both USI and the UIL grew significantly during the . The first factory occupation of the was carried out by the UIL at a steel plant in Dalmine in February 1919, before the military put an end to it. In July, a strike movement spread through Italy, culminating in a general strike on 20 July. While USI supported it and was convinced by the workers' enthusiasm that revolution could be possible, the UIL and the socialists were opposed. The socialists succeeded in curtailing the general strike and it imploded with a day. The government, unsettled by the radicalism on display, reacted with repression against the far left and concessions to workers and peasants.\nIn Portugal, working class unrest picked up from the start of the war. In 1917, radicals began to dominate the labor movement as a result of the war, the \"Sid\u00f3nio Pais\" dictatorship established that year, and the influence of the Russian Revolution. The 1918 Portugal general strike was called for November but failed, and in 1919 the syndicalist General Confederation of Labour (, CGT) was formed as the country's first national union confederation.\nIn Brazil, in both Rio de Janeiro and S\u00e3o Paulo, syndicalists, along with anarchists and socialists, were leaders in the 1917\u20131919 Brazil strike movement and cycle of labor struggles. It included a general strike in 1917, a failed uprising in 1918 inspired by the Russian Revolution, and a number of smaller strikes. The movement was put down by increased organization by employers to resist workers' demands and by government repression, including the closure of unions, arrests, deportations of foreign militants, and violence, with some 200 workers killed in S\u00e3o Paulo alone. In Argentina, FORA had split into the anarcho-communist FORA V and the syndicalist FORA IX. While FORA V called for a futile general strike in 1915, FORA IX was more careful. It called off general strikes it had planned in 1917 and 1918. In January 1919, five workers were by the authorities during a strike led by a union with tenuous links to FORA V. At the funeral, police killed another 39 workers. Both FORA organizations called for a general strike, which continued after FORA IX reached a settlement. Vigilantes, supported by business and the military, attacked unions and militants. In all, between 100 and 700 people died in what became known as the Tragic Week. Nevertheless, strikes continued to increase and both FORA V and IX grew.\nThe United States underwent an increase in labor militancy during the post-war period. 1919 saw the Seattle general strike, large miners' strikes, the Boston police strike, and the nationwide steel strike of 1919. The IWW had been nearly destroyed in the previous two years by local criminal syndicalism laws, the federal government, and vigilante violence. It attempted to take credit for some of the strikes, although in reality it was too weak to play a significant role. The First Red Scare intensified the attacks on the IWW; by the end of 1919, the IWW was practically powerless. 1919 also saw the Canadian labour revolt, leading to the formation of One Big Union, which was only partly industrial unionist.\nInternational Workers' Association.\nThe Bolsheviks suppressed syndicalism in Russia but courted syndicalists abroad as part of their international strategy. In March 1919, the 1st Congress of the Comintern was held in Moscow. The Bolsheviks acknowledged syndicalism's opposition to socialist reformism and saw them as part of the revolutionary wing of the labor movement. No syndicalists attended the founding convention, mainly because the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War, which included a blockade of Russia by the Allied powers of World War I, made travel to Moscow near impossible. After long discussions, the CNT opted to join the Comintern, although it classified its adherence as provisional as a concession to detractors of Bolshevism. USI also decided to join; some like Borghi had reservations about the course of events in Russia. In France, the CGT's radical minority that had opposed the war enthusiastically supported Bolshevism. They formed the Revolutionary Syndicalist Committees and attempted to push the CGT as a whole to support the Comintern. The General Executive Board of the IWW decided join the Comintern, although this decision was never confirmed by a convention. German and Swedish syndicalists were more critical of Bolshevism from the start. Rocker declared already in August 1918 that the Bolshevik regime was \"but a new system of tyranny\".\nSyndicalists became more estranged from the Comintern in 1920. The 2nd World Congress of the Comintern in the summer of 1920 was attended by numerous syndicalists. The Italian USI, the Spanish CNT, the British shop stewards, and the revolutionary minority of the CGT had official representatives, while others like John Reed of the American IWW, Augustin Souchy of the German FAUD, and Taro Yoshiharo, a Japanese Wobbly, attended in an unofficial capacity. This was the first major international gathering of syndicalists since the end of the war. Western syndicalists' knowledge of the facts on the ground in Russia was at this point rather limited. They thought of the soviets as organs of workers' control over production and the Bolsheviks depicted them as such. Syndicalists were not aware of the extent to which they were in reality subordinated to the communist party. Instead, the congress revealed the irreconcilable differences between the syndicalist and the Bolshevik approach. Before the congress, the Comintern's executive committee arranged discussions with syndicalists to challenge the reformist International Federation of Trade Unions (IFTU). A document proposed by Solomon Lozovsky derided the apolitical unions as \"lackeys of imperialist capitalism\" for their betrayal during the war, to which syndicalists replied that of the syndicalist unions this only applied to the CGT. Throughout the preliminary meetings, syndicalists clashed with other delegates on the questions of the dictatorship of the proletariat and the conquest of state power as well as on relations with communists and the Comintern. Eventually all syndicalists agreed to the formation of a council tasked with spreading revolutionizing the trade union movement. Disagreements continued at the congress itself.\nDecline.\nFrom the early 1920s, the traditional syndicalist movements in most countries began to wane; state repression played a role, although movements that were not suppressed also declined. According to van der Linden and Thorpe, syndicalist organizations saw themselves as having three options: they could stay true to their revolutionary principles and be marginalized, they could give up those principles in order to adapt to new conditions, or they could disband or merge into non-syndicalist organizations. The Spanish Revolution of 1936 resulted in the widespread implementation of anarcho-syndicalist and more broadly socialist organizational principles throughout various portions of the country for two to three years, primarily Catalonia, Aragon, Andalusia, and parts of the Levante, with the main union organization of the Republican faction being the CNT. Much of Spain's economy was put under workers' control before the Nationalist faction won the civil war and suppressed them. By the end of the 1930s, meaningful legal syndicalist organizations existed only in Bolivia, Chile, Sweden and Uruguay. Syndicalists were involved in the anti-fascist movements of resistance during World War II in several countries, including Germany, France, and Poland.\nSyndicalism's decline was the result of a number of factors. In Russia, Italy, Portugal, Germany, Spain, and the Netherlands, syndicalist movements were suppressed by authoritarian governments. The IWW in the United States and the Mexican House of the World Worker were weakened considerably by state repression. Syndicalist movements that were not suppressed also declined. According to van der Linden and Thorpe, this was primarily the result of the integration of the working class into capitalist relations. Proletarian families became units of individualized consumption as standards of living increased. This was partly the result of state intervention, particularly the emergence of the welfare state. Avenues for social reform opened up and the franchise was widened, giving parliamentary reformism legitimacy. Altena agrees that the state's growing influence in society was decisive for syndicalism's diminished influence. In addition to the welfare state, he refers to the increased significance of national policies, which eroded local autonomy. This made centralized unions able to negotiate national agreements more important and national and parliamentary politics more enticing for workers. They therefore turned to social democracy in larger numbers. Additionally, Altena says that syndicalism lost out to sports and entertainment in the cultural sphere.\nVadim Damier adds to this that the development of capitalist production and changes in the division of labor diminished syndicalism's recruitment base. According to authors like Stearns, Edward Shorter, Charles Tilly, and Bob Holton, who deem syndicalism a transitional form of workers' resistance between older craft-based artisanship and modern factory-based industry, syndicalism's decline was a product of that transition having been completed and workers being assimilated to capitalist factory discipline. Darlington counters that syndicalism attracted a variety of workers, not just artisans and skilled workers; he concedes that such changes played a role in Spain, France, and some other countries.\nSeveral authors argue that syndicalism's demise was the result of workers' inherent pragmatism or conservatism, causing them to only be interested in immediate material gains rather than long-term goals like overthrowing capitalism. Robert Hoxie, Selig Perlman, and Patrick Renshaw invoke this argument to explain the IWW's decline, while Stearns, Dermot Keogh, and G. D. H. Cole do so with respect to French, Irish, and British syndicalism, respectively. Darlington disputes the assumption that workers are incapable of developing a revolutionary consciousness. He says that seeking material gains is not incompatible with developing class consciousness, which entails the awareness that workers' material interests conflict with capitalism, particularly in times of crisis.\nAccording to many Marxists, syndicalism was a reaction to reformism in the labor movement and could not survive without it. The collapse of reformism after the war therefore automatically weakened syndicalism. According to Eric Hobsbawm, the biggest reason for syndicalism's decline was the rise of communism. Several communist parties drew their cadres from the syndicalists' ranks. To radical workers, the programmatic distinctions between syndicalism and communism were not all that relevant. The key is that, after the war, communism represented militancy or revolutionary attitude as such. Darlington also sees the effects of the Russian Revolution as an important reason for the decline of syndicalism. Darlington argues that the emergence of communism highlighted syndicalism's inherent weaknesses: the contradiction of building organizations that sought to be both revolutionary cadre organizations and mass labour unions, the emphasis on economic struggle to the detriment of political action and the commitment to localism limiting its ability to provide an effective centralized organization and leadership. Darlington claims the Bolsheviks overcame these limitations and its success in Russia drew syndicalist leaders and members. It also exacerbated splits within the syndicalist camp.\nLegacy.\nThe Nationalist faction victory in the Spanish Civil War put an end to syndicalism as a mass movement. Immediately after World War II, there were attempts to rekindle anarcho-syndicalism in Germany; these were thwarted by Cold War anti-communism, Stalinism, and a failure to attract newer younger activists. Syndicalists maintained some influence in Latin American labor movements into the 1970s. The protest movements of the late 1960s saw renewed interest in syndicalism by activists in Germany, the United States, and Britain. During its Hot Autumn of 1969, Italy experienced labor actions reminiscent of syndicalism; according to Carl Levy, syndicalists did not actually exert any influence. During the 1980s in the Polish People's Republic, the trade union Solidarity (), even though not strictly syndicalist, attracted masses of dissident workers by reviving many syndicalist ideas and practices. European anarcho-syndicalist unions declined after World War II. The Swedish SAC Syndikalisterna remained one of the few active IWA affiliates.\nThe IWA exists to this day, albeit with very little influence. At most, it is a \"flicker of history, the custodian of doctrine\" according to Wayne Thorpe. Among its member organizations is the British Solidarity Federation, which was formed in 1950, originally named the Syndicalist Workers' Federation. The German Free Workers' Union (, FAU) was formed to carry on the FAUD's tradition in 1977; it has a membership of just 350 as of 2011. It left the IWA in 2018 to form the International Confederation of Labor (ICL). Spain has several syndicalist federations, including the CNT, which has around 50,000 members as of 2018. It, too, was a member of the IWA until 2018, when it joined the FAU in forming the ICL. After being defeated in the civil war, tens of thousands of CNT militants went into exile, mostly in France. In exile, the organization atrophied, with just 5,000 mostly older members by 1960. During the Spanish transition to democracy, the CNT was revived with a peak membership of over 300,000 in 1978; however, it was soon weakened, first by accusations of having been involved in the Scala affair (bombing of a nightclub), then by a schism. Members who favored participation in state-sponsored union elections left and formed an organization they would eventually name the General Confederation of Labor (, CGT). Despite these concessions, the CGT still views itself as an anarcho-syndicalist organization and has around 100,000 members as of 2018.\nAccording to Darlington, syndicalism left a legacy that was widely admired by labor and political activists in a number of countries. For example, the IWW song \"Solidarity Forever\" became part of the American labor movement's canon. The strike wave, including the recruitment of unskilled and foreign-born workers by the Congress of Industrial Organizations, that swept the United States in the 1930s followed in the IWW's footsteps. The tactic of the sit-down strike, made famous by the United Auto Workers in the Flint sit-down strike, was pioneered by Wobblies in 1906.\nIn his study of French syndicalism, Stearns concluded that it was a dismal failure. He argues that the radicalism of syndicalist labor leaders shocked French workers and the government, and thereby weakened the labor movement as a whole. Syndicalism was most popular among workers not yet fully integrated into modern capitalist industry but most French workers had adapted to this system and accepted it, therefore it was not able to seriously challenge prevailing conditions or even scare politicians and employers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26778", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26778", "title": "SapirWhorfHypothesis", "text": ""}
{"id": "26779", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26779", "title": "Soviet Union", "text": "Country in Eurasia (1922\u20131991)\nThe Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), commonly known as the Soviet Union, was a transcontinental country that spanned much of Eurasia from 1922 until it dissolved in 1991. During its existence, it was the largest country by area, extending across eleven time zones and sharing borders with twelve countries, and the third-most populous country. An overall successor to the Russian Empire, it was nominally organized as a federal union of national republics, the largest and most populous of which was the Russian SFSR. In practice, its government and economy were highly centralized. As a one-party state governed by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), it was the flagship communist state. Its capital and largest city was Moscow.\nThe Soviet Union's roots lay in the October Revolution of 1917. The new government, led by Vladimir Lenin, established the Russian SFSR, the world's first constitutionally communist state. The revolution was not accepted by all within the Russian Republic, resulting in the Russian Civil War. The Russian SFSR and its subordinate republics were merged into the Soviet Union in 1922. Following Lenin's death in 1924, Joseph Stalin came to power, inaugurating rapid industrialization and forced collectivization that led to significant economic growth but contributed to a famine between 1930 and 1933 that killed millions. The Soviet forced labour camp system of the Gulag was expanded. During the late 1930s, Stalin's government conducted the Great Purge to remove opponents, resulting in large scale deportations, arrests, and show trials accompanied by public fear. Having failed to build an anti-Nazi coalition in Europe, the Soviet Union signed a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany in 1939. Despite this, in 1941 Germany invaded the Soviet Union in the largest land invasion in history, opening the Eastern Front of World War II. The Soviets played a decisive role in defeating the Axis powers while liberating much of Central and Eastern Europe. However they would suffer an estimated 27 million casualties, which accounted for most losses among the victorious Allies. In the aftermath of the war, the Soviet Union consolidated the territory occupied by the Red Army, forming satellite states, and undertook rapid economic development which cemented its status as a superpower.\nGeopolitical tensions with the United States led to the Cold War. The American-led Western Bloc coalesced into NATO in 1949, prompting the Soviet Union to form its own military alliance, the Warsaw Pact, in 1955. Neither side engaged in direct military confrontation, and instead fought on an ideological basis and through proxy wars. In 1953, following Stalin's death, the Soviet Union undertook a campaign of de-Stalinization under Nikita Khrushchev, which saw reversals and rejections of Stalinist policies. This campaign caused ideological tensions with the PRC led by Mao Zedong, culminating in the acrimonious Sino-Soviet split. During the 1950s, the Soviet Union expanded its efforts in space exploration and took a lead in the Space Race with the first artificial satellite, the first human spaceflight, the first space station, and the first probe to land on another planet. In 1985, the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, sought to reform the country through his policies of \"glasnost\" and \"perestroika\". In 1989, various countries of the Warsaw Pact overthrew their Soviet-backed regimes, leading to the fall of the Eastern Bloc. A major wave of nationalist and separatist movements erupted across the Soviet Union, primarily in Azerbaijan, Georgia and the Baltic states. In 1991, amid efforts to preserve the country as a renewed federation, an attempted coup against Gorbachev by hardline communists prompted the largest republics\u2014Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus\u2014to secede. On 26 December, Gorbachev officially recognized the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Boris Yeltsin, the leader of the Russian SFSR, oversaw its reconstitution into the Russian Federation, which became the Soviet Union's successor state; all other republics emerged as fully independent post-Soviet states. The Commonwealth of Independent States was formed in the aftermath of the disastrous Soviet collapse, although the Baltics would never join.\nDuring its existence, the Soviet Union produced many significant social and technological achievements and innovations. The USSR was one of the most advanced industrial states during its existence. It had the world's second-largest economy and largest standing military. As a nuclear state, it wielded the largest arsenal of nuclear weapons in the world. As an Allied nation, it was a founding member of the United Nations as well as one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. Before its dissolution, the Soviet Union was one of the world's two superpowers through its hegemony in Eastern Europe and Asia, global diplomacy, ideological influence (particularly in the Global South), military might, economic strengths, and scientific accomplishments.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"soviet\" is derived from the Russian word (), meaning 'council', 'assembly', 'advice', ultimately deriving from the proto-Slavic verbal stem of ('to inform'), related to Slavic ('news'), English \"wise\". The word \"sovietnik\" means 'councillor'. Some organizations in Russian history were called \"council\" (). In the Russian Empire, the State Council, which functioned from 1810 to 1917, was referred to as a Council of Ministers.\nThe soviets as workers' councils first appeared during the 1905 Russian Revolution. Although they were quickly suppressed by the Imperial army, after the February Revolution of 1917, workers' and soldiers' soviets emerged throughout the country and shared power with the Russian Provisional Government. The Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, demanded that all power be transferred to the soviets, and gained support from the workers and soldiers. After the October Revolution, in which the Bolsheviks seized power from the Provisional Government in the name of the soviets, Lenin proclaimed the formation of the Russian Socialist Federal Soviet Republic (RSFSR).\nDuring the Georgian Affair of 1922, Lenin called for the Russian SFSR and other national soviet republics to form a greater union which he initially named as the Union of Soviet Republics of Europe and Asia (). Joseph Stalin initially resisted Lenin's proposal but ultimately accepted it, and with Lenin's agreement he changed the name to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), although all republics began as \"socialist soviet\" and did not change to the other order until 1936. In addition, in the regional languages of several republics, the word \"council\" or \"conciliar\" in the respective language was only quite late changed to an adaptation of the Russian \"soviet\" and never in others, e.g. Ukrainian SSR.\n (in the Latin alphabet: \"SSSR\") is the abbreviation of the Russian-language cognate of USSR, as written in Cyrillic letters. The soviets used this abbreviation so frequently that audiences worldwide became familiar with its meaning. After this, the most common Russian initialization is (transliteration: ) which essentially translates to \"Union of SSRs\" in English. In addition, the Russian short form name (transliteration: , which literally means \"Soviet Union\") is also commonly used, but only in its unabbreviated form. Since the start of the Great Patriotic War at the latest, abbreviating the Russian name of the Soviet Union as has been taboo, the reason being that as a Russian Cyrillic abbreviation is associated with the infamous of Nazi Germany, as \"SS\" is in English.\nIn English-language media, the state was referred to as the Soviet Union or the USSR. The Russian SFSR dominated the Soviet Union to such an extent that, for most of the Soviet Union's existence, it was colloquially, but incorrectly, referred to as Russia.\nHistory.\nThe history of the Soviet Union began with the ideals of the Bolshevik Revolution and ended in dissolution amid economic collapse and political disintegration. Established in 1922 following the Russian Civil War, the Soviet Union became a one-party state under the Communist Party. Its early years under Lenin were marked by the implementation of socialist policies and the New Economic Policy (NEP), which allowed for market-oriented reforms.\nThe rise of Joseph Stalin in the late 1920s ushered in an era of intense centralization and totalitarianism. Stalin's rule was characterized by the forced collectivization of agriculture, rapid industrialization, and the Great Purge, which eliminated perceived enemies of the state. The Soviet Union, one of the Big Four Allied powers alongside the United States, the United Kingdom, and China, played a crucial role in the Allied victory in World War II. It paid a tremendous human cost with millions of Soviet citizens dying in the conflict.\nThe Soviet Union emerged as one of the world's two superpowers, leading the Eastern Bloc in opposition to the Western Bloc during the Cold War. This period saw the USSR engage in an arms race, the Space Race, and proxy wars around the globe. The post-Stalin leadership, particularly under Nikita Khrushchev, initiated a de-Stalinization process, leading to a period of liberalization and relative openness known as the Khrushchev Thaw. However, the subsequent era under Leonid Brezhnev, sometimes referred to as the Era of Stagnation, was marked by economic decline, political corruption, and a rigid gerontocracy. Despite efforts to maintain the Soviet Union's superpower status, the economy struggled due to its centralized nature, technological backwardness, and inefficiencies. The vast military expenditures and burdens of maintaining the Eastern Bloc further strained the Soviet economy.\nIn the 1980s, Mikhail Gorbachev's policies of \"glasnost\" (openness) and \"perestroika\" (restructuring) aimed to revitalize the Soviet system but instead accelerated its unraveling. Nationalist movements gained momentum across the Soviet republics and the control of the Communist Party weakened. The failed coup attempt in August 1991 against Gorbachev by hardline communists hastened the end of the Soviet Union, which formally dissolved on 26 December 1991, ending nearly seven decades of Soviet rule.\nGeography.\nWith an area of , the Soviet Union was the world's largest country, a status that is retained by the Russian Federation. Covering a sixth of Earth's land surface, its size was comparable to that of North America. Two other successor states, Kazakhstan and Ukraine, rank among the top 10 countries by land area, and the largest country entirely in Europe, respectively. The European portion accounted for a quarter of the country's area and was the cultural and economic center. The eastern part in Asia extended to the Pacific Ocean to the east and Afghanistan to the south, and, except some areas in Central Asia, was much less populous. It spanned over east to west across 11 time zones, and over north to south. It had five climate zones: tundra, taiga, steppes, desert and mountains.\nThe USSR, like Russia, had the world's longest border, measuring over , or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 circumferences of Earth. Two-thirds of it was a coastline. The country bordered Afghanistan, the People's Republic of China, Czechoslovakia, Finland, Hungary, Iran, Mongolia, North Korea, Norway, Poland, Romania, and Turkey from 1945 to 1991. The Bering Strait separated the USSR from the United States, while the La P\u00e9rouse Strait separated it from Japan.\nThe country's highest mountain was Communism Peak (now Ismoil Somoni Peak) in Tajikistan, at . The USSR also included most of the world's largest lakes; the Caspian Sea (shared with Iran), and Lake Baikal, the world's largest (by volume) and deepest freshwater lake that is also an internal body of water in Russia.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe Soviet communist state system was based on unified state power and democratic centralism. The highest organ of state authority, the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, stood above all other state organs and worked under the leadership of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The executive organ of the state (synonymous with government), the Council of Ministers, was an internal organ of the All-Union Supreme Soviet.\nCommunist Party.\nAt the top of the Communist Party was the Central Committee, elected at Party Congresses and Conferences. In turn, the Central Committee voted for a Politburo (called the Presidium between 1952 and 1966), Secretariat and the general secretary (First Secretary from 1953 to 1966), the \"de facto\" highest office in the Soviet Union. Depending on the degree of power consolidation, it was either the Politburo as a collective body or the General Secretary, who always was one of the Politburo members, that effectively led the party and the country (except for the period of the highly personalized authority of Stalin, exercised directly through his position in the Council of Ministers rather than the Politburo after 1941). They were not controlled by the general party membership, as the key principle of the party organization was democratic centralism, demanding strict subordination to higher bodies, and elections went uncontested, endorsing the candidates proposed from above.\nThe Communist Party maintained its dominance over the state mainly through its control over the system of appointments. All senior government officials and most deputies of the Supreme Soviet were members of the CPSU. Of the party heads themselves, Stalin (1941\u20131953) and Khrushchev (1958\u20131964) were Premiers. Upon the forced retirement of Khrushchev, the party leader was prohibited from this kind of double membership, but the later General Secretaries for at least some part of their tenure occupied the mostly ceremonial position of Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, the nominal head of state. The institutions at lower levels were overseen and at times supplanted by primary party organizations.\nHowever, in practice the degree of control the party was able to exercise over the state bureaucracy, particularly after the death of Stalin, was far from total, with the bureaucracy pursuing different interests that were at times in conflict with the party, nor was the party itself monolithic from top to bottom, although factions were officially banned.\nHighest organ of state authority.\nThe Supreme Soviet (successor of the Congress of Soviets) was nominally the highest organ of state authority for most of the Soviet history, at first acting as a rubber stamp institution, approving and implementing all decisions made by the party. However, its powers and functions were extended in the late 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, including the creation of new state commissions and committees. It gained additional powers relating to the approval of the Five-Year Plans and the government budget. The Supreme Soviet elected a Presidium (successor of the Central Executive Committee) to wield its power between plenary sessions, ordinarily held twice a year, and appointed the Supreme Court, the Procurator General and the Council of Ministers (known before 1946 as the Council of People's Commissars), headed by the Chairman (Premier) and managing an enormous bureaucracy responsible for the administration of the economy and society. State and party structures of the constituent republics largely emulated the structure of the central institutions, although the Russian SFSR, unlike the other constituent republics, for most of its history had no republican branch of the CPSU, being ruled directly by the union-wide party until 1990. Local authorities were organized likewise into party committees, local Soviets and executive committees. While the state system was nominally federal, the party was unitary.\nThe state security police (the KGB and ) played an important role in Soviet politics. It was instrumental in the Red Terror and Great Purge, but was brought under strict party control after Stalin's death. Under Yuri Andropov, the KGB engaged in the suppression of political dissent and maintained an extensive network of informers, reasserting itself as a political actor to some extent independent of the party-state structure, culminating in the anti-corruption campaign targeting high-ranking party officials in the late 1970s and early 1980s.\nUnified power and reform.\nThe constitution, which was promulgated in 1924, 1936 and 1977, did not limit state power. No separation of powers existed in the Soviet Union, as the state system was based on the unified state power of the highest organ of state authority, that is, the All-Union Supreme Soviet which worked under the party's leadership. The system was governed less by statute than by informal conventions, and no settled mechanism of leadership succession existed. Bitter and at times deadly power struggles took place in the Politburo after the deaths of Lenin and Stalin, as well as after Khrushchev's dismissal, itself due to a decision by both the Politburo and the Central Committee. All leaders of the Communist Party before Gorbachev died in office, except Georgy Malenkov and Khrushchev, who were both dismissed from the party leadership amid internal struggle within the party.\nBetween 1988 and 1990, facing considerable opposition, Mikhail Gorbachev enacted reforms shifting power away from the highest bodies of the party and making the Supreme Soviet less dependent on them. The Congress of People's Deputies was established, the majority of whose members were directly elected in competitive elections held in March 1989, the first in Soviet history. The Congress now elected the Supreme Soviet, which became a full-time parliament, and much stronger than before. For the first time since the 1920s, it refused to rubber stamp proposals from the party and Council of Ministers. In 1990, Gorbachev introduced and assumed the position of the President of the Soviet Union, concentrated power in his executive office, independent of the party, and subordinated the government, now renamed the Cabinet of Ministers of the USSR, to himself.\nTensions grew between the Union-wide authorities under Gorbachev, reformists led in Russia by Boris Yeltsin and controlling the newly elected Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR, and communist hardliners. On 19\u201321 August 1991, a group of hardliners staged a coup attempt. The coup failed, and the State Council of the Soviet Union became the highest organ of state power 'in the period of transition'. Gorbachev resigned as General Secretary, only remaining President for the final months of the existence of the USSR.\nJudicial system.\nThe judiciary was not independent of the other branches of government. The Supreme Court supervised the lower courts (People's Court) and applied the law as established by the constitution or as interpreted by the Supreme Soviet. The Constitutional Oversight Committee reviewed the constitutionality of laws and acts. The Soviet Union used the inquisitorial system of Roman law, where the judge, procurator, and defence attorney collaborate to \"establish the truth\".\nHuman rights.\nHuman rights in the Soviet Union were severely limited. The Soviet Union was a totalitarian state from 1927 until 1953 and a one-party state until 1990. Freedom of speech was suppressed and dissent was punished. Independent political activities were not tolerated, whether these involved participation in free labour unions, private corporations, independent churches or opposition political parties. The freedom of movement within and especially outside the country was limited. The state restricted rights of citizens to private property.\nForeign relations.\nDuring his rule, Stalin always made the final policy decisions. Otherwise, Soviet foreign policy was set by the commission on the Foreign Policy of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, or by the party's highest body the Politburo. Operations were handled by the separate Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It was known as the People's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs (or Narkomindel), until 1946. The most influential spokesmen were Georgy Chicherin, Maxim Litvinov, Vyacheslav Molotov, Andrey Vyshinsky, and Andrei Gromyko. Intellectuals were based in the Moscow State Institute of International Relations.\nEarly policies (1919\u20131939).\nThe Marxist-Leninist leadership of the Soviet Union intensely debated foreign policy issues and changed directions several times. Even after Stalin assumed dictatorial control in the late 1920s, there were debates, and he frequently changed positions.\nDuring the country's early period, it was assumed that Communist revolutions would break out soon in every major industrial country, and it was the Russian responsibility to assist them. The Comintern was the weapon of choice. A few revolutions did break out, but they were quickly suppressed (the longest lasting one was in Hungary)\u2014the Hungarian Soviet Republic\u2014lasted only from 21 March 1919 to 1 August 1919. The Russian Bolsheviks were in no position to give any help.\nBy 1921, Lenin, Trotsky, and Stalin realized that capitalism had stabilized itself in Europe and there would not be any widespread revolutions anytime soon. It became the duty of the Russian Bolsheviks to protect what they had in Russia, and avoid military confrontations that might destroy their bridgehead. Russia was now a pariah state, along with Germany. The two came to terms in 1922 with the Treaty of Rapallo that settled long-standing grievances. At the same time, the two countries secretly set up training programs for the illegal German army and air force operations at hidden camps in the USSR.\nMoscow eventually stopped threatening other states, and instead worked to open peaceful relationships in terms of trade, and diplomatic recognition. The United Kingdom dismissed the warnings of Winston Churchill and a few others about a continuing Marxist-Leninist threat, and opened trade relations and \"de facto\" diplomatic recognition in 1922. There was hope for a settlement of the pre-war Tsarist debts, but it was repeatedly postponed. Formal recognition came when the new Labour Party came to power in 1924. All the other countries followed suit in opening trade relations. Henry Ford opened large-scale business relations with the Soviets in the late 1920s, hoping that it would lead to long-term peace. Finally, in 1933, the United States officially recognized the USSR, a decision backed by the public opinion and especially by US business interests that expected an opening of a new profitable market.\nIn the late 1920s and early 1930s, Stalin ordered Marxist-Leninist parties across the world to strongly oppose non-Marxist political parties, labour unions or other organizations on the left, which they labelled social fascists. In the usage of the Soviet Union, and of the Comintern and its affiliated parties in this period, the epithet \"fascist\" was used to describe capitalist society in general and virtually any anti-Soviet or anti-Stalinist activity or opinion. Stalin reversed himself in 1934 with the Popular Front program that called on all Marxist parties to join with all anti-Fascist political, labour, and organizational forces that were opposed to fascism, especially of the Nazi variety.\nThe rapid growth of power in Nazi Germany encouraged both Paris and Moscow to form a military alliance, and the Franco-Soviet Treaty of Mutual Assistance was signed in May 1935. A firm believer in collective security, Stalin's foreign minister Maxim Litvinov worked very hard to form a closer relationship with France and Britain.\nIn 1939, half a year after the Munich Agreement, the USSR attempted to form an anti-Nazi alliance with France and Britain. Adolf Hitler proposed a better deal, which would give the USSR control over much of Eastern Europe through the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact. In September, Germany invaded Poland, and the USSR also invaded later that month, resulting in the partition of Poland. In response, Britain and France declared war on Germany, marking the beginning of World War II.\nWorld War II (1939\u20131945).\nUp until his death in 1953, Joseph Stalin controlled all foreign relations of the Soviet Union during the interwar period. Despite the increasing build-up of Germany's war machine and the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War, the Soviet Union did not cooperate with any other nation, choosing to follow its own path. However, after Operation Barbarossa, the Soviet Union's priorities changed. Despite previous conflict with the United Kingdom, Vyacheslav Molotov dropped his post war border demands.\nCold War (1945\u20131991).\nThe Cold War was a period of geopolitical tension between the United States and the Soviet Union and their respective allies, the Western Bloc and the Eastern Bloc, which began following World War II in 1945. The term \"cold war\" is used because there was no large-scale fighting directly between the two superpowers, but they each supported major regional conflicts known as proxy wars. The conflict was based around the ideological and geopolitical struggle for global influence by these two superpowers, following their temporary alliance and victory against Nazi Germany in 1945. Aside from the nuclear arsenal development and conventional military deployment, the struggle for dominance was expressed via indirect means such as psychological warfare, propaganda campaigns, espionage, far-reaching embargoes, rivalry at sports events and technological competitions such as the Space Race.\nAdministrative divisions.\nConstitutionally, the USSR was a federation of constituent Union Republics, which were either unitary states, such as Ukraine or Byelorussia (SSRs), or federations, such as Russia or Transcaucasia (SFSRs), all four being the founding republics who signed the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR in December 1922. In 1924, during the national delimitation in Central Asia, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan were formed from parts of Russia's Turkestan ASSR and two Soviet dependencies, the Khorezm and Bukharan PSPs. In 1929, Tajikistan was split off from the Uzbekistan SSR. With the constitution of 1936, the Transcaucasian SFSR was dissolved, resulting in its constituent republics of Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan being elevated to Union Republics, while Kazakhstan and Kirghizia were split off from the Russian SFSR, resulting in the same status. In August 1940, Moldavia was formed from parts of Ukraine and Soviet-occupied Bessarabia, and Ukrainian SSR. Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were also annexed by the Soviet Union and turned into SSRs, which was not recognized by most of the international community and was considered an illegal occupation. After the Soviet invasion of Finland, the Karelo-Finnish SSR was formed on annexed territory as a Union Republic in March 1940 and then incorporated into Russia as the Karelian ASSR in 1956. Between July 1956 and September 1991, there were 15 union republics (see map below).\nMilitary.\nUnder the Military Law of September 1925, the Soviet Armed Forces consisted of the Land Forces, the Air Force, the Navy, Joint State Political Directorate (OGPU) and the Internal Troops. The OGPU later became independent and in 1934 joined the NKVD secret police, and so its internal troops were under the joint leadership of the defense and internal commissariats. After World War II, Strategic Missile Forces (1959), Air Defense Forces (1948) and National Civil Defense Forces (1970) were formed, which ranked first, third, and sixth in the official Soviet system of importance (ground forces were second, Air Force fourth, and Navy fifth).\nThe army had the greatest political influence. In 1989, there served two million soldiers divided between 150 motorized and 52 armored divisions. Until the early 1960s, the Soviet navy was a rather small military branch, but after the Caribbean crisis, under the leadership of Sergei Gorshkov, it expanded significantly. It became known for battlecruisers and submarines. In 1989, there served 500 000 men. The Soviet Air Force focused on a fleet of strategic bombers and during war situation was to eradicate enemy infrastructure and nuclear capacity. The air force also had a number of fighters and tactical bombers to support the army in the war. Strategic missile forces had more than 1,400 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), deployed between 28 bases and 300 command centers.\nIn the post-war period, the Soviet Army was directly involved in several military operations abroad. These included the suppression of the uprising in East Germany (1953), Hungarian revolution (1956) and the invasion of Czechoslovakia (1968). The Soviet Union also participated in the war in Afghanistan between 1979 and 1989.\nIn the Soviet Union, general conscription applied, meaning all able-bodied males aged 18 and older were drafted in the armed forces.\nEconomy.\nThe Soviet Union adopted a command economy, whereby production and distribution of goods were centralized and directed by the government. For the overwhelming majority of its existence, the USSR did not use GDP or GNP to measure its economy, instead relying on the Material Product System. The first Bolshevik experience with a command economy was the policy of war communism, which involved the nationalization of industry, centralized distribution of output, coercive or forced requisition of agricultural production, and attempts to eliminate money circulation, private enterprises and free trade. The barrier troops were also used to enforce Bolshevik control over food supplies in areas controlled by the Red Army, a role which soon earned them the hatred of the Russian civilian population. After the severe economic collapse, Lenin replaced war communism by the New Economic Policy (NEP) in 1921, legalizing free trade and private ownership of small businesses. The economy steadily recovered as a result.\nAfter a long debate among the members of the Politburo about the course of economic development, by 1928\u20131929, upon gaining control of the country, Stalin abandoned the NEP and pushed for full central planning, starting forced collectivization of agriculture and enacting draconian labour legislation. Resources were mobilized for rapid industrialization, which significantly expanded Soviet capacity in heavy industry and capital goods during the 1930s. The primary motivation for industrialization was preparation for war, mostly due to distrust of the outside capitalist world. As a result, the USSR was transformed from a largely agrarian economy into a great industrial power, leading the way for its emergence as a superpower after World War II. The war caused extensive devastation of the Soviet economy and infrastructure, which required massive reconstruction.\nBy the early 1940s, the Soviet economy had become relatively self-sufficient; for most of the period until the creation of Comecon, only a tiny share of domestic products was traded internationally. After the creation of the Eastern Bloc, external trade rose rapidly. However, the influence of the world economy on the USSR was limited by fixed domestic prices and a state monopoly on foreign trade. Grain and sophisticated consumer manufactures became major import articles from around the 1960s. During the arms race of the Cold War, the Soviet economy was burdened by military expenditures, heavily lobbied for by a powerful bureaucracy dependent on the arms industry. At the same time, the USSR became the largest arms exporter to the Third World. A portion of Soviet resources during the Cold War were allocated in aid to the Soviet-aligned states. The Soviet Union's military budget in the 1970s was gigantic, forming 40\u201360% of the entire federal budget and accounting to 15% of the USSR's GDP (13% in the 1980s).\nFrom the 1930s until its dissolution in late 1991, the way the Soviet economy operated remained essentially unchanged. The economy was formally directed by central planning, carried out by Gosplan and organized in five-year plans. However, in practice, the plans were highly aggregated and provisional, subject to \"ad hoc\" intervention by superiors. All critical economic decisions were taken by the political leadership. Allocated resources and plan targets were usually denominated in rubles rather than in physical goods. Credit was discouraged, but widespread. The final allocation of output was achieved through relatively decentralized, unplanned contracting. Although in theory prices were legally set from above, in practice they were often negotiated, and informal horizontal links (e.g. between producer factories) were widespread.\nA number of basic services were state-funded, such as education and health care. In the manufacturing sector, heavy industry and defence were prioritized over consumer goods. Consumer goods, particularly outside large cities, were often scarce, of poor quality and limited variety. Under the command economy, consumers had almost no influence on production, and the changing demands of a population with growing incomes could not be satisfied by supplies at rigidly fixed prices. A massive unplanned second economy grew up at low levels alongside the planned one, providing some of the goods and services that the planners could not. The legalization of some elements of the decentralized economy was attempted with the reform of 1965.\nAlthough statistics of the Soviet economy are notoriously unreliable and its economic growth difficult to estimate precisely, by most accounts, the economy continued to expand until the mid-1980s. During the 1950s and 1960s, it had comparatively high growth and was catching up to the West. However, after 1970, the growth, while still positive, steadily declined much more quickly and consistently than in other countries, despite a rapid increase in the capital stock (the rate of capital increase was only surpassed by Japan).\nOverall, the growth rate of per capita income in the Soviet Union between 1960 and 1989 was slightly above the world average (based on 102 countries). A 1986 study published in the \"American Journal of Public Health\" claimed that, citing World Bank data, the Soviet model provided a better quality of life and human development than market economies at the same level of economic development in most cases. According to Stanley Fischer and William Easterly, growth could have been faster. By their calculation, per capita income in 1989 should have been twice higher than it was, considering the amount of investment, education and population. The authors attribute this poor performance to the low productivity of capital. Steven Rosefielde states that the standard of living declined due to Stalin's despotism. While there was a brief improvement after his death, it lapsed into stagnation.\nIn 1987, Mikhail Gorbachev attempted to reform and revitalize the economy with his program of \"perestroika\". His policies relaxed state control over enterprises but did not replace it by market incentives, resulting in a sharp decline in output. The economy, already suffering from reduced petroleum export revenues, started to collapse. Prices were still fixed, and the property was still largely state-owned until after the country's dissolution. For most of the period after World War II until its collapse, Soviet GDP (PPP) was the second-largest in the world, and third during the second half of the 1980s, although on a per-capita basis, it was behind that of First World countries. Compared to countries with similar per-capita GDP in 1928, the Soviet Union experienced significant growth.\nIn 1990, the country had a Human Development Index of 0.920, placing it in the 'high' category of human development. It was the third-highest in the Eastern Bloc, behind Czechoslovakia and East Germany, and the 25th in the world of 130 countries.\nEnergy.\nThe need for fuel declined in the Soviet Union from the 1970s to the 1980s, both per ruble of gross social product and per ruble of industrial product. The decline was very rapid between 1965 and 1970, then slowed between 1970 and 1975. From 1975 to 1980, the decline continued at an even slower rate, with fuel requirements per ruble of gross social product decreasing by only 2.6%. David Wilson, a historian, believed that the gas industry would account for 40% of Soviet fuel production by the end of the century. His theory did not come to fruition because of the USSR's collapse. According to Wilson, the Soviet Union was, in theory, well-positioned to avoid an energy crisis and could have sustained economic growth rates of 2\u20132.5% during the 1990s, supported by its energy resources. However, the energy sector faced many difficulties, among them the country's high military expenditure and hostile relations with the First World.\nIn 1991, the Soviet Union had a pipeline network of for crude oil and another for natural gas. Petroleum and petroleum-based products, natural gas, metals, wood, agricultural products, and a variety of manufactured goods, primarily machinery, arms and military equipment, were exported. In the 1970s and 1980s, the USSR heavily relied on fossil fuel exports to earn hard currency. At its peak in 1988, it was the largest producer and second-largest exporter of crude oil, surpassed only by Saudi Arabia.\nScience and technology.\nThe Soviet Union placed great emphasis on science and technology. Lenin believed the USSR would never overtake the developed world if it remained as technologically backward as it was upon its founding. Soviet authorities proved their commitment to Lenin's belief by developing massive networks and research and development organizations. In the early 1960s, 40% of chemistry PhDs in the Soviet Union were attained by women, compared with only 5% in the United States. By 1989, Soviet scientists were among the world's best-trained specialists in several areas, such as energy physics, selected areas of medicine, mathematics, welding, space technology, and military technologies. However, due to rigid state planning and bureaucracy, the Soviets remained far behind the First World in chemistry, biology, and computer science. Under Stalin, the Soviet government persecuted geneticists in favour of Lysenkoism, a pseudoscience rejected by the scientific community in the Soviet Union and abroad but supported by Stalin's inner circles. Implemented in the USSR and China, it resulted in reduced crop yields and is widely believed to have contributed to the Great Chinese Famine. In the 1980s, the Soviet Union had more scientists and engineers relative to the world's population than any other major country, owing to strong levels of state support. Some of its most remarkable technological achievements, such as launching the world's first space satellite, were achieved through military research.\nUnder the Reagan administration, Project Socrates determined that the Soviet Union addressed the acquisition of science and technology in a manner radically different to the United States. The US prioritized indigenous research and development in both the public and private sectors. In contrast, the USSR placed greater emphasis on acquiring foreign technology, which it did through both covert and overt means. However, centralized state planning kept Soviet technological development greatly inflexible. This was exploited by the US to undermine the strength of the Soviet Union and thus foster its reform.\nSpace program.\nAt the end of the 1950s, the USSR constructed the first satellite\u2014Sputnik 1, which marked the beginning of the Space Race\u2014a competition to achieve superior spaceflight capability with the United States. This was followed by other successful satellites, most notably Sputnik 5, where test dogs were sent to space. On 12 April 1961, the USSR launched Vostok 1, which carried Yuri Gagarin, making him the first human to ever be launched into space and complete a space journey. The first plans for space shuttles and orbital stations were drawn up in Soviet design offices, but personal disputes between designers and management prevented their development.\nIn terms of the Luna program, the USSR only had automated spacecraft launches with no crewed spacecraft. The N1\u2014a Super heavy-lift launch vehicle intended to match the American Saturn V for a Soviet manned moon landing\u2014failed all four of its test launches, and the 'Moon' part of Space Race was won by the Americans. The Soviet public's reaction to the American moon-landing was mixed. The Soviet government limited the release of information about it, which affected the reaction. A portion of the populace did not give it attention, and another portion was angered.\nIn the 1970s, specific proposals for the design of a space shuttle emerged, but shortcomings, especially in the electronics industry (rapid overheating of electronics), postponed it till the end of the 1980s. The first shuttle, the Buran, flew in 1988, but without a human crew. Another, \"Ptichka\", endured prolonged construction and was canceled in 1991. For their launch into space, there is today an unused superpower rocket, Energia, which is the most powerful in the world.\nIn the late 1980s, the Soviet Union built the \"Mir\" orbital station. It was built on the construction of \"Salyut\" stations and its only role was civilian-grade research tasks. Mir was the only orbital station in operation from 1986 to 1998. Gradually, other modules were added to it, including American modules. However, the station deteriorated rapidly after a fire on board and was deorbited in 2001, burning up in the Earth's atmosphere.\nTransport.\nTransport was a vital component of the country's economy. The economic centralization of the late 1920s and 1930s led to the development of infrastructure on a massive scale, most notably the establishment of Aeroflot, an aviation enterprise. The country had a wide variety of modes of transport by land, water and air. However, due to inadequate maintenance, much of the road, water and Soviet civil aviation transport were outdated and technologically backward compared to the First World.\nSoviet rail transport was the largest and most intensively used in the world; it was also better developed than most of its Western counterparts. By the late 1970s and early 1980s, Soviet economists were calling for the construction of more roads to alleviate some of the burdens from the railways and to improve the Soviet government budget. The street network and automotive industry remained underdeveloped, and dirt roads were common outside major cities. Soviet maintenance projects proved unable to take care of even the few roads the country had. By the early-to-mid-1980s, the Soviet authorities tried to solve the road problem by ordering the construction of new ones. Meanwhile, the automobile industry was growing at a faster rate than road construction. The underdeveloped road network led to a growing demand for public transport.\nDespite improvements, several aspects of the transport sector were still riddled with problems due to outdated infrastructure, lack of investment, corruption and bad decision-making. Soviet authorities were unable to meet the growing demand for transport infrastructure and services.\nThe Soviet merchant navy was one of the largest in the world.\nDemographics.\nExcess deaths throughout World War I and the Russian Civil War (including the famine of 1921\u20131922 that was triggered by Lenin's war communism policies) amounted to a combined total of 18\u00a0million, some 10\u00a0million in the 1930s, and more than 20\u00a0million in 1941\u20131945. The postwar Soviet population was 45 to 50\u00a0million smaller than it would have been if pre-war demographic growth had continued. According to Catherine Merridale, '...reasonable estimate would place the total number of excess deaths for the whole period somewhere around 60 million.'\nThe birth rate of the USSR decreased from 44.0 per thousand in 1926 to 18.0 in 1974, mainly due to increasing urbanization and the rising average age of marriages. The mortality rate demonstrated a gradual decrease as well\u2014from 23.7 per thousand in 1926 to 8.7 in 1974. In general, the birth rates of the southern republics in Transcaucasia and Central Asia were considerably higher than those in the northern parts of the Soviet Union, and in some cases even increased in the post\u2013World War II period, a phenomenon partly attributed to slower rates of urbanization and traditionally earlier marriages in the southern republics. Soviet Europe moved towards sub-replacement fertility, while Soviet Central Asia continued to exhibit population growth well above replacement-level fertility.\nThe late 1960s and the 1970s witnessed a reversal of the declining trajectory of the rate of mortality in the USSR, and was especially notable among men of working age, but was also prevalent in Russia and other predominantly Slavic areas of the country. An analysis of the official data from the late 1980s showed that after worsening in the late-1970s and the early 1980s, adult mortality began to improve again. The infant mortality rate increased from 24.7 in 1970 to 27.9 in 1974. Some researchers regarded the rise as mostly real, a consequence of worsening health conditions and services. The rises in both adult and infant mortality were not explained or defended by Soviet officials, and the Soviet government stopped publishing all mortality statistics for ten years. Soviet demographers and health specialists remained silent about the mortality increases until the late-1980s, when the publication of mortality data resumed, and researchers could delve into the real causes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUrbanism.\nThe Soviet Union imposed heavy controls on city growth, preventing some cities from reaching their full potential while promoting others.\nFor the entirety of the Soviet Union's existence, the most populous cities were Moscow and Leningrad (both in Russian SFSR), with the third far place taken by Kiev (Ukrainian SSR). At the USSR's inception, the fourth and fifth most populous cities were Kharkov (Ukrainian SSR) and Baku (Azerbaijan SSR), but, by the end of the century, Tashkent (Uzbek SSR), which had assumed the position of capital of Soviet Central Asia, had risen to fourth place. Minsk (Byelorussian SSR) saw rapid growth during the 20th century, rising from the 32nd most populous in the union to the 7th.\nWomen and fertility.\nUnder Lenin, the state made explicit commitments to promote the equality of men and women. Many early Russian feminists and ordinary Russian working women actively participated in the Revolution, and many more were affected by the events of that period and the new policies. Beginning in October 1918, Lenin's government liberalized divorce and abortion laws, decriminalized homosexuality (re-criminalized in 1932), permitted cohabitation, and ushered in a host of reforms. However, without birth control, the new system produced many broken marriages, as well as countless out-of-wedlock children. The epidemic of divorces and extramarital affairs created social hardships when Soviet leaders wanted people to concentrate their efforts on growing the economy. Giving women control over their fertility also led to a precipitous decline in the birth rate, perceived as a threat to their country's military power. By 1936, Stalin reversed most of the liberal laws, ushering in a pronatalist era that lasted for decades.\nBy 1917, Russia became the first great power to grant women the right to vote. After heavy casualties in World Wars I and II, women outnumbered men in Russia by a 4:3 ratio; this contributed to the larger role women played in Russian society compared to other great powers at the time.\nLGBT rights.\nThe Soviet Union repressed homosexuality. Even during the period when homosexuality was officially legal after the abolition of the Tsarist penal code criminalising it, Soviet courts attempted to repress non-traditional forms of sexuality, which were widely viewed by Russian revolutionaries as a form of capitalist decadence despite more liberal views on homosexuality from Soviet academic sexologists. After Stalin's consolidation of power, homosexuality became officially recriminalised in 1934. The increased homophobia during this time interval was driven by the economic demands of the First Five-Year Plan, as well as the NKVD's view of homosexuals as \"socially harmful elements\", although even during this heightened period of repression, a clandestine homosexual subculture was able to persist. Homosexuality remained a criminal offence throughout the remainder of the Soviet Union's existence.\nEducation.\nAnatoly Lunacharsky became the first People's Commissar for Education of Soviet Russia. In the beginning, the Soviet authorities placed great emphasis on the elimination of illiteracy. All left-handed children were forced to write with their right hand in the Soviet school system. Literate people were automatically hired as teachers. For a short period, quality was sacrificed for quantity. By 1940, Stalin could announce that illiteracy had been eliminated. Throughout the 1930s, social mobility rose sharply, which has been attributed to reforms in education. In the aftermath of World War II, the country's educational system expanded dramatically, which had a tremendous effect. In the 1960s, nearly all children had access to education, the only exception being those living in remote areas. Nikita Khrushchev tried to make education more accessible, making it clear to children that education was closely linked to the needs of society. Education also became important in giving rise to the New Man. Citizens directly entering the workforce had the constitutional right to a job and to free vocational training.\nThe education system was highly centralized and universally accessible to all citizens, with affirmative action for applicants from nations associated with cultural backwardness. However, as part of a general antisemitic policy, an unofficial Jewish quota was applied in the leading institutions of higher education by subjecting Jewish applicants to harsher entrance examinations. The Brezhnev era also introduced a rule that required all university applicants to present a reference from the local Komsomol party secretary. According to statistics from 1986, the number of higher education students per the population of 10,000 was 181 for the USSR, compared to 517 for the US.\nNationalities and ethnic groups.\nThe Soviet Union was an ethnically diverse country, with more than 100 distinct ethnic groups. The total population of the country was estimated at 293\u00a0million in 1991. According to a 1990 estimate, the majority of the population were Russians (50.78%), followed by Ukrainians (15.45%) and Uzbeks (5.84%). Overall, in 1989 the ethnic demography of the country showed that 69.8% was East Slavic, 17.5% was Turkic, 1.6% were Armenians, 1.6% were Balts, 1.5% were Uralic, 1.5% were Tajik, 1.4% were Georgian, 1.2% were Moldovan and 4.1% were of other various ethnic groups.\nAll citizens of the USSR had their own ethnic affiliation. The ethnicity of a person was chosen at the age of sixteen by the child's parents. If the parents did not agree, the child was automatically assigned the ethnicity of the father. Partly due to Soviet policies, some of the smaller minority ethnic groups were considered part of larger ones, such as the Mingrelians of Georgia, who were classified with the linguistically related Georgians. Some ethnic groups voluntarily assimilated, while others were brought in by force. Russians, Belarusians, and Ukrainians, who were all East Slavic and Orthodox, shared close cultural, ethnic, and religious ties, while other groups did not. With multiple nationalities living in the same territory, ethnic antagonisms developed over the years.\nMembers of various ethnicities participated in legislative bodies. Organs of power like the Politburo, the Secretariat of the Central Committee etc., were formally ethnically neutral, but in reality, ethnic Russians were overrepresented, although there were also non-Russian leaders in the Soviet leadership, such as Joseph Stalin, Grigory Zinoviev, Nikolai Podgorny or Andrei Gromyko. During the Soviet era, a significant number of ethnic Russians and Ukrainians migrated to other Soviet republics, and many of them settled there. According to the last census in 1989, the Russian 'diaspora' in the Soviet republics had reached 25\u00a0million.\nHealth.\nIn 1917, before the revolution, health conditions were significantly behind those of developed countries. As Lenin later noted, \"Either the lice will defeat socialism, or socialism will defeat the lice\". The Soviet health care system was conceived by the People's Commissariat for Health in 1918. Under the Semashko model, health care was to be controlled by the state and would be provided to its citizens free of charge, a revolutionary concept at the time. Article 42 of the 1977 Soviet Constitution gave all citizens the right to health protection and free access to any health institutions in the USSR. Before Leonid Brezhnev became general secretary, the Soviet healthcare system was held in high esteem by many foreign specialists. This changed, however, from Brezhnev's accession and Mikhail Gorbachev's tenure as leader, during which the health care system was heavily criticized for many basic faults, such as the quality of service and the unevenness in its provision. Minister of Health Yevgeniy Chazov, during the 19th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, while highlighting such successes as having the most doctors and hospitals in the world, recognized the system's areas for improvement and felt that billions of rubles were squandered. \nAfter the revolution, life expectancy for all age groups went up. These improvements continued into the 1960s when statistics indicated that the life expectancy briefly surpassed that of the United States; life expectancy started to decline in the 1970s, possibly because of alcohol abuse. At the same time, infant mortality began to rise. After 1974, the government stopped publishing statistics on the matter. This trend can be partly explained by the number of pregnancies rising drastically in the Asian part of the country where infant mortality was the highest while declining markedly in the more developed European part of the Soviet Union.\nDentistry.\nSoviet dental technology and dental health were considered extremely bad; in 1991, the average 35-year-old had 12 to 14 cavities, fillings or missing teeth. Toothpaste was often not available, and toothbrushes did not conform to standards of modern dentistry.\nLanguage.\nUnder Lenin, the government gave small language groups their own writing systems. The development of these writing systems was highly successful, even though some flaws were detected. During the later days of the USSR, countries with the same multilingual situation implemented similar policies. A serious problem when creating these writing systems was that the languages differed dialectally greatly from each other. When a language had been given a writing system and appeared in a notable publication, it would attain 'official language' status. There were many minority languages which never received their own writing system; therefore, their speakers were forced to have a second language. There are examples where the government retreated from this policy, most notably under Stalin where education was discontinued in languages that were not widespread. These languages were then assimilated into another language, mostly Russian. During World War II, some minority languages were banned, and their speakers accused of collaborating with the enemy.\nAs the most widely spoken of the Soviet Union's many languages, Russian \"de facto\" functioned as an official language, as the 'language of interethnic communication' (), but only assumed the \"de jure\" status as the official national language in 1990.\nReligion.\nChristianity and Islam had the highest number of adherents among the religious citizens. Eastern Christianity predominated among Christians, with Russia's traditional Russian Orthodox Church being the largest Christian denomination. About 90% of the Soviet Union's Muslims were Sunnis, with Shias being concentrated in the Azerbaijan SSR. Smaller groups included Roman Catholics, Jews, Buddhists, and a variety of Protestant denominations (especially Baptists and Lutherans).\nReligious influence had been strong in the Russian Empire. The Russian Orthodox Church enjoyed a privileged status as the church of the monarchy and took part in carrying out official state functions. The immediate period following the establishment of the Soviet state included a struggle against the Orthodox Church, which the revolutionaries considered an ally of the former ruling classes.\nIn Soviet law, the 'freedom to hold religious services' was constitutionally guaranteed, although the ruling Communist Party regarded religion as incompatible with the Marxist spirit of scientific materialism. In practice, the Soviet system subscribed to a narrow interpretation of this right, and in fact used a range of official measures to discourage religion and curb the activities of religious groups.\nThe 1918 Council of People's Commissars decree establishing the Russian SFSR as a secular state also decreed that 'the teaching of religion in all [places] where subjects of general instruction are taught, is forbidden. Citizens may teach and may be taught religion privately.' Among further restrictions, those adopted in 1929 included express prohibitions on a range of church activities, including meetings for organized Bible study. Both Christian and non-Christian establishments were shut down by the thousands in the 1920s and 1930s. By 1940, as many as 90% of the churches, synagogues, and mosques that had been operating in 1917 were closed; the majority of them were demolished or re-purposed for state needs with little concern for their historic and cultural value.\nMore than 85,000 Orthodox priests were shot in 1937 alone. Only a twelfth of the Russian Orthodox Church's priests were left functioning in their parishes by 1941. In the period between 1927 and 1940, the number of Orthodox Churches in Russia fell from 29,584 to less than 500 (1.7%).\nThe Soviet Union was officially a secular state, but a 'government-sponsored program of forced conversion to atheism' was conducted under the doctrine of state atheism. The government targeted religions based on state interests, and while most organized religions were never outlawed, religious property was confiscated, believers were harassed, and religion was ridiculed while atheism was propagated in schools. In 1925, the government founded the League of Militant Atheists to intensify the propaganda campaign. Accordingly, although personal expressions of religious faith were not explicitly banned, a strong sense of social stigma was imposed on them by the formal structures and mass media, and it was generally considered unacceptable for members of certain professions (teachers, state bureaucrats, soldiers) to be openly religious. While persecution accelerated following Stalin's rise to power, a revival of Orthodoxy was fostered by the government during World War II and the Soviet authorities sought to control the Russian Orthodox Church rather than liquidate it. During the first five years of Soviet power, the Bolsheviks executed 28 Russian Orthodox bishops and over 1,200 Russian Orthodox priests. Many others were imprisoned or exiled. Believers were harassed and persecuted. Most seminaries were closed, and the publication of most religious material was prohibited. By 1941, only 500 churches remained open out of about 54,000 in existence before World War I.\nConvinced that religious anti-Sovietism had become a thing of the past, and with the looming threat of war, the Stalin administration began shifting to a more moderate religion policy in the late 1930s. Soviet religious establishments overwhelmingly rallied to support the war effort during World War II. Amid other accommodations to religious faith after the German invasion, churches were reopened. Radio Moscow began broadcasting a religious hour, and a historic meeting between Stalin and Orthodox Church leader Patriarch Sergius of Moscow was held in 1943. Stalin had the support of the majority of the religious people in the USSR even through the late 1980s. The general tendency of this period was an increase in religious activity among believers of all faiths.\nUnder Nikita Khrushchev, the state leadership clashed with the churches in 1958\u20131964, a period when atheism was emphasized in the educational curriculum, and numerous state publications promoted atheistic views. During this period, the number of churches fell from 20,000 to 10,000 from 1959 to 1965, and the number of synagogues dropped from 500 to 97. The number of working mosques also declined, falling from 1,500 to 500 within a decade.\nReligious institutions remained monitored by the Soviet government, but churches, synagogues, temples, and mosques were all given more leeway in the Brezhnev era. Official relations between the Orthodox Church and the government again warmed to the point that the Brezhnev government twice honored Orthodox Patriarch Alexy I with the Order of the Red Banner of Labour. A poll conducted by Soviet authorities in 1982 recorded 20% of the Soviet population as 'active religious believers.'\nCulture.\nThe culture of the Soviet Union evolved through several stages during its existence. During the first decade following the revolution, there was relative freedom and artists experimented with several different styles to find a distinctive Soviet style of art. Lenin wanted art to be accessible to the Russian people. On the other hand, hundreds of intellectuals, writers, and artists were exiled or executed, and their work banned, such as Nikolay Gumilyov who was shot for alleged conspiracy against the Bolsheviks, and Yevgeny Zamyatin.\nThe government encouraged a variety of trends. In art and literature, numerous schools, some traditional and others radically experimental, proliferated. Communist writers Maxim Gorky and Vladimir Mayakovsky were active during this time. As a means of influencing a largely illiterate society, films received encouragement from the state, and much of director Sergei Eisenstein's best work dates from this period.\nDuring Stalin's rule, the Soviet culture was characterized by the rise and domination of the government-imposed style of socialist realism, with all other trends being severely repressed, with rare exceptions, such as Mikhail Bulgakov's works. Many writers were imprisoned and killed.\nFollowing the Khrushchev Thaw, censorship was diminished. During this time, a distinctive period of Soviet culture developed, characterized by conformist public life and an intense focus on personal life. Greater experimentation in art forms was again permissible, resulting in the production of more sophisticated and subtly critical work. The government loosened its emphasis on socialist realism; thus, for instance, many protagonists of the novels of author Yury Trifonov concerned themselves with problems of daily life rather than with building socialism. Underground dissident literature, known as \"samizdat\", developed during this late period. In architecture, the Khrushchev era mostly focused on functional design as opposed to the highly decorated style of Stalin's epoch. In music, in response to the increasing popularity of forms of popular music like jazz in the West, many jazz orchestras were permitted throughout the USSR, notably the Melodiya Ensemble, named after the principle record label in the USSR.\nIn the second half of the 1980s, Gorbachev's policies of \"perestroika\" and \"glasnost\" significantly expanded freedom of expression throughout the country in the media and the press.\nSport.\nIn summer of 1923 in Moscow was established the Proletarian Sports Society \"Dynamo\" as a sports organization of Soviet secret police Cheka.\nOn 13 July 1925 the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) adopted a statement \"About the party's tasks in sphere of physical culture\". In the statement was determined the role of physical culture in Soviet society and the party's tasks in political leadership of physical culture movement in the country.\nThe Soviet Olympic Committee formed on 21 April 1951, and the IOC recognized the new body in its 45th session. In the same year, when the Soviet representative Konstantin Andrianov became an IOC member, the USSR officially joined the Olympic Movement. The 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki thus became first Olympic Games for Soviet athletes. The Soviet Union was the biggest rival to the United States at the Summer Olympics, winning six of its nine appearances at the games and also topping the medal tally at the Winter Olympics six times. The Soviet Union's Olympics success has been attributed to its large investment in sports to demonstrate its superpower image and political influence on a global stage.\nThe Soviet Union national ice hockey team won nearly every world championship and Olympic tournament between 1954 and 1991 and never failed to medal in any International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF) tournament in which they competed.\nThe Soviet Olympic team was notorious for skirting the edge of amateur rules. All Soviet athletes held some nominal jobs, but were in fact state-sponsored and trained full-time. According to many experts, that gave the Soviet Union a huge advantage over the United States and other Western countries, whose athletes were students or real amateurs. Indeed, the Soviet Union monopolized the top place in the medal standings after 1968, and, until its collapse, placed second only once, in the 1984 Winter games, after another Eastern bloc nation, the GDR. Amateur rules were relaxed only in the late 1980s and were almost completely abolished in the 1990s, after the fall of the USSR.\nAccording to British journalist Andrew Jennings, a KGB colonel stated that the agency's officers had posed as anti-doping authorities from the International Olympic Committee (IOC) to undermine doping tests and that Soviet athletes were \"rescued with [these] tremendous efforts\". Documents obtained in 2016 revealed the Soviet Union's plans for a statewide doping system in track and field in preparation for the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. Dated prior to the country's decision to boycott the Games, the document detailed the existing steroids operations of the program, along with suggestions for further enhancements.\nIn the late 1980s, the government was persuaded to fund construction of a racing yacht specifically to take part in the 1989\u20131990 Whitbread Round the World Race with a Soviet crew. The 25 metre sloop \"Fazisi\" was built in 1989 to the design of Vladislav Murnikov in Poti, Georgia. She came a creditable 11th in a field of 23 boats, but the project was not repeated.\nEnvironment.\nNeighbouring countries were aware of the high levels of pollution in the Soviet Union but after the dissolution of the Soviet Union it was discovered that its environmental problems were greater than what the Soviet authorities admitted. The Soviet Union was the world's second largest producer of harmful emissions. In 1988, total emissions in the Soviet Union were about 79% of those in the United States. But since the Soviet GNP was only 54% of that of the United States, this means that the Soviet Union generated 1.5 times more pollution than the United States per unit of GNP.\nThe Chernobyl disaster in the Ukrainian SSR in 1986 was the first major accident at a civilian nuclear power plant. Unparalleled in the world, it resulted in a large number of radioactive isotopes being released into the atmosphere. Radioactive doses were scattered relatively far. Although long-term effects of the accident were unknown, 4,000 new cases of thyroid cancer which resulted from the accident's contamination were reported at the time of the accident, but this led to a relatively low number of deaths (WHO data, 2005). Another major radioactive accident was the Kyshtym disaster.\nThe Kola Peninsula was one of the places with major problems. Around the industrial cities of Monchegorsk and Norilsk, where nickel, for example, is mined, all forests have been destroyed by contamination, while the northern and other parts of Russia have been affected by emissions. During the 1990s, people in the West were also interested in the radioactive hazards of nuclear facilities, decommissioned nuclear submarines, and the processing of nuclear waste or spent nuclear fuel. It was also known in the early 1990s that the USSR had transported radioactive material to the Barents Sea and Kara Sea, which was later confirmed by the Russian parliament. The crash of the K-141 Kursk submarine in 2000 in the west further raised concerns. In the past, there were accidents involving submarines K-19, K-8, a K-129, K-27, K-219 and K-278 Komsomolets.\nLegacy.\nThe legacy of the USSR remains a controversial topic. The socio-economic nature of communist states such as the USSR, especially under Stalin, has also been much debated, varyingly being labelled a form of bureaucratic collectivism, state capitalism, state socialism, or a totally unique mode of production. The USSR implemented a broad range of policies over a long period of time, with a large amount of conflicting policies being implemented by different leaders. Some have a positive view of it whilst others are critical towards the country, calling it a repressive oligarchy. The opinions on the USSR are complex and have changed over time, with different generations having different views on the matter as well as on Soviet policies corresponding to separate time periods during its history.\nWestern academicians published various analyses of the post-Soviet states' development, claiming that the dissolution was followed by a severe drop in economic and social conditions in these countries, including a rapid increase in poverty, crime, corruption, unemployment, homelessness, rates of disease, infant mortality and domestic violence, as well as demographic losses, income inequality and the rise of an oligarchical class, along with decreases in calorie intake, life expectancy, adult literacy, and income. Between 1988\u20131989 and 1993\u20131995, the Gini ratio (a measure of inequality) increased by an average of 9 percentage points for all former Soviet republics. According to Western analysis, the economic shocks that accompanied wholesale privatization were associated with sharp increases in mortality, Russia, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia saw a tripling of unemployment and a 42% increase in male death rates between 1991 and 1994, and in the following decades, only five or six of the post-communist states are on a path to joining the wealthy capitalist West while most are falling behind, some to such an extent that it will take over fifty years to catch up to where they were before the fall of the Soviet Bloc. As of 2011, the experience of the former Soviet republics was mixed, with some having recovered in terms of gross domestic product and others not. There are large wealth disparities, and many post-soviet economies are described as oligarchic.\nSince the dissolution of the Soviet Union, annual polling by the Levada Center has shown that over 50% of Russia's population regretted this event, with the only exception to this being in 2012 when support for the Soviet Union dipped below 50 percent. A 2018 poll showed that 66% of Russians regretted the fall of the Soviet Union, setting a 15-year record, and the majority of these regretting opinions came from people older than 55. In 2020, polls conducted by the Levada Center found that 75% of Russians agreed that the Soviet era was the greatest era in their country's history.\nAccording to the New Russia Barometer (NRB) polls by the Centre for the Study of Public Policy, 50% of Russian respondents reported a positive impression of the Soviet Union in 1991. This increased to about 75% of NRB respondents in 2000, dropping slightly to 71% in 2009. Throughout the 2000s, an average of 32% of NRB respondents supported the restoration of the Soviet Union.\nIn a 2021 poll, a record 70% of Russians indicated they had a mostly/very favourable view of Joseph Stalin. In Armenia, 12% of respondents said the USSR collapse did good, while 66% said it did harm. In Kyrgyzstan, 16% of respondents said the collapse of the USSR did good, while 61% said it did harm. In a 2018 Rating Sociological Group poll, 47% of Ukrainian respondents had a positive opinion of Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev, who ruled the Soviet Union from 1964 to 1982, while viewing Lenin, Stalin, and Gorbachev very negatively. A 2021 poll conducted by the Levada Center found that 49% of Russians prefer the USSR's political system, while 18% prefer the current political system and 16% would prefer a Western democracy. A further 62% of people polled preferred the Soviet system of central planning, while 24% prefer a market-based system. According to the Levada Center's polls, the primary reasons cited for Soviet nostalgia are the advantages of the shared economic union between the Soviet republics, including perceived financial stability. This was referenced by up to 53% of respondents in 2016. At least 43% also lamented the loss of the Soviet Union's global political superpower status. About 31% cited the loss of social trust and capital. The remainder of the respondents cited a mix of reasons ranging from practical travel difficulties to a sense of national displacement.\nThe 1941\u20131945 period of World War\u00a0II is still known in Russia as the 'Great Patriotic War'. The war became a topic of great importance in cinema, literature, history lessons at school, the mass media, and the arts. As a result of the massive losses suffered by the military and civilians during the conflict, Victory Day celebrated on 9 May is still one of the most important and emotional dates in Russia. Catherine Wanner asserts that Victory Day commemorations are a vehicle for Soviet nostalgia, as they \"kept alive a mythology of Soviet grandeur, of solidarity among the \"Sovietskii narod\", and of a sense of self as citizen of a superpower state\".\nRussian Victory Day parades are organized annually in most cities, with the central military parade taking place in Moscow (just as during the Soviet times). Additionally, the recently introduced Immortal Regiment on 9 May sees millions of Russians carry the portraits of their relatives who fought in the war. Russia also retains other Soviet holidays, such as the Defender of the Fatherland Day (23 February), International Women's Day (8 March), and International Workers' Day.\nIn the former Soviet republics.\nIn some post-Soviet republics, there is a more negative view of the USSR, although there is no unanimity on the matter. In large part due to the Holodomor, ethnic Ukrainians have a negative view of the Soviet Union. Russian-speaking Ukrainians of Ukraine's southern and eastern regions have a more positive view of the USSR. In some countries with internal conflict, there is also nostalgia for the USSR, especially for refugees of the post-Soviet conflicts who have been forced to flee their homes and have been displaced. The many Russian enclaves in the former USSR republics such as Transnistria have in a general a positive remembrance of it.\nBy the political left.\nThe left's view of the USSR is complex. While some leftists regard the USSR as an example of state capitalism or that it was an oligarchical state, other leftists admire Vladimir Lenin and the Russian Revolution. Council communists generally view the USSR as failing to create class consciousness, turning into a corrupt state in which the elite controlled society.\nTrotskyists believe that the ascendancy of the Stalinist bureaucracy ensured a degenerated or deformed workers' state, where the capitalist elite have been replaced by an unaccountable bureaucratic elite and there is no true democracy or workers' control of industry. In particular, American Trotskyist David North noted that the generation of bureaucrats that rose to power under Stalin's tutelage presided over the stagnation and breakdown of the Soviet Union.\nMany anti-Stalinist leftists such as anarchists are extremely critical of Soviet authoritarianism and repression. Much of the criticism it receives is centered around massacres in the Soviet Union, the centralized hierarchy present in the USSR and mass political repression as well as violence towards government critics and political dissidents such as other leftists. Critics also point towards its failure to implement any substantial worker cooperatives or implementing worker liberation, as well as corruption and the Soviet authoritarian nature.\nAnarchists are also critical of the country, labeling the Soviet system as \"red fascism\". Factors contributing to the anarchist animosity towards the USSR included the Soviet destruction of the Makhnovist movement after an initial alliance, the suppression of the anarchist Kronstadt rebellion, and the defeat of the rival anarchist factions by the Soviet-supported Communist faction during the Spanish Civil War.\nMaoists also have a mixed opinion on the USSR, viewing it negatively during the Sino-Soviet Split and denouncing it as revisionist and reverted to capitalism. The Chinese government in 1963 articulated its criticism of the USSR's system and promoted China's ideological line as an alternative.\nAfter the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Japanese Communist Party (JCP) released a press statement titled \"We welcome the end of a party which embodied the historical evil of great power chauvinism and hegemonism\".\nNoam Chomsky called the collapse of the Soviet Union \"a small victory for socialism, not only because of the fall of one of the most anti-socialist states in the world, where working people had fewer rights than in the West, but also because it freed the term 'socialism' from the burden of being associated in the propaganda systems of East and West with Soviet tyranny\u2014for the East, in order to benefit from the aura of authentic socialism, for the West, in order to demonize the concept.\" Some scholars on the left have posited that the end of the Soviet Union and communism as a global force allowed neoliberal capitalism to become a global system, which has resulted in rising economic inequality.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26781", "revid": "51029150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26781", "title": "Social science", "text": "Branch of science that studies society and its relationships\nSocial science (not often rendered in the plural as the social sciences) is one of the branches of science, devoted to the study of societies and the relationships among members within those societies. The term was formerly used to refer to the field of sociology, the original \"science of society\", established in the 18th century. It now encompasses a wide array of additional academic disciplines, including anthropology, archaeology, economics, geography, history, linguistics, management, communication studies, psychology, culturology, and political science.\nThe majority of positivist social scientists use methods resembling those used in the natural sciences as tools for understanding societies, and so define science in its stricter modern sense. Speculative social scientists, otherwise known as interpretivist scientists, by contrast, may use social critique or symbolic interpretation rather than constructing empirically falsifiable theories, and thus treat science in its broader sense. In modern academic practice, researchers are often eclectic, using multiple methodologies (combining both quantitative and qualitative research). To gain a deeper understanding of complex human behavior in digital environments, social science disciplines have increasingly integrated interdisciplinary approaches, big data, and computational tools. The term social research has also acquired a degree of autonomy as practitioners from various disciplines share similar goals and methods.\nHistory.\nThe history of the social sciences began in the Age of Enlightenment after 1651, which saw a revolution within natural philosophy, changing the basic framework by which individuals understood what was scientific. Social sciences came forth from the moral philosophy of the time and were influenced by the Age of Revolutions, such as the Industrial Revolution and the French Revolution. The \"social sciences\" developed from the sciences (experimental and applied), or the systematic knowledge-bases or prescriptive practices, relating to the social improvement of a group of interacting entities.\nThe beginnings of the social sciences in the 18th century are reflected in the grand encyclopedia of Diderot, with articles from Jean-Jacques Rousseau and other pioneers. The growth of the social sciences is also reflected in other specialized encyclopedias. The term \"social science\" was coined in French by Mirabeau in 1767, before becoming a distinct conceptual field in the nineteenth century. Social science was influenced by positivism, focusing on knowledge based on actual positive sense experience and avoiding the negative; metaphysical speculation was avoided. Auguste Comte used the term to describe the field, taken from the ideas of Charles Fourier; Comte also referred to the field as social physics.\nFollowing this period, five paths of development sprang forth in the social sciences, influenced by Comte in other fields. One route that was taken was the rise of social research. Large statistical surveys were undertaken in various parts of the United States and Europe. Another route undertaken was initiated by \u00c9mile Durkheim, studying \"social facts\", and Vilfredo Pareto, opening metatheoretical ideas and individual theories. A third means developed, arising from the methodological dichotomy present, in which social phenomena were identified with and understood; this was championed by figures such as Max Weber. The fourth route taken, based in economics, was developed and furthered economic knowledge as a hard science. The last path was the correlation of knowledge and social values; the antipositivism and verstehen sociology of Max Weber firmly demanded this distinction. In this route, theory (description) and prescription were non-overlapping formal discussions of a subject.\nThe foundation of social sciences in the West implies conditioned relationships between progressive and traditional spheres of knowledge. In some contexts, such as the Italian one, sociology slowly affirms itself and experiences the difficulty of affirming a strategic knowledge beyond philosophy and theology.\nAround the start of the 20th century, Enlightenment philosophy was challenged in various quarters. After the use of classical theories since the end of the scientific revolution, various fields substituted mathematics studies for experimental studies and examining equations to build a theoretical structure. The development of social science subfields became very quantitative in methodology. The interdisciplinary and cross-disciplinary nature of scientific inquiry into human behaviour, social and environmental factors affecting it, made many of the natural sciences interested in some aspects of social science methodology. Examples of boundary blurring include emerging disciplines like social research of medicine, sociobiology, neuropsychology, bioeconomics and the history and sociology of science. Increasingly, quantitative research and qualitative methods are being integrated in the study of human action and its implications and consequences. In the first half of the 20th century, statistics became a free-standing discipline of applied mathematics. Statistical methods were used confidently.\nIn the contemporary period, Karl Popper and Talcott Parsons influenced the furtherance of the social sciences. Researchers continue to search for a unified consensus on what methodology might have the power and refinement to connect a proposed \"grand theory\" with the various midrange theories that, with considerable success, continue to provide usable frameworks for massive, growing data banks; for more, see consilience. The social sciences will for the foreseeable future be composed of different zones in the research of, and sometimes distinct in approach toward, the field.\nThe term \"social science\" may refer either to the specific \"sciences of society\" established by thinkers such as Comte, Durkheim, Marx, and Weber, or more generally to all disciplines outside of \"noble science\" and arts. By the late 19th century, the academic social sciences were constituted of five fields: jurisprudence and amendment of the law, education, health, economy and trade, and art.\nAround the start of the 21st century, the expanding domain of economics in the social sciences has been described as economic imperialism.\nA distinction is usually drawn between the social sciences and the humanities. Classicist Allan Bloom writes in \"The Closing of the American Mind\" (1987):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Social science and humanities have a mutual contempt for one another, the former looking down on the latter as unscientific, the latter regarding the former as philistine. [...] The difference comes down to the fact that social science really wants to be predictive, meaning that man is predictable, while the humanities say that he is not.\nBranches.\nThe social science disciplines are branches of knowledge taught and researched at the college or university level. Social science disciplines are defined and recognized by the academic journals in which research is published, and the learned social science societies and academic departments or faculties to which their practitioners belong. Social science fields of study usually have several sub-disciplines or branches, and the distinguishing lines between these are often both arbitrary and ambiguous. The following are widely-considered to be social sciences:\nAnthropology.\nAnthropology is the holistic \"science of man\", a science of the totality of human existence. The discipline deals with the integration of different aspects of the social sciences, humanities, and human biology. In the twentieth century, academic disciplines have often been institutionally divided into three broad domains. Firstly, the natural sciences seek to derive general laws through reproducible and verifiable experiments. Secondly, the humanities generally study local traditions, through their history, literature, music, and arts, with an emphasis on understanding particular individuals, events, or eras. Finally, the social sciences have generally attempted to develop scientific methods to understand social phenomena in a generalizable way, though usually with methods distinct from those of the natural sciences.\nThe anthropological social sciences often develop nuanced descriptions rather than the general laws derived in physics or chemistry, or they may explain individual cases through more general principles, as in many fields of psychology. Anthropology (like some fields of history) does not easily fit into one of these categories, and different branches of anthropology draw on one or more of these domains. Within the United States, anthropology is divided into four sub-fields: archaeology, physical or biological anthropology, anthropological linguistics, and cultural anthropology. It is an area that is offered at most undergraduate institutions. The word () in Ancient Greek means \"human being\" or \"person\". Eric Wolf described sociocultural anthropology as \"the most scientific of the humanities, and the most humanistic of the sciences\".\nThe goal of anthropology is to provide a holistic account of humans and human nature. This means that, though anthropologists generally specialize in only one sub-field, they always keep in mind the biological, linguistic, historic and cultural aspects of any problem. Since anthropology arose as a science in Western societies that were complex and industrial, a major trend within anthropology has been a methodological drive to study peoples in societies with more simple social organization, sometimes called \"primitive\" in anthropological literature, but without any connotation of \"inferior\". Today, anthropologists use terms such as \"less complex\" societies or refer to specific modes of subsistence or production, such as \"pastoralist\" or \"forager\" or \"horticulturalist\" to refer to humans living in non-industrial, non-Western cultures, such people or folk () remaining of great interest within anthropology.\nThe quest for holism leads most anthropologists to study a people in detail, using biogenetic, archaeological, and linguistic data alongside direct observation of contemporary customs. In the 1990s and 2000s, calls for clarification of what constitutes a culture, of how an observer knows where his or her own culture ends and another begins, and other crucial topics in writing anthropology were heard. It is possible to view all human cultures as part of one large, evolving global culture. These dynamic relationships, between what can be observed on the ground, as opposed to what can be observed by compiling many local observations remain fundamental in any kind of anthropology, whether cultural, biological, linguistic or archaeological.\nCommunication studies.\nCommunication studies deals with processes of human communication, commonly defined as the sharing of symbols to create meaning. The discipline encompasses a range of topics, from face-to-face conversation to mass media outlets such as television broadcasting. Communication studies also examine how messages are interpreted through the political, cultural, economic, and social dimensions of their contexts. Communication is institutionalized under many different names at different universities, including \"communication\", \"communication studies\", \"speech communication\", \"rhetorical studies\", \"communication science\", \"media studies\", \"communication arts\", mass communication, media ecology, and \"communication and media science\".\nCommunication studies integrate aspects of both social sciences and the humanities. As a social science, the discipline often overlaps with sociology, psychology, anthropology, biology, political science, economics, and public policy, among others. From a humanities perspective, communication is concerned with rhetoric and persuasion (traditional graduate programs in communication studies trace their history to the rhetoricians of Ancient Greece). The field applies to outside disciplines as well, including engineering, architecture, mathematics, and information science.\nEconomics.\nEconomics is a social science that seeks to analyze and describe the production, distribution, and consumption of wealth. The word \"economics\" is from the Ancient Greek (, \"family, household, estate\") and (, \"custom, law\"), and hence means \"household management\" or \"management of the state\". An economist is a person using economic concepts and data in the course of employment, or someone who has earned a degree in the subject. The classic brief definition of economics, set out by Lionel Robbins in 1932, is \"the science which studies human behavior as a relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses\". Without scarcity and alternative uses, there is no economic problem. Briefer yet is \"the study of how people seek to satisfy needs and wants\" and \"the study of the financial aspects of human behavior\".\nEconomics has two broad branches: microeconomics, where the unit of analysis is the individual agent, such as a household or firm, and macroeconomics, where the unit of analysis is an economy as a whole. Another division of the subject distinguishes positive economics, which seeks to predict and explain economic phenomena, from normative economics, which orders choices and actions by some criterion; such orderings necessarily involve subjective value judgments. Since the early part of the 20th century, economics has focused largely on measurable quantities, employing both theoretical models and empirical analysis. Quantitative models, however, can be traced as far back as the physiocratic school. Economic reasoning has been increasingly applied in recent decades to other social situations such as politics, law, psychology, history, religion, marriage and family life, and other social interactions.\nThe expanding domain of economics in the social sciences has been described as economic imperialism.\nEducation.\nEducation encompasses teaching and learning specific skills, and also something less tangible but more profound: the imparting of knowledge, positive judgement and well-developed wisdom. Education has as one of its fundamental aspects the imparting of culture from generation to generation (see socialization). To educate means 'to draw out', from the Latin \"educare\", or to facilitate the realization of an individual's potential and talents. It is an application of pedagogy, a body of theoretical and applied research relating to teaching and learning and draws on many disciplines such as psychology, philosophy, computer science, linguistics, neuroscience, sociology and anthropology.\nGeography.\nGeography as a discipline can be split broadly into two main sub fields: human geography and physical geography. The former focuses largely on the built environment and how space is created, viewed and managed by humans as well as the influence humans have on the space they occupy. This may involve cultural geography, transportation, health, military operations, and cities. The latter examines the natural environment and how the climate, vegetation and life, soil, oceans, water and landforms are produced and interact (is also commonly regarded as an Earth Science). Physical geography examines phenomena related to the measurement of earth. As a result of the two subfields using different approaches a third field has emerged, which is environmental geography. Environmental geography combines physical and human geography and looks at the interactions between the environment and humans. Other branches of geography include social geography, regional geography, and geomatics.\nGeographers attempt to understand the Earth in terms of physical and spatial relationships. The first geographers focused on the science of mapmaking and finding ways to precisely project the surface of the earth. In this sense, geography bridges some gaps between the natural sciences and social sciences. Historical geography is often taught in a college in a unified Department of Geography.\nModern geography is an all-encompassing discipline, closely related to Geographic Information Science, that seeks to understand humanity and its natural environment. The fields of urban planning, regional science, and planetology are closely related to geography. Practitioners of geography use many technologies and methods to collect data such as Geographic Information Systems, remote sensing, aerial photography, statistics, and global positioning systems.\nHistory.\nHistory is the continuous, systematic narrative and research into past human events as interpreted through historiographical paradigms or theories. When used as the name of a field of study, \"history\" refers to the study and interpretation of the record of humans, societies, institutions, and any topic that has changed over time.\nTraditionally, the study of history has been considered a part of the humanities. In modern academia, whether or not history remains a humanities-based subject is contested. In the United States the National Endowment for the Humanities includes history in its definition of humanities (as it does for applied linguistics). However, the National Research Council classifies history as a social science. The historical method comprises the techniques and guidelines by which historians use primary sources and other evidence to research and then to write history. The Social Science History Association, formed in 1976, brings together scholars from numerous disciplines interested in social history.\nLaw.\nThe social science of law, jurisprudence, in common parlance, means a rule that (unlike a rule of ethics) is capable of enforcement through institutions. However, many laws are based on norms accepted by a community and thus have an ethical foundation. The study of law crosses the boundaries between the social sciences and humanities, depending on one's view of research into its objectives and effects. Law is not always enforceable, especially in the international relations context. It has been defined as a \"system of rules\", as an \"interpretive concept\" to achieve justice, as an \"authority\" to mediate people's interests, and even as \"the command of a sovereign, backed by the threat of a sanction\". However one likes to think of law, it is a completely central social institution. Legal policy incorporates the practical manifestation of thinking from almost every social science and the humanities. Laws are politics, because politicians create them. Law is philosophy, because moral and ethical persuasions shape their ideas. Law tells many of history's stories, because statutes, case law and codifications build up over time. And law is economics, because any rule about contract, tort, property law, labour law, company law and many more can have long-lasting effects on the distribution of wealth. The noun \"law\" derives from the Old English , meaning something laid down or fixed and the adjective \"legal\" comes from the Latin word .\nLinguistics.\nLinguistics investigates the cognitive and social aspects of human language. The field is divided into areas that focus on aspects of the linguistic signal, such as syntax (the study of the rules that govern the structure of sentences), semantics (the study of meaning), morphology (the study of the structure of words), phonetics (the study of speech sounds) and phonology (the study of the abstract sound system of a particular language); however, work in areas like evolutionary linguistics (the study of the origins and evolution of language) and psycholinguistics (the study of psychological factors in human language) cut across these divisions.\nThe overwhelming majority of modern research in linguistics takes a predominantly synchronic perspective (focusing on language at a particular point in time), and a great deal of it\u2014partly owing to the influence of Noam Chomsky\u2014aims at formulating theories of the cognitive processing of language. However, language does not exist in a vacuum, or only in the brain, and approaches like contact linguistics, creole studies, discourse analysis, social interactional linguistics, and sociolinguistics explore language in its social context. Sociolinguistics often makes use of traditional quantitative analysis and statistics in investigating the frequency of features, while some disciplines, like contact linguistics, focus on qualitative analysis. While certain areas of linguistics can thus be understood as clearly falling within the social sciences, other areas, like acoustic phonetics and neurolinguistics, draw on the natural sciences. Linguistics draws only secondarily on the humanities, which played a rather greater role in linguistic inquiry in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Ferdinand Saussure was one of the founders of 20th century linguistics.\nPolitical science.\nPolitical science is an academic and research discipline that deals with the theory and practice of politics and the description and analysis of political systems and political behaviour. Fields and subfields of political science include political economy, political theory and philosophy, civics and comparative politics, theory of direct democracy, apolitical governance, participatory direct democracy, national systems, cross-national political analysis, political development, international relations, foreign policy, international law, politics, public administration, administrative behaviour, public law, judicial behaviour, and public policy. Political science also studies power in international relations and the theory of great powers and superpowers. ri\nPolitical science is methodologically diverse, although recent years have witnessed an upsurge in the use of the scientific method, that is, the proliferation of formal-deductive model building and quantitative hypothesis testing. Approaches to the discipline include rational choice, classical political philosophy, interpretivism, structuralism, and behaviouralism, realism, pluralism, and institutionalism. Political science, as one of the social sciences, uses methods and techniques that relate to the kinds of inquiries sought: primary sources such as historical documents, interviews, and official records, as well as secondary sources such as scholarly articles, are used in building and testing theories. Empirical methods include survey research, statistical analysis or econometrics, case studies, experiments, and model building.\nPsychology.\nPsychology is an academic and applied field involving the study of behaviour and mental processes. Psychology also refers to the application of such knowledge to various spheres of human activity, including problems of individuals' daily lives and the treatment of mental illness. The word \"psychology\" comes from the Ancient Greek \"(psyche\", \"soul\" or \"mind\") and the suffix \"logy\" (\"study\").\nPsychology differs from anthropology, economics, political science, and sociology in seeking to capture explanatory generalizations about the mental function and overt behaviour of individuals, while the other disciplines focus on creating descriptive generalizations about the functioning of social groups or situation-specific human behaviour. In practice, however, there is quite a lot of cross-fertilization that takes place among the various fields. Psychology differs from biology and neuroscience in that it is primarily concerned with the interaction of mental processes and behaviour, and of the overall processes of a system, and not simply the biological or neural processes themselves, though the subfield of neuropsychology combines the study of the actual neural processes with the study of the mental effects they have subjectively produced.\nMany people associate psychology with clinical psychology, which focuses on assessment and treatment of problems in living and psychopathology. In reality, psychology has myriad specialties including social psychology, developmental psychology, cognitive psychology, educational psychology, industrial-organizational psychology, mathematical psychology, neuropsychology, and quantitative analysis of behaviour.\nPsychology is a very broad science that is rarely tackled as a whole, major block. Although some subfields encompass a natural science base and a social science application, others can be clearly distinguished as having little to do with the social sciences or having a lot to do with the social sciences. For example, biological psychology is considered a natural science with a social scientific application (as is clinical medicine), social and occupational psychology are, generally speaking, purely social sciences, whereas neuropsychology is a natural science that lacks application out of the scientific tradition entirely.\nIn British universities, emphasis on what tenet of psychology a student has studied and/or concentrated is communicated through the degree conferred: BPsy indicates a balance between natural and social sciences, BSc indicates a strong (or entire) scientific concentration, whereas a BA underlines a majority of social science credits. This is not always necessarily the case however, and in many UK institutions students studying the BPsy, BSc, and BA follow the same curriculum as outlined by The British Psychological Society and have the same options of specialism open to them regardless of whether they choose a balance, a heavy science basis, or heavy social science basis to their degree. If they applied to read the BA. for example, but specialized in heavily science-based modules, then they will still generally be awarded the BA.\nSociology.\nSociology is the systematic study of society, individuals' relationship to their societies, the consequences of difference, and other aspects of human social action. The meaning of the word comes from the suffix \"-logy\", which means \"study of\", derived from Ancient Greek, and the stem \"soci-\", which is from the Latin word , meaning \"companion\", or society in general.\nAuguste Comte (1798\u20131857) coined the term \"sociology\" to describe a way to apply natural science principles and techniques to the social world in 1838. Comte endeavoured to unify history, psychology and economics through the descriptive understanding of the social realm. He proposed that social ills could be remedied through sociological positivism, an epistemological approach outlined in \"The Course in Positive Philosophy\" [1830\u20131842] and \"A General View of Positivism\" (1844). Though Comte is generally regarded as the \"Father of Sociology\", the discipline was formally established by another French thinker, \u00c9mile Durkheim (1858\u20131917), who developed positivism as a foundation to practical social research. Durkheim set up the first European department of sociology at the University of Bordeaux in 1895, publishing his \"Rules of the Sociological Method\". In 1896, he established the journal . Durkheim's seminal monograph, \"Suicide\" (1897), a case study of suicide rates among Catholic and Protestant populations, distinguished sociological analysis from psychology or philosophy.\nKarl Marx rejected Comte's positivism but nevertheless aimed to establish a \"science of society\" based on historical materialism, becoming recognized as a founding figure of sociology posthumously as the term gained broader meaning. Around the start of the 20th century, the first wave of German sociologists, including Max Weber and Georg Simmel, developed sociological antipositivism. The field may be broadly recognized as an amalgam of three modes of social thought in particular: Durkheimian positivism and structural functionalism; Marxist historical materialism and conflict theory; and Weberian antipositivism and verstehen analysis. American sociology broadly arose on a separate trajectory, with little Marxist influence, an emphasis on rigorous experimental methodology, and a closer association with pragmatism and social psychology. In the 1920s, the Chicago school developed symbolic interactionism. Meanwhile, in the 1930s, the Frankfurt School pioneered the idea of critical theory, an interdisciplinary form of Marxist sociology drawing upon thinkers as diverse as Sigmund Freud and Friedrich Nietzsche. Critical theory would take on something of a life of its own after World War II, influencing literary criticism and the Birmingham School establishment of cultural studies.\nSociology evolved as an academic response to the challenges of modernity, such as industrialization, urbanization, secularization, and a perceived process of enveloping rationalization. The field generally concerns the social rules and processes that bind and separate people not only as individuals, but as members of associations, groups, communities and institutions, and includes the examination of the organization and development of human social life. The sociological field of interest ranges from the analysis of short contacts between anonymous individuals on the street to the study of global social processes. In the terms of sociologists Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann, social scientists seek an understanding of the \"Social Construction of Reality\". Most sociologists work in one or more subfields. One useful way to describe the discipline is as a cluster of sub-fields that examine different dimensions of society. For example, social stratification studies inequality and class structure; demography studies changes in population size or type; criminology examines criminal behaviour and deviance; and political sociology studies the interaction between society and state.\nSince its inception, sociological epistemologies, methods, and frames of enquiry, have significantly expanded and diverged. Sociologists use a diversity of research methods, collecting both quantitative and qualitative data, draw upon empirical techniques, and engage critical theory. Common modern methods include case studies, historical research, interviewing, participant observation, social network analysis, survey research, statistical analysis, and model building, among other approaches. Since the late 1970s, many sociologists have tried to make the discipline useful for purposes beyond the academy. The results of sociological research aid educators, lawmakers, administrators, developers, and others interested in resolving social problems and formulating public policy, through subdisciplinary areas such as evaluation research, methodological assessment, and public sociology.\nIn the early 1970s, women sociologists began to question sociological paradigms and the invisibility of women in sociological studies, analysis, and courses. In 1969, feminist sociologists challenged the discipline's androcentrism at the American Sociological Association's annual conference. This led to the founding of the organization Sociologists for Women in Society, and, eventually, a new sociology journal, Gender &amp; Society. Today, the sociology of gender is considered to be one of the most prominent sub-fields in the discipline.\nNew sociological sub-fields continue to appear\u00a0\u2014 such as community studies, computational sociology, environmental sociology, network analysis, actor-network theory, gender studies, and a growing list, many of which are cross-disciplinary in nature.\nAdditional fields of study.\nAdditional applied or interdisciplinary fields related to the social sciences or are applied social sciences include:\nMethodology.\nSocial research.\nThe origin of the survey can be traced back at least as early as the Domesday Book in 1086, while some scholars pinpoint the origin of demography to 1663 with the publication of John Graunt's \"Natural and Political Observations upon the Bills of Mortality\". Social research began most intentionally, however, with the positivist philosophy of science in the 19th century.\nIn contemporary usage, \"social research\" is a relatively autonomous term, encompassing the work of practitioners from various disciplines that share in its aims and methods. Social scientists employ a range of methods in order to analyse a vast breadth of social phenomena; from census survey data derived from millions of individuals, to the in-depth analysis of a single agent's social experiences; from monitoring what is happening on contemporary streets, to the investigation of ancient historical documents. The methods originally rooted in classical sociology and statistical mathematics have formed the basis for research in other disciplines, such as political science, media studies, and marketing and market research.\nSocial research methods may be divided into two broad schools:\nSocial scientists will commonly combine quantitative and qualitative approaches as part of a multi-strategy design. Questionnaires, field-based data collection, archival database information and laboratory-based data collections are some of the measurement techniques used. It is noted the importance of measurement and analysis, focusing on the (difficult to achieve) goal of objective research or statistical hypothesis testing. A mathematical model uses mathematical language to describe a system. The process of developing a mathematical model is termed 'mathematical modelling' (also modeling). A \"mathematical model\" is \"a representation of the essential aspects of an existing system (or a system to be constructed) that presents knowledge of that system in usable form\". Mathematical models can take many forms, including but not limited to dynamical systems, statistical models, differential equations, or game theoretic models.\nThese and other types of models can overlap, with a given model involving a variety of abstract structures. The system is a set of interacting or interdependent entities, real or abstract, forming an integrated whole. The concept of an \"integrated whole\" can also be stated in terms of a system embodying a set of relationships that are differentiated from relationships of the set to other elements, and from relationships between an element of the set and elements not a part of the relational regime. A dynamical system modeled as a mathematical formalization has a fixed \"rule\" that describes the time dependence of a point's position in its ambient space. Small changes in the state of the system correspond to small changes in the numbers. The \"evolution rule\" of the dynamical system is a fixed rule that describes what future states follow from the current state. The rule is deterministic: for a given time interval only one future state follows from the current state.\nSocial scientists often conduct program evaluation, which is a systematic method for collecting, analyzing, and using information to answer questions about projects, policies and programs, particularly about their effectiveness and efficiency. In both the public and private sectors, stakeholders often want to know whether the programs they are funding, implementing, voting for, receiving or objecting to are producing the intended effect. While program evaluation first focuses around this definition, important considerations often include how much the program costs per participant, how the program could be improved, whether the program is worthwhile, whether there are better alternatives, if there are unintended outcomes, and whether the program goals are appropriate and useful.\nTheory.\nSome social theorists emphasize the subjective nature of research. These writers espouse social theory perspectives that include various types of the following:\nOther fringe social theorists delve into the alternative nature of research. These writers share social theory perspectives that include various types of the following:\nRecursivity.\nAuthors use the concept of \"recursivity\" to foreground the situation in which social scientists find themselves when producing knowledge about the world they are always already part of. According to Audrey Alejandro, \"as social scientists, the recursivity of our condition deals with the fact that we are both subjects (as discourses are the medium through which we analyse) and objects of the academic discourses we produce (as we are social agents belonging to the world we analyse).\" From this basis, she identifies in recursivity a fundamental challenge in the production of emancipatory knowledge which calls for the exercise of reflexive efforts:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEducation and degrees.\nMost universities offer degrees in social science fields. The Bachelor of Social Science is a degree targeted at the social sciences in particular, it is often more flexible and in-depth than other degrees that include social science subjects.\nIn the United States, a university may offer a student who studies a social sciences field a Bachelor of Arts degree, particularly if the field is within one of the traditional liberal arts such as history, or a BSc: Bachelor of Science degree such as those given by the London School of Economics, as the social sciences constitute one of the two main branches of science (the other being the natural sciences). In addition, some institutions have degrees for a particular social science, such as the Bachelor of Economics degree, though such specialized degrees are relatively rare in the United States.\nGraduate students may receive a master's degree (Master of Arts, Master of Science or a field-specific degree such as Master of Public Administration) or a doctoral degree (e.g. PhD).\nFunding.\nThe funding of social science programs varies across countries and includes both private and public financing. The development of such programs typically see an increased funding and attention when their topics coincide with national political activities or economic policies. In South America, namely Brazil, the institutionalisation of social sciences took place in a political context where the state struggled to assert its territorial power, and the social scientific field was expected to produce investigation but also political inputs towards the construction of a new nation. Immediately following the 1932 Brazilian revolution, social science programs experience a surge in funding, later becoming the largest of such capital expenditure in South America. Subsequently, these developments led to the deployment of university programs and the institution of national associations in anthropology, economics, sociology and political science.\nPeople associated with the social sciences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26783", "revid": "49291118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26783", "title": "Statute", "text": "Formal written document that creates law\nA statute is a law or formal written enactment of a legislature. Statutes typically declare, command or prohibit something. Statutes are distinguished from court law and unwritten law (also known as common law) in that they are the expressed will of a legislative body, whether that be on the behalf of a country, state or province, county, municipality, or so on. They are also distinguished from secondary legislation, or regulations, that are issued by an executive body under authority granted by a statute. Depending on the legal system, a statute may also be referred to as an \"act.\"\nEtymology.\nThe word appears in use in English as early as the 14th century. \"Statute\" and earlier English spellings were derived from the Old French words \"statut\", \"estatut\", \"estatu,\" meaning \"(royal) promulgation, (legal) statute.\" These terms were in turn derived from the Late Latin \"statutum,\" meaning \"a law, decree.\"\nPublication and organization.\nIn virtually all countries, newly enacted statutes are published and distributed so that everyone can look up the statutory law. This can be done in the form of a government gazette, which may include other kinds of legal notices released by the government, or in the form of a series of books whose content is limited to legislative acts. In either form, statutes are traditionally published in chronological order based on date of enactment.\nA universal problem encountered by lawmakers throughout human history is how to organize published statutes. Such publications have a habit of starting small but growing rapidly over time, as new statutes are enacted in response to the exigencies of the moment. Eventually, persons trying to find the law are forced to sort through an enormous number of statutes enacted at various points in time to determine which portions are still in effect.\nThe solution adopted in many countries is to organize existing statutory law in topical arrangements (or \"codified\") within publications called codes, then ensure that new statutes are consistently drafted so that they add, amend, repeal or move various code sections. In turn, in theory, the code will thenceforth reflect the current cumulative state of the statutory law in that jurisdiction. In many nations statutory law is distinguished from and subordinate to constitutional law.\nAlternative meanings.\nInternational law.\nThe term \"statute\" is also used to refer to an International treaty that establishes an institution, such as the Statute of the European Central Bank, a protocol to the international courts as well, such as the Statute of the International Court of Justice and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. \"Statute\" is also another word for law. The term was adapted from England in about the 18th century.\nAutonomy statute.\nIn the autonomous communities of Spain, an autonomy statute is a legal document similar to the constitution of a federated state, save that it is enacted by the national legislature, rather than the autonomous community it governs. The autonomy statutes in Spain have the rank of \"ley org\u00e1nica\" (organic law), a category of special legislation reserved for the main institutions and issues and mentioned in the constitution (the highest ranking legal instrument in Spain). \"Leyes org\u00e1nicas\" rank between the constitution and ordinary laws. The name was chosen, among others, to avoid confusion with the term \"constitution\" (i.e. the Spanish constitution of 1978).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26784", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26784", "title": "Statutory law", "text": ""}
{"id": "26785", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26785", "title": "Sanction", "text": "A sanction may be either a permission or a restriction, depending upon context, as the word is an auto-antonym.\nExamples of sanctions include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26786", "revid": "34996428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26786", "title": "Sarajevo", "text": "Capital and largest city of Bosnia and Herzegovina\nSarajevo ( ) is the capital and largest city of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with a population of 275,524 in its administrative limits. The Sarajevo Canton, containing the city of Sarajevo and nearby municipalities, is home to 413,593 inhabitants. Located within the greater Sarajevo valley of Bosnia, it is surrounded by the Dinaric Alps and situated along the Miljacka River in the heart of the Balkans, a region of Southeastern Europe.\nSarajevo is the political, financial, social, and cultural centre of Bosnia and Herzegovina and a prominent centre of culture in the Balkans. It exerts region-wide influence in entertainment, media, fashion, and the arts. Due to its long history of religious and cultural diversity, Sarajevo is sometimes called the \"Jerusalem of Europe\" or \"Jerusalem of the Balkans\". It is one of a few major European cities to have a mosque, Catholic church, Eastern Orthodox church, and synagogue within the same neighborhood. It is also home to the former Yugoslavia's first institution of tertiary education in the form of an Islamic polytechnic, today part of the University of Sarajevo.\nAlthough there is evidence of human settlement in the area since prehistoric times, the modern city arose in the 15th century as an Ottoman stronghold when the Ottoman empire extended into Europe. Sarajevo has gained international renown several times throughout its history. In 1914, Sarajevo was the site of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand by a local Young Bosnia activist Gavrilo Princip, a murder that sparked World War I. This resulted in the end of Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and the creation of the multicultural Kingdom of Yugoslavia in the Balkan region. Later, after World War II, the area was designated the capital of the communist Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina within the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, leading to rapid expansion of its population and businesses with investment in infrastructure and economic development.\nIn 1984, Sarajevo hosted the 1984 Winter Olympics, which marked a prosperous era for the city. However, after the start of the Yugoslav Wars, the city suffered the longest siege of a capital city in modern history, for a total of 1,425 days, from April 1992 to February 1996, during the Bosnian War. With continued post-war reconstruction in the aftermath, Sarajevo is the fastest growing city in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The travel guide series \"Lonely Planet\" ranked Sarajevo as the 43rd best city in the world. In December 2009, it recommended Sarajevo as one of the top ten cities to visit in 2010.\nIn 2011, Sarajevo was nominated as the 2014 European Capital of Culture. It was also selected with Isto\u010dno Sarajevo to host the 2019 European Youth Olympic Winter Festival. In addition, in October 2019, Sarajevo was designated as a UNESCO Creative City for having placed culture at the center of its development strategies. It is also ranked as one of the world's eighteen Cities of Film. In October 2024, \"National Geographic\" declared Sarajevo as the best world destination for 2025 according to its readers.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Sarajevo\" derives from the Turkish noun , meaning \"palace\" or \"mansion\" (from Persian , \u0633\u0631\u0627\u06cc, of the same meaning). Scholars disagree on the origin of the \"evo\" attached to the end. In Slavic languages, the addition of \"-evo\" may indicate a possessive noun, thereby making the name of Sarajevo 'city of the palace'.\nOne theory is that the name may have been derived from the Ottoman Turkish term , first recorded in 1455, meaning \"the plains around the palace\" or simply \"palace plains\".\nHowever, in his \"Dictionary of Turkish Loanwords\", Abdulah \u0160kalji\u0107 maintains that the \"evo\" ending is more likely to have come from the widespread Slavic suffix used to indicate place names, than from the Turkish ending . The first mention of the name Sarajevo was in a 1507 letter written by Firuz Bey. The official name during the 400 years of Ottoman rule was \"Saraybosna\" (\"Palace of Bosnia\"), which remains the city's name in Modern Turkish.\nSarajevo has had many nicknames. The earliest is , the term Isa-Beg Ishakovi\u0107 used to describe the town he was going to construct\u2014which is Turkish for \"city\" (), in turn coming from the Persian (, meaning \"city\"). As Sarajevo developed, numerous nicknames came from comparisons to other cities in the Islamic world, i.e. \"Damascus of the North\" and \"European Jerusalem\"; the latter being the most popular.\nEnvironment.\nGeography.\nSarajevo is near the geometric center of the triangular-shaped Bosnia and Herzegovina and within the historical region of Bosnia proper. It is situated above sea level and lies in the Sarajevo valley, in the middle of the Dinaric Alps.\nThe valley was once an expansive, fertile, and green space, but considerable urban expansion and development took place following World War II. Forested hills and five major mountains surround the city. The highest of the surrounding peaks is Treskavica at , followed by Bjela\u0161nica mountain at , Jahorina at , Trebevi\u0107 at , and Igman the shortest at . The last four are also known as the Olympic Mountains of Sarajevo.\nWhen the city hosted the 1984 Winter Olympics, venues were constructed at these mountains for many winter sports events. The city is developed within hilly terrain; some steeply inclined streets and residences perch on the hillsides.\nThe Miljacka river is one of the city's chief geographic features. It flows through the city from east through the center of Sarajevo to the west part of the city, where it eventually meets up with the Bosna river. Miljacka River is also known as \"The Sarajevo River\". Its source (\"Vrelo Miljacke\") is south of the town of Pale at the foothills of Mount Jahorina, several kilometers to the east of Sarajevo center. The Bosna's source, Vrelo Bosne near Ilid\u017ea (west Sarajevo), is another notable natural landmark and a popular destination for Sarajevans and other tourists. Several smaller rivers and streams, such as Ko\u0161evski Potok, also run through the city and its vicinity.\nCityscape.\nSarajevo is close to the center of the triangular shape of Bosnia and Herzegovina in southeastern Europe. The Sarajevo city consists of four municipalities: Centar (Center), Novi Grad (New Town), Novo Sarajevo (New Sarajevo), and Stari Grad (Old Town).\nThe Metropolitan area was reduced in the 1990s after the war and the Dayton-imposed administrative division of the country, with several municipalities partitioned along the border of the newly recognized Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and Republika Srpska (RS), creating several new municipalities which together form the city of Isto\u010dno Sarajevo in the Republika Srpska: Isto\u010dna Ilid\u017ea, Isto\u010dno Novo Sarajevo, Isto\u010dni Stari Grad, Lukavica, Pale (RS-section), and Trnovo (RS-section), along with the municipality of Sokolac (which was not traditionally part of the Sarajevo area and was not partitioned).\nThe city has an urban area of . Veliki Park (Great Park) is the largest green area in the center of Sarajevo. It is nestled between Titova, Ko\u0161evo, D\u017eid\u017eikovac, Tina Ujevi\u0107a and Trampina Streets and in the lower part there is a monument dedicated to the Children of Sarajevo.\nClimate.\nSarajevo has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: Cfb) bordering on a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: Dfb). Sarajevo's climate exhibits four seasons and uniformly spread precipitation. The proximity of the Adriatic Sea moderates Sarajevo's climate somewhat, although the mountains to the south of the city greatly reduce this maritime influence. The average yearly temperature is , with January ( on average) being the coldest month of the year and July ( on average) the warmest.\nThe highest recorded temperature was on 19 August 1946 and on 23 August 2008 (41.0), while the lowest recorded temperature was on 25 January 1942. On 13 August 2024, Sarajevo recorded a temperature of , the highest since 1946. On average, Sarajevo has seven days where the temperature exceeds and four days where the temperature drops below per year. The city typically experiences mildly cloudy skies, with an average yearly cloud cover of 45%.\nThe cloudiest month is December (75% average cloud cover), while the clearest is August (37%). Moderate precipitation occurs fairly consistently throughout the year, with an average 75 days of rainfall. Suitable climatic conditions have allowed winter sports to flourish in the region, as exemplified by the 1984 Winter Olympics that were held in Sarajevo. Average winds are and the city has 1,769 hours of sunshine.\nAir quality.\nAir pollution is a major issue in Sarajevo. According to the 2016 World Health Organization's Ambient Air Pollution Database, the annual average PM2.5 concentration in 2010 was estimated to be 30 \u03bcg/m3 based on PM10 measurement, which is 3 times higher than recommended by WHO Air Quality Guidelines for the annual average PM2.5. There are no recent direct long-term PM2.5 measurements available in Sarajevo and only estimates can be made from PM10, which is less health-relevant than PM2.5. Real-time air quality data in the form of PM10, ozone, NO2, CO and SO2 by the http:// .\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n Ottoman Empire 1461\u20131878 \"de facto\", 1908 \"de jure\"\nAncient times.\nOne of the earliest findings of settlement in the Sarajevo area is that of the Neolithic Butmir culture. The discoveries at Butmir were made on the grounds of the modern-day Sarajevo suburb Ilid\u017ea in 1893 by Austro-Hungarian authorities during the construction of an agricultural school. The area's richness in flint was attractive to Neolithic humans, and the settlement flourished. The settlement developed unique ceramics and pottery designs, which characterize the Butmir people as a unique culture, as described at the International Congress of Archaeologists and Anthropologists meeting in Sarajevo in 1894.\nThe next prominent culture in Sarajevo was the Illyrians. The ancient people, who considered most of the Western Balkans as their homeland, had several key settlements in the region, mostly around the river Miljacka and the Sarajevo valley. The Illyrians in the Sarajevo region belonged to the \"Daesitiates\", the last Illyrian people in Bosnia and Herzegovina to resist Roman occupation. Their defeat by the Roman emperor Tiberius in 9 AD marks the start of Roman rule in the region. The Romans never built up the region of modern-day Bosnia, but the Roman colony of Aquae Sulphurae was near the top of present-day Ilid\u017ea, and was the most important settlement of the time. After the Romans, the Goths settled the area, followed by the Slavs in the 7th century.\nMiddle Ages.\nDuring the Middle Ages, Sarajevo was part of the Bosnian province of Vrhbosna near the traditional center of the Kingdom of Bosnia. Though a city named \"Vrhbosna\" existed, the exact settlement in Sarajevo at this time is debated. Various documents note a place called \"Tornik\" in the region, most likely in the area of the Marijin Dvor neighborhood. By all indications, Tornik was a very small marketplace surrounded by a proportionally small village and was not considered very important by Ragusan merchants.\nOther scholars say that \"Vrhbosna\" was a major town in the wider area of modern-day Sarajevo. Papal documents say that in 1238, a cathedral dedicated to Saint Paul was built in the area. Disciples of the notable saints Cyril and Methodius stopped in the region, founding a church near Vrelo Bosne. Whether or not the town was somewhere in the area of modern-day Sarajevo, the documents attest to its and the region's importance. There was also a citadel Hodidjed north-east to the Old City, dating from around 1263 until it was occupied by the Ottoman Empire in 1429.\nOttoman era.\nSarajevo was founded by the Ottoman Empire in the 1450s upon its conquest of the region, with 1461 used as the city's founding date. The first Ottoman governor of Bosnia, Isa-Beg Ishakovi\u0107, transformed the cluster of villages into a city and state capital by building several key structures, including a mosque, a closed marketplace, a hamam, a caravansarai, a bridge, and of course the governor's palace (\"Saray\"), which gave the city its present name in conjunction with \u201cevo\u201d. The mosque was named \"Careva D\u017eamija\" (the Emperor's Mosque) in honor of Sultan Mehmed II. With the improvements, Sarajevo quickly grew into the largest city in the region. By the 15th century the settlement was established as a city, named \"Bosna-Saraj\", around the citadel in 1461.\nFollowing the expulsion of Jews from Spain at the end of the 15th century, and the invitation from the Ottoman Empire to resettle their population, Sephardic Jews arrived in Sarajevo, which over time would become a leading center of Sephardic culture and the Ladino language. Though relatively small in size, a Jewish quarter would develop over several blocks in Ba\u0161\u010dar\u0161ija.\nMany local Christians converted to Islam at this time. To accommodate the new pilgrims on the road to Mecca, in 1541, Gazi Husrev-beg's quartermaster Vekil-Harrach built a pilgrim's mosque which it is still known to this day as the Had\u017eijska Mosque.\nUnder leaders such as the second governor Gazi Husrev-beg, Sarajevo grew at a rapid rate. Husrev-beg greatly shaped the physical city, as most of what is now the Old Town was built during his reign. Sarajevo became known for its large marketplace and numerous mosques, which by the middle of the 16th century numbered more than 100. At the peak of the empire, Sarajevo was the biggest and most important Ottoman city in the Balkans after Istanbul. By 1660, the population of Sarajevo was estimated to be over 80,000. By contrast, Belgrade in 1683 had 100,000, and Zagreb as late as 1851 had 14,000 people. As political conditions changed, Sarajevo became the site of warfare.\nIn 1697, during the Great Turkish War, a raid was led by Prince Eugene of Savoy of the Habsburg monarchy against the Ottoman Empire, which conquered Sarajevo and left it plague-infected and burned to the ground. After his men had looted thoroughly, they set the city on fire and destroyed nearly all of it in one day. Only a handful of neighborhoods, some mosques, and an Orthodox church were left standing. Numerous other fires weakened the city, which was later rebuilt but never fully recovered from the destruction. By 1807, it had only some 60,000 residents.\nIn the 1830s, several battles of the Bosnian uprising had taken place around the city. These had been led by Husein Grada\u0161\u010devi\u0107. Today, a major city street is named \"Zmaj od Bosne\" (Dragon of Bosnia) in his honor. The rebellion failed and for several more decades, the Ottoman state remained in control of Bosnia.\nThe Ottoman Empire made Sarajevo an important administrative center by 1850. Ba\u0161\u010dar\u0161ija became the central commercial district and cultural center of the city in the 15th century when Isa-Beg Ishakovi\u0107 founded the town. The toponym Ba\u0161\u010dar\u0161ija derives from the Turkish language.\nAustria-Hungary.\nAustria-Hungary's occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina came in 1878 as part of the Treaty of Berlin, and complete annexation followed in 1908, angering the Serbs. Sarajevo was industrialized by Austria-Hungary, who used the city as a testing area for new inventions such as tramways, which were established in 1885 before they were later installed in Vienna. Architects and engineers wanting to help rebuild Sarajevo as a modern European capital rushed to the city. A fire that burned down a large part of the central city area (\"\u010dar\u0161ija\") left more room for redevelopment. As a result, the city has a unique blend of the remaining Ottoman city market and contemporary Western architecture. Sarajevo also has some examples of Secession- and Pseudo-Moorish (Moorish Revival) styles that date from this period.\nThe Austro-Hungarian period was one of great development for the city, as the Western power brought its new acquisition up to the standards of the Victorian age. Various factories and other buildings were built at this time, and a large number of institutions were both Westernized and modernized. For the first time in history, Sarajevo's population began writing in Latin script.\nFor the first time in centuries, the city significantly expanded outside its traditional borders. Much of the city's contemporary central municipality (Centar) was constructed during this period.\nArchitecture in Sarajevo quickly developed into a wide range of styles and buildings. The Sacred Heart Cathedral, for example, was constructed using elements of neo-gothic and Romanesque architecture. The National Museum, Sarajevo brewery, and City Hall were also constructed during this period. Additionally, Austrian officials made Sarajevo the first city in this part of Europe to have a tramway.\nAlthough the Bosnia Vilayet \"de jure\" remained part of the Ottoman Empire, it was \"de facto\" governed as an integral part of Austria-Hungary with the Ottomans having no say in its day-to-day governance. This lasted until 1908 when the territory was formally annexed and turned into a condominium, jointly controlled by both Austrian Cisleithania and Hungarian Transleithania.\nThe event that triggered World War I was the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, along with his wife Sophie, Duchess of Hohenberg in Sarajevo on 28 June 1914 by Gavrilo Princip, a Bosnian Serb and self-declared Yugoslav, and member of Young Bosnia. This was followed by the Anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo, which resulted in two deaths and destruction of property.\nIn the ensuing war, however, most of the Balkan offensives occurred near Belgrade, and Sarajevo largely escaped damage and destruction. Following the war, Bosnia was annexed into the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, and Sarajevo became the capital of the Drina Province.\nYugoslavia.\nAfter World War I and pressure from the Royal Serbian Army, alongside rebelling Slavic nations in Austria-Hungary, Sarajevo became part of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Though it held some political significance as the center of first the Bosnian region and then the Drinska Banovina, the city was no longer a national capital and saw a decline in global influence.\nDuring World War II, the Kingdom of Yugoslavia's army was overrun by German and Italian forces. Following a German bombing campaign, Sarajevo was captured on 15 April 1941 by the 16th Motorized Infantry Division. The Axis powers created the Independent State of Croatia and included Sarajevo in its territory.\nImmediately following the occupation, the main Sephardi Jewish synagogue, Il Kal Grande, was looted, burned, and destroyed by the Nazis. Within a matter of months, the centuries-old Sephardi and Ashkenazi Jewish communities of Sarajevo, comprising the vast majority of Bosnian Jewry, would be rounded up in the Old Synagogue (Stari hram) and deported to their deaths in Croatian concentration camps. Roughly 85% of Bosnia's Jewish population would perish at the hands of the Nazis and the Usta\u0161e during the Holocaust in the region. The Sarajevo Haggadah was the most important artifact which survived this period, smuggled out of Sarajevo and saved from the Nazis and Usta\u0161e by the chief librarian of the National Museum, Dervi\u0161 Korkut.\nOn 12 October 1941, a group of 108 notable Bosniak citizens of Sarajevo signed the Resolution of Sarajevo Muslims by which they condemned the Genocide of Serbs organized by the Usta\u0161e, made a distinction between the Bosniaks who participated in such persecutions and the rest of the Bosniak population, presented information about the persecutions of Bosniaks by the Usta\u0161e, and requested security for all citizens of the country, regardless of their identity. During the summer of 1941, Usta\u0161e militia periodically interned and executed groups of Sarajevo Serbs. In August 1941, they arrested about one hundred Serbs suspected of ties to the resistance armies, mostly church officials and members of the intelligentsia, and executed them or deported them to concentration camps. By mid-summer 1942, around 20,000 Serbs found refuge in Sarajevo from Usta\u0161e terror.\nThe city was bombed by the Allies from 1943 to 1944. The Yugoslav Partisan movement was represented in the city. In the period February\u2013May 1945, Maks Luburi\u0107 set up a Usta\u0161e headquarters in a building known as Villa Luburi\u0107 and used it as a torture and execution place whose 323 victims were identified after the war. The resistance was led by Vladimir Peri\u0107 Valter, who died while leading the liberation of the city on 6 April 1945.\nAfter the war, Sarajevo was the capital of the Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina within the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The Republic Government invested heavily in Sarajevo, building many new residential blocks in the municipalities of Novi Grad and Novo Sarajevo, while simultaneously developing the city's industry and transforming Sarajevo into a modern city. Sarajevo grew rapidly as it became an important regional industrial center in Yugoslavia. Between the end of the war and the end of Yugoslavia, the city grew from a population of 115,000 to more than 600,000 people. The Vraca Memorial Park, a monument for victims of World War II, was dedicated on 25 November, the \"Statehood Day of Bosnia and Herzegovina\" when the ZAVNOBIH held their first meeting in 1943.\nA crowning moment of Sarajevo's time in Socialist Yugoslavia was the 1984 Winter Olympics. Sarajevo beat out Sapporo, Japan, and Falun/Gothenburg, Sweden, to host the Olympic Games. The games were followed by a tourism boom, making the 1980s one of the city's most prosperous decades.\nBosnian War.\nThe Bosnian War for independence resulted in large-scale destruction and dramatic population shifts during the Siege of Sarajevo between 1992 and 1996. Thousands of Sarajevans lost their lives under the constant bombardment and sniper shooting at civilians by the Serb forces during the siege, the longest siege of a capital city in the history of modern warfare. Bosnian Serb forces of the Republika Srpska and the Yugoslav People's Army besieged Sarajevo from 5 April 1992 to 29 February 1996.\nWhen Bosnia and Herzegovina declared independence from Yugoslavia and achieved United Nations recognition, Serbian leaders declared a new Serbian national state Republika Srpska (RS) which was carved out from the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Army of Republika Srpska encircled Sarajevo with a siege force of 18,000 stationed in the surrounding hills, from which they assaulted the city with artillery, mortars, tanks, anti-aircraft guns, heavy machine guns, multiple rocket launchers, rocket-launched aircraft bombs, and sniper rifles. From 2 May 1992, the Serbs blockaded the city. The Bosnian government defense forces inside the besieged city were poorly equipped and unable to break the siege.\nDuring the siege, 11,541 people were killed, including over 1,500 children. An additional 56,000 people were wounded, including nearly 15,000 children. The 1991 census indicates that before the siege, the city and its surrounding areas had a population of 525,980.\nWhen the siege ended, the concrete scars caused by mortar shell explosions left marks that were filled with red resin. After the red resin was placed, it left floral patterns, which led to them being dubbed Sarajevo Roses. Division of the territory according to the Dayton Agreement resulted in a mass exodus in early 1996 of some 62,000 Sarajevo Serbs from the city and its suburbs, creating today's more monoethnic post-war city.\nPresent.\nVarious modern buildings now occupy Sarajevo's skyline, most significantly the Bosmal City Center, ARIA Centar, Sarajevo City Center (all three by architect Sead Golo\u0161) and the Avaz Twist Tower, which at the time of its building was the tallest skyscraper in former Yugoslavia.\nIn 2014, the city saw anti-government protests and riots and record rainfall that caused historic flooding. Recent years have seen population growth as well as increases in tourism.\nThe Sarajevo cable car, also known as the Trebevi\u0107 cable car, Sarajevo's key landmark during the 1984 Winter Olympics, was rebuilt in 2017 and reopened on 6 April 2018. The cable car runs from Sarajevo at Bistrik station to the slopes of Trebevi\u0107 at Vidikovac station.\nAdministration.\nLargest city of Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nSarajevo is the capital of the country of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its sub-entity, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as of the Sarajevo Canton. It is also the \"de jure\" capital of another entity, Republika Srpska. Each of these levels of government has its parliament or council, as well as judicial courts, in the city. All national institutions and foreign embassies are in Sarajevo.\nSarajevo is home to the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the operational command of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nBosnia and Herzegovina's Parliament office in Sarajevo was damaged heavily in the Bosnian War. Due to damage, the staff and documents were moved to a nearby ground-level office to resume work. In late 2006, reconstruction work started on Parliament and was finished in 2007. The cost of reconstruction was 80% funded by the Greek Government through the Hellenic Program of Balkans Reconstruction (ESOAV), and 20% by Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nMunicipalities and city government.\nThe City of Sarajevo comprises four municipalities: Centar, Novi Grad, Novo Sarajevo, and Stari Grad. Each operates their own municipal government, while united they form one city government with its constitution. The executive branch () consists of a mayor, with two deputies and a cabinet.\nThe legislative branch consists of the City Council, or \"Gradsko vije\u0107e\". The council has 28 members, including a council speaker, two deputies, and a secretary. Councilors are elected by the municipality in numbers roughly proportional to their population. The City Statute requires the city council to include at least six councilors from each constituent people and at least two from the ranks of Others.\nSarajevo's Municipalities are further split into \"local communities\" (Bosnian, \"Mjesne zajednice\"). Local communities have a small role in city government and are intended as a way for ordinary citizens to get involved in city government. They are based on key neighborhoods in the city.\nEconomy.\nSarajevo's large manufacturing, administrative, and tourism sectors make it the strongest economic region of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Sarajevo Canton generates almost 25% of the country's GDP. After years of war, Sarajevo's economy saw reconstruction and rehabilitation programs. The Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina opened in Sarajevo in 1997 and the Sarajevo Stock Exchange began trading in 2002.\nWhile Sarajevo had a large industrial base during its communist period, only a few pre-existing businesses have successfully adapted to the market economy. Sarajevo industries now include tobacco products, furniture, hosiery, automobiles, and communication equipment. Companies based in Sarajevo include BH Telecom, Bosnalijek, Energopetrol, Sarajevo Tobacco Factory, and Sarajevska pivara (Sarajevo Brewery).\nIn 2019, the total export for the Sarajevo Canton was worth about 1,427,496,000 KM. Most of Sarajevo's exports (20.55%) head to Germany, with Serbia and Croatia following behind at 12% respectively. The largest amount of imported goods comes from Croatia, at 20.95%. With a worth of total import of about 4,872,213,000 KM, the total import is almost 3.4 times the total export.\nIn 1981, Sarajevo's GDP per capita was 133% of the Yugoslav average. Gross pay in Sarajevo in March 2023 was or , while net salary was or , indicating stable growth.\nTourism and recreation.\nSarajevo has a wide tourist industry and a fast-expanding service sector thanks to the strong annual growth in tourist arrivals. Sarajevo also benefits from being both a summer and winter destination with continuity in its tourism throughout the year. The travel guide series, \"Lonely Planet\" named Sarajevo as the 43rd best city in the world, and in December 2009, listed Sarajevo as one of the top ten cities to visit in 2010.\nIn 2019, 733,259 tourists visited Sarajevo, giving 1,667,545 overnight stays, which was 20% more than in 2018. Sports-related tourism uses the legacy facilities of the 1984 Winter Olympics, especially the skiing facilities on the nearby mountains of Bjela\u0161nica, Igman, Jahorina, Trebevi\u0107 and Treskavica.\nSarajevo's 600 years of history, influenced by both Western and Eastern empires, makes it a tourist attraction with splendid variations. The city has hosted travellers for centuries, because it was an important trading centre during the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian empires and because it was a natural stop for many routes between East and West. Examples of popular destinations in Sarajevo include the Vrelo Bosne park, the Sarajevo cathedral, and the Gazi Husrev-beg Mosque. Tourism in Sarajevo is chiefly focused on historical, religious, and cultural sites and winter sports.\nThere are many parks throughout the city and on the outskirts. A popular activity among locals is street chess, usually played at Trg Oslobo\u0111enja - Alija Izetbegovi\u0107. Veliki Park is the largest green area in the centre of Sarajevo. It is nestled between Titova, Ko\u0161evo, D\u017eid\u017eikovac, Tina Ujevi\u0107a and Trampina Streets and in the lower part, there is a monument dedicated to the Children of Sarajevo. Hastahana is a popular place to relax in the Austro-Hungarian neighborhood of Marijin Dvor. Goat's Bridge, locally known as \"Kozija \u0106uprija\", in the Miljacka Canyon is also a popular park destination along the Dariva walkway and river Miljacka. On 24 December 2012, a park hosting two brass sculptures resembling two mourning mothers was dedicated as the Friendship Park, commemorating over 45 years of friendship between Sarajevo and Baku, the capital of Azerbaijan.\nSarajevo is also famous for its city lookouts; including an observation deck on the Avaz Twist Tower, Park Prin\u010deva restaurant, Vidikovac lookout (Mt. Trebevi\u0107), Zmajevac lookout and Yellow/White fortresses lookouts (in Vratnik) as well as numerous other rooftops throughout the city (i.e. Alta Shopping Centre, ARIA Centar, Hotel Hecco Deluxe). A symbol of Sarajevo is the Trebevi\u0107 cable car which was reconstructed in 2018, also it is one of the most popular tourist attractions in the city taking visitors from the city centre to Mount Trebevi\u0107.\nThere is also a UNESCO tentative monument, the Old Jewish Cemetery, an almost 500 years old site that is the second-largest Jewish sepulchral complex in Europe, the one in Prague being the largest. It is also one of the most significant memorial complexes in the world. It represents the eternal proof of the coexistence of two or more different confessions under different administrations and rules, and the proof of mutual respect and tolerance.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThanks to steady but constant and stable growth after the war, today's built-up area includes not only previously mentioned urban municipalities but the urban part of Had\u017ei\u0107i that is uninterruptedly connected to Ilid\u017ea, the westernmost part of the Sarajevo urban settlement, is inhabited by more than 419,000 people. It is noticeable that the fastest-growing municipalities are Novi Grad, one of the main ones and the most inhabited one where the population has increased by almost 4,000 people or 2.95% since the 2013 census, and Ilid\u017ea that has recorded an increase of almost 7% since 2013.\nIn June 2016, the final results of the 2013 census were published. According to the census, the population of the Sarajevo Canton was 413,593, with 55,181 residents in Centar, 118,553 in Novi Grad, 64,814 in Novo Sarajevo and 36,976 in Stari Grad.\nThe last official Yugoslav census took place in 1991 and recorded 527,049 people living in the city of Sarajevo (ten municipalities). In the settlement of Sarajevo proper, there were 454,319 inhabitants. The war displaced hundreds of thousands of people, a large majority of whom have not returned.\nThe war changed the ethnic and religious profile of the city. It had long been a multicultural city, and often went by the nickname of \"Europe's Jerusalem\". At the time of the 1991 census, 49.2 percent of the city's population of 527,049 were Bosniaks, 29.8 percent Serbs, 10.7 percent Yugoslavs, 6.6 percent Croats and 3.6 percent other ethnicities (Jews, Romas, etc.).\nAccording to academic Fran Markowitz, there are several \"administrative apparatuses and public pressures that push people who might prefer to identify as flexible, multiply constituted hybrids or with one of the now unnamed minority groups into one of the three Bosniac-Croat-Serb constituent nations\". These include respondents being encouraged by census interviewers to identify as belonging to one of the three constituent peoples. Her analysis of marriage registration data shows, for instance, that 67 percent of people marrying in 2003 identified as Bosniak or Muslim, which is significantly lower than the 79.6 percent census figure from 2002 (unlike the census, where people respond to an interviewer, applicants to the marriage registry fill in the form themselves).\nTransportation.\nRoads and highways.\nSarajevo's location in a valley between mountains makes it a compact city. Narrow city streets and a lack of parking areas restrict automobile traffic but allow better pedestrian and cyclist mobility. The two main roads are Titova Ulica (Street of Marshal Tito) and the east\u2013west Zmaj od Bosne (Dragon of Bosnia) highway (E761). Located roughly at the center of the country, Sarajevo is Bosnia's main intersection. The city is connected to all the other major cities by highway or national road like Zenica, Banja Luka, Tuzla, Mostar, Gora\u017ede and Fo\u010da.\nTourists from Central Europe and elsewhere visiting Dalmatia driving via Budapest through Sarajevo also contribute to the traffic congestion in and around Sarajevo. The trans-European highway, Corridor Vc, runs through Sarajevo connecting it to Budapest in the north, and Plo\u010de at the Adriatic Sea in the south. The highway is being built by the government and should cost 3.5 billion Euro. Up until March 2012, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina invested around 600 million euros in the A1. In 2014, the sections Sarajevo-Zenica and Sarajevo-Tar\u010din were completed including the Sarajevo Beltway ring road.\nTram, bus and trolleybus.\nSarajevo's electric tramways, in operation since 1884 and electrified since 1895, are the oldest form of public transportation in the city. Sarajevo had the first full-time (dawn to dusk) tram line in Europe, and the second in the world. Opened on New Year's Day in 1885, it was the testing line for the tram in Vienna and the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and operated by horses. Originally built to , the present system in 1960 was upgraded to . The trams played a pivotal role in the growth of the city in the 20th century.\nThere are seven tramway lines supplemented by five trolleybus lines and numerous bus routes. The main railway station in Sarajevo is in the north-central area of the city. From there, the tracks head west before branching off in different directions, including to industrial zones in the city. Sarajevo is undergoing a major infrastructure renewal; many highways and streets are being repaved, the tram system is undergoing modernization, and new bridges and roads are under construction. In January 2021, the city bought 25 new BKM 433 trolleybuses. Tram track renovation lasted from August 2021 to September 2023. The city also bought 15 new Stadler Tango trams in September 2021. The first tram arrived in December 2023, while the rest are expected to arrive by the summer of 2024. An additional 10 new trams were bought, as well as 30 new buses.\nRailway.\nThe Sarajevo main railway station was built in 1882 for the narrow-gauge railway. After World War II, it was decided to replace the old station by a new functionalist building. The ceremonial completion of the station building took place in 1949. The station was electrified in 1967, as part of the early electrification program introduced in Bosnia up to 1969.\nThe Sarajevo\u2013Plo\u010de railway provides a connection to the Adriatic coast. It holds the distinction of being the first 25 kV AC-electrified country in the former Yugoslavia, followed by Croatia and Serbia. Once, the East Bosnian railway connected Sarajevo to Belgrade.\nMetro plans.\nTo solve traffic congestion in the city, Sarajevo-based architect Muzafer Osmanagi\u0107 proposed a study called \"Eco Energy 2010\u20132015\", proposing a subway system underneath the bed of the river Miljacka. The first line of Metro Sarajevo would connect Ba\u0161\u010dar\u0161ija with Otoka. This line would cost some 150 million KM and be financed by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.\nAirport.\nSarajevo International Airport () is just a few kilometers southwest of the city and was voted Best European Airport With Under 1,000,000 Passengers at the 15th Annual ACI-Europe in Munich in 2005.\nThe first regular flights to Sarajevo using an airfield in the suburb of Butmir began in 1930 when the domestic airliner Aeroput opened a regular route linking Belgrade to Podgorica through Sarajevo. Later, Aeroput opened a route that linked Sarajevo with Split, Rijeka, and Dubrovnik, and in 1938, the first international flights were introduced when Aeroput extended the route Dubrovnik \u2013 Sarajevo \u2013 Zagreb to Vienna, Brno and Prague. The airfield in Butmir remained in use until 1969.\nThe need for a new airport in Sarajevo, with an asphalt-concrete runway, was acknowledged in the mid-1960s when JAT, the Yugoslav national carrier at that time, began acquiring jet planes. The construction of the airport began in 1966 at its present location, not far from the old one.\nSarajevo Airport opened on 2 June 1969 for domestic traffic. In 1970, Frankfurt became the first international destination served. Most of the time the airport was a 'feeder' airport where passengers embarked for flights to Zagreb and Belgrade on their way to international destinations. Over time, the traffic volume steadily grew from 70,000 to 600,000 passengers a year. Later, during the Bosnian War, the airport was used for UN flights and humanitarian relief. Since the Dayton Agreement in 1995, the airport retook its role as the main air portal to Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nIn 2017, 957,971 passengers travelled through the airport, which was 61,4% of the total airport traffic in Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nPlans for the extension of the passenger terminal, together with upgrading and expanding the taxiway and apron, started in the fall of 2012. The existing terminal was expanded by approximately . The upgraded airport was directly linked to the commercial retail center Sarajevo Airport Center, making it easier for tourists and travelers to spend their time before flight boarding shopping and enjoying the many amenities that are offered. Between 2015 and 2018, the airport was upgraded for more than 25 million euros.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nSarajevo is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendship.\nSarajevo is befriended with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunications and media.\nAs the largest city of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sarajevo is the main center of the country's media. Most of the communications and media infrastructure was destroyed during the war but reconstruction monitored by the Office of the High Representative has helped to modernize the industry as a whole. For example, the Internet was first made available to the city in 1995.\n\"Oslobo\u0111enje\" (Liberation), founded in 1943, is Sarajevo's longest-running continuously circulating newspaper and the only one to survive the war. However, this long-running and trusted newspaper has fallen behind \"Dnevni avaz\" (Daily Voice), founded in 1995, and \"Jutarnje Novine\" (Morning News) in circulation in Sarajevo. Other local periodicals include the Croatian newspaper \"Hrvatska rije\u010d\" and the Bosnian magazine \"Start\", as well as weekly newspapers \"Slobodna Bosna\" (\"Free Bosnia\") and \"BH Dani\" (\"BH Days\"). \"Novi Plamen\", a monthly magazine, is the most left-wing publication.\nThe Radio and Television of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BHRT) is Sarajevo's public television station and was created in 1945 under the umbrella of the Yugoslav Radio Television (JRT). It had its first television program aired in 1961, while continuous programming started in 1969. It is one of three main TV stations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Other stations based in the city include Hayat TV, O Kanal, OBN, TV Kantona Sarajevo and TV Alfa.\nThe headquarters of Al Jazeera Balkans is also in Sarajevo, with a broadcasting studio at the top of the ARIA Centar. The news channel covers Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Croatia and Montenegro and the surrounding Balkan states.\nMany small independent radio stations exist, including established stations such as Radio M, RSG Radio (Radio Old Town), Studentski eFM Radio, Radio 202 and Radio BIR. Radio Free Europe, as well as several American and Western European stations are available.\nEducation.\nHigher education.\nHigher education has a long and rich tradition in Sarajevo. The first institution that can be classified as a tertiary educational institution was a school of Sufi philosophy established by Gazi Husrev-beg in 1537; numerous other religious schools have been established over time. In 1887, under the Austro-Hungarian Empire, a Sharia Law School began a five-year program. In the 1940s, the University of Sarajevo became the city's first secular higher education institute, effectively building upon the foundations established by the Saraybosna Han\u0131ka in 1537. In the 1950s, post-bachelor graduate degrees became available. Severely damaged during the war, it was recently rebuilt in partnership with more than 40 other universities.\nThere are also several universities in Sarajevo, including:\nPrimary and secondary education.\nAs of 2005[ [update]], there are 46 elementary schools (Grades 1\u20139) and 33 high schools (Grades 10\u201313) in Sarajevo, including three schools for children with special needs.\nThere are also several international schools in Sarajevo, catering to the expatriate community; some of which are Sarajevo International School and the French International School of Sarajevo, established in 1998.\nCulture.\nSarajevo has been home to many different religions for centuries, giving the city a range of diverse cultures. In the time of Ottoman occupation of Bosnia, Muslims, Orthodox Christians, Roman Catholics, and Sephardi Jews all shared the city while maintaining distinctive identities. They were joined during the brief occupation by Austria-Hungary by a smaller number of Germans, Hungarians, Slovaks, Czechs and Ashkenazi Jews. By 1909, about 50% of the city's inhabitants were Muslim, 25% were Catholic, 15% were Orthodox, and 10% were Jewish.\nHistorically, Sarajevo has been home to several prominent Bosnian poets, scholars, philosophers, and writers. To list only a very few; Nobel Prize-winner Vladimir Prelog is from the city, as are the writer Zlatko Top\u010di\u0107 and the poet Abdulah Sidran. Nobel Prize-winner Ivo Andri\u0107 attended high school in Sarajevo for two years. Academy Award-winning director Danis Tanovi\u0107 lives in the city.\nThe Sarajevo National Theatre is the oldest professional theater in Bosnia and Herzegovina, having been established in 1921.\nMuseums.\nSarajevo is rich in museums, including the Museum of Sarajevo, the Ars Aevi Museum of Contemporary Art, Historical Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina, The Museum of Literature and Theatre Arts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the National Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina (established in 1888) home to the Sarajevo Haggadah, an illuminated manuscript and the oldest Sephardic Jewish document in the world issued in Barcelona around 1350, containing the traditional Jewish Haggadah, is on permanent display at the museum. It is the only remaining illustrated Sephardic Haggadah in the world. The National Museum also hosts year-round exhibitions about local, regional and international culture and history, and exhibits over 5,000 artifacts from Bosnia's history.\nThe Alija Izetbegovi\u0107 Museum was opened on 19 October 2007 and is in the old town fort, more specifically in the Vratnik Kapija towers Plo\u010da and \u0160irokac. The museum is a commemoration of the influence and body of work of Alija Izetbegovi\u0107, the first president of the Presidency of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Sarajevo is also home to the War Childhood Museum, an independent not-for-profit museum containing personal belongings from the war and showing stories behind them. In addition, in 2018, the museum won the Council of Europe Museum Prize award for best museum.\nThe city also hosts the Sarajevo National Theatre, established in 1921, and the Sarajevo Youth Theatre. Some other cultural institutions include the Center for Sarajevo Culture, Sarajevo City Library, National Gallery of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the Bosniak Institute, a privately owned library and art collection focusing on Bosniak history.\nDemolitions associated with the war, as well as reconstruction, destroyed several institutions and cultural or religious symbols including the Gazi Husrev-beg Library, the national library, the Sarajevo Oriental Institute, and a museum dedicated to the 1984 Winter Olympics. Consequently, the different levels of government established strong cultural protection laws and institutions. Bodies charged with cultural preservation in Sarajevo include the Institute for the Protection of the Cultural, Historical and Natural Heritage of Bosnia and Herzegovina (and their Sarajevo Canton counterpart), and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Commission to Preserve National Monuments.\nMusic.\nSarajevo is and has historically been one of the most important musical enclaves in the region. The Sarajevo school of pop rock developed in the city between 1961 and 1991. This type of music began with bands like Indexi, Kodeksi, and singer-songwriter Kemal Monteno. It continued into the 1980s, with bands such as Plavi orkestar, Crvena jabuka, and Divlje jagode, by most accounts, pioneering the regional rock and roll movement. Sarajevo was also the home and birthplace of arguably the most popular and influential Yugoslav rock band of all time, Bijelo Dugme, somewhat of a Bosnian parallel to the Rolling Stones, in both popularity and influence.\nSarajevo was also the home of a very notable post-punk urban subculture known as the New Primitives, which began during the early 1980s with the Baglama Band which was banned shortly after its first LP and was brought into the mainstream through bands such as Zabranjeno Pu\u0161enje and Elvis J. Kurtovi\u0107 &amp; His Meteors, as well as the \"Top lista nadrealista\" radio, and later television show. Other notable bands considered to be part of this subculture are Bombaj \u0160tampa. Besides and separately from the New Primitives, Sarajevo is the hometown to one of the most significant ex-Yugoslavian alternative industrial-noise bands, SCH.\nPerhaps more importantly, Sarajevo in the late 19th and throughout the 20th century was home to a burgeoning and large center of Sevdalinka record-making and contributed greatly to bringing this historical genre of music to the mainstream, which had for many centuries been a staple of Bosnian culture. Songwriters and musicians such as Himzo Polovina, Safet Isovi\u0107, Zaim Imamovi\u0107, Zehra Deovi\u0107, Halid Be\u0161li\u0107, Hanka Paldum, Nada Mamula, Meho Puzi\u0107 and many more composed and wrote some of their most important pieces in the city.\nSarajevo also greatly influenced the pop scene of Yugoslavia with musicians like Zdravko \u010coli\u0107, Kemal Monteno, Dino Merlin, Seid Memi\u0107 Vajta, Hari Mata Hari, Mladen Voji\u010di\u0107 Tifa, \u017deljko Bebek and many more.\nMany newer Sarajevo-based bands have also found a name and established themselves in Sarajevo, such as Regina who also had two albums out in Yugoslavia, and Letu \u0160tuke, who actually formed their band in Yugoslavia with the famous Bosnian-American writer Aleksandar Hemon and got their real breakthrough later in the 2000s. Sarajevo is now home to an important and eclectic mix of new bands and independent musicians, which continue to thrive with the ever-increasing number of festivals, creative showcases, and concerts around the country. The city is also home to the region's largest jazz festival, the Jazz Fest Sarajevo.\nAmerican heavy metal band Savatage, released a song entitled \"Christmas Eve (Sarajevo 12/24)\" on their 1995 album \"Dead Winter Dead\", which was about a cello player playing a forgotten Christmas carol in war-torn Sarajevo. The song was later re-released by the same band under the name Trans-Siberian Orchestra on their 1996 debut album \"Christmas Eve and Other Stories\", which the song gave them instant success.\nFestivals.\nSarajevo is internationally renowned for its eclectic and diverse selection of over 50 annual festivals. The Sarajevo Film Festival was established in 1995 during the Bosnian War and has become the premier and largest film festival in Southeast Europe. It has been hosted at the National Theater, with screenings at the Open-air theater Metalac and the Bosnian Cultural Center, all in downtown Sarajevo. The MESS International Festival is an experimental theatre festival and the oldest living theatre festival in the Balkans. The annual Sarajevo Youth Film Festival showcases feature, animated and short films from around the world and is the premier student film festival in the Balkans. The Sarajevo Winter Festival, Jazz Fest Sarajevo and Sarajevo International Music Festival are well-known, as is the Ba\u0161\u010dar\u0161ija Nights festival, a month-long showcase of local culture, music, and dance.\nThe first incarnation of the Sarajevo Film Festival was hosted in still-warring Sarajevo in 1995, and has now progressed into being the biggest and most significant festival in Southeast Europe. A talent campus is also held during the duration of the festival, with lecturers speaking on behalf of world cinematography and holding workshops for film students from across Southeast Europe.\nThe Jazz Fest Sarajevo is the region's largest and most diverse of its kind. The festival takes place at the Bosnian Cultural Center (aka \"Main Stage\"), just down the street from the SFF, at the Sarajevo Youth Stage Theater (aka \"Strange Fruits Stage\"), at the Dom Vojske Federacije (aka \"Solo Stage\"), and at the CDA (aka \"Groove Stage\").\nSports.\nSarajevo hosted the 1984 Winter Olympics. Yugoslavia won one medal, a silver in men's giant slalom awarded to Jure Franko. Many of the Olympic facilities survived the war or were reconstructed, including the Zetra Olympic Hall and Asim Ferhatovi\u0107 Stadium. In an attempt to bring back some of Sarajevo's Olympic glory, the original Olympic luge and bobsled tracks are being repaired, due to the efforts of both the Olympic Committee of Bosnia and Herzegovina and local sports enthusiasts.\nAfter co-hosting the Southeast Europe Friendship games, Sarajevo was awarded the 2009 Special Olympic winter games, but canceled these plans. The ice arena for the 1984 Olympics, Zetra Stadium, was used during the war as a temporary hospital and, later, for housing NATO troops of the IFOR.\nIn 2011, Sarajevo was the host city of the 51st World Military Skiing Championship with over 350 participants from 23 different nations. This was the first international event of such standing since the 1984 Olympics.\nFootball is popular in Sarajevo; the city hosts FK Sarajevo and FK \u017deljezni\u010dar, which both compete in European and international cups and tournaments and have a very large trophy cabinet in the former Yugoslavia as well as independent Bosnia and Herzegovina. Other notable football clubs include Olimpik, SA\u0160K and Slavija. One of only three stadiums in Bosnia and Herzegovina that has the UEFA category 3 is the Grbavica Stadium, the home stadium of \u017deljezni\u010dar.\nAnother popular sport is basketball; the basketball club KK Bosna won the European Championship in 1979 as well as many Yugoslav and Bosnian national championships, making it one of the greatest basketball clubs in the former Yugoslavia. The chess club, Bosna Sarajevo, has been a championship team since the 1980s and is the third-ranked chess club in Europe, having won four consecutive European championships in the nineties. Handball club RK Bosna also competes in the European Champions League and is considered one of the most well-organized handball clubs in Southeast Europe with a very large fan base and excellent national, as well as international results.\nSarajevo often holds international events and competitions in sports such as tennis and kickboxing.\nThe popularity of tennis has been picking up in recent years. Since 2003, BH Telecom Indoors has been an annual tennis tournament in Sarajevo.\nSince 2007, the Sarajevo Half Marathon has been organized every year in late September. \"Giro di Sarajevo\" is also a run in the city with over 2,200 cyclists taking part in 2015.\nIn mountaineering, the local chapter of the HPS is \"HPD \"Bjela\u0161nica\"\", which had 216 members in 1936 under the Josip Fleger presidency. At the time, it had a ski section. Membership rose to 234 in 1937, and Ante Martinovi\u0107 was elected its president. Membership fell to 230 in 1938, with Josip Fleger again president.\nIn February 2019, Sarajevo and East Sarajevo hosted the European Youth Olympic Winter Festival (EYOWF).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26787", "revid": "301854", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26787", "title": "Science fiction", "text": "Literary genre\nScience fiction (often shortened to sci-fi or abbreviated SF) is the genre of speculative fiction that imagines advanced and futuristic scientific or technological progress. The elements of science fiction have evolved over time: from space exploration, extraterrestrial life, time travel, and robotics; to parallel universes, dystopian societies, and biological manipulations; and, most lately, to information technology, transhumanism (and posthumanism), and environmental challenges. Science fiction often specifically explores human responses to the consequences of these types of projected or imagined scientific advances. \nThe precise definition of science fiction has long been disputed among authors, critics, scholars, and readers. It contains many subgenres, including \"hard\" science fiction, which emphasizes scientific accuracy, and \"soft\" science fiction, which focuses on social sciences. Other notable subgenres are cyberpunk, which explores the interface between technology and society; climate fiction, which addresses environmental issues; and space opera, which emphasizes pure adventure in a universe in which space travel is common. \nPrecedents for science fiction are claimed to exist as far back as antiquity. Some books written in the Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment Age were considered early science-fantasy stories. The modern genre arose primarily in the 19th and early 20th centuries, when popular writers began looking to technological progress for inspiration and speculation. Mary Shelley's \"Frankenstein\", written in 1818, is often credited as the first true science fiction novel. Jules Verne and H. G. Wells are pivotal figures in the genre's development. In the 20th century, the genre grew during the Golden Age of Science Fiction; it expanded with the introduction of space operas, dystopian literature, and pulp magazines.\nScience fiction has come to influence not only literature, but also film, television, and culture at large. Science fiction can criticize present-day society and explore alternatives, as well as provide entertainment and inspire a \"sense of wonder\".\nDefinitions.\n\"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\", edited by John Clute and Peter Nicholls in 1993, contains an extensive discussion of the problem of defining the genre.\nAmerican writer and professor of biochemistry Isaac Asimov wrote, \"Science fiction can be defined as that branch of literature which deals with the reaction of human beings to changes in science and technology.\" \nScience fiction writer Robert A. Heinlein wrote, \"A handy short definition of almost all science fiction might read: realistic speculation about possible future events, based solidly on adequate knowledge of the real world, past and present, and on a thorough understanding of the nature and significance of the scientific method.\"\nAmerican science fiction author and editor Lester del Rey wrote, \"Even the devoted aficionado or fan\u2014has a hard time trying to explain what science fiction is,\" and no \"full satisfactory definition\" exists because \"there are no easily delineated limits to science fiction.\"\nAnother definition is provided in \"The Literature Book\" by the publisher DK: \"scenarios that are at the time of writing technologically impossible, extrapolating from present-day science...[,]...or that deal with some form of speculative science-based conceit, such as a society (on Earth or another planet) that has developed in wholly different ways from our own.\"\nThere is a tendency among science fiction enthusiasts to be their own arbiters in deciding what constitutes science fiction. David Seed says that it may be more useful to talk about science fiction as the intersection of other more concrete subgenres. American science fiction author, editor, and critic Damon Knight summed up the difficulty, saying \"Science fiction is what we point to when we say it.\"\nAlternative terms.\nAmerican magazine editor, science fiction writer, and literary agent Forrest J Ackerman has been credited with first using the term \"sci-fi\" (reminiscent of the then-trendy term \"hi-fi\") in about 1954. The first known use in print was a description of \"Donovan's Brain\" by movie critic Jesse Zunser in January 1954. As science fiction entered popular culture, writers and fans in the field came to associate the term with low-quality \"pulp\" science fiction and with low-budget, low-tech \"B m\"ovies. By the 1970s, critics in the field, such as Damon Knight and Terry Carr, were using \"sci fi\" to distinguish hack-work from serious science fiction. \nAustralian literary scholar and critic Peter Nicholls writes that \"SF\" (or \"sf\") is \"the preferred abbreviation within the community of sf writers and readers.\" \nRobert Heinlein found the term \"science fiction\" insufficient to describe certain types of works in this genre, and he suggested that the term \"speculative fiction\" be used instead for works that are more \"serious\" or \"thoughtful\".\nLiterature.\n18th century and earlier.\nSome scholars assert that science fiction had its beginnings in ancient times, when the distinction between myth and fact was blurred. Written in the 2nd century\u00a0CE by the satirist Lucian, the novel \"A True Story\" contains many themes and tropes that are characteristic of modern science fiction, including travel to other worlds, extraterrestrial lifeforms, interplanetary warfare, and artificial life. Some consider it to be the first science fiction novel. Some stories from the folktale collection \"The Arabian Nights\", along with the 10th-century fiction \"The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter\" and Ibn al-Nafis's 13th-century novel \"Theologus Autodidactus\", are also argued to contain elements of science fiction.\nSeveral books written during the Scientific Revolution and later the Age of Enlightenment are considered true works of science-fantasy. Francis Bacon's \"New Atlantis\" (1627), Johannes Kepler's \"Somnium\" (1634), Athanasius Kircher's \"Itinerarium extaticum\" (1656), Cyrano de Bergerac's \"Comical History of the States and Empires of the Moon\" (1657) and \"The States and Empires of the Sun\" (1662), Margaret Cavendish's \"The Blazing World\" (1666), Jonathan Swift's \"Gulliver's Travels\" (1726), Ludvig Holberg's \"Nicolai Klimii Iter Subterraneum\" (1741) and Voltaire's \"Microm\u00e9gas\" (1752). \nIsaac Asimov and Carl Sagan considered Johannes Kepler's 1634 novel \"Somnium\" to be the first science fiction story; it depicts a journey to the Moon and how the Earth's motion is seen from there. Kepler has been called the \"father of science fiction\".\n19th century.\nFollowing the 17th-century development of the novel as a literary form, Mary Shelley's \"Frankenstein\" (1818) and \"The Last Man\" (1826) helped to define the form of the science fiction novel. Brian Aldiss has argued that \"Frankenstein\" was the first work of science fiction. Edgar Allan Poe wrote several stories considered to be science fiction, including \"The Unparalleled Adventure of One Hans Pfaall\" (1835) about a trip to the Moon. \nJules Verne was noted for his attention to detail and scientific accuracy, especially in the novel \"Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas\" (1870). In 1887, the novel \"El anacron\u00f3pete\" by Spanish author Enrique Gaspar y Rimbau introduced the first time machine. An early French/Belgian science fiction writer was J.-H. Rosny a\u00een\u00e9 (1856\u20131940). Rosny's masterpiece is \"Les Navigateurs de l'Infini\" (\"The Navigators of Infinity\") (1925) in which the word \"astronaut (astronautique\" in French) was used for the first time.\nMany critics consider H. G. Wells to be one of science fiction's most important authors, or even \"the Shakespeare of science fiction\". His novels include \"The Time Machine\" (1895), \"The Island of Doctor Moreau\" (1896), \"The Invisible Man\" (1897), and \"The War of the Worlds\" (1898). His science fiction imagined alien invasion, biological engineering, invisibility, and time travel. In his non-fiction futurologist works, he predicted the advent of airplanes, military tanks, nuclear weapons, satellite television, space travel, and something like the World Wide Web.\n20th century.\nEdgar Rice Burroughs's novel \"A Princess of Mars\", published in 1912, was the first of his thirty-year planetary romance series about the fictional Barsoom; the novels were set on Mars and featured John Carter as the hero.\nOne of the first dystopian novels, \"We\", was written by the Russian author Yevgeny Zamyatin and published in 1924. It describes a world of harmony and conformity within a united totalitarian state.\nIn 1926, Hugo Gernsback published the first American science fiction magazine, \"Amazing Stories\". In its first issue, he provided the definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By 'scientifiction' I mean the Jules Verne, H. G. Wells and Edgar Allan Poe type of story\u2014a charming romance intermingled with scientific fact and prophetic vision... Not only do these amazing tales make tremendously interesting reading\u2014they are always instructive. They supply knowledge... in a very palatable form... New adventures pictured for us in the scientifiction of today are not at all impossible of realization tomorrow... Many great science stories destined to be of historical interest are still to be written... Posterity will point to them as having blazed a new trail, not only in literature and fiction, but progress as well.\nIn 1928, E. E. \"Doc\" Smith's first published novel, \"The Skylark of Space\" (co-authored with Lee Hawkins Garby), appeared in \"Amazing Stories\". It is often described as the first great space opera. That same year, Philip Francis Nowlan's original story about Buck Rogers, \"Armageddon 2419\", also appeared in \"Amazing Stories\". This story was followed by a Buck Rogers comic strip, the first serious science fiction comic.\n\"\" is a \"future hist\"ory novel written in 1930 by the British author Olaf Stapledon. A work of innovative scale in the science fiction genre, it describes the fictional history of humanity from the present forward across two billion years.\nIn 1937, John W. Campbell became the editor of \"Astounding Science Fiction\" magazine; this event is sometimes considered the beginning of the Golden Age of Science Fiction, which was characterized by stories celebrating scientific achievement and progress. The \"Golden Age\" is often said to have ended in 1946, but sometimes the late 1940s and the 1950s are included in this period.\nIn 1942, Isaac Asimov began the Foundation series of novels, which chronicles the rise and fall of galactic empires, and also introduces the concept of \"psychohistory\". The series was later awarded a one-time Hugo Award for \"Best All-Time Series\". Theodore Sturgeon's novel \"More Than Human\" (1953) explored possible future human evolution. In 1957, the novel \"\" by the Russian writer and paleontologist Ivan Yefremov presented a view of a future interstellar communist civilization; it is considered one of the most important Soviet science fiction novels.\nIn 1959, Robert A. Heinlein's novel \"Starship Troopers\" marked a departure from his earlier juvenile stories and novels. It is one of the first and most influential examples of military science fiction, and it introduced the concept of powered armor exoskeletons. The German space opera series \"Perry Rhodan\", written by various authors, started in 1961 with an account of the first Moon landing; the series has since expanded in space to multiple universes and in time by billions of years. It has become the most popular book series in science fiction to date.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, New Wave science fiction was known for embracing a high degree of experimentation (in both form and content), as well as a highbrow and self-consciously \"literary\" or \"artistic\" sensibility. \nIn 1961, Stanis\u0142aw Lem's novel \"Solaris\" was published in Poland. The novel dealt with the theme of human limitations, as its characters attempted to study a seemingly intelligent ocean on a newly discovered planet. Lem's work anticipated the creation of microrobots and micromachinery, nanotechnology, smartdust, virtual reality, and artificial intelligence (including swarm intelligence); his work also developed the ideas of \"necroevolution\" and artificial worlds. \nIn 1965, the novel \"Dune\" by Frank Herbert imagined a more complex and detailed future society than had most previous science fiction.\nIn 1967 Anne McCaffrey, began a science fantasy series called \"Dragonriders of Pern\" . Two novellas included in the series' first novel, \"Dragonflight\", led McCaffrey to win the first Hugo or Nebula award given to a female author.\nIn 1968, Philip K. Dick's novel \"Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?\" was published. It is the literary source of the \"Blade Runner\" movie franchise. Published in 1969, the novel \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" by Ursula K. Le Guin is set on a planet where the inhabitants have no fixed gender. The novel is one of the most influential examples of social, feminist, or anthropological science fiction.\nIn 1979, \"Science Fiction World\" magazine began publication in the People's Republic of China. It dominates the Chinese science fiction magazine market, at one time claiming a circulation of 300,000 copies per issue and an estimated 3\u20135 readers per copy, giving it a total readership of at least 1\u00a0million people\u2014making it the world's most popular science fiction periodical.\nIn 1984, William Gibson's first novel, \"Neuromancer\", helped to popularize cyberpunk and the word \"cyberspace\", a term he originally coined in the 1982 short story \"Burning Chrome\". In the same year, Octavia Butler's short story \"Speech Sounds\" won the Hugo Award for Best Short Story. She went on to explore themes of racial injustice, global warming, women's rights, and political conflict. In 1995, she became the first science fiction author to receive a MacArthur Fellowship. \nIn 1986, the novel \"Shards of Honor\" by Lois McMaster Bujold began her Vorkosigan Saga science opera. 1992's novel \"Snow Crash\" by Neal Stephenson predicted immense social upheaval due to the information revolution.\n21st century.\nIn 2007, Liu Cixin's novel \"The Three-Body Problem\" was published in China. It was translated into English by Ken Liu and published by Tor Books in 2014; it won the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 2015, making Liu the first Asian writer to win the award.\nEmerging themes in late 20th- and early 21st-century science fiction include environmental issues, the implications of the Internet and the expanding information universe, questions about biotechnology, nanotechnology, and post-scarcity societies. Recent trends and subgenres include steampunk, biopunk, and mundane science fiction.\nFilm.\nOne of the first recorded science fiction films is \"A Trip to the Moon\" from 1902, directed by French filmmaker Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s. It influenced later filmmakers, offering a different kind of creativity and fantasy. M\u00e9li\u00e8s's innovative editing and special effects techniques were widely imitated, and they became important elements of the cinematic medium.\nThe 1927 film \"Metropolis\", directed by Fritz Lang, is the first feature-length science fiction film. Though not well received in its time, it is now ranked as one of the best films ever made. \nIn 1954, \"Godzilla\", directed by Ishir\u014d Honda, started the kaiju subgenre of science fiction film; this subgenre features large creatures in any form, usually attacking a major city or engaging other monsters in battle.\nThe 1968 film \"\", was directed by Stanley Kubrick and based on a novel by Arthur C. Clarke. The film improved on the largely B-movie offerings to date in both scope and quality, and it influenced later science fiction films. \nThe original \"Planet of the Apes\" movie, directed by Franklin J. Schaffner and based on the 1963 French novel \"La Plan\u00e8te des Singes\" by Pierre Boulle, was also released in 1968. The film vividly depicts a post-apocalyptic world in which intelligent apes dominate humans. The film received both popular and critical acclaim.\nIn 1977, George Lucas began the \"Star Wars\" series with the film later called \"Star Wars: Episode IV \u2013 A New Hope.\" The series, often called a space opera, became a worldwide popular culture phenomenon and the third-highest-grossing film series of all time.\nSince the 1980s, science fiction films, along with fantasy, horror, and superhero films, have dominated Hollywood's big-budget productions. Science fiction films often \"cross ove\"r with other genres. Some examples include film noir (\"Blade Runner\", 1982), family (\"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\", 1982), war (\"Enemy Mine\", 1985), comedy (\"Spaceballs , 1987; \"Galaxy Quest, 1999), animation \"(WALL-E\", 2008; \"Big Hero 6\", 2014), Western (\"Serenity\", 2005), action (\"Edge of Tomorrow\", 2014; \"The Matrix\", 1999), adventure (\"Jupiter Ascending\", 2015; \"Interstellar\", 2014), mystery (\"Minority Report\", 2002), thriller (\"Ex Machina\", 2014), drama (\"Melancholia\", 2011; \"Predestination\", 2014), and romance (\"Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind\", 2004; \"Her\", 2013).\nTelevision.\nScience fiction and television have consistently had a close relationship. Television or similar technology often appeared in science fiction long before television itself became widely available in the late 1940s and early 1950s.\nThe first known science fiction television program was a 35-minute adapted excerpt of the play \"RUR\", written by the Czech playwright Karel \u010capek, broadcast live from the BBC's Alexandra Palace studios on 11 February 1938. The first popular science fiction program on American television was the children's adventure serial \"Captain Video and His Video Rangers\", which ran from June 1949 to April 1955.\nThe original \"The Twilight Zone\" series, produced and narrated by Rod Serling, ran from 1959 to 1964. (Serling also wrote or co-wrote most of the episodes.) The series featured fantasy, suspense, and horror as well as science fiction, with each episode being a complete story. Critics have ranked it as one of the best TV programs of any genre.\nThe animated series \"The Jetsons\", while intended as comedy and only running for one season (1962\u20131963), predicted many inventions now in common use: flat-screen televisions, newspapers on a computer-like screen, computer viruses, video chat, tanning beds, home treadmills, and more. \nIn 1963, the series \"Doctor Who\" premiered on BBC Television with a time-travel theme. The original series ran until 1989 and was revived in 2005. It has been popular globally and has significantly influenced later science fiction TV. \nOther British sci-fi dramas which are broadcast in the 1970s are \"UFO\" (1970\u20131971), \"The Tomorrow People\" (1973\u20131979), \"\" (1975\u20131977) and \"Blake's 7\" (1978\u20131981). Other notable programs during the 1960s included \"The Outer Limits\" (1963\u20131965), \"Lost in Space\" (1965\u20131968), and \"The Prisoner\" (1967).\nThe original ' series, created by Gene Roddenberry, premiered in 1966 on NBC Television and ran for three seasons. It combined elements of space opera and Space Western. Only mildly successful at first, the series gained popularity through syndication and strong fan interest. It became a popular and influential franchise with many films, television shows, novels, and other works and products. The series ' (1987\u20131994) led to six additional live action \"Star Trek\" shows: ' (1993\u20131999), ' (1995\u20132001)\",\" ' (2001\u20132005), ' (2017\u20132024), ' (2020\u20132023), and ' (2022\u2013present); additional shows are in some stage of development.\nThe miniseries \"V\" premiered in 1983 on NBC. It depicted an attempted conquest of Earth by reptilian aliens. \"Red Dwarf\", a comic science fiction series, aired on BBC Two between 1988 and 1999, and on Dave since 2009. \"The X-Files\", which featured UFOs and conspiracy theories, was created by Chris Carter and broadcast by Fox Broadcasting Company from 1993 to 2002, and again from 2016 to 2018. \n\"Stargate\", a film about ancient astronauts and interstellar teleportation, was released in 1994. The series \"Stargate SG-1\" premiered in 1997 and ran for 10 seasons (1997\u20132007). Spin-off series included \"Stargate Infinity\" (2002\u20132003), \"Stargate Atlantis\" (2004\u20132009), and \"Stargate Universe\" (2009\u20132011). \nOther 1990s series included \"Quantum Leap\" (1989\u20131993) and \"Babylon 5\" (1994\u20131999). The Syfy channel, launched in 1992 as The Sci-Fi Channel, specializes in science fiction, supernatural horror, and fantasy.\nThe space-Western series \"Firefly\" premiered in 2002 on Fox. It is set in the year 2517, after humans arrive in a new star system, and it follows the adventures of the renegade crew of \"Serenity\", a \"\"Firefly\"-class\" spaceship. The series \"Orphan Black\" began a five-season run in 2013, focusing on a woman who takes on the identity of one of her genetically identical clones. In late 2015, Syfy premiered the series \"The Expanse\" to great critical acclaim\u2014an American show about humanity's colonization of the Solar System. Its later seasons were aired through Amazon Prime Video.\nSocial influence.\nScience fiction's rapid increase in popularity during the first half of the 20th century was closely tied to public respect for science during that era, as well as the rapid pace of technological innovation and new inventions. Science fiction has often predicted scientific and technological progress. Some works imagine that this progress will tend to improve human life and society, for instance, the stories of Arthur C. Clarke and \"Star Trek\". Other works, such as H.G. Wells's \"The Time Machine\" and Aldous Huxley's \"Brave New World\", warn of possible negative consequences.\nIn 2001 the National Science Foundation conducted a survey of \"Public Attitudes and Public Understanding: Science Fiction and Pseudoscience\". The survey found that people who read or prefer science fiction may think about or relate to science differently than other people. Such people also tend to support the space program and efforts to contact extraterrestrial civilizations. Carl Sagan wrote that \"Many scientists deeply involved in the exploration of the solar system (myself among them) were first turned in that direction by science fiction.\"\nScience fiction has predicted several existing inventions, such as the atomic bomb, robots, and borazon. In the 2020 TV series \"Away,\" astronauts use a Mars rover called InSight to listen for a landing on Mars. In 2022, scientists actually used InSight to listen for the landing of a spacecraft. \nScience fiction can act as a vehicle for analyzing and recognizing a society's past, present, and potential future social relationships with the other. Science fiction offers a medium for and a representation of alterity and differences in social identity. Brian Aldiss described science fiction as \"cultural wallpaper\".\nThis broad influence can be seen in the trend for writers to use science fiction as a tool for advocacy and generating cultural insights, as well as for educators who teach across a range of academic disciplines beyond the natural sciences. Scholar and science fiction critic George Edgar Slusser said that science fiction \"is the one real international literary form we have today, and as such has branched out to visual media, interactive media and on to whatever new media the world will invent in the 21st century. Crossover issues between the sciences and the humanities are crucial for the century to come.\"\nAs protest literature.\nScience fiction has sometimes been used as a means of social protest. George Orwell's novel \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" (1949) is an important work of dystopian science fiction. The novel is often invoked in protests against governments and leaders who are seen as totalitarian. James Cameron's film \"Avatar\" (2009) was intended as a protest against imperialism, specifically the European colonization of the Americas. Science fiction in Latin America and Spain explores the concept of authoritarianism.\nRobots, artificial humans, human clones, intelligent computers, and their possible conflicts with human society have all been major themes of science fiction since the publication of Shelly's novel \"Frankenstein\" (or earlier). Some critics have seen this tendency as reflecting authors' concerns over the social alienation seen in modern society.\nFeminist science fiction poses questions about social issues such as how society constructs gender roles, the role reproduction plays in defining gender, and the inequitable political or personal power of one gender over others. Some works have illustrated these themes using utopias in which gender differences or gender power imbalances do not exist, or dystopias in which gender inequalities are intensified, thus asserting a need for feminist work to continue.\nClimate fiction (or \"cli-fi\") deals with issues of climate change and global warming. University courses on literature and environmental issues may include climate change fiction in their syllabi, and these issues are often discussed by other media beyond science fiction fandom.\nLibertarian science fiction focuses on the politics and social order implied by right libertarian philosophies with an emphasis on individualism and private property, and in some cases anti-statism. Robert A. Heinlein is one of the most popular authors of this subgenre, including his novels \"The Moon is a Harsh Mistress\" and \"Stranger in a Strange Land\".\nScience fiction comedy often satirizes and criticizes present-day society, and it sometimes makes fun of the conventions and clich\u00e9s of more serious science fiction.\nSense of wonder.\nScience fiction is often said to inspire a \"sense of wonder\". Science fiction editor, publisher, and critic David Hartwell wrote that \"Science fiction's appeal lies in combination of the rational, the believable, with the miraculous. It is an appeal to the sense of wonder.\"\nCarl Sagan wrote about growing up with science fiction:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of the great benefits of science fiction is that it can convey bits and pieces, hints, and phrases, of knowledge unknown or inaccessible to the reader . . . works you ponder over as the water is running out of the bathtub or as you walk through the woods in an early winter snowfall.\nIn 1967, Isaac Asimov commented on changes occurring in the science fiction community:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And because today's real life so resembles day-before-yesterday's fantasy, the old-time fans are restless. Deep within, whether they admit it or not, is a feeling of disappointment and even outrage that the outer world has invaded their private domain. They feel the loss of a 'sense of wonder' because what was once truly confined to 'wonder' has now become prosaic and mundane.\nStudy.\nThe field of science fiction studies involves the critical assessment, interpretation, and discussion of science fiction literature, film, TV shows, new media, fandom, and fan fiction. Science fiction scholars study the genre to better understand it and its relationship to science, technology, politics, other genres, and culture at large. \nScience fiction studies began around the turn of the 20th century, but it was not until later that science fiction studies solidified as a discipline with the publication of the academic journals \"Extrapolation\" (1959), \"\" (1972), and \"Science Fiction Studies\" (1973), and the establishment of the oldest organizations devoted to the study of science fiction in 1970, the Science Fiction Research Association and the Science Fiction Foundation. The field has grown considerably since the 1970s with the establishment of more journals, organizations, and conferences, as well as science fiction degree-granting programs such as those offered by the University of Liverpool.\nClassification.\nScience fiction has historically been subdivided into \"hard\" and \"soft\" categories, with the division centering on the feasibility of the science. However, this distinction has come under increased scrutiny in the 21st century. Some authors, such as Tade Thompson and Jeff VanderMeer, have observed that stories focusing explicitly on physics, astronomy, mathematics, and engineering tend to be considered hard science fiction, while stories focusing on botany, mycology, zoology, and the social sciences tend to be considered soft science fiction (regardless of the relative rigor of the science).\nMax Gladstone defined hard science fiction as stories \"where the math works\", but he pointed out that this definition identifies stories that often seem \"weirdly dated\", as scientific paradigms shift over time. Michael Swanwick dismissed the traditional definition of hard science fiction altogether, instead stating that it was defined by characters striving to solve problems \"in the right way\u2013with determination, a touch of stoicism, and the consciousness that the universe is not on his or her side.\"\nUrsula K. Le Guin also criticized the traditional contrast between hard and soft science fiction: \"The 'hard' science fiction writers dismiss everything except, well, physics, astronomy, and maybe chemistry. Biology, sociology, anthropology\u2014that's not science to them, that's soft stuff. They're not that interested in what human beings do, really. But I am. I draw on the social sciences a great deal.\"\nLiterary merit.\nMany critics remain skeptical of the literary value of science fiction and other forms of genre fiction, though some mainstream authors have written works claimed by opponents to be science fiction. Mary Shelley wrote a number of scientific romance novels in the Gothic literature tradition, including \"Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus\" (1818). Kurt Vonnegut was a respected American author whose works have been argued by some to contain science fiction premises or themes. \nOther science fiction authors whose works are widely considered to be \"serious\" literature include Ray Bradbury (especially \"Fahrenheit 451\" and \"The Martian Chronicles\"), Arthur C. Clarke (especially \"Childhood's End\"), and Paul Myron Anthony Linebarger (using the pseudonym Cordwainer Smith). Doris Lessing, who was later awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, wrote a series of five science fiction novels, \"Canopus in Argos: Archives\" (1979\u20131983); these novels depict the efforts of more advanced species and civilizations to influence less advanced ones, including humans on Earth.\nDavid Barnett has indicated that some novels use recognizable science fiction tropes, but they are not classified by their authors and publishers as science fiction; such novels include \"The Road\" (2006) by Cormac McCarthy, \"Cloud Atlas\" (2004) by David Mitchell, \"The Gone-Away World\" (2008) by Nick Harkaway, \"The Stone Gods\" (2007) by Jeanette Winterson, and \"Oryx and Crake\" (2003) by Margaret Atwood. Atwood in particular argued against categorizing works such as \"the Handmaid's Tale\" as science fiction; instead she labeled this novel, \"Oryx and Crake\", and \"The Testaments\" as speculative fiction, and she criticized science fiction as \"talking squids in outer space.\" \nIn his book \"The Western Canon\", literary critic Harold Bloom includes the novels \"Brave New World\", Stanis\u0142aw Lem's \"Solaris\", Kurt Vonnegut's \"Cat's Cradle\", and \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" as culturally and aesthetically significant works of Western literature, though Lem actively spurned the label \"science fiction\".\nIn her 1976 essay \"Science Fiction and Mrs Brown\", Ursula K. Le Guin was asked, \"Can a science fiction writer write a novel?\" She answered that \"I believe that all novels ... deal with character... The great novelists have brought us to see whatever they wish us to see through some character. Otherwise, they would not be novelists, but poets, historians, or pamphleteers.\"\nOrson Scott Card is best known for his 1985 science fiction novel \"Ender's Game\"; he has postulated that in science fiction, the message and intellectual significance of the work are contained within the story itself\u2014therefore the genre can omit accepted literary devices and techniques that he characterized as gimmicks or literary games.\nIn 1998, Jonathan Lethem wrote an essay titled \"Close Encounters: The Squandered Promise of Science Fiction\" in the \"Village Voice\". In this essay, he recalled the time in 1973 when Thomas Pynchon's novel \"Gravity's Rainbow\" was nominated for the Nebula Award and was passed over in favor of Arthur C. Clarke's novel \"Rendezvous with Rama\"; Lethem suggests that this point stands as \"a hidden tombstone marking the death of the hope that SF was about to merge with the mainstream.\" In the same year, science fiction author and physicist Gregory Benford wrote that \"SF is perhaps the defining genre of the twentieth century, although its conquering armies are still camped outside the Rome of the literary citadels.\"\nCommunity.\nAuthors.\nScience fiction has been written by authors from diverse cultural and geographical backgrounds. Among submissions to the science fiction publisher Tor Books, men account for 78% and women account for 22% (according to 2013 statistics from the publisher). A controversy about voting slates for the 2015 Hugo Awards highlighted a tension in the science fiction community between two things: a trend toward increasingly diverse works and authors being honored by awards, and a reaction by groups of authors and fans who preferred more \"traditional\" science fiction.\nAwards.\nAmong the most significant and well-known awards for science fiction are the Hugo Award for literature, presented by the World Science Fiction Society at Worldcon, and voted on by fans; the Nebula Award for literature, presented by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, and voted on by the community of authors; the John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel, presented by a jury of writers; and the Theodore Sturgeon Memorial Award for short fiction, presented by a jury. One notable award for science fiction films and TV programs is the Saturn Award, which is presented annually by The Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror Films.\nThere are other national awards, like Canada's Prix Aurora Awards, regional awards, like the Endeavour Award presented at Orycon for works from the U.S. Pacific Northwest, and special interest or subgenre awards such as the Chesley Award for art, presented by the Association of Science Fiction &amp; Fantasy Artists, or the World Fantasy Award for fantasy. Magazines may organize reader polls, notably the Locus Award.\nConventions.\nConventions (often abbreviated by fans as \"cons\", such as Comic-con) are held in cities around the world; these cater to a local, regional, national, or international membership. General-interest conventions cover all aspects of science fiction, while others focus on a particular interest such as media fandom or filk music. Most science fiction conventions are organized by volunteers in non-profit groups, though most media-oriented events are organized by commercial promoters.\nFandom and fanzines.\nScience fiction fandom emerged from the letters column in \"Amazing Stories\" magazine. Fans began writing letters to each other, and then assembling their comments in informal publications that became known as \"fanzines\". Once in regular communication, these fans wanted to meet in person, so they organized local clubs. During the 1930s, the first science fiction conventions gathered fans from a larger area.\nThe earliest organized online fandom was the SF Lovers Community, originally a mailing list in the late 1970s, with a text archive file that was updated regularly. In the 1980s, Usenet groups greatly expanded the circle of fans online. In the 1990s, the development of the World-Wide Web increased online fandom through websites devoted to science fiction and related genres in all media.\nThe first science fiction fanzine, \"The Comet\", was published in 1930 by the Science Correspondence Club in Chicago, Illinois. As of 2025, one of the best known fanzines is \"Ansible\", edited by David Langford, winner of numerous Hugo awards. Other notable fanzines to win one or more Hugo awards include \"File 770\", \"Mimosa\", and \"Plokta\". Artists working for fanzines have often risen to prominence in the field, including Brad W. Foster, Teddy Harvia, and Joe Mayhew; the Hugo Awards include a category for Best Fan Artists.\nElements.\nScience fiction elements can include the following:\nSubgenres.\nWhile science fiction is a genre of fiction, a science fiction genre is a subgenre within science fiction. Science fiction may be divided along any number of overlapping axes. Gary K. Wolfe's \"Critical Terms for Science Fiction and Fantasy\" identifies over 30 subdivisions of science fiction, not including science fantasy (which is a mixed genre).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26788", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26788", "title": "Spirotrich", "text": "Class of single-celled organisms\nThe spirotrichs are a large and diverse group of ciliate protozoa. They typically have prominent oral cilia in the form of a series of polykinetids, called the adoral zone of membranelles, beginning anterior to the oral cavity and running down to the left side of the mouth. There may also be one or two paroral membranes on its right side. The body cilia are fused to form polykinetids called cirri in some, and are sparse to absent in others.\nForms with cirri are common throughout soil, freshwater, and marine environments. Individuals tend to be flattened, with cirri confined to the ventral surface. These are variously used for crawling over objects, acting as feet, swimming, or assisting in food capture. They are generally divided into hypotrichs and stichotrichs, but were originally all considered hypotrichs.\nForms with sparse or absent body cilia tend to be smaller and are mostly marine, but a few are common in freshwater. Again, they are generally divided into oligotrichs and choreotrichs, but were originally all considered oligotrichs. The latter group includes the tintinnids, which produce loricae or shells and are the predominant fossil ciliates.\nAs first defined by B\u00fctschli in 1889 the spirotrichs were one of two orders, together with the now-abandoned holotrichs, and included all ciliates with prominent oral cilia: heterotrichs, hypotrichs, oligotrichs, and peritrichs, although the last were soon separated. The heterotrichs have an adoral zone of membranelles, but molecular and ultrastructure studies have shown they are a separate group that diverged from most other ciliates early on. A few of the smaller groups included with them may be genuine spirotrichs, however, such as the Protocruziida.\nThe remaining spirotrichs form a monophyletic group, but their relationships are uncertain. For the most part the oligotrichs and choreotrichs appear to form closely related, natural groups. However \"Halteria\" and its close relatives, originally considered oligotrichs, form a separate group and may even be modified stichotrichs. Studies also suggest the hypotrichs are paraphyletic to the stichotrichs, and possibly to the oligotrichs and choreotrichs as well. This stands in contrast to the earlier belief that they were the most advanced of all protozoa.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26789", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26789", "title": "Sexual selection", "text": "Mode of natural selection involving the choosing of and competition for mates\nSexual selection is a mechanism of evolution in which members of one sex choose mates of the other sex to mate with (intersexual selection), and compete with members of the same sex for access to members of the opposite sex (intrasexual selection). These two forms of selection mean that some individuals have greater reproductive success than others within a population, for example because they are more attractive or prefer more attractive partners to produce offspring. Successful males benefit from frequent mating and monopolizing access to one or more fertile females. Females can maximise the return on the energy they invest in reproduction by selecting and mating with the best males.\nThe concept was first articulated by Charles Darwin who wrote of a \"second agency\" other than natural selection, in which competition between mate candidates could lead to speciation. The theory was given a mathematical basis by Ronald Fisher in the early 20th century. Sexual selection can lead males to extreme efforts to demonstrate their fitness to be chosen by females, producing sexual dimorphism in secondary sexual characteristics, such as the ornate plumage of birds-of-paradise and peafowl, or the antlers of deer. Depending on the species, these rules can be reversed. This is caused by a positive feedback mechanism known as a Fisherian runaway, where the passing-on of the desire for a trait in one sex is as important as having the trait in the other sex in producing the runaway effect. Although the sexy son hypothesis indicates that females would prefer male offspring, Fisher's principle explains why the sex ratio is most often 1:1. \nSexual selection is widely distributed in the animal kingdom, and is also found in plants and fungi.\nHistory.\nDarwin.\nSexual selection was first proposed by Charles Darwin in \"On the Origin of Species\" (1859) and developed in \"The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex\" (1871), as he felt that natural selection alone was unable to account for certain types of non-survival adaptations. He once wrote to a colleague that \"The sight of a feather in a peacock's tail, whenever I gaze at it, makes me sick!\" His work divided sexual selection into male\u2013male competition and female choice.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThese views were to some extent opposed by Alfred Russel Wallace, mostly after Darwin's death. He accepted that sexual selection could occur, but argued that it was a relatively weak form of selection. He argued that male\u2013male competitions were forms of natural selection, but that the \"drab\" peahen's coloration is itself adaptive as camouflage. In his opinion, ascribing mate choice to females was attributing the ability to judge standards of beauty to animals (such as beetles) far too cognitively undeveloped to be capable of aesthetic feeling.\nDarwin's ideas on sexual selection were met with scepticism by his contemporaries and not considered of great importance, until in the 1930s biologists decided to include sexual selection as a mode of natural selection. Only in the 21st century have they become more important in biology; the theory is now seen as generally applicable and analogous to natural selection. A ten-year study, experimentally varying sexual selection on flour beetles with other factors held constant, showed that sexual selection protected even an inbred population against extinction.\nFisherian runaway.\nRonald Fisher, the English statistician and evolutionary biologist, developed his ideas about sexual selection in his 1930 book \"The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection\". These include the sexy son hypothesis, which might suggest a preference for male offspring, and Fisher's principle, which explains why the sex ratio is usually close to 1:1. The Fisherian runaway describes how sexual selection accelerates the preference for a specific ornament, causing the preferred trait and female preference for it to increase together in a positive feedback runaway cycle. He remarked that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... plumage development in the male, and sexual preference for such developments in the female, must thus advance together, and so long as the process is unchecked by severe counterselection, will advance with ever-increasing speed. In the total absence of such checks, it is easy to see that the speed of development will be proportional to the development already attained, which will therefore increase with time exponentially, or in geometric progression. \u2014\"Ronald Fisher, 1930\"\nThis causes a dramatic increase in both the male's conspicuous feature and in female preference for it, resulting in marked sexual dimorphism, until practical physical constraints halt further exaggeration. A positive feedback loop is created, producing extravagant physical structures in the non-limiting sex. A classic example of female choice and potential runaway selection is the long-tailed widowbird. While males have long tails that are selected for by female choice, female tastes in tail length are still more extreme with females being attracted to tails longer than those that naturally occur. Fisher understood that female preference for long tails may be passed on genetically, in conjunction with genes for the long tail itself. Long-tailed widowbird offspring of both sexes inherit both sets of genes, with females expressing their genetic preference for long tails, and males showing off the coveted long tail itself.\nRichard Dawkins presents a non-mathematical explanation of the runaway sexual selection process in his book \"The Blind Watchmaker\". Females that prefer long tailed males tend to have mothers that chose long-tailed fathers. As a result, they carry both sets of genes in their bodies. That is, genes for long tails and for preferring long tails become linked. The taste for long tails and tail length itself may therefore become correlated, tending to increase together. The more tails lengthen, the more long tails are desired. Any slight initial imbalance between taste and tails may set off an explosion in tail lengths. Fisher wrote that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The exponential element, which is the kernel of the thing, arises from the rate of change in hen taste being proportional to the absolute average degree of taste. \u2014\"Ronald Fisher, 1932\"\nThe female widowbird chooses to mate with the most attractive long-tailed male so that her progeny, if male, will themselves be attractive to females of the next generation\u2014thereby fathering many offspring that carry the female's genes. Since the rate of change in preference is proportional to the average taste amongst females, and as females desire to secure the services of the most sexually attractive males, an additive effect is created that, if unchecked, can yield exponential increases in a given taste and in the corresponding desired sexual attribute.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is important to notice that the conditions of relative stability brought about by these or other means, will be far longer duration than the process in which the ornaments are evolved. In most existing species the runaway process must have been already checked, and we should expect that the more extraordinary developments of sexual plumage are not due like most characters to a long and even course of evolutionary progress, but to sudden spurts of change. \u2014\"Ronald Fisher, 1930\"\nSince Fisher's initial conceptual model of the 'runaway' process, Russell Lande and Peter O'Donald have provided detailed mathematical proofs that define the circumstances under which runaway sexual selection can take place. Alongside this, biologists have extended Darwin's formulation; Malte Andersson's widely accepted 1994 definition is that \"sexual selection is the differences in reproduction that arise from variation among individuals in traits that affect success in competition over mates and fertilizations\". Despite some practical challenges for biologists, the concept of sexual selection is \"straightforward\".\nModern theory.\nReproductive success.\nThe reproductive success of an organism is measured by the number of offspring left behind, and by their quality or probable fitness. Sexual preference creates a tendency towards assortative mating or homogamy. The general conditions of sexual discrimination appear to be (1) the acceptance of one mate precludes the effective acceptance of alternative mates, and (2) the rejection of an offer is followed by other offers, either certainly or at such high chance that the risk of non-occurrence is smaller than the chance advantage to be gained by selecting a mate. Bateman's principle states that the sex which invests the most in producing offspring becomes a limiting resource for which the other sex competes, illustrated by the greater nutritional investment of an egg in a zygote, and the limited capacity of females to reproduce; for example, in humans, a woman can only give birth every ten months, whereas a male can become a father numerous times in the same period. More recently, researchers have doubted whether Bateman was correct.\nHonest signalling.\nThe handicap principle of Amotz Zahavi, Russell Lande and W. D. Hamilton, holds that the male's survival until and through the age of reproduction with seemingly maladaptive traits is taken by the female as a signal of his overall fitness. Such handicaps might prove he is either free of or resistant to disease, or that he possesses more speed or a greater physical strength that is used to combat the troubles brought on by the exaggerated trait. Zahavi's work spurred a re-examination of the field and several new theories. In 1984, Hamilton and Marlene Zuk introduced the \"Bright Male\" hypothesis, suggesting that male elaborations might serve as a marker of health, by exaggerating the effects of disease and deficiency.\nMale intrasexual competition.\nMale\u2013male competition occurs when two males of the same species compete for the opportunity to mate with a female. Sexually dimorphic traits, size, sex ratio, and the social situation may all play a role in the effects male\u2013male competition has on the reproductive success of a male and the mate choice of a female. Larger males tend to win male\u2013male conflicts. Males take many risks in such conflicts, so the value of the resource must be large enough to justify those risks. Winner and loser effects further influence male behaviour. Male\u2013male competition may also affect a female's ability to select the best mates, and therefore decrease the likelihood of successful reproduction.\nMultiple models.\nMore recently, the field has grown to include other areas of study, not all of which fit Darwin's definition of sexual selection. A \"bewildering\" range of models variously attempt to relate sexual selection not only to the fundamental questions of anisogamy and parental roles, but also to mechanisms such as sex ratios \u2013 governed by Fisher's principle, parental care, investing in sexy sons, sexual conflict, and the \"most-debated effect\", namely mate choice. Elaborated characteristics that might seem costly, like the tail of the Montezuma swordfish (\"Xiphophorus montezumae\"), do not always have an energetics, performance or even survival cost; this may be because \"compensatory traits\" have evolved in concert with the sexually selected traits.\nToolkit of natural selection.\nSexual selection may explain how characteristics such as feathers had survival value at an early stage in their evolution. The earliest proto-birds such as \"Protarchaeopteryx\" had well-developed feathers but could not fly. The feathers may have served as insulation, helping females incubate their eggs, but if proto-bird courtship combined displays of forelimb feathers with energetic jumps, then the transition to flight could have been relatively smooth.\nSexual selection may sometimes generate features that help cause a species' extinction, as has historically been suggested for the giant antlers of the Irish elk (\"Megaloceros giganteus\") that became extinct in Holocene Eurasia (although climate-induced habitat deterioration and anthropogenic pressure are now considered more likely causes). It may, however, also do the opposite, driving species divergence\u2014sometimes through elaborate changes in genitalia\u2014such that new species emerge. Sexual selection often interacts with natural selection to drive speciation.\nSex role reversal.\nDarwin addressed sex role reversal in \"The Descent of Man\", with females undergoing selection by male mating partners. Darwin and then others described reversed sex roles in the barred buttonquail (\"Turnix suscitator\"). Expected sex hierarchy norms were similarly subverted among pipefish (Syngnathinae) and seahorses (\"Hippocampus\"). Females of these species are generally larger, more colorful, and more aggressive than males.\nIn different taxa.\nSexual selection is widely distributed among the eukaryotes, occurring in plants, fungi, and animals. Since Darwin's pioneering observations on humans, it has been studied intensively among the insects, spiders, amphibians, scaled reptiles, birds, and mammals, revealing many distinctive behaviours and physical adaptations.\nIn mammals.\nDarwin conjectured that heritable traits such as beards, hairlessness, and steatopygia in different human populations are results of sexual selection in humans. Humans are sexually dimorphic; females select males using factors including voice pitch, facial shape, muscularity, and height.\nAmong the many instances of sexual selection in mammals is extreme sexual dimorphism, with males as much as six times heavier than females, and male fighting for dominance among elephant seals. Dominant males establish large harems of several dozen females; unsuccessful males may attempt to copulate with a harem male's females if the dominant male is inattentive. This forces the harem male to defend his territory continuously, not feeding for as much as three months.\nAlso seen in mammals is sex-role reversal, as in the highly social meerkats, where a large female is dominant within a pack, and female\u2013female competition is observed. The dominant female produces most of the offspring; the subordinate females are nonbreeding, providing altruistic care to the young.\nIn arthropods.\nSexual selection occurs in a wide range of spider species, both before and after copulation. Post-copulatory sexual selection involves sperm competition and cryptic female choice. Sperm competition occurs where the sperm of more than one male competes to fertilise the egg of the female. Cryptic female choice involves the expelling of a male's sperm during or after copulations.\nMany forms of sexual selection exist among the insects. Parental care is often provided by female insects, as in bees, but male parental care is found in belostomatid water bugs, where the male, after fertilizing the eggs, allows the female to glue her eggs onto his back. He broods them until the nymphs hatch 2\u20134 weeks later. The eggs are large and reduce the ability of the male to fertilise other females and catch prey, and increases its predation risk.\nAmong the fireflies (Lampyrid beetles), males fly in darkness and emit a species-specific pattern of light flashes, which are answered by perching receptive females. The colour and temporal variation of the flashes contribute to success in attracting females.\nAmong the beetles, sexual selection is common. In the mealworm beetle, \"Tenebrio molitor,\" males release pheromones to attract females to mate. Females choose mates based on whether they are infected, and on their mass.\nIn molluscs.\nPostcopulatory intersexual selection occurs in \"Idiosepius paradoxus\", the Japanese pygmy squid. Males place their spermatangia on an external location on the female's body. The female physically removes spermatangia of males she is presumed to favour less.\nIn amphibians and reptiles.\nMany amphibians have annual breeding seasons with male\u2013male competition. Males arrive at the water's edge first in large numbers, and produce a wide range of vocalizations to attract mates. Among frogs, the fittest males have the deepest croaks and the best territories; females select their mates at least partly based on the depth of croaking. This has led to sexual dimorphism, with females larger than males in 90% of species, and male fighting to access females. Spikethumb frogs are suggested to engage in male-male competition with their elongated prepollex to maintain their mating site. The prepollex, which serves as a rudimentary digit, contains a projecting spine that may be used during this combat, leaving scars on the heads and forelimbs of other males.\nMany different tactics are used by snakes to acquire mates. Ritual combat between males for the females they want to mate with includes topping, a behaviour exhibited by most viperids, in which one male twists around the vertically elevated fore body of its opponent and forcing it downward. Neck biting is common while the snakes are entwined.\nIn birds.\nBirds have evolved a wide variety of mating behaviours and many types of sexual selection. These include intersexual selection (female choice) and intrasexual competition, where individuals of the more abundant sex compete with each other for the privilege to mate. Many species, notably the birds-of-paradise, are sexually dimorphic; the differences such as in size and coloration are energetically costly attributes that signal competitive breeding. Conflicts between an individual's fitness and signalling adaptations ensure that sexually selected ornaments such as coloration of plumage and courtship behaviour are honest traits. Signals must be costly to ensure that only good-quality individuals can present these exaggerated sexual ornaments and behaviours. Males with the brightest plumage are favoured by females of multiple species of bird.\nMany bird species make use of mating calls, the females preferring males with songs that are complex and varied in amplitude, structure, and frequency. Larger males have deeper songs and increased mating success.\nIn plants and fungi.\nFlowering plants have many secondary sexual characteristics subject to sexual selection including floral symmetry if pollinators visit flowers assortatively by degree of symmetry, nectar production, floral structure, and inflorescences, as well as sexual dimorphisms.\nFungi appear to make use of sexual selection, although they also often reproduce asexually. In the Basidiomycetes, the sex ratio is biased towards males, implying sexual selection there. Male\u2013male competition to fertilise occurs in fungi including yeasts. Pheromone signaling is used by female gametes and by conidia, implying male choice in these cases. Female\u2013female competition may also occur, indicated by the much faster evolution of female-biased genes in fungi.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26790", "revid": "49883437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26790", "title": "Stanis\u0142aw Lem", "text": "Polish science fiction author and futurologist (1921\u20132006)\nStanis\u0142aw Herman Lem (; 12 September 1921 \u2013 27 March 2006) was a Polish writer. He was the author of many novels, short stories, and essays on various subjects, including philosophy, futurology, and literary criticism. Many of his science fiction stories are of satirical and humorous character. Lem's books have been translated into more than 50 languages and have sold more than 45\u00a0million copies. Worldwide, he is best known as the author of the 1961 novel \"Solaris\". In 1976, Theodore Sturgeon wrote that Lem was the most widely read science fiction writer in the world. \nLem was the author of the fundamental philosophical work \"Summa Technologiae\", in which he anticipated the creation of virtual reality, artificial intelligence, and also developed the ideas of human autoevolution, the creation of artificial worlds, and many others. Lem's science fiction works explore philosophical themes through speculations on technology, the nature of intelligence, the impossibility of communication with and understanding of alien intelligence, despair about human limitations, and humanity's place in the universe. His essays and philosophical books cover these and many other topics. Translating his works is difficult due to Lem's elaborate neologisms and idiomatic wordplay. \nThe Sejm (the lower house of the Polish Parliament) declared 2021 Stanis\u0142aw Lem Year.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nLem was born in 1921 in Lw\u00f3w, interwar Poland (now Lviv, Ukraine). According to his own account, he was actually born on 13 September, but the date was changed to the 12th on his birth certificate because of superstition. He was the son of Sabina n\u00e9e Woller (1892\u20131979) and Samuel Lem (1879\u20131954), a wealthy laryngologist and former physician in the Austro-Hungarian Army, and first cousin to Polish poet Marian Hemar (Lem's father's sister's son). In later years Lem sometimes claimed to have been raised Roman Catholic, but he went to Jewish religious lessons during his school years. He later became an atheist \"for moral reasons ... the world appears to me to be put together in such a painful way that I prefer to believe that it was not created ... intentionally\". In later years he would call himself both an agnostic and an atheist.\nAfter the 1939 Soviet invasion of Poland's former eastern territory (now part of Ukraine and Belarus), he was not allowed to study at Lw\u00f3w Polytechnic as he wished because of his \"bourgeois origin\", and only due to his father's connections he was accepted to study medicine at Lw\u00f3w University in 1940. During the subsequent Nazi occupation (1941\u20131944), Lem's Jewish family avoided placement in the Nazi Lw\u00f3w Ghetto, surviving with false papers. He would later recall:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;During that period, I learned in a very personal, practical way that I was no \"Aryan\". I knew that my ancestors were Jews, but I knew nothing of the Mosaic faith and, regrettably, nothing at all of Jewish culture. So it was, strictly speaking, only the Nazi legislation that brought home to me the realization that I had Jewish blood in my veins.\nDuring that time, Lem earned a living as a car mechanic and welder, and occasionally stole munitions from storehouses (to which he had access as an employee of a German company) to pass them on to the Polish resistance.\nIn 1945, Lw\u00f3w was annexed into the Soviet Ukraine, and the family, along with many other Polish citizens, was resettled to Krak\u00f3w, where Lem, at his father's insistence, took up medical studies at the Jagiellonian University. He did not take his final examinations on purpose, to avoid the career of military doctor, which he suspected could have become lifelong. After receiving \"absolutorium\" (Latin term for the evidence of completion of the studies without diploma), he did an obligatory monthly work at a hospital, at a maternity ward, where he assisted at a number of childbirths and a caesarean section. Lem said that the sight of blood was one of the reasons he decided to drop medicine.\nRise to fame.\nLem started his literary work in 1946 with a number of publications in different genres, including poetry, as well as his first science fiction novel, \"The Man from Mars\", serialized in \"Nowy \u015awiat Przyg\u00f3d\" (\"New World of Adventures\"). Between 1948 and 1950 Lem was working as a scientific research assistant at the Jagiellonian University, and published a number of short stories, poems, reviews, etc., particularly in the magazine \"Tygodnik Powszechny\". In 1951, he published his first book, \"The Astronauts\". In 1954, he published a short story collection, \"Sezam i inne opowiadania\" [\"Sesame and Other Stories\"] . The following year, 1955, saw the publication of another science fiction novel, \"The Magellanic Cloud\".\nDuring the era of Stalinism in Poland, which had begun in the late 1940s, all published works had to be directly approved by the state. Thus \"The Astronauts\" was not, in fact, the first novel Lem finished, just the first that made it past the state censors. Going by the date of the finished manuscript, Lem's first book was a partly autobiographical novel \"Hospital of the Transfiguration\", finished in 1948. It would be published seven years later, in 1955, as a part of the trilogy \"Czas nieutracony\" (\"Time Not Lost\"). The experience of trying to push \"Czas nieutracony\" through the censors was one of the major reasons Lem decided to focus on the less-censored genre of science fiction. Nonetheless, most of Lem's works published in the 1950s also contain various elements of socialist realism as well as of the \"glorious future of communism\" forced upon him by the censors and editors. Lem later criticized several of his early pieces as compromised by the ideological pressure.\nLem became truly productive after 1956, when the de-Stalinization period in the Soviet Union led to the \"Polish October\", when Poland experienced an increase in freedom of speech. Between 1956 and 1968, Lem authored seventeen books. His writing over the next three decades or so was split between science fiction and essays about science and culture.\nIn 1957, he published his first non-fiction, philosophical book, \"Dialogs\", as well as a science fiction anthology, \"The Star Diaries\", collecting short stories about one of his most popular characters, Ijon Tichy. 1959 saw the publication of three books: the novels \"Eden\" and \"The Investigation\", and the short story anthology \"An Invasion from Aldebaran\" (\"Inwazja z Aldebarana\"). 1961 saw the novels \"Memoirs Found in a Bathtub\", \"Solaris\", and \"Return from the Stars\", with \"Solaris\" being among his top works. This was followed by a collection of his essays and non-fiction prose, \"Wej\u015bcie na orbit\u0119\" (1962), and a short story anthology \"Noc ksi\u0119\u017cycowa\" (1963). In 1964, Lem published a large work on the border of philosophy and sociology of science and futurology, \"Summa Technologiae\", as well as a novel, \"The Invincible\".\n1965 saw the publication of \"The Cyberiad\" and of a short story collection, \"The Hunt\" (Polowanie). 1966 was the year of \"Highcastle\", followed in 1968 by \"His Master's Voice\" and \"Tales of Pirx the Pilot\". \"Highcastle\" was another of Lem's autobiographical works, and touched upon a theme that usually was not favored by the censors: Lem's youth in the pre-war, then-Polish, Lviv. 1968 and 1970 saw two more non-fiction treatises, \"The Philosophy of Chance\" and \"Science Fiction and Futurology\". Ijon Tichy returned in 1971's \"The Futurological Congress\"; in the same year Lem released a genre-mixing experiment, \"A Perfect Vacuum\", a collection of reviews of non-existent books. In 1973 a similar work, \"Imaginary Magnitude\", was published. In 1976, Lem published two works: \"The Mask\" and \"The Chain of Chance\". In 1980, he published another set of reviews of non-existent works, \"Provocation\". The following year saw another Tichy novel, \"Observation on the Spot\", and \"Golem XIV\". Later in that decade, Lem published \"Peace on Earth\" (1984) and \"Fiasco\" (1986), his last science fiction novel.\nIn the late 1970s and early 1980s, Lem cautiously supported the Polish dissident movement, and started publishing essays in the Paris-based magazine \"Kultura\". In 1982, with martial law in Poland declared, Lem moved to West Berlin, where he became a fellow of the Institute for Advanced Study, Berlin (\"Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin\"). After that, he settled in Vienna. He returned to Poland in 1988.\nFinal years.\nFrom the late 1980s onwards, Lem tended to concentrate on philosophical texts and essays, published in Polish magazines including \"Tygodnik Powszechny\", \"Odra\", and \"Przegl\u0105d\". These were later collected in a number of anthologies.\nIn the early 1980s literary critic and historian Stanis\u0142aw Bere\u015b conducted a lengthy interview with Lem, which was published in book format in 1987 as \"Rozmowy ze Stanis\u0142awem Lemem\" (\"Conversations with Stanis\u0142aw Lem)\". That edition was subject to censorship. A revised, complete edition was published in 2002 as \"Tako rzecze\u2026 Lem\" (\"Thus spoke... Lem\").\nIn the early 1990s, Lem met with the literary critic and scholar Peter Swirski for a series of extensive interviews, published together with other critical materials and translations as \"A Stanislaw Lem Reader\" (1997). In these interviews Lem speaks about a range of issues he rarely discussed previously. The book also includes Swirski's translation of Lem's retrospective essay \"Thirty Years Later\", devoted to Lem's nonfictional treatise \"Summa Technologiae\". During later interviews in 2005, Lem expressed his disappointment with the genre of science fiction, and his general pessimism regarding technical progress. He viewed the human body as unsuitable for space travel, held that information technology drowns people in a glut of low-quality information, and considered truly intelligent robots as both undesirable and impossible to construct.\nWritings.\nScience fiction.\nLem's prose shows a mastery of numerous genres and themes.\nRecurring themes.\nOne of Lem's major recurring themes, beginning from his very first novel, \"The Man from Mars\", was the impossibility of communication between profoundly alien beings, which may have no common ground with human intelligence, and humans. The best known example is the living planetary ocean in \"Solaris\". Other examples include the intelligent swarms of mechanical insect-like micromachines in \"The Invincible\", and strangely ordered societies of more human-like beings in \"Fiasco\" and \"Eden\", describing the failure of first contact.\nAnother key recurring theme is the shortcomings of humans. In \"His Master's Voice\", Lem describes the failure of humanity's intelligence to decipher and truly comprehend an apparent message from space. Two overlapping arcs of short stories, \"Fables for Robots\" and \"The Cyberiad\" provide a commentary on humanity in the form of a series of grotesque, humorous, fairytale-like short stories about a mechanical universe inhabited by robots (who have occasional contact with biological \"slimies\" and human \"palefaces\"). Lem also underlines the uncertainties of evolution, including that it might not progress upwards in intelligence.\nOther writings.\n\"The Investigation\" and \"The Chain of Chance\" are crime novels (the latter without a murderer); \"Pami\u0119tnik...\" is a psychological drama inspired by Kafka. \"A Perfect Vacuum\" and \"Imaginary Magnitude\" are collections of reviews of and introductions to non-existent books. Similarly, \"Provocations\" purports to review a non-existent Holocaust-themed work.\nEssays.\n\"Dialogs\" and \"Summa Technologiae\" (1964) are Lem's two most famous philosophical texts. The \"Summa\" is notable for being a unique analysis of prospective social, cybernetic, and biological advances; in this work, Lem discusses philosophical implications of technologies that were completely in the realm of science fiction at the time, but are gaining importance today\u2014for instance, virtual reality and nanotechnology.\nViews in later life.\nThroughout the entirety of his life, Stanis\u0142aw Lem remained deeply attached to his original hometown of Lw\u00f3w (then in Poland, now Lviv in Ukraine) and missed it greatly. Although he never called for Poland to retake the city, he expressed sorrow and felt a sense of injustice at Poland losing the city to the USSR after the Second World War. His criticism of most science fiction surfaced in literary and philosophical essays \"Science Fiction and Futurology\" and interviews. In the 1990s, Lem forswore science fiction and returned to futurological prognostications, most notably those expressed in \"Okamgnienie\" [\"Blink of an Eye\"]. He had a deep appreciation for the works of Polish writer Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz and respected J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski as a national leader. \nLem said that since the success of the trade union Solidarity, and the collapse of the Soviet empire, he felt his wild dreams about the future could no longer compare with reality. He became increasingly critical of modern technology in his later life, criticising inventions such as the Internet, which he said \"makes it easier to hurt our neighbors.\" He was a proponent of nuclear power, which he saw as a potential means for Poland to secure its sovereignty via reducing dependency on fossil fuels from Russia. In his 2004-2006 columns for \"Tygodnik Powszechny\", Lem was highly critical of Vladimir Putin, George W. Bush, Andrzej Lepper, Samoobrona, the League of Polish Families, and the All-Polish Youth.\nRelationship with American science fiction.\nSFWA.\nLem was awarded an honorary membership in the Science Fiction Writers of America (SFWA) in 1973. SFWA honorary membership is given to people who do not meet the publishing criteria for joining the regular membership, but who would be welcomed as members had their work appeared in the qualifying English-language publications. Lem never had a high opinion of American science fiction, describing it as ill-thought-out, poorly written, and interested more in making money than in ideas or new literary forms. After his eventual American publication, when he became eligible for regular membership, his honorary membership was rescinded. This formal action was interpreted by some SFWA members as a rebuke for his stance, and it seems that Lem interpreted it as such. Lem was invited to stay on with the organization with a regular membership, but he declined. After many members (including Ursula K. Le Guin, who quit her membership and then refused the Nebula Award for Best Novelette for \"The Diary of the Rose\") protested against Lem's treatment by the SFWA, a member offered to pay his dues. Lem never accepted the offer.\nPhilip K. Dick.\nLem singled out only one American science fiction writer for praise, Philip K. Dick, in a 1984 English-language anthology of his critical essays, \"\". Lem had initially held a low opinion of Philip K. Dick (as he did for the bulk of American science fiction) and would later say that this was due to a limited familiarity with Dick's work, since Western literature was hard to come by in the Polish People's Republic.\nDick alleged that Stanis\u0142aw Lem was probably a false name used by a composite committee operating on orders of the Communist party to gain control over public opinion, and wrote a letter to the FBI to that effect. There were several attempts to explain Dick's act. Lem was responsible for the Polish translation of Dick's work \"Ubik\" in 1972, and when Dick felt monetarily short-changed by the publisher, he held Lem personally responsible (see \"Microworlds\"). Also it was suggested that Dick was under the influence of strong medications, including opioids, and may have experienced a \"slight disconnect from reality\" some time before writing the letter. A \"defensive patriotism\" of Dick against Lem's attacks on American science fiction may have played some role as well. Lem would later mention Dick in his monograph \"Science Fiction and Futurology\".\nSignificance.\nWriting.\nLem is one of the most highly acclaimed science fiction writers, hailed by critics as equal to such classic authors as H. G. Wells and Olaf Stapledon. In 1976, Theodore Sturgeon wrote that Lem was the most widely read science fiction writer in the world. In Poland, in the 1960s and 1970s, Lem remained under the radar of mainstream critics, who dismissed him as a \"mass market\", low-brow, youth-oriented writer; such dismissal might have given him a form of invisibility from censorship.\nIn 1999, Franz Rottensteiner, Lem's former agent abroad, had this to say about Lem's reception on international markets:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;With [number of translations and copies sold], Lem is the most successful author in modern Polish fiction; nevertheless his commercial success in the world is limited, and the bulk of his large editions was due to the special publishing conditions in the Communist countries: Poland, the Soviet Union, and the German Democratic Republic. Only in West Germany was Lem really a critical and a commercial success [... and everywhere ...] in recent years interest in him has waned.\nLem is the only writer of European [science fiction, most of whose] books have been translated into English, and [...] kept in print in the USA. Lem's critical success in English is due mostly to the excellent translations of Michael Kandel.\nLem's works were widely translated abroad, appearing in over 40 languages and have sold over 45\u00a0million copies. As of 2020[ [update]], about 1.5 million copies were sold in Poland after his death, with the annual numbers of 100,000 matching the new bestsellers.\nInfluence.\nWill Wright's popular city-planning game \"SimCity\" was partly inspired by Lem's short story \"The Seventh Sally\" in \"The Cyberiad\".\nThe video game \"Stellaris\" is highly inspired by his works, as its creators said at the start of 2021, designated the \"Year of Lem\".\nA major character in the film \"Planet 51\", an alien Lem, was named by screenwriter Joe Stillman after Stanis\u0142aw Lem. Since the film was intended to be a parody of American pulp science fiction shot in Eastern Europe, Stillman thought that it would be hilarious to hint at the writer whose works have nothing to do with little green men.\nAdaptations of Lem's works.\n\"Solaris\" was made into a film in 1968 by Russian director Boris Nirenburg, a film in 1972 by Russian director Andrei Tarkovsky\u2014which won a Special Jury Prize at the Cannes Film Festival in 1972\u2014and an American film in 2002 by Steven Soderbergh. Film critics have noted the influence of Tarkovsky's adaptation on later science fiction films such as \"Event Horizon\" (1997) and Christopher Nolan's \"Inception\" (2010).\nA number of other dramatic and musical adaptations of his work exist, such as adaptations of \"The Astronauts\" (\"First Spaceship on Venus\", 1960) and \"The Magellanic Cloud\" (\"Ikarie XB-1\", 1963). Lem himself was, however, critical of most of the screen adaptations, with the sole exception of \"Przek\u0142adaniec\" in 1968 by Andrzej Wajda. In 2013, the Israeli\u2013Polish co-production \"The Congress\" was released, inspired by Lem's novel \"The Futurological Congress\".\nGy\u00f6rgy P\u00e1lfi directed a film adaptation of \"His Master's Voice\" with the same title, which was released in 2018.\nIn 2023, 11 Bit Studios published \"The Invincible\", an adventure video game developed by Starward Industries. The game is an adaptation of Stanis\u0142aw Lem's 1964 novel.\nPolitical views.\nLem's early works were socialist realist, possibly to satisfy state censorship, and in his later years he was critical of this aspect of them. In 1982, with the onset of the martial law in Poland, Lem moved to Berlin for studies, and the next year he moved for several years (1983\u20131988) to Vienna. He never showed any wish to relocate permanently in the West. By the standards of the Eastern Bloc, Lem was financially well off for most of his life. Lem was a critic of capitalism, totalitarianism, and of both Stalinist and Western ideologies.\nLem believed there were no absolutes. He said: \"I should wish, as do most men, that immutable truths existed, that not all would be eroded by the impact of historical time, that there were some essential propositions, be it only in the field of human values, the basic values, etc. In brief, I long for the absolute. But at the same time I am firmly convinced that there are no absolutes, that everything is historical, and that you cannot get away from history.\" Lem was concerned that if the human race attained prosperity and comfort, this would lead it to passiveness and degeneration.\nPersonal life.\nLem was a polyglot: he knew Polish, Latin (from medical school), German, French, English, Russian and Ukrainian. Lem claimed that his IQ was tested at high school as 180.\nIn 1953, Lem met radiology student Barbara Le\u015bniak, whom he married in a civil ceremony the same year. The couple's church marriage ceremony was performed in February 1954. Barbara died on 27 April 2016. Their only child, Tomasz (born 1968), who graduated with a degree in physics from Princeton University, has written \"Awantury na tle powszechnego ci\u0105\u017cenia\" (\"Tantrums on the Background of the Universal Gravitation\"), a memoir which contains numerous personal details about Lem. The book jacket says Tomasz works as a translator and has a daughter, Anna.\nAs of 1984, Lem's writing pattern was to get up a short time before five in the morning and start writing soon after, for 5 or 6 hours before taking a break.\nLem was an aggressive driver. He loved sweets (especially halva and chocolate-covered marzipan), and did not give them up even when, toward the end of his life, he fell ill with diabetes. In the mid-80s due to health problems he stopped smoking. Coffee often featured in Lem's writing and interviews.\nStanis\u0142aw Lem died from a heart failure in the hospital of the Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krak\u00f3w on 27 March 2006 at the age of 84. He was buried at Salwator Cemetery, Sector W, Row 4, grave 17 ().\nIn November 2021, Agnieszka Gajewska's biography of Lem, \"Holocaust and the Stars\", was translated into English by Katarzyna Gucio and published by Routledge. It discussed aspects of Lem's life, such as being forced to wear the yellow badge and being struck for not removing his hat in the presence of Germans, as required of Jews at the time.\nLem loved movies and greatly enjoyed artistic cinema (especially the movies of Luis Bu\u00f1uel). He also liked King Kong, James Bond, \"Star Wars\", and \"Star Trek\" movies but he remained mostly displeased by movies which were based upon his own stories. The only notable exceptions are \"Voyage to the End of the Universe\" (1963) (which didn't credit Lem as writer of the original book \"The Magellanic Cloud\") and \"Przek\u0142adaniec\" (\"Layer Cake\") (1968) (which was based upon his short story \"Do You Exist, Mr Jones?\").\nBibliography.\nA list of works by Stanis\u0142aw Lem and their subsequent adaptations in other media:\nA list of books and monographs about Stanis\u0142aw Lem:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26791", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26791", "title": "Satire", "text": "Literary and art genre with a style of humor based on parody\nSatire is a genre of the visual, literary, and performing arts, usually in the form of fiction and less frequently non-fiction, in which vices, follies, abuses, and shortcomings are held up to ridicule, often with the intent of exposing or shaming the perceived flaws of individuals, corporations, government, or society itself into improvement. Although satire is usually meant to be humorous, its greater purpose is often constructive social criticism, using wit to draw attention to both particular and wider issues in society. Satire may also poke fun at popular themes in art and film.\nA prominent feature of satire is strong irony or sarcasm\u2014\"in satire, irony is militant\", according to literary critic Northrop Frye\u2014 but parody, burlesque, exaggeration, juxtaposition, comparison, analogy, and double entendre are all frequently used in satirical speech and writing. This \"militant\" irony or sarcasm often professes to approve of (or at least accept as natural) the very things the satirist wishes to question.\nSatire is found in many artistic forms of expression, including internet memes, literature, plays, commentary, music, film and television shows, and media such as lyrics.\nEtymology and roots.\nThe word \"satire\" comes from the Latin word \"satur\" and the subsequent phrase \"lanx satura.\" \"Satur\" meant \"full\", but the juxtaposition with \"lanx\" shifted the meaning to \"miscellany or medley\": the expression \"lanx satura\" literally means \"a full dish of various kinds of fruits\". The use of the word \"lanx\" in this phrase, however, is disputed by B.L. Ullman.\nTo Quintilian, the satire was a strict literary form, but the term soon escaped from the original narrow definition. Robert Elliott writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As soon as a noun enters the domain of metaphor, as one modern scholar has pointed out, it clamours for extension; and satura (which had had no verbal, adverbial, or adjectival forms) was immediately broadened by appropriation from the Greek word for \"satyr\" (satyros) and its derivatives. The odd result is that the English \"satire\" comes from the Latin satura; but \"satirize\", \"satiric\", etc., are of Greek origin. By about the 4th century AD the writer of satires came to be known as satyricus; St. Jerome, for example, was called by one of his enemies 'a satirist in prose' ('satyricus scriptor in prosa'). Subsequent orthographic modifications obscured the Latin origin of the word satire: satura becomes satyra, and in England, by the 16th century, it was written 'satyre.'\nThe word \"satire\" derives from \"satura\", and its origin was not influenced by the Greek mythological figure of the \"satyr\". In the 17th century, philologist Isaac Casaubon was the first to dispute the etymology of satire from satyr, contrary to the belief up to that time.\nHumour.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nLaughter is not an essential component of satire; in fact, there are types of satire that are not meant to be \"funny\" at all. Conversely, not all humour, even on such topics as politics, religion or art is necessarily \"satirical\", even when it uses the satirical tools of irony, parody, and burlesque.\nEven light-hearted satire has a serious \"after-taste\": the organizers of the Ig Nobel Prize describe this as \"first make people laugh, and then make them think\".\nSocial and psychological functions.\nSatire and irony in some cases have been regarded as the most effective source to understand a society, the oldest form of social study. They provide the keenest insights into a group's collective psyche, reveal its deepest values and tastes, and the society's structures of power. Some authors have regarded satire as superior to non-comic and non-artistic disciplines like history or anthropology. In a prominent example from ancient Greece, philosopher Plato, when asked by a friend for a book to understand Athenian society, referred him to the plays of Aristophanes.\nHistorically, satire has satisfied the popular need to debunk and ridicule the leading figures in politics, economy, religion and other prominent realms of power. Satire confronts public discourse and the collective imaginary, playing as a public opinion counterweight to power (be it political, economic, religious, symbolic, or otherwise), by challenging leaders and authorities. For instance, it forces administrations to clarify, amend or establish their policies. Satire's job is to expose problems and contradictions, and it is not obligated to solve them. Karl Kraus set in the history of satire a prominent example of a satirist role as confronting public discourse.\nFor its nature and social role, satire has enjoyed in many societies a special freedom license to mock prominent individuals and institutions. The satiric impulse, and its ritualized expressions, carry out the function of resolving social tension. Institutions like the ritual clowns, by giving expression to the antisocial tendencies, represent a safety valve which re-establishes equilibrium and health in the collective imaginary, which are jeopardized by the repressive aspects of society.\nThe state of political satire in a given society reflects the tolerance or intolerance that characterizes it, and the state of civil liberties and human rights. Under totalitarian regimes any criticism of a political system, and especially satire, is suppressed. A typical example is the Soviet Union where the dissidents, such as Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and Andrei Sakharov were under strong pressure from the government. While satire of everyday life in the USSR was allowed, the most prominent satirist being Arkady Raikin, political satire existed in the form of anecdotes that made fun of Soviet political leaders, especially Brezhnev, famous for his narrow-mindedness and love for awards and decorations.\nClassifications.\nSatire is a diverse genre which is complex to classify and define, with a wide range of satiric \"modes\".\nHoratian, Juvenalian, Menippean.\nSatirical literature can commonly be categorized as either Horatian, Juvenalian, or Menippean.\nHoratian.\nHoratian satire, named for the Roman satirist Horace (65\u20138 BCE), playfully criticizes some social vice through gentle, mild, and light-hearted humour. Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) wrote Satires to gently ridicule the dominant opinions and \"philosophical beliefs of ancient Rome and Greece\". Rather than writing in harsh or accusing tones, he addressed issues with humor and clever mockery. Horatian satire follows this same pattern of \"gently [ridiculing] the absurdities and follies of human beings\".\nIt directs wit, exaggeration, and self-deprecating humour toward what it identifies as folly. Horatian satire's sympathetic tone is common in modern society. A Horatian satirist's goal is to heal the situation with smiles, rather than by anger. Horatian satire is a gentle reminder to take life less seriously and evokes a wry smile.\nJuvenalian.\nJuvenalian satire, named for the writings of the Roman satirist Juvenal (late first century \u2013 early second century AD), is more contemptuous and abrasive than the Horatian. Juvenal disagreed with the opinions of the public figures and institutions of the Empire and actively attacked them through his literature. \"He utilized the satirical tools of exaggeration and parody to make his targets appear monstrous and incompetent\". Juvenal's satire follows this same pattern of abrasively ridiculing societal structures. Juvenal also, unlike Horace, attacked public officials and governmental organizations through his satires, regarding their opinions as not just wrong, but evil.\nFollowing in this tradition, Juvenalian satire addresses perceived social evil through scorn, outrage, and savage ridicule. This form is often pessimistic, characterized by the use of irony, sarcasm, moral indignation and personal invective, with less emphasis on humor. Strongly polarized political satire can often be classified as Juvenalian.\nA Juvenal satirist's goal is generally to provoke some sort of political or societal change because he sees his opponent or object as evil or harmful. A Juvenal satirist mocks \"societal structure, power, and civilization\" by exaggerating the words or position of his opponent in order to jeopardize their opponent's reputation and/or power. Jonathan Swift has been established as an author who \"borrowed heavily from Juvenal's techniques in [his critique] of contemporary English society\".\nSatire vis-\u00e0-vis teasing.\nIn the history of theatre there has always been a conflict between engagement and disengagement on politics and relevant issue, between satire and grotesque on one side, and jest with teasing on the other. Max Eastman defined the spectrum of satire in terms of \"degrees of biting\", as ranging from satire proper at the hot-end, and \"kidding\" at the violet-end; Eastman adopted the term kidding to denote what is just satirical in form, but is not really firing at the target. Nobel laureate satirical playwright Dario Fo pointed out the difference between satire and teasing (\"sfott\u00f2\"). Teasing is the reactionary side of the comic; it limits itself to a shallow parody of physical appearance. The side-effect of teasing is that it humanizes and draws sympathy for the powerful individual towards which it is directed. Satire instead uses the comic to go against power and its oppressions, has a subversive character, and a moral dimension which draws judgement against its targets. Fo formulated an operational criterion to tell real satire from \"sfott\u00f2\", saying that real satire arouses an outraged and violent reaction, and that the more they try to stop you, the better is the job you are doing. Fo contends that, historically, people in positions of power have welcomed and encouraged good-humoured buffoonery, while modern day people in positions of power have tried to censor, ostracize and repress satire.\nTeasing (\"sfott\u00f2\") is an ancient form of simple buffoonery, a form of comedy without satire's subversive edge. Teasing includes light and affectionate parody, good-humoured mockery, simple one-dimensional poking fun, and benign spoofs. Teasing typically consists of an impersonation of someone monkeying around with his exterior attributes, tics, physical blemishes, voice and mannerisms, quirks, way of dressing and walking, and/or the phrases he typically repeats. By contrast, teasing never touches on the core issue, never makes a serious criticism judging the target with irony; it never harms the target's conduct, ideology and position of power; it never undermines the perception of his morality and cultural dimension. \"Sfott\u00f2\" directed towards a powerful individual makes him appear more human and draws sympathy towards him. Hermann G\u00f6ring propagated jests and jokes against himself, with the aim of humanizing his image.\nClassifications by topics.\nTypes of satire can also be classified according to the topics it deals with. From the earliest times, at least since the plays of Aristophanes, the primary topics of literary satire have been politics, religion and sex. This is partly because these are the most pressing problems that affect anybody living in a society, and partly because these topics are usually taboo. Among these, politics in the broader sense is considered the pre-eminent topic of satire. Satire which targets the clergy is a type of political satire, while religious satire is that which targets religious beliefs. Satire on sex may overlap with blue comedy, off-color humor and dick jokes.\nScatology has a long literary association with satire, as it is a classical mode of the grotesque, the grotesque body and the satiric grotesque. Shit plays a fundamental role in satire because it symbolizes death, the turd being \"the ultimate dead object\". The satirical comparison of individuals or institutions with human excrement, exposes their \"inherent inertness, corruption and dead-likeness\". The ritual clowns of clown societies, like among the Pueblo Indians, have ceremonies with filth-eating. In other cultures, sin-eating is an apotropaic rite in which the sin-eater (also called filth-eater), by ingesting the food provided, takes \"upon himself the sins of the departed\". Satire about death overlaps with black humor and gallows humor.\nAnother classification by topics is the distinction between political satire, religious satire and satire of manners. Political satire is sometimes called topical satire, satire of manners is sometimes called satire of everyday life, and religious satire is sometimes called philosophical satire. Comedy of manners, sometimes also called satire of manners, criticizes mode of life of common people; political satire aims at behavior, manners of politicians, and vices of political systems. Historically, comedy of manners, which first appeared in British theater in 1620, has uncritically accepted the social code of the upper classes. Comedy in general accepts the rules of the social game, while satire subverts them.\nAnother analysis of satire is the spectrum of his possible tones: wit, ridicule, irony, sarcasm, cynicism, the sardonic and invective.\nThe type of humour that deals with creating laughter at the expense of the person telling the joke is called reflexive humour. Reflexive humour can take place at dual levels of directing humour at self or at the larger community the self identifies with. The audience's understanding of the context of reflexive humour is important for its receptivity and success. Satire is found not only in written literary forms. In preliterate cultures it manifests itself in ritual and folk forms, as well as in trickster tales and oral poetry.\nIt appears also in graphic arts, music, sculpture, dance, cartoon strips, and graffiti. Examples are Dada sculptures, Pop Art works, music of Gilbert and Sullivan and Erik Satie, punk and rock music. In modern media culture, stand-up comedy is an enclave in which satire can be introduced into mass media, challenging mainstream discourse. Comedy roasts, mock festivals, and stand-up comedians in nightclubs and concerts are the modern forms of ancient satiric rituals.\nDevelopment.\nAncient Egypt.\nOne of the earliest examples of what might be called satire, The Satire of the Trades, is in Egyptian writing from the beginning of the 2nd millennium BC. The text's apparent readers are students, tired of studying. It argues that their lot as scribes is not only useful, but far superior to that of the ordinary man. Scholars such as Helck think that the context was meant to be serious.\nThe Papyrus Anastasi I (late 2nd millennium BC) contains a satirical letter which first praises the virtues of its recipient, but then mocks the reader's meagre knowledge and achievements.\nAncient Greece.\nThe Greeks had no word for what later would be called \"satire\", although the terms cynicism and parody were used. Modern critics call the Greek playwright Aristophanes one of the best known early satirists: his plays are known for their critical political and societal commentary, particularly for the political satire by which he criticized the powerful Cleon (as in \"The Knights\"). He is also notable for the persecution he underwent. Aristophanes' plays turned upon images of filth and disease. His bawdy style was adopted by Greek dramatist-comedian Menander. His early play \"Drunkenness\" contains an attack on the politician Callimedon.\nThe oldest form of satire still in use is the Menippean satire by Menippus of Gadara. His own writings are lost. Examples from his admirers and imitators mix seriousness and mockery in dialogues and present parodies before a background of diatribe. As in the case of Aristophanes plays, menippean satire turned upon images of filth and disease.\nAncient China.\nSatire, or fengci (\u8af7\u523a) the way it is called in Chinese, goes back at least to Confucius, being mentioned in the Book of Odes (Shijing \u8a69\u7d93). It meant \"to criticize by means of an ode\". In the pre-Qin era it was also common for schools of thought to clarify their views through the use of short explanatory anecdotes, also called yuyan (\u5bd3\u8a00), translated as \"entrusted words\". These yuyan usually were brimming with satirical content. The Daoist text Zhuangzi is the first to define this concept of Yuyan. During the Qin and Han dynasty, however, the concept of yuyan mostly died out through their heavy persecution of dissent and literary circles, especially by Qin Shi Huang and Han Wudi.\nRoman world.\nThe first Roman to discuss satire critically was Quintilian, who invented the term to describe the writings of Gaius Lucilius. The two most prominent and influential ancient Roman satirists are Horace and Juvenal, who wrote during the early days of the Roman Empire. Other important satirists in ancient Latin are Gaius Lucilius and Persius. \"Satire\" in their work is much wider than in the modern sense of the word, including fantastic and highly coloured humorous writing with little or no real mocking intent. When Horace criticized Augustus, he used veiled ironic terms. In contrast, Pliny reports that the 6th-century-BC poet Hipponax wrote \"satirae\" that were so cruel that the offended hanged themselves.\nIn the 2nd century AD, Lucian wrote \"True History\", a book satirizing the clearly unrealistic travelogues/adventures written by Ctesias, Iambulus, and Homer. He states that he was surprised they expected people to believe their lies, and stating that he, like them, has no actual knowledge or experience, but shall now tell lies as if he did. He goes on to describe a far more obviously extreme and unrealistic tale, involving interplanetary exploration, war among alien life forms, and life inside a 200 mile long whale back in the terrestrial ocean, all intended to make obvious the fallacies of books like \"Indica\" and \"The Odyssey\".\nMedieval Islamic world.\nMedieval Arabic poetry included the satiric genre \"hija\". Satire was introduced into Arabic prose literature by the author Al-Jahiz in the 9th century. While dealing with serious topics in what are now known as anthropology, sociology and psychology, he introduced a satirical approach, \"based on the premise that, however serious the subject under review, it could be made more interesting and thus achieve greater effect, if only one leavened the lump of solemnity by the insertion of a few amusing anecdotes or by the throwing out of some witty or paradoxical observations. He was well aware that, in treating of new themes in his prose works, he would have to employ a vocabulary of a nature more familiar in \"hija\", satirical poetry.\" For example, in one of his zoological works, he satirized the preference for longer human penis size, writing: \"If the length of the penis were a sign of honor, then the mule would belong to the (honorable tribe of) Quraysh\". Another satirical story based on this preference was an \"Arabian Nights\" tale called \"Ali with the Large Member\".\nIn the 10th century, the writer Tha'alibi recorded satirical poetry written by the Arabic poets As-Salami and Abu Dulaf, with As-Salami praising Abu Dulaf's wide breadth of knowledge and then mocking his ability in all these subjects, and with Abu Dulaf responding back and satirizing As-Salami in return. An example of Arabic political satire included another 10th-century poet Jarir satirizing Farazdaq as \"a transgressor of the Sharia\" and later Arabic poets in turn using the term \"Farazdaq-like\" as a form of political satire.\nThe terms \"comedy\" and \"satire\" became synonymous after Aristotle's \"Poetics\" was translated into Arabic in the medieval Islamic world, where it was elaborated upon by Islamic philosophers and writers, such as Abu Bischr, his pupil Al-Farabi, Avicenna, and Averroes. Due to cultural differences, they disassociated comedy from Greek dramatic representation and instead identified it with Arabic poetic themes and forms, such as \"hija\" (satirical poetry). They viewed comedy as simply the \"art of reprehension\", and made no reference to light and cheerful events, or troubled beginnings and happy endings, associated with classical Greek comedy. After the Latin translations of the 12th century, the term \"comedy\" thus gained a new semantic meaning in Medieval literature.\nUbayd Zakani introduced satire in Persian literature during the 14th century. His work is noted for its satire and obscene verses, often political or bawdy, and often cited in debates involving homosexual practices. He wrote the \"Resaleh-ye Delgosha\", as well as \"Akhlaq al-Ashraf\" (\"Ethics of the Aristocracy\") and the famous humorous fable \"Masnavi Mush-O-Gorbeh\" (Mouse and Cat), which was a political satire. His non-satirical serious classical verses have also been regarded as very well written, in league with the other great works of Persian literature. Between 1905 and 1911, Bibi Khatoon Astarabadi and other Iranian writers wrote notable satires.\nMedieval Europe.\nIn the Early Middle Ages, examples of satire were the songs by Goliards or vagants now best known as an anthology called Carmina Burana and made famous as texts of a composition by the 20th-century composer Carl Orff. Satirical poetry is believed to have been popular, although little has survived. With the advent of the High Middle Ages and the birth of modern vernacular literature in the 12th century, it began to be used again, most notably by Chaucer. The disrespectful manner was considered \"unchristian\" and ignored, except for the moral satire, which mocked misbehaviour in Christian terms. Examples are \"Livre des Mani\u00e8res\" by \u00c9tienne de Foug\u00e8res (~1178), and some of Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\". Sometimes epic poetry (epos) was mocked, and even feudal society, but there was hardly a general interest in the genre.\nIn the High Middle Ages the work Reynard the Fox, written by Willem die Madoc maecte, and its translations were a popular work that satirized the class system at the time. Representing the various classes as certain anthropomorphic animals. As example, the lion in the story represents the nobility, which is portrayed as being weak and without character, but very greedy. Versions of Reynard the Fox were also popular well into the early modern period. The Dutch translation Van den vos Reynaerde is considered a major medieval Dutch literary work. In the Dutch version De Vries argues that the animal characters represent barons who conspired against the Count of Flanders.\nEarly modern western satire.\nDirect social commentary via satire returned in the 16th century, when texts such as the works of Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais tackled more serious issues.\nTwo major satirists of Europe in the Renaissance were Giovanni Boccaccio and Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais. Other examples of Renaissance satire include \"Till Eulenspiegel\", \"Reynard the Fox\", Sebastian Brant's \"Narrenschiff\" (1494), Erasmus's \"Moriae Encomium\" (1509), Thomas More's \"Utopia\" (1516), and \"Carajicomedia\" (1519).\nThe Elizabethan (i.e. 16th-century English) writers thought of satire as related to the notoriously rude, coarse and sharp satyr play. Elizabethan \"satire\" (typically in pamphlet form) therefore contains more straightforward abuse than subtle irony. The French Huguenot Isaac Casaubon pointed out in 1605 that satire in the Roman fashion was something altogether more civilised. Casaubon discovered and published Quintilian's writing and presented the original meaning of the term (satira, not satyr), and the sense of wittiness (reflecting the \"dishfull of fruits\") became more important again. Seventeenth-century English satire once again aimed at the \"amendment of vices\" (Dryden).\nIn the 1590s a new wave of verse satire broke with the publication of Hall's \"Virgidemiarum\", six books of verse satires targeting everything from literary fads to corrupt noblemen. Although Donne had already circulated satires in manuscript, Hall's was the first real attempt in English at verse satire on the Juvenalian model. The success of his work combined with a national mood of disillusion in the last years of Elizabeth's reign triggered an avalanche of satire\u2014much of it less conscious of classical models than Hall's \u2014 until the fashion was brought to an abrupt stop by censorship.\nAnother satiric genre to emerge around this time was the satirical almanac, with Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais's work \"Pantagrueline Prognostication\" (1532), which mocked astrological predictions. The strategies Fran\u00e7ois utilized within this work were employed by later satirical almanacs, such as the \"Poor Robin\" series that spanned the 17th to 19th centuries.\nAncient and modern India.\nSatire (\"Kataksh\" or \"Vyang\") has played a prominent role in Indian and Hindi literature, and is counted as one of the \"ras\" of literature in ancient books. With the commencement of printing of books in local language in the nineteenth century and especially after India's freedom, this grew. Many of the works of Tulsi Das, Kabir, Munshi Premchand, village minstrels, Hari katha singers, poets, Dalit singers and current day stand up Indian comedians incorporate satire, usually ridiculing authoritarians, fundamentalists and incompetent people in power. In India, it has usually been used as a means of expression and an outlet for common people to express their anger against authoritarian entities.\nAge of Enlightenment.\nThe Age of Enlightenment, an intellectual movement in the 17th and 18th centuries advocating rationality, produced a great revival of satire in Britain. This was fuelled by the rise of partisan politics, with the formalisation of the Tory and Whig parties\u2014and also, in 1714, by the formation of the Scriblerus Club, which included Alexander Pope, Jonathan Swift, John Gay, John Arbuthnot, Robert Harley, Thomas Parnell, and Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke. This club included several of the notable satirists of early-18th-century Britain. They focused their attention on Martinus Scriblerus, \"an invented learned fool... whose work they attributed all that was tedious, narrow-minded, and pedantic in contemporary scholarship\". In their hands astute and biting satire of institutions and individuals became a popular weapon. The turn to the 18th century was characterized by a switch from Horatian, soft, pseudo-satire, to biting \"juvenal\" satire.\nJonathan Swift was one of the greatest of Anglo-Irish satirists, and one of the first to practise modern journalistic satire. For instance, In his \"A Modest Proposal\" Swift suggests that Irish peasants be encouraged to sell their own children as food for the rich, as a solution to the \"problem\" of poverty. His purpose is of course to attack indifference to the plight of the desperately poor. In his book \"Gulliver's Travels\" he writes about the flaws in human society in general and English society in particular. John Dryden wrote an influential essay entitled \"A Discourse Concerning the Original and Progress of Satire\" that helped fix the definition of satire in the literary world. His satirical \"Mac Flecknoe\" was written in response to a rivalry with Thomas Shadwell and eventually inspired Alexander Pope to write his satirical \"Dunciad\".\nAlexander Pope (b. May 21, 1688) was a satirist known for his Horatian satirist style and translation of the \"Iliad\". Famous throughout and after the long 18th century, Pope died in 1744. Pope, in his \"The Rape of the Lock\", is delicately chiding society in a sly but polished voice by holding up a mirror to the follies and vanities of the upper class. Pope does not actively attack the self-important pomp of the British aristocracy, but rather presents it in such a way that gives the reader a new perspective from which to easily view the actions in the story as foolish and ridiculous. A mockery of the upper class, more delicate and lyrical than brutal, Pope nonetheless is able to effectively illuminate the moral degradation of society to the public. \"The Rape of the Lock\" assimilates the masterful qualities of a heroic epic, such as the \"Iliad\", which Pope was translating at the time of writing \"The Rape of the Lock\". However, Pope applied these qualities satirically to a seemingly petty egotistical elitist quarrel to prove his point wryly.\nOther satirical works by Pope include the \"Epistle to Dr Arbuthnot\".\nDaniel Defoe pursued a more journalistic type of satire, being famous for his \"The True-Born Englishman\" which mocks xenophobic patriotism, and \"The Shortest-Way with the Dissenters\"\u2014advocating religious toleration by means of an ironical exaggeration of the highly intolerant attitudes of his time.\nThe pictorial satire of William Hogarth is a precursor to the development of political cartoons in 18th-century England. The medium developed under the direction of its greatest exponent, James Gillray from London. With his satirical works calling the king (George III), prime ministers and generals (especially Napoleon) to account, Gillray's wit and keen sense of the ridiculous made him the pre-eminent cartoonist of the era.\nEbenezer Cooke (1665\u20131732), author of \"The Sot-Weed Factor\" (1708), was among the first writers of literary satire in Colonial America. Benjamin Franklin (1706\u20131790) and others followed, using satire to shape an emerging nation's culture through its sense of the ridiculous.\nSatire in Victorian England.\nSeveral satiric papers competed for the public's attention in the Victorian era (1837\u20131901) and Edwardian period, such as \"Punch\" (1841) and \"Fun\" (1861).\nPerhaps the most enduring examples of Victorian satire, however, are to be found in the Savoy Operas of Gilbert and Sullivan. In fact, in \"The Yeomen of the Guard\", a jester is given lines that paint a very neat picture of the method and purpose of the satirist, and might almost be taken as a statement of Gilbert's own intent:\n\"I can set a braggart quailing with a quip,\"\n\"The upstart I can wither with a whim;\"\n\"He may wear a merry laugh upon his lip,\"\n\"But his laughter has an echo that is grim!\"\nNovelists such as Charles Dickens (1812\u20131870) often used passages of satiric writing in their treatment of social issues.\nContinuing the tradition of Swiftian journalistic satire, Sidney Godolphin Osborne (1808\u20131889) was the most prominent writer of scathing \"Letters to the Editor\" of the London \"Times\". Famous in his day, he is now all but forgotten. His maternal grandfather William Eden, 1st Baron Auckland was considered to be a possible candidate for the authorship of the Junius letters. Osborne's satire was so bitter and biting that at one point he received a public censure from Parliament's then Home Secretary Sir James Graham. Osborne wrote mostly in the Juvenalian mode over a wide range of topics mostly centered on British government's and landlords' mistreatment of poor farm workers and field laborers. He bitterly opposed the New Poor Laws and was passionate on the subject of the British government's botched response to the Great Irish Famine and the mistreatment of British soldiers during the Crimean War.\nA number of works of fiction during this time, influenced by Egyptomania, used the backdrop of Ancient Egypt as a device for satire. Some works, like Edgar Allan Poe's \"Some Words with a Mummy\" (1845) and Grant Allen's \"My New Year's Eve Among the Mummies\" (1878), portrayed Egyptian civilization as having already achieved many of the Victorian era's advancements (like the steam engine and gaslamps) in an effort to satire the notion of progress. Other works, like Jane Loudon's \"\", satirized Victorian curiosities with the afterlife.\nLater in the nineteenth century, in the United States, Mark Twain (1835\u20131910) grew to become American's greatest satirist: his novel \"Huckleberry Finn\" (1884) is set in the antebellum South, where the moral values Twain wishes to promote are completely turned on their heads. His hero, Huck, is a rather simple but goodhearted lad who is ashamed of the \"sinful temptation\" that leads him to help a fugitive slave. In fact his conscience, warped by the distorted moral world he has grown up in, often bothers him most when he is at his best. He is prepared to do good, believing it to be wrong.\nTwain's younger contemporary Ambrose Bierce (1842\u20131913) gained notoriety as a cynic, pessimist and black humorist with his dark, bitterly ironic stories, many set during the American Civil War, which satirized the limitations of human perception and reason. Bierce's most famous work of satire is probably \"The Devil's Dictionary\" (1906), in which the definitions mock cant, hypocrisy and received wisdom.\n20th-century satire.\nKarl Kraus is considered the first major European satirist since Jonathan Swift. In 20th-century literature, satire was used by English authors such as Aldous Huxley (1930s) and George Orwell (1940s), which under the inspiration of Zamyatin's Russian 1921 novel \"We\", made serious and even frightening commentaries on the dangers of the sweeping social changes taking place throughout Europe. Anatoly Lunacharsky wrote 'Satire attains its greatest significance when a newly evolving class creates an ideology considerably more advanced than that of the ruling class, but has not yet developed to the point where it can conquer it. Herein lies its truly great ability to triumph, its scorn for its adversary and its hidden fear of it. Herein lies its venom, its amazing energy of hate, and quite frequently, its grief, like a black frame around glittering images. Herein lie its contradictions, and its power.' Many social critics of this same time in the United States, such as Dorothy Parker and H. L. Mencken, used satire as their main weapon, and Mencken in particular is noted for having said that \"one horse-laugh is worth ten thousand syllogisms\" in the persuasion of the public to accept a criticism. Novelist Sinclair Lewis was known for his satirical stories such as \"Main Street\" (1920), \"Babbitt\" (1922), \"Elmer Gantry\" (1927; dedicated by Lewis to H. L. Mencken), and \"It Can't Happen Here\" (1935), and his books often explored and satirized contemporary American values. The film \"The Great Dictator\" (1940) by Charlie Chaplin is itself a parody of Adolf Hitler; Chaplin later declared that he would have not made the film if he had known about the concentration camps.\nModern Soviet satire was very popular in the 1920s and 1930s. This form of satire is recognized by its level of sophistication and intelligence used, along with its own level of parody. Since there is no longer the need of survival or revolution to write about, modern Soviet satire focused on the quality of life.\nIn the United States 1950s, satire was introduced into American stand-up comedy most prominently by Lenny Bruce and Mort Sahl. As they challenged the taboos and conventional wisdom of the time, were ostracized by the mass media establishment as \"sick comedians\". In the same period, Paul Krassner's magazine \"The Realist\" began publication, to become immensely popular during the 1960s and early 1970s among people in the counterculture; it had articles and cartoons that were savage, biting satires of politicians such as Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon, the Vietnam War, the Cold War and the war on drugs. This baton was also carried by the original National Lampoon magazine, edited by Doug Kenney and Henry Beard and featuring blistering satire written by Michael O'Donoghue, P.J. O'Rourke, and Tony Hendra, among others. Prominent satiric stand-up comedian George Carlin acknowledged the influence \"The Realist\" had in his 1970s conversion to a satiric comedian.\nA more humorous brand of satire enjoyed a renaissance in the UK in the early 1960s with the satire boom, led by comedians including Peter Cook, Alan Bennett, Jonathan Miller, and Dudley Moore, whose stage show \"Beyond the Fringe\" was a hit not only in Britain, but also in the United States. Other significant influences in 1960s British satire include David Frost, Eleanor Bron and the television program \"That Was The Week That Was\".\nJoseph Heller's most famous work, \"Catch-22\" (1961), satirizes bureaucracy and the military, and is frequently cited as one of the greatest literary works of the twentieth century. Departing from traditional Hollywood farce and screwball, director and comedian Jerry Lewis used satire in his self-directed films \"The Bellboy\" (1960), \"The Errand Boy\" (1961) and \"The Patsy\" (1964) to comment on celebrity and the star-making machinery of Hollywood. The film \"Dr. Strangelove\" (1964) starring Peter Sellers was a popular satire on the Cold War. Sellers and the British satire boom had a direct influence on the comedy troupe Monty Python. \"Empire\" magazine called \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\" (1979) \"an unrivalled satire on religion\".\nSeverino \"Nonoy\" Marcelo's 1978 Philippine adult animated comedy film, \"Tadhana\", presents a satirical, humorous and poignant view of the Philippines' history of Spanish colonization.\nContemporary satire.\nContemporary popular usage of the term \"satire\" is often very imprecise. While satire often uses caricature and parody, by no means are all uses of these or other humorous devices satiric. Refer to the careful definition of satire that heads this article. \"The Cambridge Companion to Roman Satire\" also warns of the ambiguous nature of satire: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSatire is used on many UK television programmes, particularly popular panel shows and quiz shows such as \"Mock the Week\" (2005\u20132022) and \"Have I Got News for You\" (1990\u2013ongoing). It is found on radio quiz shows such as \"The News Quiz\" (1977\u2013ongoing) and \"The Now Show\" (1998\u20132024). One of the most watched UK television shows of the 1980s and early 1990s, the puppet show \"Spitting Image\" was a satire of the royal family, politics, entertainment, sport and British culture of the era. Court Flunkey from \"Spitting Image\" is a caricature of James Gillray, intended as a homage to the father of political cartooning.\nCreated by DMA Design in 1997, satire features prominently in the British video game series \"Grand Theft Auto\". Another example is the \"Fallout\" series, namely Interplay-developed \"Fallout: A Post Nuclear Role Playing Game\" (1995). Other games utilizing satire include \"Postal\" (1997), \"State of Emergency\" (2002), \"Phone Story\" (2011), and \"7 Billion Humans\" (2018).\nTrey Parker and Matt Stone's \"South Park\" (1997\u2013ongoing) relies almost exclusively on satire to address issues in American culture, with episodes addressing racism, anti-Semitism, militant atheism, homophobia, sexism, environmentalism, corporate culture, political correctness and anti-Catholicism, among many other issues.\nSatirical web series and sites include Emmy-nominated \"Honest Trailers\" (2012\u2013), Internet phenomena-themed Encyclopedia Dramatica (2004\u2013), Uncyclopedia (2005\u2013), self-proclaimed \"America's Finest News Source\" \"The Onion\" (1988\u2013). and \"The Onion's\" Christian conservative counterpart \"The Babylon Bee\" (2016\u2013).\nIn the United States, Stephen Colbert's television program, \"The Colbert Report\" (2005\u201314) is instructive in the methods of contemporary American satire; sketch comedy television show \"Saturday Night Live\" is also known for its satirical impressions and parodies of prominent persons and politicians, among some of the most notable, their parodies of U.S. political figures Hillary Clinton and of Sarah Palin. Colbert's character is an opinionated and self-righteous commentator who, in his TV interviews, interrupts people, points and wags his finger at them, and \"unwittingly\" uses a number of logical fallacies. In doing so, he demonstrates the principle of modern American political satire: the ridicule of the actions of politicians and other public figures by taking all their statements and purported beliefs to their furthest (supposedly) logical conclusion, thus revealing their perceived hypocrisy or absurdity.\nIn the United Kingdom, a popular modern satirist was the late Sir Terry Pratchett, author of the internationally best-selling \"Discworld\" book series. One of the most well-known and controversial British satirists is Chris Morris, co-writer and director of \"Four Lions\".\nIn Canada, satire has become an important part of the comedy scene. Stephen Leacock was one of the best known early Canadian satirists, and in the early 20th century, he achieved fame by targeting the attitudes of small-town life. In more recent years, Canada has had several prominent satirical television series and radio shows. Some, including \"CODCO\", \"The Royal Canadian Air Farce\", \"This Is That\", and \"This Hour Has 22 Minutes\" deal directly with current news stories and political figures, while others, like \"History Bites\" present contemporary social satire in the context of events and figures in history. The Beaverton is a Canadian news satire site similar to The Onion. Canadian songwriter Nancy White uses music as the vehicle for her satire, and her comic folk songs are regularly played on CBC Radio.\nIn Hong Kong, there was a well-known Australian Kim Jong-un impersonator Howard X who often utilised satire to show his support for Hong Kong city's pro-democracy movements and liberation of North Korea. He believed humor to be a very powerful weapon and often made it clear that his imitation of the dictator was done to satirize him, not to glorify him. Throughout his career as a professional impersonator he worked with multiple organisations and celebrities to create parodies and to spark conversations about politics and human rights.\nCartoonists often use satire as well as straight humour. Al Capp's satirical comic strip \"Li'l Abner\" was censored in September 1947. The controversy, as reported in \"Time\", centred on Capp's portrayal of the US Senate. Said Edward Leech of Scripps-Howard, \"We don't think it is good editing or sound citizenship to picture the Senate as an assemblage of freaks and crooks... boobs and undesirables.\" Walt Kelly's \"Pogo\" was likewise censored in 1952 over his overt satire of Senator Joe McCarthy, caricatured in his comic strip as \"Simple J. Malarky\". Garry Trudeau, whose comic strip \"Doonesbury\" focuses on satire of the political system, and provides a trademark cynical view on national events. Trudeau exemplifies humour mixed with criticism. For example, the character Mark Slackmeyer lamented that because he was not legally married to his partner, he was deprived of the \"exquisite agony\" of experiencing a nasty and painful divorce like heterosexuals. This, of course, satirized the claim that gay unions would denigrate the sanctity of heterosexual marriage.\nLike some literary predecessors, many recent television satires contain strong elements of parody and caricature; for instance, the popular animated series \"The Simpsons\" and \"South Park\" both parody modern family and social life by taking their assumptions to the extreme; both have led to the creation of similar series. As well as the purely humorous effect of this sort of thing, they often strongly criticise various phenomena in politics, economic life, religion and many other aspects of society, and thus qualify as satirical. Due to their animated nature, these shows can easily use images of public figures and generally have greater freedom to do so than conventional shows using live actors.\nNews satire is also a very popular form of contemporary satire, appearing in as wide an array of formats as the news media itself: print (e.g. \"The Onion\", \"Waterford Whispers News\", \"Private Eye\"), radio (e.g. \"On the Hour\"), television (e.g. \"The Day Today\", \"The Daily Show\", \"Brass Eye\") and the web (e.g. \"Faking News\", \"El Koshary Today\", \"Babylon Bee\", \"The Beaverton\", \"The Daily Bonnet\" and \"The Onion\"). Other satires are on the list of satirists and satires.\nIn an interview with \"Wikinews\", Sean Mills, President of \"The Onion\", said angry letters about their news parody always carried the same message. \"It's whatever affects that person\", said Mills. \"So it's like, 'I love it when you make a joke about murder or rape, but if you talk about cancer, well my brother has cancer and that's not funny to me.' Or someone else can say, 'Cancer's \"hilarious\", but don't talk about rape because my cousin got raped.' Those are rather extreme examples, but if it affects somebody personally, they tend to be more sensitive about it.\"\nSatire is also gaining recognition for its value in social science research, particularly when authors are seeking to unpack complex social issues like gendered racism.\nSatire is regularly used by social movements covering a range of issues to achieve strategic goals. US community organizer and author of Rules for Radicals, Saul Alinsky, stated, \"'Humour is essential to a successful tactician, for the most potent weapons known to [people] are satire and ridicule\".\nTechniques.\nLiterary satire is usually written out of earlier satiric works, reprising previous conventions, commonplaces, stance, situations and tones of voice. Exaggeration is one of the most common satirical techniques. Contrarily, diminution is also a satirical technique.\nLegal status.\nFor its nature and social role, satire has enjoyed in many societies a special freedom license to mock prominent individuals and institutions. In Germany, Japan, and Italy satire is protected by the constitution.\nSince satire belongs to the realm of art and artistic expression, it benefits from broader lawfulness limits than mere freedom of information of journalistic kind. In some countries a specific \"right to satire\" is recognized and its limits go beyond the \"right to report\" of journalism and even the \"right to criticize\". Satire benefits not only of the protection to freedom of speech, but also to that to culture, and that to scientific and artistic production.\nAustralia.\nIn September 2017 The Juice Media received an e-mail from the Australian National Symbols Officer requesting that the use of a satirical logo, called the \"Coat of Harms\" based on the Australian Coat of Arms, no longer be used as they had received complaints from the members of the public. Coincidentally 5 days later a Bill was proposed to Australian parliament to amend the Criminal Code Act 1995. If passed, those found to be in breach of the new amendment can face 2\u20135 years imprisonment.\nAs of June 2018, the Criminal Code Amendment (Impersonating a Commonwealth Body) Bill 2017 was before the Australian Senate with the third reading moved May 10, 2018.\nCensorship and criticism.\nDescriptions of satire's biting effect on its target include 'venomous', 'cutting', 'stinging', vitriol. Because satire often combines anger and humor, as well as the fact that it addresses and calls into question many controversial issues, it can be profoundly disturbing.\nTypical arguments.\nBecause it is essentially ironic or sarcastic, satire is often misunderstood. A typical misunderstanding is to confuse the satirist with their persona.\nBad taste.\nCommon uncomprehending responses to satire include revulsion (accusations of poor taste, or that \"it's just not funny\" for instance) and the idea that the satirist actually does support the ideas, policies, or people being ridiculed. For instance, at the time of its publication, many people misunderstood Swift's purpose in \"A Modest Proposal\", assuming it to be a serious recommendation of economically motivated cannibalism. Much later in history, in the weeks following 9/11 the American public at large found works of satire to be in bad taste and not appropriate for the social climate at the time. Some media outlets at the time, like essayist Roger Rosenblatt in an editorial for \"Time\" magazine's September 24 issue, would go so far as to claim that irony was dead.\nTargeting the victim.\nSome critics of Mark Twain see \"Huckleberry Finn\" as racist and offensive, missing the point that its author clearly intended it to be satire (racism being in fact only one of a number of Mark Twain's known concerns attacked in \"Huckleberry Finn\"). This same misconception was suffered by the main character of the 1960s British television comedy satire \"Till Death Us Do Part\". The character of Alf Garnett (played by Warren Mitchell) was created to poke fun at the kind of narrow-minded, racist, little Englander that Garnett represented. Instead, his character became a sort of anti-hero to people who actually agreed with his views. (The same situation occurred with Archie Bunker in American TV show \"All in the Family\", a character derived directly from Garnett.)\nThe Australian satirical television comedy show \"The Chaser's War on Everything\" has suffered repeated attacks based on various perceived interpretations of the \"target\" of its attacks. The \"Make a Realistic Wish Foundation\" sketch (June 2009), which attacked in classical satiric fashion the heartlessness of people who are reluctant to donate to charities, was widely interpreted as an attack on the Make a Wish Foundation, or even the terminally ill children helped by that organisation. Prime Minister of the time Kevin Rudd stated that The Chaser team \"should hang their heads in shame\". He went on to say that \"I didn't see that but it's been described to me. ...But having a go at kids with a terminal illness is really beyond the pale, absolutely beyond the pale.\" Television station management suspended the show for two weeks and reduced the third season to eight episodes.\nRomantic prejudice.\nThe romantic prejudice against satire is the belief spread by the romantic movement that satire is something unworthy of serious attention; this prejudice has held considerable influence to this day. Such prejudice extends to humour and everything that arouses laughter, which are often underestimated as frivolous and unworthy of serious study. For instance, humor is generally neglected as a topic of anthropological research and teaching.\nHistory of opposition toward notable satires.\nBecause satire criticises in an ironic, essentially indirect way, it frequently escapes censorship in a way more direct criticism might not. Periodically, however, it runs into serious opposition, and people in power who perceive themselves as attacked attempt to censor it or prosecute its practitioners. In a classic example, Aristophanes was persecuted by the demagogue Cleon.\n1599 book ban.\nIn 1599, the Archbishop of Canterbury John Whitgift and the Bishop of London Richard Bancroft, whose offices had the function of licensing books for publication in England, issued a decree banning verse satire. The decree, now known as the Bishops' Ban of 1599, ordered the burning of certain volumes of satire by John Marston, Thomas Middleton, Joseph Hall, and others; it also required histories and plays to be specially approved by a member of the Queen's Privy Council, and it prohibited the future printing of satire in verse.\nThe motives for the ban are obscure, particularly since some of the books banned had been licensed by the same authorities less than a year earlier. Various scholars have argued that the target was obscenity, libel, or sedition. It seems likely that lingering anxiety about the Martin Marprelate controversy, in which the bishops themselves had employed satirists, played a role; both Thomas Nashe and Gabriel Harvey, two of the key figures in that controversy, suffered a complete ban on all their works. In the event, though, the ban was little enforced, even by the licensing authority itself.\n21st-century polemics.\nIn 2005, the Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy caused global protests by offended Muslims and violent attacks with many fatalities in the Near East. It was not the first case of Muslim protests against criticism in the form of satire, but the Western world was surprised by the hostility of the reaction: Any country's flag in which a newspaper chose to publish the parodies was being burnt in a Near East country, then embassies were attacked, killing 139 people in mainly four countries; politicians throughout Europe agreed that satire was an aspect of the freedom of speech, and therefore to be a protected means of dialogue. Iran threatened to start an International Holocaust Cartoon Competition, which was immediately responded to by Jews with an Israeli Anti-Semitic Cartoons Contest.\nIn 2006 British comedian Sacha Baron Cohen released \"Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan\", a \"mockumentary\" that satirized everyone, from high society to frat boys. The film was criticized by many. Although Baron Cohen is Jewish, some complained that it was antisemitic, and the government of Kazakhstan boycotted the film. The film itself had been a reaction to a longer quarrel between the government and the comedian.\nIn 2008, popular South African cartoonist and satirist Jonathan Shapiro (who is published under the pen name Zapiro) came under fire for depicting then-president of the ANC Jacob Zuma in the act of undressing in preparation for the implied rape of 'Lady Justice' which is held down by Zuma loyalists. The cartoon was drawn in response to Zuma's efforts to duck corruption charges, and the controversy was heightened by the fact that Zuma was himself acquitted of rape in May 2006. In February 2009, the South African Broadcasting Corporation, viewed by some opposition parties as the mouthpiece of the governing ANC, shelved a satirical TV show created by Shapiro, and in May 2009 the broadcaster pulled a documentary about political satire (featuring Shapiro among others) for the second time, hours before scheduled broadcast.\nOn December 29, 2009, Samsung sued Mike Breen, and the \"Korea Times\" for $1\u00a0million, claiming criminal defamation over a satirical column published on Christmas Day, 2009.\nOn April 29, 2015, the UK Independence Party (UKIP) requested Kent Police investigate the BBC, claiming that comments made about Party leader Nigel Farage by a panelist on the comedy show \"Have I Got News For You\" might hinder his chances of success in the general election (which would take place a week later), and claimed the BBC breached the Representation of the People Act. Kent Police rebuffed the request to open an investigation, and the BBC released a statement, \"Britain has a proud tradition of satire, and everyone knows that the contributors on \"Have I Got News for You\" regularly make jokes at the expense of politicians of all parties.\"\nSatirical prophecy.\nSatire is occasionally prophetic: the jokes precede actual events. Among the eminent examples are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26792", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26792", "title": "Samuel Butler (poet)", "text": "Poet and satirist\nSamuel Butler (baptized 14 February 1613 \u2013 25 September 1680) was an English poet and satirist. He is remembered now chiefly for a long satirical poem titled \"Hudibras\".\nBiography.\nSamuel Butler was born in Strensham, Worcestershire, and was the son of a farmer and churchwarden, also named Samuel. His date of birth is unknown, but there is documentary evidence for the date of his baptism of 14 February. The date of Butler's baptism is given as 8 February by Treadway Russell Nash in his 1793 edition of \"Hudibras\". Nash had already mentioned Butler in his \"Collections for a History of Worcestershire\" (1781), and perhaps because the latter date seemed to be a revised account, it has been repeated by many writers and editors. However, The parish register of Strensham records under the year 1612: \"Item was christened Samuell Butler the sonne of Samuell Butler the xiiijth of February anno ut supra\". Lady Day, 25 March, was New Year's Day in England at the time, so the year of his baptism was 1613 according to the change of the start of the year with the Calendar Act of 1750 (see Old Style and New Style dates). Nash also claims in his 1793 edition of \"Hudibras\" that Butler's father entered his son's baptism into the register, an error that was also repeated in later publications; however, the entry was clearly written by a different hand.\nButler was brought up in the household of Sir William Russell of Strensham and became his clerk. \"When just a Boy he would make observations and reflections on every Thing one sayd or did, and censure it to be either well or ill. He was never at the University for the reason alleged.\" He was educated at the King's School, Worcester, under Henry Bright whose teaching is recorded favourably by Thomas Fuller, a contemporary writer, in his \"Worthies of England\". In early youth he was a servant to the Countess of Kent. Through Lady Kent he met her steward, the jurist John Selden who influenced his later writings. He also tried his hand at painting but was reportedly not very good at it; one of his editors reporting that \"his pictures served to stop windows and save the tax\" (on window glass). Conversely, John Aubrey who knew Butler quite well enough to be one of his pallbearers, wrote that \"He was thinking once to have made painting his Profession. His love to and skill in painting made a great friendship between him and Mr. Samuel Cowper (The Prince of Limners of this Age).\" He studied law but did not practice.\nAfter the Restoration he became secretary, or steward, to Richard Vaughan, 2nd Earl of Carbery, Lord President of Wales, which entailed living at least a year in Ludlow, Shropshire, until January 1662 while he was paying craftsmen working on repairing the castle there. In late 1662 the first part of \"Hudibras\", which he began writing when lodging at Holborn, London, in 1658 and continued to work on while in Ludlow, was published, and the other two in 1664 and 1678 respectively. One early purchaser of the first two parts was Samuel Pepys. While the diarist acknowledged that the book was the \"greatest fashion\" he could not see why it was found to be so witty.\nDespite the popularity of \"Hudibras\", Butler was not offered a place at Court. \"Satyrical Witts disoblige whom they converse with; and consequently make to themselves many Enemies and few Friends; and this was his manner and case.\" However, Butler is thought to have been in the employment of the Duke of Buckingham in the summer of 1670, and accompanied him on a diplomatic mission to France. Butler also received financial support in the form of a grant from King Charles II.\nDuring the latter part of his life, Butler lived in a house in the now partially demolished Rose Street, to the west of Covent Garden.\nDeath.\nButler died of consumption on 25 September 1680, and was buried on 27 September in the Church-yard of St. Paul's, Covent Garden; in the north part next to the church at the east end. \"His feet touch the wall. His grave 2 yards distant from the Pillaster of the Dore (by his desire) 6 feet deep\" at the expense of a Mr. Longueville, although he was not in debt when he died. Aubrey in \"Brief Lives\" describes his grave as \"being in the north part next to the church at the east end ... 2 yards distant from the pillaster of the dore\". Also, a monument to him was placed in Westminster Abbey in 1732 by a printer, John Barber, and the Lord Mayor of London. There is also a memorial plaque to him in the small village church of Strensham, Worcestershire, near the town of Upton upon Severn, his birthplace.\n\"Hudibras\".\n\"Hudibras\" is directed against religious sectarianism. The poem was very popular in its time, and several of its phrases have passed into the dictionary. It was sufficiently popular to spawn imitators. \"Hudibras\" takes some of its characterization from \"Don Quixote\" but, unlike that work, it has many more references to personalities and events of the day. Butler was also influenced by satirists such as John Skelton and Paul Scarron's \"Virgile travesti\"; a satire on classical literature, particularly Virgil.\n\"Hudibras\" was reprinted many times in the centuries following Butler's death. Two of the more noteworthy editions are those edited by Zachery Grey (1744) and Treadway Russell Nash (1793). The standard edition of the work was edited by John Wilders (1967).\nOther writings.\nMost of his other writings never saw print until they were collected and published by Robert Thyer in 1759. Butler wrote many short biographies, epigrams and verses, the earliest surviving from 1644. Of his verses, the best known is \"The Elephant on the Moon\", about a mouse trapped in a telescope, a satire on Sir Paul Neale of the Royal Society. Butler's taste for the mock heroic is shown by another early poem \"Cynarctomachy\", or Battle between Bear and Dogs, which is both a homage to and a parody of a Greek poem ascribed to Homer, \"Batrachomyomachia\". \nHe wrote the poem \"Upon Philip Nye's Thanksgiving Beard\" about the Puritan Philip Nye and later also mentioned him in \"Hudibras\".\nHis supposed lack of money later in life is strange as he had numerous unpublished works which could have offered him income including a set of Theophrastan character sketches which were not printed until 1759. Many other works are dubiously attributed to him.\nQuotations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A News-monger is a Retailer of Rumour, that takes up upon Trust, and sells as cheap as he buys. He deals in a perishable Commodity, that will not keep: for if it be not fresh it lies upon his Hands, and will yield nothing. True or false is all one to him; for Novelty being the Grace of bothe, a Truth grows stale as soon as a Lye...\u2014\u200a\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26793", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26793", "title": "Spirits", "text": ""}
{"id": "26794", "revid": "40869948", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26794", "title": "List of science fiction and fantasy artists", "text": "This is a list of science fiction and fantasy artists, notable and well-known 20th- and 21st-century artists who have created book covers or interior illustrations for books, or who have had their own books or comic books of fantastic art with science fiction or fantasy themes published. Artists known exclusively for their work in comic books are not included. Many of the artists are known for their work in both the fantasy and sf fields. Artists who have won the Hugo Award, the World Fantasy Award, or the Chesley Award are noted, as are inductees into the Science Fiction Hall of Fame.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n * See also\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26795", "revid": "10399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26795", "title": "Saxophone", "text": "Single-reed woodwind instrument\nThe saxophone (often referred to colloquially as the sax) is a type of single-reed woodwind instrument with a conical body, usually made of brass. As with all single-reed instruments, sound is produced when a reed on a mouthpiece vibrates to produce a sound wave inside the instrument's body. The pitch is controlled by opening and closing holes in the body to change the effective length of the tube. The holes are closed by leather pads attached to keys operated by the player. Saxophones are made in various sizes and are almost always treated as transposing instruments. A person who plays the saxophone is called a \"saxophonist\" or \"saxist\".\nThe saxophone is used in a wide range of musical styles including classical music (such as concert bands, chamber music, solo repertoire, and occasionally orchestras), military bands, marching bands, jazz (such as big bands and jazz combos), and contemporary music. The saxophone is also used as a solo and melody instrument or as a member of a horn section in some styles of rock and roll and popular music.\nThe saxophone was invented by the Belgian instrument maker Adolphe Sax in the early 1840s and was patented on 28 June 1846. Sax invented two groups of seven instruments each\u2014one group contained instruments in C and F, and the other group contained instruments in B\u266d and E\u266d. The B\u266d and E\u266d instruments soon became dominant, and most saxophones encountered today are from this series. Instruments from the series pitched in C and F never gained a foothold and constituted only a small fraction of instruments made by Sax. \"High-pitch\" (also marked \"H\" or \"HP\") saxophones tuned sharper than the (concert) A = 440 Hz standard were produced into the early twentieth century for sonic qualities suited for outdoor use, but are not playable to modern tuning and are considered obsolete. \"Low-pitch\" (also marked \"L\" or \"LP\") saxophones are equivalent in tuning to modern instruments. C soprano and C melody saxophones were produced for the casual market as parlor instruments during the early twentieth century, and saxophones in F were introduced during the late 1920s but never gained acceptance.\nThe modern &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;saxophone family consists entirely of B\u266d and E\u266d instruments. The saxophones in widest use are the B\u266d soprano, E\u266d alto, B\u266d tenor, and E\u266d baritone. The E\u266d sopranino and B\u266d bass saxophone are typically used in larger saxophone choir settings, when available.\nIn the table below, consecutive members of each family are pitched an octave apart. \nDescription.\nConstruction.\nThe pitch of a saxophone is controlled by opening or closing the tone holes along the body of the instrument to change the length of the vibrating air column. The tone holes are closed by leather pads connected to keys\u2014most are operated by the player's fingers, but some are operated using the palm or the side of a finger. There is an octave key, which raises the pitch of the lower notes by one octave. The lowest note on most modern saxophones is the written B\u266d below middle\u00a0C. Nearly all baritone saxophones are now constructed with an extra key to allow them to play low\u00a0A, and a small number of altos with a low\u00a0A key have been manufactured. The highest keyed note has traditionally been the F two and a half octaves above the low\u00a0B\u266d, but many instruments now have an extra key for a high\u00a0F\u266f, and some modern soprano saxophones even have a high\u00a0G key. Notes above this are part of the altissimo register and require advanced embouchure techniques and fingering combinations.\nSaxophone music is written in treble clef, appropriately transposed for each different type of instrument, and all saxophones use the same key arrangement and fingerings. Therefore, any written note corresponds to the same fingering on any saxophone, making it easier for players to switch instruments.\nAlto and larger saxophones have a detachable curved neck at the top, and a U-shaped bend (the \"bow\") that turns the tubing upward as it approaches the bell. Soprano and sopranino saxophones are usually constructed without a detachable neck or a bow but some have a small detachable neck and some are shaped like an alto saxophone with a bow section. There are rare examples of alto, tenor, and baritone saxophones with mostly straight bodies. Baritone, bass, and contrabass saxophones have extra bends to accommodate the length of tubing. The fingering system for the saxophone is similar to the systems used for the oboe, the Boehm-system clarinet, and the flute.\nMaterials.\nFrom the earliest days of the saxophone the body and key cups have been made from sheet brass stock, which can be worked into complex shapes. The keywork is manufactured from other types of brass stock. King made saxophones with necks and bells of sterling silver from the 1930s into the early 1960s. Yanagisawa revived this idea in the 1980s and later introduced instruments entirely made of sterling silver. Keilwerth and P. Mauriat have used nickel silver, a copper-nickel-zinc alloy more commonly used for flutes, for the bodies of some saxophone models. \nFor visual and tonal effect, higher copper variants of brass are sometimes substituted for the more common \"yellow brass\" and \"cartridge brass.\" Yanagisawa made its 902 and 992 series saxophones with the high copper alloy phosphor bronze to achieve a darker, more \"vintage\" tone than the brass 901 and 991 models.\nOther materials are used for some mechanical parts and keywork. Buttons where the fingers contact the keys are usually made from plastic or mother of pearl. Rods, screw pins, and springs are usually made of blued or stainless steel. Mechanical buffers of felt, cork, leather, and various synthetic materials are used to minimize mechanical noise from key movement and to optimize the action of the keywork. Nickel silver is sometimes used for hinges for its advantages of mechanical durability, although the most common material for such applications has remained brass.\nManufacturers usually apply a finish to the surface of the instrument's body and keywork. The most common finish is a thin coating of clear or colored acrylic lacquer to protect the brass from oxidation and maintain a shiny appearance. Silver or gold plating are offered as options on some models. Some silver plated saxophones are also lacquered. Plating saxophones with gold is an expensive process because an underplating of silver is required for the gold to adhere to. Nickel plating has been used on the bodies of early budget model saxophones and is commonly used on keywork when a more durable finish is desired, mostly with student model saxophones. Chemical surface treatment of the base metal has come into use as an alternative to the lacquer and plating finishes in recent years.\nMouthpiece and reed.\nThe saxophone uses a single-reed mouthpiece similar to that of the clarinet. Each size of saxophone (alto, tenor, etc.) uses a different size of reed and mouthpiece.\nMost saxophonists use reeds made from \"Arundo donax\" cane, but since the middle of the twentieth century some have been made of fiberglass or other composite materials. Saxophone reeds are proportioned slightly differently from clarinet reeds, being wider for the same length. Commercial reeds vary in hardness and design, and single-reed players try different reeds to find those that suit their mouthpiece, embouchure, and playing style.\nMouthpiece design has a profound impact on tone. Different mouthpiece design characteristics and features tend to be favored for different styles. Early mouthpieces were designed to produce a \"warm\" and \"round\" sound for classical playing. Among classical mouthpieces, those with a concave (\"excavated\") \"chamber\" are truer to Adolphe Sax's original design; these provide a softer or less piercing tone favored by the Rasch\u00e8r school of classical playing. Saxophonists who follow the French school of classical playing, influenced by Marcel Mule, generally use mouthpieces with smaller chambers for a somewhat \"brighter\" sound with relatively more upper harmonics. The use of the saxophone in dance orchestras and jazz ensembles from the 1920s onward placed emphasis on dynamic range and projection, leading to innovation in mouthpiece designs. At the opposite extreme from the classical mouthpieces are those with a small chamber and a low clearance above the reed between the tip and the chamber, called high \"baffle\". These produce a bright sound with maximum projection, suitable for having a sound stand out among amplified instruments.\nMouthpieces come in a wide variety of materials including vulcanized rubber (sometimes called hard rubber or ebonite), plastic and metals like bronze or surgical steel. Less common materials that have been used include wood, glass, crystal, porcelain and bone. Recently, Delrin has been added to the stock of mouthpiece materials.\nThe effect of mouthpiece materials on tone of the saxophone has been the subject of much debate. According to Larry Teal, the mouthpiece material has little, if any, effect on the sound, and the physical dimensions give a mouthpiece its tone color. There are examples of \"dark\" sounding metal pieces and \"bright\" sounding hard rubber pieces. The extra bulk required near the tip with hard rubber affects mouth position and airflow characteristics.\nHistory.\nEarly development and adoption.\nThe saxophone was designed around 1840 by Adolphe Sax, a Belgian instrument maker, flautist, and clarinetist. Born in Dinant and originally based in Brussels, he moved to Paris in 1842 to establish his musical instrument business. Before working on the saxophone, he made several improvements to the bass clarinet by improving its keywork and acoustics and extending its lower range. Sax was also a maker of the ophicleide, a large conical brass instrument in the bass register with keys similar to a woodwind instrument. His experience with these two instruments allowed him to develop the skills and technologies needed to make the first saxophones.\nAs an outgrowth of his work improving the bass clarinet, Sax began developing an instrument with the projection of a brass instrument and the agility of a woodwind. He wanted it to overblow at the octave, unlike the clarinet, which rises in pitch by a twelfth when overblown. An instrument that overblows at the octave has identical fingering for both registers.\nSax created an instrument with a single-reed mouthpiece and conical brass body. Having constructed saxophones in several sizes in the early 1840s, Sax applied for, and received, a 15-year patent for the instrument on 28 June 1846. The patent encompassed 14 versions of the fundamental design, split into two categories of seven instruments each, and ranging from sopranino to contrabass. A limited number of instruments in the series pitched in F and C were produced by Sax, but the series pitched in E\u266d and B\u266d quickly became the standard. All the instruments were given an initial written range from the B below the treble staff to the E\u266d one half-step below the third ledger line above staff, giving each saxophone a range of two and a half octaves. Sax's patent expired in 1866. Thereafter, numerous other instrument manufacturers implemented their own improvements to the design and keywork.\nSax's original keywork, which was based on the Tri\u00e9bert-system oboe for the left hand and the Boehm-system clarinet for the right, was simplistic and made certain legato passages and wide intervals extremely difficult to finger; that system was later improved with extra keys, linkage mechanisms, and alternate fingerings.\nEarly in the development of the saxophone the upper keyed range was extended to E, then to F above the staff; 1880s era sheet music for saxophone was written for the range of low B to F. In 1887 the Buffet-Crampon company obtained a patent for extending the bell and adding an extra key to extend the range downwards by one semitone to B\u266d. This extension is standard in modern designs, with the notable exception of baritone saxophones which have keys down to low A. The upper range to F remained the standard for nearly a century until a high F\u266f key became common on modern saxophones.\nIn the 1840s and 1850s, Sax's invention gained use in small classical ensembles (both all-saxophone and mixed), as a solo instrument, and in French and British military bands. Saxophone method books were published and saxophone instruction was offered at conservatories in France, Switzerland, Belgium, Spain, and Italy. By 1856, the French \"Garde Republicaine\" band was the largest ensemble of its time to prominently feature the instrument, using eight saxophones. The saxophone was used experimentally in orchestral scores, but never came into widespread use as an orchestral instrument. In 1853\u201354, the orchestra of Louis Antoine Jullien featured a soprano saxophone on a concert tour of the United States.\nAfter an early period of interest and support from classical music communities in Europe, interest in the saxophone as a classical instrument waned in the late nineteenth century. Saxophone teaching at the Paris Conservatory was suspended from 1870 to 1900 and classical saxophone repertoire stagnated during that period. But it was during this same period that the saxophone began to be promoted in the United States, largely through the efforts of Patrick Gilmore, bandleader for the 22nd Regiment of the New York State National Guard, and Edward A. Lefebre, a Dutch \u00e9migr\u00e9 and saxophonist who had family business associations with Sax. Lefebre settled in New York in early 1872 after he arrived as a clarinetist with a British opera company. Gilmore organized the World Peace Jubilee and International Music Festival taking place in Boston that summer. The Garde R\u00e9publicaine band performed, and Lefebre was a clarinetist with the Great Festival Orchestra for that event. In the fall of 1873, Gilmore was reorganizing the 22nd Regiment band under the influence of the Garde Republicaine band and recruited Lefebre, who had established a reputation in New York as a saxophonist over the previous year. Gilmore's band soon featured a soprano-alto-tenor-baritone saxophone section, which also performed as a quartet. The Gilmore-Lefebre association lasted until Gilmore's death in 1892, during which time Lefebre also performed in smaller ensembles of various sizes and instrumentation, and worked with composers to increase light classical and popular repertoire for saxophone.\nLefebre's later promotional efforts were very significant in broadening the adoption of the saxophone. Starting near the end of the 1880s, he consulted with the brass instrument manufacturer C.G. Conn to develop and start production of improved saxophones to replace the costly, scarce, and mechanically unreliable European instruments that were in the American market. The early 1890s saw regular production of saxophones commence at Conn and its offshoot Buescher Manufacturing Company, which dramatically increased the availability of saxophones in the US. Lefebre worked with the music publisher Carl Fischer to distribute his transcriptions, arrangements, and original works for saxophone, and worked with the Conn Conservatory to further saxophone pedagogy in the US. Lefebre's associations with Conn and Fischer lasted into the first decade of the twentieth century, and Fischer continued to publish new arrangements of Lefebre's works after his death.\nEarly twentieth-century growth and development.\nWhile the saxophone remained marginal, used mainly as a novelty instrument in the classical world, many new musical niches were established for it during the early decades of the twentieth century. Its early use in vaudeville and ragtime bands around the turn of the century laid the groundwork for its use in dance orchestras and eventually jazz. As the market for saxophones grew in the US, the manufacturing industry grew. The Martin Band Instrument Company started producing saxophones between 1905 and 1912, and the Cleveland Band Instrument Company started producing saxophones under contract to the H. N. White Company in 1916. The saxophone was promoted for the casual market with the introduction of the C soprano (slightly higher than the regular soprano) and C melody (between alto and tenor) saxophones, both pitched in C to enable them to play from piano music. Production of such instruments stopped during the Great Depression. During the 1920s, the saxophone came into use as a jazz instrument. Starting in the late 1920s and early 1930s, the modern era of classical saxophone was launched largely through the efforts of Marcel Mule and Sigurd Rasch\u00e8r, and the classical repertoire for the instrument expanded rapidly.\nThe use of the saxophone for more dynamic and more technically demanding styles of playing added incentive for improvements in keywork and acoustic design. Early saxophones had two separate octave keys operated by the left thumb to control the two octave vents required on alto or larger saxophones. Around the turn of the century, mechanisms were developed to operate both octave vents with a single key using the left thumb. Ergonomic design of keywork evolved rapidly during the 1920s and 1930s. The front F mechanism supporting alternate fingerings for high E and F, and a stack-linked G\u266f key action, became standard during the 1920s, followed by improvements to the left-hand table key mechanisms controlling G\u266f and the bell keys. New bore designs during the 1920s and 1930s resulted from the quest for improved intonation, dynamic response and tonal qualities. The 1920s were also an era of design experiments like the Buescher straight altos and tenors, the King \"Saxello\" soprano, the C. G. Conn \"mezzo-soprano\" saxophone keyed in F, and the \"Conn-O-Sax\" saxophone\u2013English horn hybrid.\nFrench saxophonist and educator Jean-Marie Londeix greatly expanded the saxophone repertoire and available techniques in the second half of the 20th century, commissioning a great deal of new saxophone works with extended techniques, including those by Denisov, Lauba, Ross\u00e9, and Rolin.\nModern saxophone emerges.\nThe modern layout of the saxophone emerged during the 1930s and 1940s, first with right-side bell keys introduced by C. G. Conn on baritones, then by King on altos and tenors. The mechanics of the left hand table were revolutionized by Selmer with their Balanced Action instruments in 1936, capitalizing on the right-side bell key layout. In 1948 Selmer introduced their Super Action saxophones with offset left and right hand stack keys. Thirty to forty years later this 1948 Selmer layout was nearly universal.\nThe high F\u266f key was also first introduced as an option on the Balanced Action model, although it took several decades for it to gain acceptance because of perceived deleterious effects on intonation.\nMarcel Mule established study of the saxophone as a classical instrument at the Conservatoire de Paris from the 1940s. Larry Teal did the same in the United States at the University of Michigan a decade later. A number of other American institutions have since become recognized homes for the study of classical saxophone. They include Northwestern University, Indiana University, and the Eastman School of Music.\nUsage.\nIn military bands.\nThe saxophone first gained popularity in military bands. Although the instrument was initially ignored in Germany, French and Belgian military bands were quick to include it in their ensembles. Most French and Belgian military bands incorporate at least a quartet of saxophones, comprising an E\u266d baritone, B\u266d tenor, E\u266d alto and B\u266d soprano. These four instruments have proven the most popular of all Sax's creations with the E\u266d contrabass and B\u266d bass usually considered impractically large and E\u266d sopranino insufficiently powerful. British military bands tend to include at minimum two saxophonists on alto and tenor.\nIn classical music.\nThe saxophone was introduced into the concert band, which usually calls for two E\u266d alto saxophones, a B\u266d tenor saxophone, and an E\u266d baritone saxophone. A B\u266d soprano saxophone is also sometimes used, and is played by the first alto saxophonist. A bass saxophone in B\u266d is used in some older or larger concert band works (especially in the music of Percy Grainger).\nSaxophones are used in chamber music, such as saxophone quartets and other chamber combinations of instruments. The classical saxophone quartet consists of a B\u266d soprano saxophone, E\u266d alto saxophone, B\u266d tenor saxophone, and E\u266d baritone saxophone (SATB). On occasion, the soprano is replaced with a second alto sax (AATB); a few professional saxophone quartets have featured non-standard instrumentation, such as James Fei's Alto Quartet (four altos).\nThere is a repertoire of classical compositions and arrangements for the SATB instrumentation dating back to the nineteenth century, particularly by French composers who knew Sax. However, the largest body of chamber works for saxophone are from the modern era of classical saxophone initiated by Marcel Mule in 1928. Sigurd Rasch\u00e8r followed as a soloist in orchestral works, starting in 1931, and also figured prominently in development of modern classical saxophone repertoire. The Mule quartet is often considered the prototype for quartets due to the level of virtuosity demonstrated by its members and its central role in the development of modern quartet repertoire. However, organized quartets existed before Mule's ensemble, the prime example being the quartet headed by Edward A. Lefebre (1834\u20131911), which was a subset of Patrick Gilmore's 22nd Regiment band between 1873 and 1893.\nIn the 20th and 21st centuries, the saxophone found increased popularity in symphony orchestras. The instrument has also been used in opera and choral music. Musical theatre scores also can include parts for saxophone, sometimes doubling another woodwind or brass instrument.\nSelected works of the repertoire.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSelected saxophone quartets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSelected chamber-music pieces with saxophone.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSelected orchestral pieces with saxophones.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSelected operas and musicals with saxophones.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn jazz and popular music.\nCoincident with the more widespread availability of saxophones in the US around the turn of the century was the rise of ragtime music. The bands featuring the syncopated African-American rhythmic influences of ragtime were an exciting new feature of the American cultural landscape and provided the groundwork for new styles of dancing. Two of the best known ragtime-playing brass bands with saxophones were those led by W. C. Handy and James R. Europe. Europe's 369th Infantry Regiment Band popularized ragtime in France during its 1918 tour. The rise of dance bands into the 1920s followed from the popularity of ragtime. The saxophone was also used in Vaudeville entertainment during the same period. Ragtime, Vaudeville, and dance bands introduced much of the American public to the saxophone. Rudy Wiedoeft became the best known individual saxophone stylist and virtuoso during this period leading into the \"saxophone craze\" of the 1920s. Following it, the saxophone became featured in music as diverse as the \"sweet\" music of Paul Whiteman and Guy Lombardo, jazz, swing, and large stage show bands.\nThe rise of the saxophone as a jazz instrument followed its widespread adoption in dance bands during the early 1920s. The Fletcher Henderson Orchestra, formed in 1923, featured arrangements to back up improvisation, bringing the first elements of jazz to the large dance band format. Following the innovations of the Fletcher Henderson Orchestra, the Duke Ellington Orchestra and Jean Goldkette's Victor Recording Orchestra featured jazz solos with saxophones and other instruments. The association of dance bands with jazz would reach its peak with the swing music of the 1930s. The large show band format, influenced by the 1930s swing bands, would be used as backing for popular vocalists and stage shows in the post World War II era, and provided a foundation for big band jazz. Show bands with saxophone sections became a staple of television talk shows (such as the \"Tonight Show\" that featured bands led by Doc Severinsen and Branford Marsalis) and Las Vegas stage shows. The swing era fostered the later saxophone styles that permeated bebop and rhythm and blues in the early postwar era.\nColeman Hawkins established the tenor saxophone as a jazz solo instrument during his stint with Fletcher Henderson from 1923 to 1934. Hawkins' arpeggiated, rich-toned, vibrato-laden style was the main influence on swing era tenor players before Lester Young, and his influence continued with other big-toned tenor players into the era of modern jazz. Among the tenor players directly influenced by him were Chu Berry, Charlie Barnet, Tex Beneke, Ben Webster, Vido Musso, Herschel Evans, Buddy Tate, and Don Byas. Hawkins' bandmate Benny Carter and Duke Ellington's alto saxophonist Johnny Hodges became influential on swing era alto styles, while Harry Carney brought the baritone saxophone to prominence with the Duke Ellington Orchestra. The New Orleans player Sidney Bechet gained recognition for playing the soprano saxophone during the 1920s, but the instrument did not come into wide use until the modern era of jazz.\nAs Chicago style jazz evolved from New Orleans jazz in the 1920s, one of its defining features was the addition of saxophones to the ensemble. The small Chicago ensembles offered more improvisational freedom than did the New Orleans or large band formats, fostering the innovations of saxophonists Jimmy Dorsey (alto), Frankie Trumbauer (c-melody), Bud Freeman (tenor) and Stump Evans (baritone). Dorsey and Trumbauer became important influences on tenor saxophonist Lester Young.\nLester Young's approach on tenor saxophone differed from Hawkins', emphasizing more melodic \"linear\" playing that wove in and out of the chordal structure and longer phrases that differed from those suggested by the tune. He used vibrato less, fitting it to the passage he was playing. His tone was smoother and darker than that of his 1930s contemporaries. Young's playing was a major influence on the modern jazz saxophonists Al Cohn, Stan Getz, Zoot Sims, Dexter Gordon, Wardell Gray, Lee Konitz, Warne Marsh, Charlie Parker, and Art Pepper.\nThe influence of Lester Young with the Count Basie Orchestra in the late 1930s and the popularity of Hawkins' 1939 recording of \"Body and Soul\" marked the saxophone as an influence on jazz equal to the trumpet, which had been the defining instrument of jazz since its beginnings in New Orleans. But the greatest influence of the saxophone on jazz was to occur a few years later when alto saxophonist Charlie Parker became an icon of the bebop revolution that influenced generations of jazz musicians. The small-group format of bebop and post-bebop jazz ensembles gained ascendancy in the 1940s as musicians used the harmonic and melodic freedom pioneered by Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, Thelonious Monk, and Bud Powell in extended jazz solos.\nDuring the 1950s, prominent alto players included Sonny Stitt, Cannonball Adderley, Jackie McLean, Lou Donaldson, Sonny Criss and Paul Desmond, while prominent tenor players included Lester Young, Coleman Hawkins, Dexter Gordon, John Coltrane, Sonny Rollins, Stan Getz, Zoot Sims, Lucky Thompson, Eddie \"Lockjaw\" Davis, and Paul Gonsalves. Serge Chaloff, Gerry Mulligan, Pepper Adams and Leo Parker brought the baritone saxophone to prominence as a solo instrument. Steve Lacy renewed attention to the soprano saxophone in the context of modern jazz and John Coltrane boosted the instrument's popularity during the 1960s. Smooth jazz musician Kenny G also uses the soprano sax as his principal instrument.\nSaxophonists such as John Coltrane, Ornette Coleman, Sam Rivers, and Pharoah Sanders defined the forefront of creative exploration with the avant-garde movement of the 1960s. The new realms offered with modal, harmolodic, and free jazz were explored with every device that saxophonists could conceive of. Sheets of sound, tonal exploration, upper harmonics, and multiphonics were hallmarks of the creative possibilities that saxophones offered. One lasting influence of the avant-garde movement is the exploration of non-Western ethnic sounds on the saxophone, for example, the African-influenced sounds used by Sanders and the Indian-influenced sounds used by Coltrane. The devices of the avant-garde movement have continued to be influential in music that challenges the boundaries between avant-garde and other categories of jazz, such as that of alto saxophonists Steve Coleman and Greg Osby.\nSome ensembles such as the World Saxophone Quartet use the soprano-alto-tenor-baritone (SATB) format of the classical saxophone quartet for jazz. In the 1990s, World Saxophone Quartet founder Hamiet Bluiett formed the quartet Baritone Nation (four baritones).\nThe \"jump swing\" bands of the 1940s gave rise to rhythm and blues, featuring horn sections and exuberant, strong-toned, heavily rhythmic styles of saxophone playing with a melodic sense based on blues tonalities. Illinois Jacquet, Sam Butera, Arnett Cobb, and Jimmy Forrest were major influences on R&amp;B tenor styles and Louis Jordan, Eddie \"Cleanhead\" Vinson, Earl Bostic, and Bull Moose Jackson were major influences on alto. The R&amp;B saxophone players influenced later genres including rock and roll, ska, soul, and funk. Horn section work continued with Johnny Otis and Ray Charles featuring horn sections and the Memphis Horns, the Phenix Horns, and Tower of Power achieving distinction for their section playing. Horn sections were added to the Chicago and West Coast blues bands of Lowell Fulson, T-Bone Walker, B.B. King, and Guitar Slim. Rock and soul fusion bands such as Chicago, The Electric Flag, and Blood, Sweat, and Tears featured horn sections. Bobby Keys and Clarence Clemons became influential rock and roll saxophone stylists. Junior Walker, King Curtis and Maceo Parker became influential soul and funk saxophone stylists, influencing the more technical jazz-fusion sounds of Michael Brecker and Bob Mintzer and pop-jazz players such as Candy Dulfer.\nUnusual variants.\nA number of experimental saxophones and saxophone-related instruments have appeared since Sax's original work, most with no lasting impact. During the early 1920s Reiffel &amp; Husted of Chicago produced a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;slide soprano saxophone. During the 1920s some straight alto and tenor saxophones were produced by Buescher, which proved cumbersome to handle and more difficult to transport. Buescher custom produced one straight baritone saxophone as novelty instrument for a vaudeville performer. C.G. Conn introduced two new variants in 1928\u20131929, the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Conn-O-Sax\" and the mezzo-soprano saxophone, both keyed in F, one step above the E\u266d alto. The Conn-O-Sax is built straight, with a slightly curved neck, a spherical liebesfuss-style bell, and extra keys for low A and up to high G. It was produced only in 1929 and 1930, and intended to imitate the form and timbre of the cor anglais. With fewer than 100 surviving instruments, the Conn-O-Sax is highly sought after by collectors. The Conn mezzo-soprano experienced a similarly short production run, as the economics of the Great Depression curtailed the market for what were regarded as novelty instruments. Most were subsequently expended by Conn to train its repair technicians.\nThe most successful of the unusual 1920s designs was the King &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Saxello\", essentially a straight B\u266d soprano, but with a slightly curved neck and tipped bell, made by the H. N. White Company. Such instruments now command prices up to US$4,000. Its lasting influence is shown in the number of companies, including Keilwerth, Rampone &amp; Cazzani (\"altello\" model), L.A. Sax and Sax Dakota USA, marketing straight-bore, tipped-bell soprano saxophones as saxellos (or \"saxello sopranos\").\nInterest in two 1920s variants was revived by jazz musician Rahsaan Roland Kirk, who called his straight Buescher alto a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;\"stritch\" and his Saxello a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;\"manzello\". The Buescher straight alto was a production instrument while the manzello was in fact a Saxello with a custom-made large bell and modified keywork. More recently, the mezzo-soprano, or a modern variant of it, came into use by jazz musicians Anthony Braxton, James Carter, Vinny Golia, and Joe Lovano.\nSome of the 1920s experimental designs, in addition to the Saxello, provide the basis for similar instruments produced during the modern era. Straight altos and tenors have been revived by Keilwerth, L.A. Sax and Sax Dakota USA. A mezzo-soprano in the key of G has been produced by Danish woodwind technician Peter Jessen, most notably played by Joe Lovano. This instrument is more in the timbral quality of Bb soprano saxophone.\nThe &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;\"contralto\" saxophone, similar in size to the orchestral C-melody, was developed in the late 20th century by California instrument maker Jim Schmidt. This instrument has a larger bore and a new fingering system, and does not resemble the orchestral instrument except for its key and register.\n \nBenedikt Eppelsheim, of Munich, Germany has introduced recent innovations at the upper and lower ends of the saxophone range. The soprillo sax is a piccolo-sized saxophone pitched an octave higher than the B\u266d soprano sax. It is so small that the octave key is built into the mouthpiece. The tubax, developed in 1999 by Eppelsheim, plays the same range and with the same fingering as the E\u266d contrabass saxophone. Its bore, however, is narrower than that of a contrabass, resulting in a more compact instrument with a \"reedier\" tone (akin to the double-reed contrabass sarrusophone). It can be played with the smaller (and more commonly available) baritone saxophone mouthpiece and reeds. Eppelsheim has also produced lower models of tubax in C and B\u266d, equivalent to the subcontrabass saxophone.\nAmong the 2000s developments is the aulochrome, a double soprano saxophone invented by Belgian instrument maker Fran\u00e7ois Louis in 2001.\nSince the 1950s, saxophones with non-metallic bodies have occasionally been in production. Such instruments have failed to gain acceptance over a number of issues including durability, repairability, and deficiencies in key action and tone. The best known of these efforts is the 1950s Grafton acrylic alto saxophone used briefly by Charlie Parker and Ornette Coleman. It had a production run of over 10 years as a budget model saxophone. The polycarbonate Vibratosax is in production as a low cost alternative to metal saxophones. Wooden Sawat saxophones are made in Thailand on a small scale. Opinions vary on the significance of body materials to sound.\nThe fingering scheme of the saxophone, which has had only minor changes since the instrument's original invention, has presented inherent acoustic problems related to closed keys below the first open tonehole that affect response of, and slightly muffle, some notes. There is also a lack of tactile consistency between key centers, requiring extra effort from the player to adjust modes of muscle memory when moving between key centers. There have been two noteworthy efforts to remedy the acoustic problems and awkward aspects of the original fingering system:\nThe Leblanc Rationale and System saxophones have key mechanics designed to remedy the acoustic problems associated with closed keys below the first open tonehole. They also enable players to make half-step shifts of scales by depressing one key while keeping the rest of the fingering consistent with that of the fingering a half step away. Some Leblanc System features were built into the Vito Model 35 saxophones of the 1950s and 1960s. Despite the advantages of that system, acceptance was impaired by the expense and mechanical reliability issues related to the complexity of certain key mechanisms.\nThe chromatic, or linear fingering, saxophone is a project of instrument designer and builder Jim Schmidt, developing a horn maximizing tactile and logical consistency between every interval regardless of the key, and avoiding the acoustic problems associated with closed keys below the first open tone hole. Several working prototypes have been built and presented at trade shows. Production of this original and expensive saxophone is on an individual order basis.\nRelated instruments.\nInexpensive keyless folk versions of the saxophone made of bamboo (recalling a chalumeau) were developed in the 20th century by instrument makers in Hawaii, Jamaica, Thailand, Indonesia, Ethiopia, and Argentina. The Hawaiian instrument, called a xaphoon, was invented during the 1970s and is also marketed as a \"bamboo sax\", although its cylindrical bore more closely resembles that of a clarinet, and its lack of any keywork makes it more akin to a recorder. Jamaica's best known exponent of a similar type of homemade bamboo \"saxophone\" was the mento musician and instrument maker 'Sugar Belly' (William Walker). In the Minahasa region of the Indonesian island of Sulawesi, there exist entire bands made up of bamboo \"saxophones\" and \"brass\" instruments of various sizes. These instruments are imitations of European instruments, made using local materials. Similar instruments are produced in Thailand.\nIn Argentina, \u00c1ngel Sampedro del R\u00edo and Mariana Garc\u00eda have produced bamboo saxophones of various sizes since 1985. Many synthesizer wind controllers are played and fingered like a saxophone, such as the Electronic Wind Instrument (EWI). A double reed instrument known as the rothphone and a brass instrument known as the jazzophone are both shaped similarly to an alto or tenor saxophone.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26796", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26796", "title": "StarTrek", "text": ""}
{"id": "26797", "revid": "28804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26797", "title": "Sackbut", "text": "Early form of trombone from the Renaissance and Baroque periods\nA sackbut is an early form of the trombone used during the Renaissance and Baroque eras. A sackbut has the characteristic telescopic slide of a trombone, used to vary the length of the tube to change pitch, but is distinct from later trombones by its smaller, more cylindrically-proportioned bore, and its less-flared bell. Unlike the earlier slide trumpet from which it evolved, the sackbut possesses a U-shaped slide with two parallel sliding tubes, rather than just one.\nRecords of the term \"trombone\" predate the term \"sackbut\" by two decades, and evidence for the German term \"Posaune\" is even older. \"Sackbut\", originally a French term, was used in England until the instrument fell into disuse in the eighteenth century; when it returned, the Italian term \"trombone\" became dominant. In modern English, an older trombone or a replica is called a \"sackbut\".\nThe bell section was more resonant, since it did not contain the tuning slide and was loosely stayed rather than firmly braced to itself. This trait and its smaller bore and bell produce a \"covered, blended sound which was a timbre particularly effective for working with voices... zincks and crumhorns\", as in an alta cappella.\nThe revived instrument had changed in specific ways. In the mid-18th century, the bell flare increased, crooks fell out of use, and flat, removable stays were replaced by tubular braces. The new shape produced a stronger sound, suitable for open-air performance in the marching bands where trombones became popular again in the 19th century. Before the early 19th century, most trombone players adjusted their tuning using a crook placed at the joint between the bell and the slide or seldom between the mouthpiece and the slide.\", rather than the modern tuning slide on the bell curve, whose cylindrical sections prevent the instrument from flaring smoothly through this section. Older trombones also generally don't have water keys, stockings, a leadpipe, or a slide lock, but as these parts are not critical to sound, replicas may include them. Bore size remained variable, as it still is today.\nTerminological history.\nThe first reference to a slide instrument was probably \"trompette des m\u00e9nestrels\", first found in Burgundy in the 1420s and later in other regions of Europe. The name distinguished the instrument from the \"trompettes de guerre\" (war trumpets), which were of fixed length.\nThe next word to appear in the 15th century that implied a slide was the \"sackbutt\" group of words. There are two theories for the sources: it is either derived from the Middle French \"sacquer\" (to pull) and \"bouter\" (to push) or from the Spanish \"sacar\" (to draw or pull) and \"bucha\" (a tube or pipe). The term survives in numerous English spelling variations including sacbutt, sackbutte, sagbut, shagbolt, sacabushe, shakbusse and shakbusshe.\nClosely related to \"sackbutt\" was the name used in France: \"sacqueboute\" and in Spain, where it was \"sacabuche\". These terms were used in England and France until the 18th century.\nIn Scotland in 1538 the slide instrument is referred to as \"draucht trumpet\" (drawn trumpet) as opposed to a \"weir trumpet\" (war trumpet), which had a fixed length.\nIn Germany, the original word was \"Posaune\", appearing about 1450 and is still used today. This (as well as \"bason\") derives from \"busine,\" which is Latinate and meant straight trumpet.\nIn Italy it was (and remains) \"trombone\", which derived from trumpet in the Latin \"tromba\" or \"drompten\", used in the Low Countries. The first records of it being used are around 1440, but it is not clear whether this was just a nickname for a trumpet player. In 1487 a writer links the words \"trompone\" and \"sacqueboute\" and mentions the instrument as playing the contratenor part in a danceband.\n\"See: Clarion\"\nHistory.\nThe trombone developed from the buisine trumpet. Up until 1375 trumpets were simply a long straight tube with a bell flare.\nThere are various uses of \"sackbut\"-like words in translations of the Bible, including the Geneva Bible and King James Bible, due to a faulty translation from the Vulgate; the Latin term in the Vulgate actually referred to a type of harp.\nFrom 1375 the iconography sees trumpets being made with bends, and some in 'S' shapes. Around 1400 we see the \"loop\"-shaped trumpet appear in paintings and at some point in the 15th century, a single-tube slide was added. This slide trumpet was known as a \"trompette des m\u00e9nestrels\" in the alta cappella bands.\nThe earliest clear evidence of a U-shaped slide moving on two inner tubes is in a fresco painting by Filippino Lippi in Rome, \"The Assumption of the Virgin\", dating from 1488 to 1493.\nFrom the 15th to the 19th centuries, the instrument designs changed very little overall, apart from a slight widening of the bell in classical era. Since the 19th century, trombone bore sizes and bells have increased significantly.\nIt was one of the most important instruments in Baroque polychoral works, along with the cornett and organ.\nInstrument sizes.\nSackbuts come in several sizes. According to Michael Praetorius, these were:\nThe pitch of the trombones has (notionally) moved up a semi-tone since the 17th century, and this is explained in the section on pitch.\nBecause the tenor instrument is described as \"Gemeine\" (common or ordinary), this is probably the most widely used trombone. The basses, due to their longer slides, have a hinged handle on the slide stay, which is used to reach the long positions.\nA giant contrabass sackbut known as the (lit.\u2009'octave trombone') was known in 16th and early 17th centuries, and is represented by only a few existing instruments. One surviving original instrument in B\u266d, an octave below the tenor, built in 1639 by Georg Nicolaus \u00d6ller in Stockholm, is housed in the Scenkonstmuseet. In addition, Ewald Meinl has made a modern copy of this instrument, and it is currently owned and played by Wim Becu.\nConstruction.\nThe bore size of renaissance/baroque trombones is approximately and the bell rarely more than in diameter. This compares with modern tenor trombones, which commonly have bores to and bells to .\nModern reproductions of sackbuts sacrifice some authenticity to harness manufacturing techniques and inventions that make them more comfortable for modern players, while retaining much of the original character of the old instruments.\nSome original instruments could be disassembled into the constituent straight tubes, bowed tubes, bell flare, and stays, with ferrules at the joints. Mersenne has a diagram. (Little imagination is needed to see how it could be reassembled\u2014with an extra tube\u2014into something approaching a natural trumpet.) There is a debate as to whether they used tight fittings, wax or another joining substance. Modern sackbut reproductions are usually soldered together. Some modern sackbut reproductions use glue as a compromise to give a loose fitting for high resonance without risk of falling apart.\nTuning slides came in during the very late 18th century. Early trombonists adjusted pitch with the slide, and by adding variously shaped and sized crooks. Modern reproductions often have a bell bow tuning slide or telescopic slide between the slide and bell sections. Crooks are still used, as are variously sized bell bow sections for larger changes.\nThe stays on period sackbuts are flat. While the bell stay remained flat, from about 1660 the slide stays became tubular. On many modern reproductions round slide stays are much more comfortable to play and easier to make.\nA loose connection between the bell stay and the bell is thought key to a resonant bell, and thus a better sackbut sound. Original instruments have a hinge joint (a looser connection helped imperfect slides slide). Modern copies with a tuning slide in the bell can need more support for operation of the slide, so either an extra stay by the tuning slide is provided or a joint without play in only one axis is employed.\nThe original way to make the slide tubes was to roll a flat piece of metal around a solid cylinder mandrel, and the joining edges soldered together. Modern manufacturers now draw the tubes. They also tend to have stockings, which were only invented around 1850. In addition, modern made slides are usually made of nickel silver with chrome plating, giving a smoother finish and quieter action than simply the brass that would have originally been used.\nThe water key was added in the 19th century, but modern reproductions often have them.\nPitch.\nUntil some time in the 18th century, the trombone was in A and the pitch of that A was about a half-step higher than it is today\u2014460\u2013480\u00a0Hz. There was a transition around the 18th century when trombones started to be thought of in B\u266d at around 440\u00a0Hz. This change did not require a change in the instrument; there was merely a renaming of notes for given slide positions. But it does mean that the baroque and renaissance repertoire was intended to be played at the higher pitch. There are many examples of evidence for this:\nThe tenor trombones that survive are pitched closest to B\u266d at A=440\u00a0Hz, which is the same as A at A=466\u00a0Hz. So what we now think of as a tenor trombone with B\u266d in first position, pitched at A=440 was actually thought of as a trombone in A (in first position), pitched at A=466. Surviving basses in D at A=466 (E\u266d at 440)\u2014for example: Ehe, 1612 (Leipzig) and Hainlein, c.1630 (Nuremberg) confirm Praetorius' description. It is also worth noting that Rognoni's \"Suzanne ung jour\" setting descends repeatedly to BB\u266d, which is a tone lower than the lowest note playable on a bass in F; on a bass in D, it falls in (modern) fifth position.\nMany groups now perform at A=466\u00a0Hz for the sake of greater historical accuracy.\nTimbre.\nThe sackbut was described as suitable for playing with the 'loud' ensembles in the outdoors, as well as the 'soft' ensembles inside.\nThe alta capella bands are seen in drawings as entertaining outside with ensembles including shawms, trumpets and trombones. When pushed, sackbuts can easily make a loud and brassy sound.\nThe sackbut also responds very well to rather soft playing\u2014more so than a modern trombone. The sound is characterized by a more delicate, vocal timbre. The flat rims and shallow cups of the older mouthpieces are instrumental in providing the player with a much wider palette of articulations and tonal colours. This flexibility lends itself to a vocal style of playing and facilitates very characterful phrasing.\nMersenne wrote in 1636, \"It should be blown by a skillful musician so that it may not imitate the sounds of the trumpet, but rather assimilate itself to the sweetness of the human voice, lest it should emit a warlike rather than a peaceful sound.\"\nLorenzo da Lucca was said to have had \"in his playing a certain grace and lightness with a manner so pleasing\".\nPerformance practice.\nIn musical traditions that continued into the baroque from earlier practice, musicians were expected to give expression to the written music by ornamenting with a mixture of one-note \"graces\" and whole passage \"divisions\" (also known as \"diminutions\"). The suggestions for producing effective ornaments without disrupting the line and harmony are discussed alongside countless examples in the 16th and early 17th century Italian division tutors. Graces such as the accento, portar della voce, tremolo, groppo, trillo, esclamationo and intonatio are all to be considered by performers of any music in this period.\n\"Cornetts and trombones...play divisions that are neither scrappy, nor so wild and involved that they spoil the underlying melody and the composer's design: but are introduced at such moments and with such vivacity and charm that they give the music the greatest beauty and spirit\"\nBottrigari, Venice 1594\nAlong with the improvisation, many of these tutors discuss articulation. Francesco Rognoni in 1620 describes the tonguing as the most important part of producing \"a good and beautiful effect in playing wind instruments, and principally the cornett\" (which of course had a very similar role to the trombone). The treatises discuss the various strengths of consonants from \"le\" through \"de\" to \"te\". But the focus of the text is for playing rapid notes \"similar to the gorgia of the human voice\" with \"soft and smooth\" double tonguing (\"lingua riversa\") using \"le re le re\". This is opposed to using \"te che te che\", which is described as \"harsh, barbarous and displeasing\". The natural 'pairing' of notes these articulations provide is similar to the instructions for string players who are instructed to slur (\"lireggiar\") pairs of eighth notes with one bow stroke per quarter beat.\nAnother integral part of the early music sound-world is the musical temperament. Music in the middle-ages favours intervals of the fourth and fifth, which is why Pythagorean tuning was used. The interval of a third was used as a clash until the Renaissance, when it became consonant in compositions, which went hand-in-hand with the widespread use of meantone temperament. During the 17th century, Well temperament began to become more and more popular as the range of keys increased. Temperament affects the colour of a composition, and therefore modern performances, typically employing equal temperament, may not be true representations of the composers' intentions.\nThese old tunings are the result of the natural harmonic series of a brass instrument such as the sackbut. \nAs the bell is smaller than a modern trombone, the harmonic series is closer to a perfect harmonic series, which is the basis for just tuning. Without adjusting the slide, the first to second harmonic is a perfect octave, second to third harmonic is a fifth slightly wider than equal temperament and fourth to fifth harmonic is a major third slightly narrower than in equal temperament. These adjusted intervals make chords ring and are the basis of meantone. In fact, Daniel Speer says \"Once you have found a good C (third position), this is also the place you will find your F\u266f.\u201d Playing a sounding C and F\u266f in exactly the same position on a modern orchestra sounds out of tune, but it tunes perfectly well on in a sackbut choir if everyone plays natural harmonics.\nPlenty of musical understanding can be gathered from reading the original music print. Publishers such as SPES and Arnaldo Forni Edition provide facsimile copies of plenty of music for trombone from this era. To read these it one needs to become familiar with the old clefs, time signatures, ligatures and notational conventions of the era.\nSymbolism.\nThe sound of sackbuts (and trombones) has long been thought especially solemn and noble, had an association with death and the afterlife. The instrument was a symbol of divine presence, the voice of the angels and instrument of judgment. This symbolism can be seen, for instance, in \"L'Orfeo\", \"Alceste\", \"The Magic Flute\", the \"Death March\" from \"Saul\", and funeral aequales.\nThis association was probably encouraged by the lack of distinction made between natural horns, slide trumpets, and trombones in this Renaissance; they were used and often named interchangeably. Martin Luther's 1534 translation of the Bible into German renders the Greek \"shophar\" and \"salpigx\" to \"Posaune\". \"Posaune\" at the time could refer to a natural horn or other brass instrument, but it later came to mean exclusively \"trombone\" (similarly, English translations generally have \"trumpet\", and only occasionally \"horn\" or \"shofar\"). This gives the later reader of the Luther Bible texts such as: \u201c\u2026we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trombone; for the trombone shall sound and the dead shall be raised incorruptible\" (1 Corinthians 15:52).\nRepertoire.\nBefore 1600.\nThe sackbut replaced the slide trumpet in the 15th century alta capella wind bands that were common in towns throughout Europe playing courtly dance music. See Waits.\nAnother key use of the trombone was in ceremonies, in conjunction with the trumpet. In many towns in Germany and Northern Italy, 'piffari' bands were employed by local governments throughout the 16th century to give regular concerts in public squares and would lead processions for festivals. Piffari usually contained a mix of wind, brass and percussion instruments and sometimes viols.\nVenice's doge had his own piffari company and they gave an hour-long concert in the Piazza each day, as well as sometimes performing for services in St. Mark's. Each of the six confraternities in Venice also had their own independent piffari groups too, which would all play at a lavish procession on the feast of Corpus Domini. These groups are in addition to the musicians employed by St. Mark's to play in the balconies with the choir (the piffari would play on the main level).\nIt also was used in church music both for instrumental service music and as a doubling instrument for choral music. The treble and high alto parts were most often played by cornetts or shawms, with the violin sometimes replacing the cornett in 17th century Italian music.\nThe first record of trombones being used in churches was in Innsbruck 1503. Seville Cathedral's records show employment of trombonists in 1526, followed by several other Spanish cathedrals during the 16th century, used not only for ceremonial music and processionals, but also for accompaniment of the liturgical texts as well, doubling voices.\nThe sacred use of trombones was brought to a fine art by the Andrea Gabrieli, Giovanni Gabrieli and their contemporaries c.1570-1620 Venice and there is also evidence of trombonists being employed in churches and cathedrals in Italy at times during the second half of the 16th century in Bologna, Rome, Padua, Mantua and Modena.\nSince ensembles had flexible instrumentation at this time, there is relatively little music before Giovanni Gabrieli's publication \"Symphoniae sacrae\" (1597) that specifically mentions trombones. The only example currently known is the music by Francesco Corteccia for the Medici wedding 1539.\n1600\u20131700.\nSolo.\nThe 17th century brings two pieces of real solo trombone repertoire.\nGiovanni Martino Cesare wrote \"La Hieronyma,\" (Musikverlag Max Hieber, MH6012) the earliest known piece for accompanied solo trombone. It comes from Cesare's collection \"Musicali Melodie per voci et instrumenti a una, due, tre, quattro, cinque, e sei\" published in Munich 1621 of 28 pieces for a mixture of violins, cornetts, trombone, vocal soloists and organ continuo. The collection also contains \"La Bavara\" for four trombones.\nThe other solo trombone piece of the 17th century, \"Sonata trombone &amp; basso\" (modern edition by H Weiner, Ensemble Publications), was written around 1665. This anonymous piece is also known as the 'St. Thomas Sonata' because it was kept in the library of the Saint Thomas Augustinian Monastery in Brno, Czech Republic.\nFrancesco Rognoni was another composer who specified the trombone in a set of divisions (variations) on the well-known song \"Suzanne ung jour\" (London Pro Musica, REP15). Rognoni was a master violin and gamba player whose treatise \"Selva di Varie passaggi secondo l'uso moderno\" (Milan 1620 and facsimile reprint by Arnaldo Forni Editore 2001) details improvisation of diminutions and Suzanne is given as one example. Although most diminutions are written for organ, string instruments or cornett, Suzanne is \"per violone over Trombone alla bastarda\". With virtuosic semiquaver passages across the range of the instrument, it reflects Praetorius' comments about the large range of the tenor and bass trombones, and good players of the Quartposaune (bass trombone in F) could play fast runs and leaps like a viola bastarda or cornetto. The term \"bastarda\" describes a technique that made variations on all the different voices of a part song, rather than just the melody or the bass: \"considered illegitimate because it was not polyphonic\".\nChamber music.\nIn the 17th century, a considerable repertoire of chamber music using sackbut with various combinations of violins, cornetts and dulcians, often with continuo, appeared. Composers included Dario Castello, Giovanni Battista Fontana, Giovanni Paolo Cima, Andrea Cima, Johann Heinrich Schmelzer and Matthias Weckmann.\nAntonio Bertali wrote several trio sonatas for 2 violins, trombone and bass continuo in the mid-17th century. One such \"Sonata a 3\" is freely available in facsimile form from the D\u00fcben Collection website hosted by Uppsala universitet. A \"Sonata a3 in C\" is published by Musica Rara and attributed to Biber, although the authorship is unclear and it is more likely to have been written by Bertali.\nDario Castello, a wind player at St. Mark's Venice in the early 17th century had two books of \"Sonate Concertate\" published in 1621 and 1629. The sonatas of 1-4 parts with bass continuo often specify trombones, as well as cornett, violin and bassoon. The numerous reprints during the 17th century affirm his popularity then, as perhaps now.\nGiuseppe Scarani joined St. Mark's Venice in 1629 as a singer and in the following year published \"Sonate concertate\", a volume of works for 2 or 3 (unspecified) instruments (and b.c.). The title has been suggested was chosen to try and capture some of Castello's success.\nTiburtio Massaino wrote a Canzona for eight trombones, published in Raverio's 1608 collection.\nJohann Heinrich Schmelzer wrote several sonatas that included trombones\u2014such as his \"Sonata \u00e0 7\" for two cornetts, two trumpets, three trombones, and basso continuo.\nDaniel Speer published a four-part sonata in \"Neu-gebachene Taffel-Schnitz\" (1685). In 1687, Speer published the first written instruction in sackbut (and several other instruments) playing: \"Grund-richtiger/kurtz/leicht und noethiger Unterricht der Musicalischen Kunst\". The second edition in 1697 provides two three part sonatas for trombones.\nAn English work of note from this period is Matthew Locke's \"Music for His Majestys Sagbutts and Cornetts\", a suite for Charles II's coronation 1661.\nLight music.\nNon-serious music, often based on dances for festive occasions, rarely had specified instrumentation. Often you find something like \"per diversi musici\". Indeed, the groups that would perform them would often be full of multi-instrumentalists.\nJohann Pezel wrote for Stadtpfeifer with his \"Hora decima musicorum\" (1670), containing sonatas, as well as \"F\u00fcnff-stimmigte blasende Music\" (1685) with five-part intradas and dance pieces.\nWell known pieces from Germany includes Samuel Scheidt's \"Ludi Musici\" (1621) and Johann Hermann Schein's \"Banchetto musicale\" (1617).\nThe first English piece scored for trombone is John Adson's \"Courtly Masquing Ayres\" (1611). Another light collection suitable for including trombones is Anthony Holborne's \"Pavans, Galliards, Allmains, and other short Aeirs both Grave and Light in Five Parts for Viols, Violins or Other Musicall Winde Instruments\" (1599).\nSacred music.\nVenice.\nTrombonists were in the regular ensemble at St. Mark's Venice from its formation in 1568 until they left the payroll in 1732. The first two ensemble directors\u2014\"maestro di concerti\"\u2014Girolamo Dalla Casa (1568\u20131601) and Giovanni Bassano (1601\u20131617)\u2014were cornett players and the nucleus of the group was two cornetts and two trombones, although for the larger ceremonies many extra players were hired. During a mass attended by the Doge, evidence suggests they would have played a canzona in the Gradual after the Epistle and the Agnus Dei, a sonata in the Offertory as well as reinforcing vocal parts or substituting for absent singers.\nThis ensemble was used extensively by Giovanni Gabrieli in pieces substantially for brass, voices and organ in Venice up until his death in 1612. He was greatly influential in Venetian composers in other churches and confraternities, and his early baroque and cori spezzati style is seen in contemporaries like Giovanni Picchi and Giovanni Battista Grillo.\nIt is suggested that Monteverdi wrote his \"Vespro della Beata Vergine\" (1610) as a pitch for employment at St. Mark's as successor to Giovanni Gabrieli. In addition to the Magnificat, two movements specify trombones: the opening \"Deus in adiutorium\" is for six voices, two violins, two cornetts, three trombones, five viole da braccio and basso continuo; Sonata sopra \"Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis\" is for soprano, two violins, two cornetts, three trombones (one of which can be a viola da braccio) and basso continuo. Monteverdi also leaves the option to use trombones as part of the \"sex instrumentis\" of the \"Dixit Dominus\" and in the instrumental \"Ritornello a 5\" between verses of \"Ave maris stella\".\nFrom around 1617, when the \"maestro de' concerti\" at St. Marks changed to violinist Francesco Bonfante and correspondingly the ensemble changed from basically a brass ensemble to being more evenly mixed with brass, wind and string instruments.\nMonteverdi arrived at St. Mark's in 1613 and it is unsurprising that he includes trombones and strings for several more sacred works during his time here, published in his \"Selva morale e spirituale\" 1641. Of the c.40 items in this collection, six specify three or four trombones (or viola da braccio, ad lib): SV268 Beatus vir I, SV263 Dixit Dominus I, SV263 Dixit Dominus II, SV261 Et iterum venturus est, SV258 Gloria in excelsis Deo, SV281 Magnificat I. Each is for 3-8 voices with 3 violins (apart from SV261), the trombones/violas and basso continuo. Monteverdi also specified trombones in two more sacred works: SV198 Laetatus sum (i) (1650) for 6 voices, 2 violins, 2 trombones and bassoon and SV272 Laudate Dominum omnes gentes I (1641) for 5 voices 'concertato', 4 voice chorus ad lib, 4 viola da braccio or trombones and basso continuo.\nGermany/Austria.\nA prolific composer for trombones in Germany in the 17th century was Heinrich Sch\u00fctz. His \"Fili me, Absalon\" (SWV 269) and \"Attendite, popule meus\" (SWV 270), are both scored for bass voice, four trombones (of which two are optionally violins) and basso continuo, are well known. They are part of his first \"Symphoniae Sacrae\" collection dating from 1629 and commentators have noted that the style reflects his studies in Venice with Giovanni Gabrieli 1609\u20131612. Other pieces that specify trombones (according to Grove) are (grouped by the collection they were published in): Concert mit 11 Stimmen (1618): SWV 21, in \"Psalmen Davids\" (Psalms of David) Op. 2 (1619): SWV 38, 40\u201346, Symphoniae sacrae I Op.6 (1629): SWV 259, 269\u2013271, 274, Symphoniae sacrae II Op.10 (1647): SWV 344, Symphoniae sacrae III Op. 12 (1650): SWV 398a, Historia (1664): SWV 435, 448, 449, 453, 461, 452, 466\u2013470, 473, 474\u2013476, Schwanengesang Psalm 119 (1671): SWV 500, although many others are suitable for trombones too.\nJohann Hermann Schein specified trombones in some of his sacred vocal works in the \"Opella nova, ander Theil, geistlicher Concerten\" collection (Leipzig, 1626). For example, \"Uns ist ein Kind geboren\" is scored for violino, traversa, alto trombone, tenor voice, fagotto and basso continuo. \"Mach dich auf, werde licht, Zion\" uses Canto 1: violino, cornetto, flauto picciolo e voce, Canto 2: voce e traversa, Alto: Trombone e Voce, Tenore: Voce e Trombone, Basso: Fagotto Trombone e Voce and Basso Continuo, during which solos for each of the trombonists are specified. Of particular interest is \"Maria, gegr\u00fcsset seist du, Holdselige,\" which uses soprano and tenor voices, alto trombone, 2 tenor trombones and on the bass line \"trombone grosso,\" which goes down to pedal A, and a couple of diatonic scale passages from bottom C.\nGerman composer Johann Rudolf Ahle wrote some notable sacred pieces for voices and trombones. \"H\u00f6re, Gott\" uses five favoriti singers, two ripieno choirs (which double other parts at intense moments) and seven trombones, with basso continuo. And his most famous \"Neu-gepflanzte Th\u00fcringische Lust-Garten..\" (1657\u201365) contains several sacred works with 3 or 4 trombones, including \"Magnificat a 8\" for SATB soloists, cornett, 3 trombones and continuo and \"Herr nun l\u00e4ssestu deinen Diener a 5\" for bass, 4 trombones and continuo.\nDieterich Buxtehude specifies trombones in a few sacred concertos using style derived from polychoral Venetian works and one secular piece. For example, \"Gott f\u00e4hret auf mit Jauchzen\" (BuxWV33 from CW v, 44) is scored for SSB voices, 2 violins, 2 violas, trombones, 2 cornetts, 2 trumpets, bassoon and basso continuo.\nThere are a few vocal works involving trombones in works by Andreas Hammerschmidt. These include \"Lob- und Danck Lied aus dem 84. Psalm\" for 9 voices, 5 trumpets, 3 trombones, 5 violas and basso continuo (Freiberg, 1652). There is also \"Hochzeitsgesang f\u00fcr Daniel Sartorius: Es ist nicht gut, dass der Mensch allein sei\" for 5 voices, 2 violins, 2 trombones, bassoon and basso continuo.\nJohann Schelle has numerous sacred vocal works that use trombones. For instance \"Vom Himmel kam der Engel Schar\" is scored for soprano, tenor, SSATB choir, 2 violins, 2 violas, 2 cornetts, 3 trombones, 2 trumpets, timpani, basso continuo, and \"Lobe den Herrn, meine Seele\" is for two choirs of SSATB and similar instruments to the previous work.\nThe lesser known Austrian composer Christoph Strauss, Kapellmeister to the Habsburg Emperor Mathias 1616\u20131620, wrote two important collections for trombones, cornetts and voices. His motets published in Nova ac diversimoda sacrarum cantionum composition, seu motettae (Vienna, 1613) are in a similar tradition to Gabrieli's music. Of the sixteen motets in the collection, all are titled \"concerto\" apart from the \"sonata\" \"Expectans Expectavi Dominum\" for 6 trombones, cantus voice and tenor voice. In 1631 he published a number of masses, which were much more baroque, with basso continuo, rhetorical word painting and obligato usage of instruments.\nLater in the 17th century, Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber composed sacred works for voices and orchestra featuring trombones. His \"Requiem\" mass (1692) uses an orchestra of strings, 3 trombones and basso continuo. A similar ensemble accompanies 8 vocal lines in his \"Lux perpetua\" (c1673), and three more similar works in the 1690s.\nTheatre.\nMonteverdi ushers sackbuts into the first great opera, 'L'Orfeo' 1607. The orchestra at the first performance, as shown in the first publication, the list of \"stromenti\" at the front of the score specifies four trombones, but at one point in Act 3, however, the score calls for five trombones.\n1700\u20131750.\nThere is relatively little repertoire for the trombone in the late baroque.\nJohann Sebastian Bach uses trombones in fourteen of his church cantatas\u2014BWV 2, 3, 4, 21, 23, 25, 28, 38, 64, 68, 96, 101, 121, 135\u2014as well as motet BWV 118. He uses the trombone sound to reflect the (by now) archaic sounds of the Renaissance trombones doubling voices (with cornett playing the soprano line), yet he also uses them independently, which John Eliot Gardiner says prepares the way for their use in Beethoven's Symphony No. 5. The cantatas were either composed in Leipzig during 1723\u20131725, or (for BWV 4, 21 &amp; 23) the trombone parts were added to the existing cantata during the same period. The cornett and trombone parts would have been played by the Stadtpfeifer.\nIn England, George Frideric Handel includes trombones in three of his oratorios: \"Saul\" (1738), \"Israel in Egypt\" (1738) and \"Samson\" (1741). There are no other documented groups or performances with trombone players in England at this time, and it has been suggested that the premiers took place with a visiting group from Germany, as was the custom in Paris at this time.\nVienna's Imperial court used trombones in church music:\nJohann Joseph Fux was Hofkapellmeister in Vienna from 1715 until 1741. Many of his masses use the choir strengthened by strings, cornetts and trombones, often with independent moments for the instrumentalists and sometimes. \"Missa SS Trinitatis\" uses two choirs, which again points to the traditions going back to Gabrieli. His highly successful Requiem is for five vocal parts, two cornetts, two trombones, strings and continuo. He also uses the trombone in smaller motets and antiphons, such as his setting of \"Alma Redemptoris mater\" for soprano, alto trombone, strings and continuo. Some of his chamber music involves trombones, as do many of his operas, used as an obbligato instrument.\nAlso in the Vienna court was Antonio Caldara, vice-kapellmeister 1717\u20131736. Among his output are two Holy Week settings as Da Capo arias: \"Deh sciogliete, o mesti lumi\" for soprano, unison violins, bassoon, two trombones and organ and \"Dio, qual sia\" for soprano, trombone, bassoon and basso continuo.\n1750\u20131800.\nAgain this period suffers from a lack of trombone players. Most of these works derive from Vienna and Salzburg.\nJoseph Haydn uses trombones in \"Il rotorno di Tobia\", \"Die sieben letzten Worte\", \"The Creation\", \"Die Jahreszeiten\", \"Der Sturm\", \"Orfeo ed Euridice\" and secular cantata choruses.\nWolfgang Amadeus Mozart uses trombones in connection with death or the supernatural. This includes the Requiem (K626, 1791), Great Mass in C minor (K423, 1783), \"Coronation Mass (C major)\" (K317, 1779), several other masses, \"Vesperae Solennes de Confessore\" (K339, 1780), \"Vesperae de Dominica\", his arrangement of Handel's \"Messiah\" plus two of his three great operas: \"Don Giovanni\" (K527, 1787) and \"Die Zauberfl\u00f6te\" (K620, 1791). Mozart's first use of the trombone was an obligato line in the oratorio \"Die Schuldigkeit des ersten Gebots\" (K35, 1767)\nChristoph Willibald Gluck includes trombones in five of his operas: \"Iphig\u00e9nie en Aulide\" (1774), Orfeo ed Euridice (1774), \"Alceste\" (1776), \"Iphig\u00e9nie en Tauride\" (1779) and \"Echo et Narcisse\" (1779), as well as ballet \"Don Juan\" (1761).\nSome chamber music in this period includes trombone in an obligato role with voice, and also as a concerto instrument with string orchestra. Composers include the likes of Leopold Mozart, Georg Christoph Wagenseil, Johann Albrechtsberger, Michael Haydn and Johann Ernst Eberlin.\nFor works for trombone post-1800, please see trombone.\nRecordings.\nPlenty of recordings of the authentic sackbut are now available from the groups such as Concerto Palatino, HMSC, Gabrieli Consort and the Toulouse Sacqueboutiers. For a closer examination of the instrument, here are some recommended recordings where the sackbut is heavily featured in a \"solo\" capacity.\nEarly surviving instruments.\nThe earliest instruments:\nOther notable sackbuts:\nFor more information, see Herbert (2006).\nModern manufacturers.\nThe modern German \"church trombone\" also resembles a sackbut.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26798", "revid": "50548440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26798", "title": "Saxhorn", "text": "Family of valved brass instruments\nThe saxhorn is a family of valved brass instruments that have conical bores and deep cup-shaped mouthpieces. The saxhorn family was developed by Adolphe Sax, who is also known for creating the saxophone family. The sound of the saxhorn has a characteristic mellow tone quality and blends well with other brass.\nThe saxhorn family.\nThe saxhorns form a family of seven brass instruments (although at one point ten different sizes seem to have existed). Designed for band use, they are pitched alternately in E\u266d and B\u266d, like the saxophone group.\nModern saxhorns still manufactured and in use:\nHistorically, much confusion exists as to the nomenclature of the various instruments in different languages.\nThe following table lists the members of the saxhorn family as described in the orchestration texts of Hector Berlioz and Cecil Forsyth, the J. Howard Foote catalog of 1893, and modern names. The modern instrument names continue to exhibit inconsistency, denoted by a \"/\" between the two names in use. In the table \"Pitch\" means the concert pitch of notational Middle C on each instrument (2nd partial, no valves depressed) in scientific pitch notation.\nThis list is not exhaustive of historic nomenclature for the saxhorns, for which there may exist no comprehensive and authoritative source.\nRanges of individual members.\nThe saxhorn is based on the same three-valve system as most other valved brass instruments. Each member of the family is named after the root note produced by the second partial with no valves actuated. Each member nominally possesses or possessed the typical three-valve brass range from the note one tritone below that root note (second partial, all valves actuated) to the note produced by eighth partial with no valves actuated, i.e., the note two octaves above the root note.\nAll the modern members of the family are transposing instruments written in the treble clef with the root note produced by the second partial with no valves actuated being written as middle C, though the baritone horn often plays bass clef parts, especially in concert band music and when playing parts written for the trombone.\nHistory.\nDeveloped during the mid-to-late 1830s, the saxhorn family was patented in Paris in 1845 by Adolphe Sax. During the 19th century, the debate as to whether the saxhorn family was truly new, or rather a development of previously existing instruments, was the subject of prolonged lawsuits.\nThroughout the mid-1850s, Sax continued to experiment with the instrument's valve pattern.\nThe Trojan March (\"Marche Troyenne\") of the Berlioz opera \"Les Troyens\" (1856\u201358) features an on-stage band which includes a family of saxhorns. The Royal Hunt and Storm (\"Chasse Royale\") from the same opera uses them orchestrally. Sir John Eliot Gardiner wanted to use them in his 2003 recording, but was unable to borrow them from major conservatoires; he was eventually put in touch with a private collector who loaned him a set.\nSaxhorns were popularized by the distinguished Distin Quintet, who toured Europe during the mid-19th century. This family of musicians, publishers and instrument manufacturers had a significant impact on the growth of the brass band movement in Britain during the mid- to late-19th century.\nThe saxhorn was the most common brass instrument in American Civil War bands. The over-the-shoulder variety of the instrument was used, as the backward-pointing bell of the instrument allowed troops marching behind the band to hear the music.\nContemporary works featuring this instrument are D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Dondeyne's \"Tubissimo\" for bass tuba or saxhorn and piano (1983), Olivier Messiaen's \"Et exspecto resurrectionem mortuorum\" (1964), and Dmitri Shostakovich's \"March of the Soviet Militia\" (1970).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26799", "revid": "18578145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26799", "title": "Scanner", "text": "Scanner may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26800", "revid": "50299840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26800", "title": "Sonic Team", "text": "Japanese video game developer\n, doing business as , is a Japanese video game developer owned by Sega. Sonic Team is best known for its \"Sonic the Hedgehog\" series. Some Sonic Team games, such as the original \"Sonic\" games and \"Nights into Dreams\" (1996), are considered among the best video games ever made.\nThe initial team, formed in 1990, consisted of Sega developers including programmer Yuji Naka, artist Naoto Ohshima and level designer Hirokazu Yasuhara. The team took the name Sonic Team in 1991 with the release of their first game, \"Sonic the Hedgehog,\" for the Sega Genesis. It was a major success and contributed to millions of Genesis sales. The next \"Sonic\" games were developed by Naka and Yasuhara in America at Sega Technical Institute, while Ohshima worked on \"Sonic CD\" in Japan at CS3. Naka returned to Japan in 1994 to become the head of CS3, later renamed R&amp;D No. 8. During this time, the division took on the Sonic Team brand but developed games that do not feature Sonic, such as \"Nights into Dreams\" (1996) and \"Burning Rangers\" (1998).\nFollowing the release of \"Sonic Adventure\" in 1998, some Sonic Team staff moved to the United States to form Sonic Team USA and develop \"Sonic Adventure 2\" (2001). With Sega's divestiture of its studios into separate companies, R&amp;D No. 8 became SONICTEAM Ltd. in 2000, with Naka as CEO and Sonic Team USA as its subsidiary. Sega's financial troubles led to several major structural changes in the early 2000s; the United Game Artists studio was absorbed by Sonic Team in 2003, and Sonic Team USA became Sega Studios USA in 2004.\nAfter Sammy Corporation purchased Sega in 2004, Sonic Team was reincorporated to become Sega's GE1 research and development department. Naka left Sega during the development of \"Sonic the Hedgehog\" (2006), and Sega Studios USA was merged back into Sonic Team in 2008. The following decade was marked by \"Sonic\" games of varying reception, with head of studio Takashi Iizuka acknowledging that Sonic Team had prioritized shipping over quality.\nHistory.\n1990: Formation and \"Sonic the Hedgehog\".\nIn 1984, programmer Yuji Naka was hired into Sega's Consumer Development division. His first project was \"Girl's Garden\", which he and Hiroshi Kawaguchi created as part of their training process. For his next game, \"Phantasy Star\" (1987) for the Master System, Naka created pseudo-3D animation effects. He met artist Naoto Ohshima while working on the game.\nDuring the late 1980s and early 1990s, a rivalry formed between Sega and Nintendo due to the release of their 16-bit video game consoles: the Sega Genesis and the Super Nintendo Entertainment System. Sega needed a mascot character that would be as synonymous with their brand as Mario was with Nintendo. Sega wanted a killer app and character that could appeal to an older demographic than preteens, demonstrate the capabilities of the Genesis, and ensure commercial success in North America.\nSega held an internal competition to submit characters designs for a mascot. Ohshima designed a blue hedgehog named Sonic, who was inserted into a prototype game created by Naka. The Sonic design was refined to be less aggressive and appeal to a wider audience before the division began development on their platform game \"Sonic the Hedgehog\". According to Ohshima, Sega was looking for a game that would sell well in the United States as well as in Japan. Ohshima and Naka already had the game and character ready, with Ohshima having worked with Sega's toy and stationery department on design ideas. Ohshima said their progress encouraged Sega to select their proposal, as theirs was the only team to have put in a high amount of time and effort. This left him confident their proposal would be selected.\nThe \"Sonic the Hedgehog\" project began with just Naka and Ohshima, but grew to involve two programmers, two sound engineers, and three designers. Hirokazu Yasuhara joined to supervise Naka and Ohshima and develop levels, and became the lead designer. He satisfied Naka's request for a simple, one-button design by having Sonic do damage by jumping. \"Sonic the Hedgehog\" was released in 1991 and proved a major success, contributing to millions of sales of the Genesis. The team took the name Sonic Team for the game's release. Naka referred to Sonic Team as only a \"team name\" at this point; the division's other games did not use this particular name.\n1992\u20131998: Re-establishment and new intellectual properties.\nShortly after the release of \"Sonic the Hedgehog\", Naka, Yasuhara, and a number of other Japanese developers relocated to California to join Sega Technical Institute (STI), a development division established by Mark Cerny intended as an elite studio combining the design philosophies of American and Japanese developers. While Naka and Yasuhara developed \"Sonic the Hedgehog 2\" at STI, Ohshima worked on \"Sonic CD,\" a prequel for the Sega CD add-on. Though Naka was not directly involved in the \"Sonic CD\" development, he exchanged design ideas with Ohshima.\nFollowing the release of \"Sonic &amp; Knuckles\" in 1994, Naka returned to Japan, having been offered a role as a producer. He was placed in charge of Sega's Consumer Development Department 3, also known as CS3. Naka was reunited with Ohshima and brought with him Takashi Iizuka, who had also worked with Naka's team at STI. In the mid-1990s, Sonic Team started work on new intellectual property, leading to the creation of \"Nights into Dreams\" (1996) and \"Burning Rangers\" (1998) for the Sega Saturn. Naka stated that the release of \"Nights\" is when Sonic Team was truly formed as a brand.\nFew \"Sonic\" games were released for the Saturn. Since Sonic Team was preoccupied with \"Nights into Dreams\", it outsourced the development of the last Genesis \"Sonic\" game, \"Sonic 3D Blast\" (1996), to the British studio Traveller's Tales. Sonic Team developed bonus levels for a Saturn port, released in place of the canceled STI game \"Sonic X-treme\". Yasuhara moved to London to assist the development of \"Sonic R\" (1997), a \"Sonic\" racing game co-developed by Sonic Team and Traveller's Tales. The only other Saturn \"Sonic\" game was \"Sonic Jam\" (1997), a compilation of the Genesis games with a 3D overworld Sonic Team used to experiment with 3D \"Sonic\" gameplay. \nThe Saturn was a commercial failure, which some writers attributed to its lack of a major \"Sonic\" game. Sega shifted focus to the Dreamcast, which launched in Japan in 1998. Sonic Team saw the Dreamcast as an opportunity to revisit the \"Sonic\" series. They had begun working on a 3D \"Sonic\" game for the Saturn, but development moved to the Dreamcast to align with Sega's plans. Iizuka led the project; Iizuka had long wanted to create a \"Sonic\" role-playing video game and felt the Dreamcast was powerful enough to achieve his vision. The game became \"Sonic Adventure\" (1998), the bestselling Dreamcast game.\nAround this time, CS3 was renamed Sega Research and Development Department 8 (R&amp;D No. 8). It was sometimes referred to as AM8 or \"Sega-AM8\", as Sega's R&amp;D department was named Sega Amusement Machine Research and Development (AM), though Sonic Team focused solely on home console games. Until 2000, media referred to Sonic Team as both R&amp;D No. 8 and AM8.\n1999\u20132003: Dreamcast, Sonic Team USA and formation into company.\nIn 1999, shortly after the release of \"Sonic Adventure\", twelve Sonic Team members relocated to San Francisco to establish Sonic Team USA, while others remained in Japan. Shortly afterward, a number of key employees\u2014including Ohshima\u2014left Sega to form a new studio, Artoon. Sonic Team achieved success in the arcade market in 1999 with the rhythm game \"Samba de Amigo\", also released for the Dreamcast. They also began developing online games; in 1999, they released \"ChuChu Rocket!\", a puzzle game that used the Dreamcast's online capabilities. In 2000, Sonic Team launched the role-playing game \"Phantasy Star Online\" to critical and commercial success.\nSega began to restructure its studios in October 2000 and spun off its software divisions into subsidiary companies. When the departments took new names, Naka felt it important to preserve the Sonic Team brand name, and the division's new legal name as a company was SONICTEAM, Ltd. Naka was installed as the CEO, and Sonic Team USA became a subsidiary of the new company.\nDespite a number of well received games, Sega discontinued the Dreamcast in 2001 and exited the hardware business. Sega transitioned into a third-party developer and began developing games for multiple platforms. From 2000, Sonic Team in Japan began to release fewer games, with a few releases such as the puzzle game \"Puyo Pop\" and the action game \"Billy Hatcher and the Giant Egg\". The company changes and lack of a Sega console affected Sonic Team; according to Naka, in a 2006 interview, \"Our approach was always to create strategic title concepts, which included the hardware. We do somewhat miss the idea of being able to address these constant challenges.\" Yasuhara left to join Naughty Dog after Sega discontinued the Dreamcast. However, originality remained important for Naka; Sonic Team developed \"Sonic Heroes\" instead of \"Sonic Adventure 3\", explored the digital card game genre with \"\", and developed the original game \"Billy Hatcher\". Naka credited the enduring success of \"Sonic\" to the character's appeal to children. Naka's goal was to appeal to the largest audience possible and to appeal to children.\nEarly in 2003, Sega president Hideki Sato and COO Tetsu Kamaya announced they were stepping down from their roles, with Sato being replaced by Hisao Oguchi, the head of Hitmaker. As part of Oguchi's restructuring plan, he announced his intention to consolidate Sega's studios into \"four or five core operations\". Sonic Team was financially solvent and absorbed United Game Artists, another Sega subsidiary led by Tetsuya Mizuguchi and known for the music games \"Space Channel 5\" (1999) and \"Rez\" (2001).\n2004\u2013present: Reintegration and recent years.\nIn 2004, the Japanese company Sammy acquired a controlling interest in Sega and formed Sega Sammy Holdings. Prior to the merger, Sega began the process of re-integrating its subsidiaries into the main company. Sonic Team USA became Sega Studios USA, while SONICTEAM Ltd. became Sega's Global Entertainment 1 research and development division (GE1). The team is still referred to as Sonic Team. As of 2005, senior Sega figures including Toshihiro Nagoshi and Yu Suzuki were reporting to Naka; according to Takashi Yuda, he was involved in all Sega game development. Naka announced his departure on 8 May 2006 and formed a new studio, Prope, to focus on creating original games. He left Sonic Team during the development of \"Sonic the Hedgehog\" (2006), released as part of the 15-year anniversary of the \"Sonic\" franchise. \"Sonic the Hedgehog\" was panned for its bugs and design flaws; \"Sonic Unleashed\" (2008) received mixed reviews, but sold well. Both games were released for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360; Sonic Team also developed a series of \"Sonic\" games for the Wii and Nintendo DS, such as 2007's \"Sonic and the Secret Rings\".\nBy 2010, Sonic Team had become part of CS Research and Development No. 2 (CS2), Sega Studios USA had been reintegrated into the Japanese team, and Iizuka had become the head of the department. After a series of poorly received \"Sonic\" releases, Sonic Team refocused on speed and more traditional side-scrolling in ' and ', \"Sonic Generations\", and \"Sonic Colors\", which all received better reviews. In 2015, Iizuka recognized in an interview with \"Polygon\" that Sonic Team had prioritized shipping games over quality, and had not had enough involvement in later third-party \"Sonic\" games, such as \"\". He hoped the Sonic Team logo would stand as a \"mark of quality\"; he planned to release quality games and expand the \"Sonic\" brand, while retaining the modern Sonic design. Iizuka stated that doing new things with the franchise has had good and bad points at times. Sonic Team's first \"Sonic\" game exclusive to smartphones, \"Sonic Runners\", was released in 2015. An endless runner, it was designed to have more replay value than other games in the genre. \"Sonic Runners\" received mixed reviews and was unprofitable, resulting in its discontinuation a year later.\nIn 2017, Sonic Team developed and released \"Sonic Forces\", and oversaw the development of \"Sonic Mania\" by Christian Whitehead. \"Forces\" was aimed at a broad audience of young and adult players, while \"Mania\" was focused on fans of the original Genesis games. \"Mania\" became the best reviewed \"Sonic\" game in fifteen years following nearly two decades of mixed reviews for the franchise. Sonic Team also contributed to the 2019 reboot of \"Sakura Wars.\" Sonic Team is embedded within the second business division of Sega, which has more than 400 employees as of 2023.\nSonic Team USA / Sega Studios USA.\nSonic Team USA, later Sega Studios USA, was a division of Sega and of Sonic Team while Sonic Team was a subsidiary company. It was founded when twelve Sonic Team members, including Takashi Iizuka, relocated to San Francisco, California, in 1999, and was a subsidiary of SONICTEAM, Ltd. by 2000. The team worked on game development, translation, and market studies in the United States, until they returned to Japan and merged back into Sonic Team in 2008.\nSonic Team USA translated \"Sonic Adventure\" and tested \"ChuChu Rocket!\" in America before beginning work on \"Sonic Adventure 2\". They took inspiration from their location in San Francisco, as well as Yosemite National Park and other areas of the United States. \"Sonic Adventure 2\" was released on 23 June 2001, and was ported to the GameCube. The next Sonic Team USA project was \"Sonic Heroes\" (2003), the first \"Sonic\" game developed for multiple platforms. Sonic Team USA took a different approach with \"Heroes\" from the \"Sonic Adventure\" games, focusing on gameplay more similar to the Genesis games to which even casual gamers could adapt.\nAfter SONICTEAM, Ltd. merged back into Sega in 2004, Sonic Team USA was renamed Sega Studios USA. Its next project was \"Shadow the Hedgehog\", released in 2005, a spin-off starring Shadow. Unlike previous games, \"Shadow the Hedgehog\" was targeted at older players and featured different gameplay styles, including the use of guns and different endings to the game. \"Shadow the Hedgehog\" was panned for its level design and mature themes, but was a commercial success, selling at least 1.59 million copies.\nThe final Sega Studios USA game was \"\", the sequel to \"Nights into Dreams\" and the first \"Nights\" game since the cancellation of \"Air Nights\" in 2000. Iizuka felt it was important to retain the original game's concepts while developing new mechanics, and released it on the Wii, a more family-oriented console. \"Journey of Dreams\" was also designed to have a more European feel, in contrast to the \"Sonic\" games, which were more American. The sound and CGI were completed by Sonic Team in Japan, while Sega Studios USA handled the rest of the development for the 2007 release.\nSega Studios USA oversaw the development of \"Sonic Rivals\" (2006) and \"Sonic Rivals 2\" (2007) by Backbone Entertainment. In 2008, Sega Studios USA merged with Sonic Team, making Iizuka the head of Sonic Team and a vice president of product development for Sega. In 2016, Iizuka relocated to Los Angeles to oversee development, with the goal of making the studios there \"a centralized hub for the global brand\".\nGames.\nSonic Team has developed a number of video games, with many of them becoming bestsellers. The studio is best known for its \"Sonic the Hedgehog\" series of platform games, which account for the majority of Sonic Team's work; the 1991 release of \"Sonic the Hedgehog\" is considered one of the most important moments in video game history, as it propelled Genesis sales and displaced Nintendo as the leading game company. Sonic Team have also developed games including action games such as \"Nights into Dreams\", \"Burning Rangers\", and \"Billy Hatcher and the Giant Egg,\" the online puzzle game \"ChuChu Rocket!\", the online role-playing game \"Phantasy Star Online,\" and the music game \"Samba de Amigo\". \"Phantasy Star Online\" is credited for introducing online RPGs to consoles and was the first online RPG for many players. According to Sean Smith of \"Retro Gamer\", few companies could claim to have released as many AAA games over such a long period, especially between 1991 and 2000. Some Sonic Team games, such as the original \"Sonic\" games for the Genesis and \"Nights\", are considered among the best video games ever made. Iizuka said Sonic Team would be open to developing a third \"Nights\" game or a sequel to \"Knuckles' Chaotix\" (1995), if Sega were to commission them.\nSega and Sonic Team have been criticized for their handling of \"Sonic the Hedgehog\" after the beginning of the 3D era of video games. Edwin Evans-Thirlwell of \"Eurogamer\" described the 3D Sonic games as \"20-odd years of slowly accumulating bullshit\", and wrote that unlike Sonic's main competitor, Nintendo's \"Mario\" series, \"Sonic\" in 3D never had a \"transcendental hit\". Sega of America marketing director Al Nilsen and \"Sonic Mania\" developer Christian Whitehead said the large number of characters was problematic, with Whitehead describing them as \"padding\". In 2015, Sega CEO Haruki Satomi acknowledged that Sega had \"partially betrayed\" the trust of their fans and hoped to focus on quality over quantity.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26801", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26801", "title": "Sega hardware", "text": ""}
{"id": "26803", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26803", "title": "Sorting Algorithm", "text": ""}
{"id": "26805", "revid": "41775779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26805", "title": "Sex", "text": "Trait that determines an organism's sexually reproductive function\nSex is the biological trait that determines whether an anisogamous sexually reproducing organism produces male or female gametes. During sexual reproduction, a male and a female gamete fuse to form a zygote, which develops into an offspring that inherits traits from each parent. By convention, organisms that produce smaller gametes (spermatozoa, sperm) are called \"male\", while organisms that produce larger gametes (ova, often called egg cells) are called \"female\". An organism that produces both types of gamete is a hermaphrodite. \nIn non-hermaphroditic species, the sex of an individual is determined through one of several biological sex-determination systems. Most mammalian species have the XY sex-determination system, where the male usually carries an X and a Y chromosome (XY), and the female usually carries two X chromosomes (XX). Other chromosomal sex-determination systems in animals include the ZW system in birds, and the XO system in some insects. Various environmental systems include temperature-dependent sex determination in reptiles and crustaceans.\nThe male and female of a species may be physically alike (sexual monomorphism) or have physical differences (sexual dimorphism). In sexually dimorphic species, including most birds and mammals, the sex of an individual is usually identified through observation of that individual's sexual characteristics. Sexual selection or mate choice can accelerate the evolution of differences between the sexes.\nSome kinds of functional differences between individuals, such as in fungi, may be referred to as mating types.\nSexual reproduction.\nSexual reproduction, in which two individuals produce an offspring that possesses a selection of the genetic traits of each parent, is exclusive to eukaryotes. Genetic traits are encoded in the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) of chromosomes. The eukaryote cell has a set of paired homologous chromosomes, one from each parent, and this double-chromosome stage is called \"diploid\". During sexual reproduction, a diploid organism produces specialized haploid sex cells called gametes via meiosis, each of which has a single set of chromosomes. Meiosis involves a stage of genetic recombination via chromosomal crossover, in which regions of DNA are exchanged between matched pairs of chromosomes, to form new chromosomes, each with a new combination of the genes of the parents. Then the chromosomes are separated into single sets in the gametes. When gametes fuse during fertilization, the resulting zygote has half of the genetic material of the mother and half of the father. The combination of chromosomal crossover and fertilization, bringing the two single sets of chromosomes together to make a new diploid zygote, results in a new organism that contains a different set of the genetic traits of each parent.\nIn animals, the haploid stage only occurs in the gametes, the sex cells that fuse to form a zygote that develops directly into a new diploid organism. In a plant species, the diploid organism produces a type of haploid spore by meiosis that is capable of undergoing repeated cell division to produce a multicellular haploid organism. In either case, the gametes may be externally similar (isogamy) as in the green alga \"Ulva\" or may be different in size and other aspects (anisogamy). The size difference is greatest in oogamy, a type of anisogamy in which a small, motile gamete combines with a much larger, non-motile gamete.\nIn anisogamic organisms, by convention, the larger gamete (called an ovum, or egg cell) is considered female, while the smaller gamete (called a spermatozoon, or sperm cell) is considered male. An individual that produces large gametes is female, and one that produces small gametes is male. An individual that produces both types of gamete is a hermaphrodite. In some species, a hermaphrodite can self-fertilize and produce an offspring on its own. \nAnimals.\nMost sexually reproducing animals spend their lives as diploid, with the haploid stage reduced to single-cell gametes. The gametes of animals have male and female forms\u2014spermatozoa and egg cells, respectively. These gametes combine to form embryos, which develop into new organisms.\nThe male gamete, a spermatozoon (produced in vertebrates within the testes), is a small cell containing a single long flagellum which propels it. Spermatozoa are extremely reduced cells, lacking many cellular components that would be necessary for embryonic development. They are specialized for motility, seeking out an egg cell and fusing with it in a process called fertilization.\nFemale gametes are egg cells. In vertebrates, they are produced within the ovaries. They are large, immobile cells that contain the nutrients and cellular components necessary for a developing embryo. Egg cells are often associated with other cells which support the development of the embryo, forming an egg. In mammals, the fertilized embryo instead develops within the female, receiving nutrition directly from its mother.\nAnimals are usually mobile and seek out a partner of the opposite sex for mating. Animals that live in the water can mate using external fertilization, where the eggs and sperm are released into and combine within the surrounding water. Most animals that live outside of water, however, use internal fertilization, transferring sperm directly into the female to prevent the gametes from drying up.\nIn most birds, both excretion and reproduction are done through a single posterior opening, called the cloaca\u2014male and female birds touch cloaca to transfer sperm, a process called \"cloacal kissing\". In many other terrestrial animals, males use specialized sex organs to assist the transport of sperm\u2014these male sex organs are called intromittent organs. In humans and other mammals, this male organ is known as the penis, which enters the female reproductive tract (called the vagina) to achieve insemination\u2014a process called sexual intercourse. The penis contains a tube through which semen (a fluid containing sperm) travels. In female mammals, the vagina connects with the uterus, an organ which directly supports the development of a fertilized embryo within (a process called gestation).\nBecause of their motility, animal sexual behavior can involve coercive sex. Traumatic insemination, for example, is used by some insect species to inseminate females through a wound in the abdominal cavity\u2014a process detrimental to the female's health.\nPlants.\nLike animals, land plants have specialized male and female gametes. In seed plants, male gametes are produced by reduced male gametophytes that are contained within pollen which have hard coats that protect the male gamete forming cells during transport from the anthers to the stigma. The female gametes of seed plants are contained within ovules. Once fertilized, these form seeds which, like eggs, contain the nutrients necessary for the initial development of the embryonic plant.\nThe flowers of flowering plants contain their sexual organs. Most flowering plants are hermaphroditic, with both male and female parts in the same flower or on the same plant in single sex flowers. About 5% of plant species have individual plants that are one sex or the other. The female parts, in the center of a hermaphroditic or female flower, are the pistils, each unit consisting of a carpel, a style and a stigma. Two or more of these reproductive units may be merged to form a single compound pistil, the fused carpels forming an ovary. Within the carpels are ovules which develop into seeds after fertilization. The male parts of the flower are the stamens: these consist of long filaments arranged between the pistil and the petals that produce pollen in anthers at their tips. When a pollen grain lands upon the stigma on top of a carpel's style, it germinates to produce a pollen tube that grows down through the tissues of the style into the carpel, where it delivers male gamete nuclei to fertilize an ovule that eventually develops into a seed.\nSome hermaphroditic plants are self-fertile, but plants have evolved multiple different self-incompatibility mechanisms to avoid self-fertilization, involving sequential hermaphroditism, molecular recognition systems and morphological mechanisms such as heterostyly.\nIn pines and other conifers, the sex organs are produced within cones that have male and female forms. Male cones are smaller than female ones and produce pollen, which is transported by wind to land in female cones. The larger and longer-lived female cones are typically more durable and contain ovules within them that develop into seeds after fertilization.\nBecause seed plants are immobile, they depend upon passive methods for transporting pollen grains to other plants. Many, including conifers and grasses, produce lightweight pollen which is carried by wind to neighboring plants. Some flowering plants have heavier, sticky pollen that is specialized for transportation by insects or larger animals such as hummingbirds and bats, which may be attracted to flowers containing rewards of nectar and pollen. These animals transport the pollen as they move to other flowers, which also contain female reproductive organs, resulting in pollination.\nFungi.\nMost species of fungus can reproduce sexually and have life cycles with both haploid and diploid phases. These species of fungus are typically isogamous, i.e. lacking male and female specialization. One haploid fungus grows into contact with another, and then they fuse their cells. In some cases, the fusion is asymmetric, and the cell that donates only a nucleus (and no accompanying cellular material) could arguably be considered male. Fungi may also have more complex allelic mating systems, with other sexes not accurately described as male, female, or hermaphroditic.\nSome fungi, including baker's yeast, have mating types that determine compatibility. Yeasts with the same mating types will not fuse with each other to form diploid cells, only with yeast carrying another mating type.\nMany species of higher fungi produce mushrooms as part of their sexual reproduction. Within the mushroom, diploid cells are formed, later dividing into haploid spores.\nSexual systems.\nA sexual system is a distribution of male and female functions across organisms in a species.\nAnimals.\nApproximately 95% of animal species have separate male and female individuals, and are said to be gonochoric. About 5% of animal species are hermaphroditic. This low percentage is partially attributable to the very large number of insect species, in which hermaphroditism is absent. About 99% of vertebrates are gonochoric, and the remaining 1% that are hermaphroditic are almost all fishes.\nPlants.\nThe majority of plants are bisexual,212 either hermaphrodite (with both stamens and pistil in the same flower) or monoecious. In dioecious species male and female sexes are on separate plants. About 5% of flowering plants are dioecious, resulting from as many as 5000 independent origins. Dioecy is common in gymnosperms, in which about 65% of species are dioecious, but most conifers are monoecious.\nEvolution of sex.\nIt is generally accepted that isogamy was ancestral to anisogamy and that anisogamy evolved several times independently in different groups of eukaryotes, including protists, algae, plants, and animals. The evolution of anisogamy is synonymous with the origin of male and the origin of female. It is also the first step towards sexual dimorphism and influenced the evolution of various sex differences.\nIt is unclear whether anisogamy first led to the evolution of hermaphroditism or the evolution of gonochorism,213 and the evolution of sperm and eggs has left no fossil evidence. \nA 1.2 billion year old fossil from \"Bangiomorpha pubescens\" has provided the oldest fossil record for the differentiation of male and female reproductive types and shown that sexes evolved early in eukaryotes. Studies on green algae have provided genetic evidence for the evolutionary link between sexes and mating types. \nThe original form of sex was external fertilization. Internal fertilization, or sex as we know it, evolved later and became dominant for vertebrates after their emergence on land.\nAdaptive function of sex.\nThe most basic role of meiosis appears to be conservation of the integrity of the genome that is passed on to progeny by parents. The two most fundamental aspects of sexual reproduction, meiotic recombination and outcrossing, are likely maintained respectively by the adaptive advantages of recombinational repair of genomic DNA damage and genetic complementation which masks the expression of deleterious recessive mutations. Genetic variation, often produced as a byproduct of these processes, may provide long-term advantages in those sexual lineages that favor outcrossing.\nSex-determination systems.\nThe biological cause of an organism developing into one sex or the other is called \"sex determination\". The cause may be genetic, environmental, haplodiploidy, or multiple factors. Within animals and other organisms that have genetic sex-determination systems, the determining factor may be the presence of a sex chromosome. In plants that are sexually dimorphic, such as \"Ginkgo biloba\", the liverwort \"Marchantia polymorpha\" or the dioecious species in the flowering plant genus \"Silene\", sex may also be determined by sex chromosomes. Non-genetic systems may use environmental cues, such as the temperature during early development in crocodiles, to determine the sex of the offspring.\nSex determination is often distinct from sex differentiation. Sex determination is the designation for the development stage towards either male or female, while sex differentiation is the pathway towards the development of the phenotype.\nGenetic.\nXY sex determination.\nHumans and most other mammals have an XY sex-determination system: the Y chromosome carries factors responsible for triggering male development, making XY sex determination mostly based on the presence or absence of the Y chromosome. It is the male gamete that determines the sex of the offspring. In this system XX mammals typically are female and XY typically are male. However, individuals with XXY or XYY are males, while individuals with X and XXX are females. Unusually, the platypus, a monotreme mammal, has ten sex chromosomes; females have ten X chromosomes, and males have five X chromosomes and five Y chromosomes. Platypus egg cells all have five X chromosomes, whereas sperm cells can either have five X chromosomes or five Y chromosomes.\nXY sex determination is found in other organisms, including insects like the common fruit fly, and some plants. In some cases, it is the number of X chromosomes that determines sex rather than the presence of a Y chromosome. In the fruit fly individuals with XY are male and individuals with XX are female; however, individuals with XXY or XXX can also be female, and individuals with X can be males.\nZW sex determination.\nIn birds, which have a ZW sex-determination system, the W chromosome carries factors responsible for female development, and default development is male. In this case, ZZ individuals are male and ZW are female. It is the female gamete that determines the sex of the offspring. This system is used by birds, some fish, and some crustaceans.\nThe majority of butterflies and moths also have a ZW sex-determination system. Females can have Z, ZZW, and even ZZWW.\nXO sex determination.\nIn the XO sex-determination system, males have one X chromosome (XO) while females have two (XX). All other chromosomes in these diploid organisms are paired, but organisms may inherit one or two X chromosomes. This system is found in most arachnids, insects such as silverfish (Apterygota), dragonflies (Paleoptera) and grasshoppers (Exopterygota), and some nematodes, crustaceans, and gastropods.\nIn field crickets, for example, insects with a single X chromosome develop as male, while those with two develop as female.\nIn the nematode \"Caenorhabditis elegans\", most worms are self-fertilizing hermaphrodites with an XX karyotype, but occasional abnormalities in chromosome inheritance can give rise to individuals with only one X chromosome\u2014these XO individuals are fertile males (and half their offspring are male).\nZO sex determination.\nIn the ZO sex-determination system, males have two Z chromosomes, whereas females have one. This system is found in several species of moths.\nEnvironmental.\nFor many species, sex is not determined by inherited traits, but instead by environmental factors such as temperature experienced during development or later in life.\nIn the fern \"Ceratopteris\" and other homosporous fern species, the default sex is hermaphrodite, but individuals that grow in soil that has previously supported hermaphrodites are influenced by the pheromone antheridiogen to develop as male. The bonelliidae larvae can only develop as males when they encounter a female.\nSequential hermaphroditism.\nSome species can change sex over the course of their lifespan, a phenomenon called sequential hermaphroditism. \nTeleost fishes are the only vertebrate lineage where sequential hermaphroditism occurs. In clownfish, smaller fish are male, and the dominant and largest fish in a group becomes female; when a dominant female is absent, then her partner changes sex from male to female. In many wrasses the opposite is true: the fish are initially female and become male when they reach a certain size. \nSequential hermaphroditism also occurs in plants such as \"Arisaema triphyllum\".\nTemperature-dependent sex determination.\nMany reptiles, including all crocodiles and most turtles, have temperature-dependent sex determination. In these species, the temperature experienced by the embryos during their development determines their sex. \nIn some turtles, for example, males are produced at lower temperatures than females; but \"Macroclemys\" females are produced at temperatures lower than 22\u00a0\u00b0C or above 28\u00a0\u00b0C, while males are produced in between those temperatures.\nHaplodiploidy.\nCertain insects, such as honey bees and ants, use a haplodiploid sex-determination system. Diploid bees and ants are generally female, and haploid individuals (which develop from unfertilized eggs) are male. This sex-determination system results in highly biased sex ratios, as the sex of offspring is determined by fertilization (arrhenotoky or pseudo-arrhenotoky resulting in males) rather than the assortment of chromosomes during meiosis.\nSex differences.\nAnisogamy is the fundamental difference between male and female. Richard Dawkins has stated that it is possible to interpret all the differences between the sexes as stemming from this.\nSexual dimorphism.\nIn many animals and some plants, individuals of male and female sex differ in size and appearance, a phenomenon called sexual dimorphism. Sexual dimorphism in animals is often associated with sexual selection: the mating competition between individuals of one sex vis-\u00e0-vis the opposite sex. Other examples demonstrate that it is the preference of females that drives sexual dimorphism, such as in the case of the stalk-eyed fly.\nSex differences in humans include a generally larger size and more body hair in men, while women have larger breasts, wider hips, and a higher body fat percentage. In other species, there may be differences in coloration or other features, and may be so pronounced that the different sexes may be mistaken for two entirely different taxa.\nFemales are the larger sex in a majority of animals. For instance, female southern black widow spiders are typically twice as long as the males. This size disparity may be associated with the cost of producing egg cells, which requires more nutrition than producing sperm: larger females are able to produce more eggs. In many other cases, the male of a species is larger than the female. Mammal species with extreme sexual size dimorphism, such as elephant seals, tend to have highly polygynous mating systems, presumably due to selection for success in competition with other males. \nSexual dimorphism can be extreme, with males, such as some anglerfish, living parasitically on the female. Some plant species also exhibit dimorphism in which the females are significantly larger than the males, such as in the moss genus \"Dicranum\" and the liverwort genus \"Sphaerocarpos\". There is some evidence that, in these genera, the dimorphism may be tied to a sex chromosome, or to chemical signaling from females.\nIn birds, males often have a more colorful appearance and may have features (like the long tail of male peacocks) that would seem to put them at a disadvantage (e.g. bright colors would seem to make a bird more visible to predators). One proposed explanation for this is the handicap principle. This hypothesis argues that, by demonstrating he can survive with such handicaps, the male is advertising his genetic fitness to females\u2014traits that will benefit daughters as well, who will not be encumbered with such handicaps.\nSex differences in behavior.\nThe sexes across gonochoric species usually differ in behavior. In most animal species, females invest more in parental care, although in some species, such as some coucals, the males invest more parental care. Females also tend to be more choosy for who they mate with, such as most bird species. Males tend to be more competitive for mating than females.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26808", "revid": "35751661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26808", "title": "Star", "text": "Large self-illuminated object in space\nA star is a luminous spheroid of plasma held together by self-gravity. The nearest star to Earth is the Sun. Many other stars are visible to the naked eye at night; their immense distances from Earth make them appear as fixed points of light. The most prominent stars have been categorised into constellations and asterisms, and many of the brightest stars have proper names. Astronomers have assembled star catalogues that identify the known stars and provide standardized stellar designations. The observable universe contains an estimated to stars. Only about 4,000 of these stars are visible to the naked eye\u2014all within the Milky Way galaxy.\nA star's life begins with the gravitational collapse of a gaseous nebula of material largely comprising hydrogen, helium, and traces of heavier elements. Its total mass mainly determines its evolution and eventual fate. A star shines for most of its active life due to the thermonuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium in its core. This process releases energy that traverses the star's interior and radiates into outer space. At the end of a star's lifetime, fusion ceases and its core becomes a stellar remnant: a white dwarf, a neutron star, or\u2014if it is sufficiently massive\u2014a black hole.\nStellar nucleosynthesis in stars or their remnants creates almost all naturally occurring chemical elements heavier than lithium. Stellar mass loss or supernova explosions return chemically enriched material to the interstellar medium. These elements are then recycled into new stars. Astronomers can determine stellar properties\u2014including mass, age, metallicity (chemical composition), variability, distance, and motion through space\u2014by carrying out observations of a star's apparent brightness, spectrum, and changes in its position in the sky over time.\nStars can form orbital systems with other astronomical objects, as in planetary systems and star systems with two or more stars. When two such stars orbit closely, their gravitational interaction can significantly impact their evolution. Stars can form part of a much larger gravitationally bound structure, such as a star cluster or a galaxy.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"star\" ultimately derives from the Proto-Indo-European root , also meaning 'star'\u00a0\u2013 which is further analyzable as 'to burn' (also the source of the word \"ash\") plus (the agentive suffix). Its cognates in other languages include Latin , Greek , and German ; further cognates in English include \"asterisk\", \"asteroid\", \"astral\", \"constellation\", and \"Esther\".\nObservation history.\nHistorically, stars have been important to civilizations throughout the world. They have been part of religious practices, divination rituals, mythology, used for celestial navigation and orientation, to mark the passage of seasons, and to define calendars.\nEarly astronomers recognized a difference between \"fixed stars\", whose position on the celestial sphere does not change, and \"wandering stars\" (planets), which move noticeably relative to the fixed stars over days or weeks. Many ancient astronomers believed that the stars were permanently affixed to a heavenly sphere and that they were immutable. By convention, astronomers grouped prominent stars into asterisms and constellations and used them to track the motions of the planets and the inferred position of the Sun. The motion of the Sun against the background stars (and the horizon) was used to create calendars, which could be used to regulate agricultural practices. The Gregorian calendar, currently used nearly everywhere in the world, is a solar calendar based on the angle of the Earth's rotational axis relative to its local star, the Sun.\nThe oldest accurately dated star chart was the result of ancient Egyptian astronomy in 1534\u00a0BC. The earliest known star catalogues were compiled by the ancient Babylonian astronomers of Mesopotamia in the late 2nd millennium BC, during the Kassite Period (c.\u20091531 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091155 BC).\nThe first star catalogue in Greek astronomy was created by Aristillus in approximately 300\u00a0BC, with the help of Timocharis. The star catalog of Hipparchus (2nd century BC) included 1,020 stars, and was used to assemble Ptolemy's star catalogue. Hipparchus is known for the discovery of the first recorded \"nova\" (new star). Many of the constellations and star names in use today derive from Greek astronomy.\nDespite the apparent immutability of the heavens, Chinese astronomers were aware that new stars could appear. In 185\u00a0AD, they were the first to observe and write about a supernova, now known as SN 185. The brightest stellar event in recorded history was the SN 1006 supernova, which was observed in 1006 and written about by the Egyptian astronomer Ali ibn Ridwan and several Chinese astronomers. The SN 1054 supernova, which gave birth to the Crab Nebula, was also observed by Chinese and Islamic astronomers.\nMedieval Islamic astronomers gave Arabic names to many stars that are still used today and they invented numerous astronomical instruments that could compute the positions of the stars. They built the first large observatory research institutes, mainly to produce \"Zij\" star catalogues. Among these, the \"Book of Fixed Stars\" (964) was written by the Persian astronomer Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi, who observed a number of stars, star clusters (including the Omicron Velorum and Brocchi's Clusters) and galaxies (including the Andromeda Galaxy). According to A. Zahoor, in the 11th century, the Persian polymath scholar Abu Rayhan Biruni described the Milky Way galaxy as a multitude of fragments having the properties of nebulous stars, and gave the latitudes of various stars during a lunar eclipse in 1019.\nAccording to Josep Puig, the Andalusian astronomer Ibn Bajjah proposed that the Milky Way was made up of many stars that almost touched one another and appeared to be a continuous image due to the effect of refraction from sublunary material, citing his observation of the conjunction of Jupiter and Mars on 500 AH (1106/1107\u00a0AD) as evidence. \nEarly European astronomers such as Tycho Brahe identified new stars in the night sky (later termed \"novae\"), suggesting that the heavens were not immutable. In 1584, Giordano Bruno suggested that the stars were like the Sun, and may have other planets, possibly even Earth-like, in orbit around them, an idea that had been suggested earlier by the ancient Greek philosophers, Democritus and Epicurus, and by medieval Islamic cosmologists such as Fakhr al-Din al-Razi. By the following century, the idea of the stars being the same as the Sun was reaching a consensus among astronomers. To explain why these stars exerted no net gravitational pull on the Solar System, Isaac Newton suggested that the stars were equally distributed in every direction, an idea prompted by the theologian Richard Bentley.\nThe Italian astronomer Geminiano Montanari recorded observing variations in luminosity of the star Algol in 1667. Edmond Halley published the first measurements of the proper motion of a pair of nearby \"fixed\" stars, demonstrating that they had changed positions since the time of the ancient Greek astronomers Ptolemy and Hipparchus.\nWilliam Herschel was the first astronomer to attempt to determine the distribution of stars in the sky. During the 1780s, he established a series of gauges in 600 directions and counted the stars observed along each line of sight. From this, he deduced that the number of stars steadily increased toward one side of the sky, in the direction of the Milky Way core. His son John Herschel repeated this study in the southern hemisphere and found a corresponding increase in the same direction. In addition to his other accomplishments, William Herschel is noted for his discovery that some stars do not merely lie along the same line of sight, but are physical companions that form binary star systems.\nThe science of stellar spectroscopy was pioneered by Joseph von Fraunhofer and Angelo Secchi. By comparing the spectra of stars such as Sirius to the Sun, they found differences in the strength and number of their absorption lines\u2014the dark lines in stellar spectra caused by the atmosphere's absorption of specific frequencies. In 1865, Secchi began classifying stars into spectral types. The modern version of the stellar classification scheme was developed by Annie J. Cannon during the early 1900s.\nThe first direct measurement of the distance to a star (61 Cygni at 11.4 light-years) was made in 1838 by Friedrich Bessel using the parallax technique. Parallax measurements demonstrated the vast separation of the stars in the heavens. Observation of double stars gained increasing importance during the 19th century. In 1834, Friedrich Bessel observed changes in the proper motion of the star Sirius and inferred a hidden companion. Edward Pickering discovered the first spectroscopic binary in 1899 when he observed the periodic splitting of the spectral lines of the star Mizar in a 104-day period. Detailed observations of many binary star systems were collected by astronomers such as Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve and S. W. Burnham, allowing the masses of stars to be determined from computation of orbital elements. The first solution to the problem of deriving an orbit of binary stars from telescope observations was made by Felix Savary in 1827.\nThe twentieth century saw increasingly rapid advances in the scientific study of stars. The photograph became a valuable astronomical tool. Karl Schwarzschild discovered that the color of a star and, hence, its temperature, could be determined by comparing the visual magnitude against the photographic magnitude. The development of the photoelectric photometer allowed precise measurements of magnitude at multiple wavelength intervals. In 1921 Albert A. Michelson made the first measurements of a stellar diameter using an interferometer on the Hooker telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory.\nImportant theoretical work on the physical structure of stars occurred during the first decades of the twentieth century. In 1913, the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram was developed, propelling the astrophysical study of stars. Successful models were developed to explain the interiors of stars and stellar evolution. Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin first proposed that stars were made primarily of hydrogen and helium in her 1925 PhD thesis. The spectra of stars were further understood through advances in quantum physics. This allowed the chemical composition of the stellar atmosphere to be determined.\nWith the exception of rare events such as supernovae and supernova impostors, individual stars have primarily been observed in the Local Group, and especially in the visible part of the Milky Way (as demonstrated by the detailed star catalogues available for the Milky Way galaxy) and its satellites. Individual stars such as Cepheid variables have been observed in the M87 and M100 galaxies of the Virgo Cluster, as well as luminous stars in some other relatively nearby galaxies. With the aid of gravitational lensing, a single star (named Icarus) has been observed at 9\u00a0billion light-years away.\nDesignations.\nThe concept of a constellation was known to exist during the Babylonian period. Ancient sky watchers imagined that prominent arrangements of stars formed patterns, and they associated these with particular aspects of nature or their myths. Twelve of these formations lay along the band of the ecliptic and these became the basis of astrology. Many of the more prominent individual stars were given names, particularly with Arabic or Latin designations.\nAs well as certain constellations and the Sun itself, individual stars have their own myths. To the Ancient Greeks, some \"stars\", known as planets (Greek \u03c0\u03bb\u03b1\u03bd\u03ae\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 (plan\u0113t\u0113s), meaning \"wanderer\"), represented various important deities, from which the names of the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn were taken. (Uranus and Neptune were Greek and Roman gods, but neither planet was known in Antiquity because of their low brightness. Their names were assigned by later astronomers.)\nCirca 1600, the names of the constellations were used to name the stars in the corresponding regions of the sky. The German astronomer Johann Bayer created a series of star maps and applied Greek letters as designations to the stars in each constellation. Later a numbering system based on the star's right ascension was invented and added to John Flamsteed's star catalogue in his book \"Historia coelestis Britannica\" (the 1712 edition), whereby this numbering system came to be called \"Flamsteed designation\" or \"Flamsteed numbering\".\nThe internationally recognized authority for naming celestial bodies is the International Astronomical Union (IAU). The International Astronomical Union maintains the Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) which catalogs and standardizes proper names for stars. A number of private companies sell names of stars which are not recognized by the IAU, professional astronomers, or the amateur astronomy community. The British Library calls this an unregulated commercial enterprise, and the New York City Department of Consumer and Worker Protection issued a violation against one such star-naming company for engaging in a deceptive trade practice.\nUnits of measurement.\nAlthough stellar parameters can be expressed in SI units or Gaussian units, it is often most convenient to express mass, luminosity, and radii in solar units, based on the characteristics of the Sun. In 2015, the IAU defined a set of \"nominal\" solar values (defined as SI constants, without uncertainties) which can be used for quoting stellar parameters:\nThe solar mass M\u2609 was not explicitly defined by the IAU due to the large relative uncertainty () of the Newtonian constant of gravitation \"G\". Since the product of the Newtonian constant of gravitation and solar mass\ntogether (\"G\"M\u2609) has been determined to much greater precision, the IAU defined the \"nominal\" solar mass parameter to be:\nThe nominal solar mass parameter can be combined with the most recent (2014) CODATA estimate of the Newtonian constant of gravitation \"G\" to derive the solar mass to be approximately . Although the exact values for the luminosity, radius, mass parameter, and mass may vary slightly in the future due to observational uncertainties, the 2015 IAU nominal constants will remain the same SI values as they remain useful measures for quoting stellar parameters.\nLarge lengths, such as the radius of a giant star or the semi-major axis of a binary star system, are often expressed in terms of the astronomical unit\u2014approximately equal to the mean distance between the Earth and the Sun (150\u00a0million km or approximately 93\u00a0million miles). In 2012, the IAU defined the astronomical constant to be an exact length in meters: 149,597,870,700 m.\nFormation and evolution.\nStars condense from regions of space of higher matter density, yet those regions are less dense than within a vacuum chamber. These regions\u2014known as \"molecular clouds\"\u2014consist mostly of hydrogen, with about 23 to 28 percent helium and a few percent heavier elements. One example of such a star-forming region is the Orion Nebula. Most stars form in groups of dozens to hundreds of thousands of stars. Massive stars in these groups may powerfully illuminate those clouds, ionizing the hydrogen, and creating H II regions. Such feedback effects, from star formation, may ultimately disrupt the cloud and prevent further star formation.\nAll stars spend the majority of their existence as \"main-sequence\" stars, fueled primarily by the nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium within their cores. However, stars of different masses have markedly different properties at various stages of their development. The ultimate fate of more massive stars differs from that of less massive stars, as do their luminosities and the impact they have on their environment. Accordingly, astronomers often group stars by their mass:\nStar formation.\nThe formation of a star begins with gravitational instability within a molecular cloud, caused by regions of higher density\u2014often triggered by compression of clouds by radiation from massive stars, expanding bubbles in the interstellar medium, the collision of different molecular clouds, or the collision of galaxies (as in a starburst galaxy). When a region reaches a sufficient density of matter to satisfy the criteria for Jeans instability, it begins to collapse under its own gravitational force.\nAs the cloud collapses, individual conglomerations of dense dust and gas form \"Bok globules\". As a globule collapses and the density increases, the gravitational energy converts into heat and the temperature rises. When the protostellar cloud has approximately reached the stable condition of hydrostatic equilibrium, a protostar forms at the core. These pre-main-sequence stars are often surrounded by a protoplanetary disk and powered mainly by the conversion of gravitational energy. The period of gravitational contraction lasts about 10\u00a0million years for a star like the sun, up to 100\u00a0million years for a red dwarf.\nEarly stars of less than 2\u00a0M\u2609 are called T Tauri stars, while those with greater mass are Herbig Ae/Be stars. These newly formed stars emit jets of gas along their axis of rotation, which may reduce the angular momentum of the collapsing star and result in small patches of nebulosity known as Herbig\u2013Haro objects.\nThese jets, in combination with radiation from nearby massive stars, may help to drive away the surrounding cloud from which the star was formed.\nEarly in their development, T Tauri stars follow the Hayashi track\u2014they contract and decrease in luminosity while remaining at roughly the same temperature. Less massive T Tauri stars follow this track to the main sequence, while more massive stars turn onto the Henyey track.\nMost stars are observed to be members of binary star systems, and the properties of those binaries are the result of the conditions in which they formed. A gas cloud must lose its angular momentum in order to collapse and form a star. The fragmentation of the cloud into multiple stars distributes some of that angular momentum. The primordial binaries transfer some angular momentum by gravitational interactions during close encounters with other stars in young stellar clusters. These interactions tend to split apart more widely separated (soft) binaries while causing hard binaries to become more tightly bound. This produces the separation of binaries into their two observed populations distributions.\nMain sequence.\nStars spend about 90% of their lifetimes fusing hydrogen into helium in high-temperature-and-pressure reactions in their cores. Such stars are said to be on the main sequence and are called dwarf stars. Starting at zero-age main sequence, the proportion of helium in a star's core will steadily increase, the rate of nuclear fusion at the core will slowly increase, as will the star's temperature and luminosity.\nThe Sun, for example, is estimated to have increased in luminosity by about 40% since it reached the main sequence 4.6\u00a0billion () years ago.\nEvery star generates a stellar wind of particles that causes a continual outflow of gas into space. For most stars, the mass lost is negligible. The Sun loses every year, or about 0.01% of its total mass over its entire lifespan. However, very massive stars can lose to each year, significantly affecting their evolution. Stars that begin with more than 50\u00a0M\u2609 can lose over half their total mass while on the main sequence.\nThe time a star spends on the main sequence depends primarily on the amount of fuel it has and the rate at which it fuses it. The Sun is expected to live 10\u00a0billion () years. Massive stars consume their fuel very rapidly and are short-lived. Low mass stars consume their fuel very slowly. Stars less massive than 0.25\u00a0M\u2609, called red dwarfs, are able to fuse nearly all of their mass while stars of about 1\u00a0M\u2609 can only fuse about 10% of their mass. The combination of their slow fuel-consumption and relatively large usable fuel supply allows low mass stars to last about one trillion () years; the most extreme of 0.08\u00a0M\u2609 will last for about 12\u00a0trillion years. Red dwarfs become hotter and more luminous as they accumulate helium. When they eventually run out of hydrogen, they contract into a white dwarf and decline in temperature. Since the lifespan of such stars is greater than the current age of the universe (13.8\u00a0billion years), no stars under about 0.85\u00a0M\u2609 are expected to have moved off the main sequence.\nBesides mass, the elements heavier than helium can play a significant role in the evolution of stars. Astronomers label all elements heavier than helium \"metals\", and call the chemical concentration of these elements in a star, its metallicity. A star's metallicity can influence the time the star takes to burn its fuel, and controls the formation of its magnetic fields, which affects the strength of its stellar wind. Older, population II stars have substantially less metallicity than the younger, population I stars due to the composition of the molecular clouds from which they formed. Over time, such clouds become increasingly enriched in heavier elements as older stars die and shed portions of their atmospheres.\nPost\u2013main sequence.\nAs stars of at least 0.4\u00a0M\u2609 exhaust the supply of hydrogen at their core, they start to fuse hydrogen in a shell surrounding the helium core. The outer layers of the star expand and cool greatly as they transition into a red giant. In some cases, they will fuse heavier elements at the core or in shells around the core. As the stars expand, they throw part of their mass, enriched with those heavier elements, into the interstellar environment, to be recycled later as new stars. In about 5\u00a0billion years, when the Sun enters the helium burning phase, it will expand to a maximum radius of roughly , 250 times its present size, and lose 30% of its current mass.\nAs the hydrogen-burning shell produces more helium, the core increases in mass and temperature. In a red giant of up to 2.25\u00a0M\u2609, the mass of the helium core becomes degenerate prior to helium fusion. Finally, when the temperature increases sufficiently, core helium fusion begins explosively in what is called a helium flash, and the star rapidly shrinks in radius, increases its surface temperature, and moves to the horizontal branch of the HR diagram. For more massive stars, helium core fusion starts before the core becomes degenerate, and the star spends some time in the red clump, slowly burning helium, before the outer convective envelope collapses and the star then moves to the horizontal branch.\nAfter a star has fused the helium of its core, it begins fusing helium along a shell surrounding the hot carbon core. The star then follows an evolutionary path called the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) that parallels the other described red-giant phase, but with a higher luminosity. The more massive AGB stars may undergo a brief period of carbon fusion before the core becomes degenerate. During the AGB phase, stars undergo thermal pulses due to instabilities in the core of the star. In these thermal pulses, the luminosity of the star varies and matter is ejected from the star's atmosphere, ultimately forming a planetary nebula. As much as 50 to 70% of a star's mass can be ejected in this mass loss process. Because energy transport in an AGB star is primarily by convection, this ejected material is enriched with the fusion products dredged up from the core. Therefore, the planetary nebula is enriched with elements like carbon and oxygen. Ultimately, the planetary nebula disperses, enriching the general interstellar medium. Therefore, future generations of stars are made of the \"star stuff\" from past stars.\nMassive stars.\nDuring their helium-burning phase, a star of more than 9 solar masses expands to form first a blue supergiant and then a red supergiant. Particularly massive stars (exceeding 40 solar masses, like Alnilam, the central blue supergiant of Orion's Belt) do not become red supergiants due to high mass loss. These may instead evolve to a Wolf\u2013Rayet star, characterised by spectra dominated by emission lines of elements heavier than hydrogen, which have reached the surface due to strong convection and intense mass loss, or from stripping of the outer layers.\nWhen helium is exhausted at the core of a massive star, the core contracts and the temperature and pressure rises enough to fuse carbon (see Carbon-burning process). This process continues, with the successive stages being fueled by neon (see neon-burning process), oxygen (see oxygen-burning process), and silicon (see silicon-burning process). Near the end of the star's life, fusion continues along a series of onion-layer shells within a massive star. Each shell fuses a different element, with the outermost shell fusing hydrogen; the next shell fusing helium, and so forth.\nThe final stage occurs when a massive star begins producing iron. Since iron nuclei are more tightly bound than any heavier nuclei, any fusion beyond iron does not produce a net release of energy.\nSome massive stars, particularly luminous blue variables, are very unstable to the extent that they violently shed their mass into space in events known as supernova impostors, becoming significantly brighter in the process. Eta Carinae is known for having undergone a supernova impostor event, the Great Eruption, in the 19th century.\nCollapse.\nAs a star's core shrinks, the intensity of radiation from that surface increases, creating such radiation pressure on the outer shell of gas that it will push those layers away, forming a planetary nebula. If what remains after the outer atmosphere has been shed is less than roughly 1.4\u00a0M\u2609, it shrinks to a relatively tiny object about the size of Earth, known as a white dwarf. White dwarfs lack the mass for further gravitational compression to take place. The electron-degenerate matter inside a white dwarf is no longer a plasma. Eventually, white dwarfs fade into black dwarfs over a very long period of time.\nIn massive stars, fusion continues until the iron core has grown so large (more than 1.4\u00a0M\u2609) that it can no longer support its own mass. This core will suddenly collapse as its electrons are driven into its protons, forming neutrons, neutrinos, and gamma rays in a burst of electron capture and inverse beta decay. The shockwave formed by this sudden collapse causes the rest of the star to explode in a supernova. Supernovae become so bright that they may briefly outshine the star's entire home galaxy. When they occur within the Milky Way, supernovae have historically been observed by naked-eye observers as \"new stars\" where none seemingly existed before.\nA supernova explosion blows away the star's outer layers, leaving a remnant such as the Crab Nebula. The core is compressed into a neutron star, which sometimes manifests itself as a pulsar or X-ray burster. In the case of the largest stars, the remnant is a black hole greater than 4\u00a0M\u2609. In a neutron star the matter is in a state known as neutron-degenerate matter, with a more exotic form of degenerate matter, QCD matter, possibly present in the core.\nThe blown-off outer layers of dying stars include heavy elements, which may be recycled during the formation of new stars. These heavy elements allow the formation of rocky planets. The outflow from supernovae and the stellar wind of large stars play an important part in shaping the interstellar medium.\nBinary stars.\nBinary stars' evolution may significantly differ from that of single stars of the same mass. For example, when any star expands to become a red giant, it may overflow its Roche lobe, the surrounding region where material is gravitationally bound to it; if stars in a binary system are close enough, some of that material may overflow to the other star, yielding phenomena including contact binaries, common-envelope binaries, cataclysmic variables, blue stragglers, and type Ia supernovae. Mass transfer leads to cases such as the Algol paradox, where the most-evolved star in a system is the least massive.\nThe evolution of binary star and higher-order star systems is intensely researched since so many stars have been found to be members of binary systems. Around half of Sun-like stars, and an even higher proportion of more massive stars, form in multiple systems, and this may greatly influence such phenomena as novae and supernovae, the formation of certain types of star, and the enrichment of space with nucleosynthesis products.\nThe influence of binary star evolution on the formation of evolved massive stars such as luminous blue variables, Wolf\u2013Rayet stars, and the progenitors of certain classes of core collapse supernova is still disputed. Single massive stars may be unable to expel their outer layers fast enough to form the types and numbers of evolved stars that are observed, or to produce progenitors that would explode as the supernovae that are observed. Mass transfer through gravitational stripping in binary systems is seen by some astronomers as the solution to that problem.\nDistribution.\nStars are not spread uniformly across the universe but are normally grouped into galaxies along with interstellar gas and dust. A typical large galaxy like the Milky Way contains hundreds of billions of stars. There are more than 2\u00a0trillion () galaxies, though most are less than 10% the mass of the Milky Way. Overall, there are likely to be between and stars, which are more stars than all the grains of sand on planet Earth. Most stars are within galaxies, but between 10 and 50% of the starlight in large galaxy clusters may come from stars outside of any galaxy.\nA multi-star system consists of two or more gravitationally bound stars that orbit each other. The simplest and most common multi-star system is a binary star, but systems of three or more stars exist. For reasons of orbital stability, such multi-star systems are often organized into hierarchical sets of binary stars. Larger groups are called star clusters. These range from loose stellar associations with only a few stars to open clusters with dozens to thousands of stars, up to enormous globular clusters with hundreds of thousands of stars. Such systems orbit their host galaxy. The stars in an open or globular cluster all formed from the same giant molecular cloud, so all members normally have similar ages and compositions.\nMany stars are observed, and most or all may have originally formed in gravitationally bound, multiple-star systems. This is particularly true for very massive O and B class stars, 80% of which are believed to be part of multiple-star systems. The proportion of single star systems increases with decreasing star mass, so that only 25% of red dwarfs are known to have stellar companions. As 85% of all stars are red dwarfs, more than two thirds of stars in the Milky Way are likely single red dwarfs. In a 2017 study of the Perseus molecular cloud, astronomers found that most of the newly formed stars are in binary systems. In the model that best explained the data, all stars initially formed as binaries, though some binaries later split up and leave single stars behind.\nThe nearest star to the Earth, apart from the Sun, is Proxima Centauri, away. Travelling at the orbital speed of the Space Shuttle, , it would take about 150,000 years to arrive. This is typical of stellar separations in galactic discs. Stars can be much closer to each other in the centres of galaxies and in globular clusters, or much farther apart in galactic halos.\nDue to the relatively vast distances between stars outside the galactic nucleus, collisions between stars are thought to be rare. In denser regions such as the core of globular clusters or the galactic center, collisions can be more common. Such collisions can produce what are known as blue stragglers. These abnormal stars have higher surface temperatures and thus are bluer than stars at the main sequence turnoff in the cluster to which they belong; in standard stellar evolution, blue stragglers would already have evolved off the main sequence and thus would not be seen in the cluster.\nCharacteristics.\nAlmost everything about a star is determined by its initial mass, including such characteristics as luminosity, size, evolution, lifespan, and its eventual fate.\nAge.\nMost stars are between 1\u00a0billion and 10\u00a0billion years old. Some stars may even be close to 13.8\u00a0billion years old\u2014the observed age of the universe. The oldest star yet discovered, HD 140283, nicknamed Methuselah star, is an estimated 14.46 \u00b1 0.8\u00a0billion years old. (Due to the uncertainty in the value, this age for the star does not conflict with the age of the universe, determined by the Planck satellite as 13.799 \u00b1 0.021).\nThe more massive the star, the shorter its lifespan, primarily because massive stars have greater pressure on their cores, causing them to burn hydrogen more rapidly. The most massive stars last an average of a few million years, while stars of minimum mass (red dwarfs) burn their fuel very slowly and can last tens to hundreds of billions of years.\nChemical composition.\nWhen stars form in the present Milky Way galaxy, they are composed of about 71% hydrogen and 27% helium, as measured by mass, with a small fraction of heavier elements. Typically the portion of heavy elements is measured in terms of the iron content of the stellar atmosphere, as iron is a common element and its absorption lines are relatively easy to measure. The portion of heavier elements may be an indicator of the likelihood that the star has a planetary system.\nAs of 2005[ [update]] the star with the lowest iron content ever measured is the dwarf HE1327-2326, with only 1/200,000th the iron content of the Sun. By contrast, the super-metal-rich star \u03bc Leonis has nearly double the abundance of iron as the Sun, while the planet-bearing star 14 Herculis has nearly triple the iron. Chemically peculiar stars show unusual abundances of certain elements in their spectrum; especially chromium and rare earth elements. Stars with cooler outer atmospheres, including the Sun, can form various diatomic and polyatomic molecules.\nDiameter.\nDue to their great distance from the Earth, all stars except the Sun appear to the unaided eye as shining points in the night sky that twinkle because of the effect of the Earth's atmosphere. The Sun is close enough to the Earth to appear as a disk instead, and to provide daylight. Other than the Sun, the star with the largest apparent size is R Doradus, with an angular diameter of only 0.057 arcseconds.\nThe disks of most stars are much too small in angular size to be observed with current ground-based optical telescopes, so interferometer telescopes are required to produce images of these objects. Another technique for measuring the angular size of stars is through occultation. By precisely measuring the drop in brightness of a star as it is occulted by the Moon (or the rise in brightness when it reappears), the star's angular diameter can be computed.\nStars range in size from neutron stars, which vary anywhere from 20 to in diameter, to supergiants like Betelgeuse in the Orion constellation, which has a diameter about 640 times that of the Sun with a much lower density.\nKinematics.\nThe motion of a star relative to the Sun can provide useful information about the origin and age of a star, as well as the structure and evolution of the surrounding galaxy. The components of motion of a star consist of the radial velocity toward or away from the Sun, and the traverse angular movement, which is called its proper motion.\nRadial velocity is measured by the doppler shift of the star's spectral lines and is given in units of km/s. The proper motion of a star, its parallax, is determined by precise astrometric measurements in units of milli-arc seconds (mas) per year. With knowledge of the star's parallax and its distance, the proper motion velocity can be calculated. Together with the radial velocity, the total velocity can be calculated. Stars with high rates of proper motion are likely to be relatively close to the Sun, making them good candidates for parallax measurements.\nWhen both rates of movement are known, the space velocity of the star relative to the Sun or the galaxy can be computed. Among nearby stars, it has been found that younger population I stars have generally lower velocities than older, population II stars. The latter have elliptical orbits that are inclined to the plane of the galaxy. A comparison of the kinematics of nearby stars has allowed astronomers to trace their origin to common points in giant molecular clouds; such groups with common points of origin are referred to as stellar associations.\nMagnetic field.\nThe magnetic field of a star is generated within regions of the interior where convective circulation occurs. This movement of conductive plasma functions like a dynamo, wherein the movement of electrical charges induce magnetic fields, as does a mechanical dynamo. Those magnetic fields have a great range that extend throughout and beyond the star. The strength of the magnetic field varies with the mass and composition of the star, and the amount of magnetic surface activity depends upon the star's rate of rotation. This surface activity produces starspots, which are regions of strong magnetic fields and lower than normal surface temperatures. Coronal loops are arching magnetic field flux lines that rise from a star's surface into the star's outer atmosphere, its corona. The coronal loops can be seen due to the plasma they conduct along their length. Stellar flares are bursts of high-energy particles that are emitted due to the same magnetic activity.\nYoung, rapidly rotating stars tend to have high levels of surface activity because of their magnetic field. The magnetic field can act upon a star's stellar wind, functioning as a brake to gradually slow the rate of rotation with time. Thus, older stars such as the Sun have a much slower rate of rotation and a lower level of surface activity. The activity levels of slowly rotating stars tend to vary in a cyclical manner and can shut down altogether for periods of time. During the Maunder Minimum, for example, the Sun underwent a 70-year period with almost no sunspot activity.\nMass.\nStars have masses ranging from less than half the solar mass to over 200 solar masses (see List of most massive stars). One of the most massive stars known is Eta Carinae, which, with 100\u2013150\u00a0times as much mass as the Sun, will have a lifespan of only several million years. Studies of the most massive open clusters suggests 150\u00a0M\u2609 as a rough upper limit for stars in the current era of the universe. This represents an empirical value for the theoretical limit on the mass of forming stars due to increasing radiation pressure on the accreting gas cloud. Several stars in the R136 cluster in the Large Magellanic Cloud have been measured with larger masses, but it has been determined that they could have been created through the collision and merger of massive stars in close binary systems, sidestepping the 150\u00a0M\u2609 limit on massive star formation.\nThe first stars to form after the Big Bang may have been larger, up to 300\u00a0M\u2609, due to the complete absence of elements heavier than lithium in their composition. This generation of supermassive population III stars is likely to have existed in the very early universe (i.e., they are observed to have a high redshift), and may have started the production of chemical elements heavier than hydrogen that are needed for the later formation of planets and life. In June 2015, astronomers reported evidence for Population III stars in the Cosmos Redshift 7 galaxy at \"z\" \n 6.60.\nWith a mass only 80\u00a0times that of Jupiter (MJ), 2MASS J0523-1403 is the smallest known star undergoing nuclear fusion in its core. For stars with metallicity similar to the Sun, the theoretical minimum mass the star can have and still undergo fusion at the core, is estimated to be about 75 MJ. When the metallicity is very low, the minimum star size seems to be about 8.3% of the solar mass, or about 87 MJ. Smaller bodies called brown dwarfs, occupy a poorly defined grey area between stars and gas giants.\nThe combination of the radius and the mass of a star determines its surface gravity. Giant stars have much lower surface gravity than do main-sequence stars, while the opposite is the case for degenerate, compact stars such as white dwarfs. The surface gravity can influence the appearance of a star's spectrum, with higher gravity causing a broadening of the absorption lines.\nRotation.\nThe rotation rate of stars can be determined through spectroscopic measurement, or more exactly determined by tracking their starspots. Young stars can have a rotation greater than 100\u00a0km/s at the equator. The B-class star Achernar, for example, has an equatorial velocity of about 225\u00a0km/s or greater, causing its equator to bulge outward and giving it an equatorial diameter that is more than 50% greater than between the poles. This rate of rotation is just below the critical velocity of 300\u00a0km/s at which speed the star would break apart. By contrast, the Sun rotates once every 25\u201335 days depending on latitude, with an equatorial velocity of 1.93\u00a0km/s. A main-sequence star's magnetic field and the stellar wind serve to slow its rotation by a significant amount as it evolves on the main sequence.\nDegenerate stars have contracted into a compact mass, resulting in a rapid rate of rotation. However they have relatively low rates of rotation compared to what would be expected by conservation of angular momentum\u2014the tendency of a rotating body to compensate for a contraction in size by increasing its rate of spin. A large portion of the star's angular momentum is dissipated as a result of mass loss through the stellar wind. In spite of this, the rate of rotation for a pulsar can be very rapid. The pulsar at the heart of the Crab nebula, for example, rotates 30 times per second. The rotation rate of the pulsar will gradually slow due to the emission of radiation.\nTemperature.\nThe surface temperature of a main-sequence star is determined by the rate of energy production of its core and by its radius, and is often estimated from the star's color index. The temperature is normally given in terms of an effective temperature, which is the temperature of an idealized black body that radiates its energy at the same luminosity per surface area as the star. The effective temperature is only representative of the surface, as the temperature increases toward the core. The temperature in the core region of a star is several million kelvins.\nThe stellar temperature will determine the rate of ionization of various elements, resulting in characteristic absorption lines in the spectrum. The surface temperature of a star, along with its visual absolute magnitude and absorption features, is used to classify a star (see classification below).\nMassive main-sequence stars can have surface temperatures of 50,000\u00a0K. Smaller stars such as the Sun have surface temperatures of a few thousand K. Red giants have relatively low surface temperatures of about 3,600\u00a0K; but they have a high luminosity due to their large exterior surface area.\nRadiation.\nThe energy produced by stars, a product of nuclear fusion, radiates to space as both electromagnetic radiation and particle radiation. The particle radiation emitted by a star is manifested as the stellar wind, which streams from the outer layers as electrically charged protons and alpha and beta particles. A steady stream of almost massless neutrinos emanate directly from the star's core.\nThe production of energy at the core is the reason stars shine so brightly: every time two or more atomic nuclei fuse together to form a single atomic nucleus of a new heavier element, gamma ray photons are released from the nuclear fusion product. This energy is converted to other forms of electromagnetic energy of lower frequency, such as visible light, by the time it reaches the star's outer layers.\nThe color of a star, as determined by the most intense frequency of the visible light, depends on the temperature of the star's outer layers, including its photosphere. Besides visible light, stars emit forms of electromagnetic radiation that are invisible to the human eye. In fact, stellar electromagnetic radiation spans the entire electromagnetic spectrum, from the longest wavelengths of radio waves through infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, to the shortest of X-rays, and gamma rays. From the standpoint of total energy emitted by a star, not all components of stellar electromagnetic radiation are significant, but all frequencies provide insight into the star's physics.\nUsing the stellar spectrum, astronomers can determine the surface temperature, surface gravity, metallicity and rotational velocity of a star. If the distance of the star is found, such as by measuring the parallax, then the luminosity of the star can be derived. The mass, radius, surface gravity, and rotation period can then be estimated based on stellar models. (Mass can be calculated for stars in binary systems by measuring their orbital velocities and distances. Gravitational microlensing has been used to measure the mass of a single star.) With these parameters, astronomers can estimate the age of the star.\nLuminosity.\nThe luminosity of a star is the amount of light and other forms of radiant energy it radiates per unit of time. It has units of power. The luminosity of a star is determined by its radius and surface temperature. Many stars do not radiate uniformly across their entire surface. The rapidly rotating star Vega, for example, has a higher energy flux (power per unit area) at its poles than along its equator.\nPatches of the star's surface with a lower temperature and luminosity than average are known as starspots. Small, \"dwarf\" stars such as the Sun generally have essentially featureless disks with only small starspots. \"Giant\" stars have much larger, more obvious starspots, and they exhibit strong stellar limb darkening. That is, the brightness decreases towards the edge of the stellar disk. Red dwarf flare stars such as UV Ceti may possess prominent starspot features.\nMagnitude.\nThe apparent brightness of a star is expressed in terms of its apparent magnitude. It is a function of the star's luminosity, its distance from Earth, the extinction effect of interstellar dust and gas, and the altering of the star's light as it passes through Earth's atmosphere. Intrinsic or absolute magnitude is directly related to a star's luminosity, and is the apparent magnitude a star would be if the distance between the Earth and the star were 10 parsecs (32.6 light-years).\nBoth the apparent and absolute magnitude scales are logarithmic units: one whole number difference in magnitude is equal to a brightness variation of about 2.5 times (the 5th root of 100 or approximately 2.512). This means that a first magnitude star (+1.00) is about 2.5 times brighter than a second magnitude (+2.00) star, and about 100 times brighter than a sixth magnitude star (+6.00). The faintest stars visible to the naked eye under good seeing conditions are about magnitude +6.\nOn both apparent and absolute magnitude scales, the smaller the magnitude number, the brighter the star; the larger the magnitude number, the fainter the star. The brightest stars, on either scale, have negative magnitude numbers. The variation in brightness (\u0394\"L\") between two stars is calculated by subtracting the magnitude number of the brighter star (\"m\"b) from the magnitude number of the fainter star (\"m\"f), then using the difference as an exponent for the base number 2.512; that is to say:\nformula_1\nformula_2\nRelative to both luminosity and distance from Earth, a star's absolute magnitude (\"M\") and apparent magnitude (\"m\") are not equivalent; for example, the bright star Sirius has an apparent magnitude of \u22121.44, but it has an absolute magnitude of +1.41.\nThe Sun has an apparent magnitude of \u221226.7, but its absolute magnitude is only +4.83. Sirius, the brightest star in the night sky as seen from Earth, is approximately 23 times more luminous than the Sun, while Canopus, the second brightest star in the night sky with an absolute magnitude of \u22125.53, is approximately 14,000 times more luminous than the Sun. Despite Canopus being vastly more luminous than Sirius, the latter star appears the brighter of the two. This is because Sirius is merely 8.6 light-years from the Earth, while Canopus is much farther away at a distance of 310 light-years.\nThe most luminous known stars have absolute magnitudes of roughly \u221212, corresponding to 6\u00a0million times the luminosity of the Sun. Theoretically, the least luminous stars are at the lower limit of mass at which stars are capable of supporting nuclear fusion of hydrogen in the core; stars just above this limit have been located in the NGC 6397 cluster. The faintest red dwarfs in the cluster are absolute magnitude 15, while a 17th absolute magnitude white dwarf has been discovered.\nClassification.\nThe current stellar classification system originated in the early 20th century, when stars were classified from \"A\" to \"Q\" based on the strength of the hydrogen line. It was thought that the hydrogen line strength was a simple linear function of temperature. Instead, it was more complicated: it strengthened with increasing temperature, peaked near 9000\u00a0K, and then declined at greater temperatures. The classifications were since reordered by temperature, on which the modern scheme is based.\nStars are given a single-letter classification according to their spectra, ranging from type \"O\", which are very hot, to \"M\", which are so cool that molecules may form in their atmospheres. The main classifications in order of decreasing surface temperature are: \"O, B, A, F, G, K\", and \"M\". A variety of rare spectral types are given special classifications. The most common of these are types \"L\" and \"T\", which classify the coldest low-mass stars and brown dwarfs. Each letter has 10 sub-divisions, numbered from 0 to 9, in order of decreasing temperature. However, this system breaks down at extreme high temperatures as classes \"O0\" and \"O1\" may not exist.\nIn addition, stars may be classified by the luminosity effects found in their spectral lines, which correspond to their spatial size and is determined by their surface gravity. These range from \"0\" (hypergiants) through \"III\" (giants) to \"V\" (main-sequence dwarfs); some authors add \"VII\" (white dwarfs). Main-sequence stars fall along a narrow, diagonal band when graphed according to their absolute magnitude and spectral type. The Sun is a main-sequence \"G2V\" yellow dwarf of intermediate temperature and ordinary size.\nThere is additional nomenclature in the form of lower-case letters added to the end of the spectral type to indicate peculiar features of the spectrum. For example, an \"\"e\" can indicate the presence of emission lines; \"m\" represents unusually strong levels of metals, and \"var\"\" can mean variations in the spectral type.\nWhite dwarf stars have their own class that begins with the letter \"D\". This is further sub-divided into the classes \"DA\", \"DB\", \"DC\", \"DO\", \"DZ\", and \"DQ\", depending on the types of prominent lines found in the spectrum. This is followed by a numerical value that indicates the temperature.\nVariable stars.\nVariable stars have periodic or random changes in luminosity because of intrinsic or extrinsic properties. Of the intrinsically variable stars, the primary types can be subdivided into three principal groups.\nDuring their stellar evolution, some stars pass through phases where they can become pulsating variables. Pulsating variable stars vary in radius and luminosity over time, expanding and contracting with periods ranging from minutes to years, depending on the size of the star. This category includes Cepheid and Cepheid-like stars, and long-period variables such as Mira.\nEruptive variables are stars that experience sudden increases in luminosity because of flares or mass ejection events. This group includes protostars, Wolf-Rayet stars, and flare stars, as well as giant and supergiant stars.\nCataclysmic or explosive variable stars are those that undergo a dramatic change in their properties. This group includes novae and supernovae. A binary star system that includes a nearby white dwarf can produce certain types of these spectacular stellar explosions, including the nova and a Type Ia supernova. The explosion is created when the white dwarf accretes hydrogen from the companion star, building up mass until the hydrogen undergoes fusion. Some novae are recurrent, having periodic outbursts of moderate amplitude.\nStars can vary in luminosity because of extrinsic factors, such as eclipsing binaries, as well as rotating stars that produce extreme starspots. A notable example of an eclipsing binary is Algol, which regularly varies in magnitude from 2.1 to 3.4 over a period of 2.87 days.\nStructure.\nThe interior of a stable star is in a state of hydrostatic equilibrium: the forces on any small volume almost exactly counterbalance each other. The balanced forces are inward gravitational force and an outward force due to the pressure gradient within the star. The pressure gradient is established by the temperature gradient of the plasma; the outer part of the star is cooler than the core. The temperature at the core of a main-sequence or giant star is at least on the order of . The resulting temperature and pressure at the hydrogen-burning core of a main-sequence star are sufficient for nuclear fusion to occur and for sufficient energy to be produced to prevent further collapse of the star.\nAs atomic nuclei are fused in the core, they emit energy in the form of gamma rays. These photons interact with the surrounding plasma, adding to the thermal energy at the core. Stars on the main sequence convert hydrogen into helium, creating a slowly but steadily increasing proportion of helium in the core. Eventually the helium content becomes predominant, and energy production ceases at the core. Instead, for stars of more than 0.4\u00a0M\u2609, fusion occurs in a slowly expanding shell around the degenerate helium core.\nIn addition to hydrostatic equilibrium, the interior of a stable star will maintain an energy balance of thermal equilibrium. There is a radial temperature gradient throughout the interior that results in a flux of energy flowing toward the exterior. The outgoing flux of energy leaving any layer within the star will exactly match the incoming flux from below.\nThe radiation zone is the region of the stellar interior where the flux of energy outward is dependent on radiative heat transfer, since convective heat transfer is inefficient in that zone. In this region the plasma will not be perturbed, and any mass motions will die out. Where this is not the case, then the plasma becomes unstable and convection will occur, forming a convection zone. This can occur, for example, in regions where very high energy fluxes occur, such as near the core or in areas with high opacity (making radiatative heat transfer inefficient) as in the outer envelope.\nThe occurrence of convection in the outer envelope of a main-sequence star depends on the star's mass. Stars with several times the mass of the Sun have a convection zone deep within the interior and a radiative zone in the outer layers. Smaller stars such as the Sun are just the opposite, with the convective zone located in the outer layers. Red dwarf stars with less than 0.4\u00a0M\u2609 are convective throughout, which prevents the accumulation of a helium core. For most stars the convective zones will vary over time as the star ages and the constitution of the interior is modified.\nThe photosphere is that portion of a star that is visible to an observer. This is the layer at which the plasma of the star becomes transparent to photons of light. From here, the energy generated at the core becomes free to propagate into space. It is within the photosphere that sun spots, regions of lower than average temperature, appear.\nAbove the level of the photosphere is the stellar atmosphere. In a main-sequence star such as the Sun, the lowest level of the atmosphere, just above the photosphere, is the thin chromosphere region, where spicules appear and stellar flares begin. Above this is the transition region, where the temperature rapidly increases within a distance of only . Beyond this is the corona, a volume of super-heated plasma that can extend outward to several million kilometres. The existence of a corona appears to be dependent on a convective zone in the outer layers of the star. Despite its high temperature, the corona emits very little light, due to its low gas density. The corona region of the Sun is normally only visible during a solar eclipse.\nFrom the corona, a stellar wind of plasma particles expands outward from the star, until it interacts with the interstellar medium. For the Sun, the influence of its solar wind extends throughout a bubble-shaped region called the heliosphere.\nNuclear fusion reaction pathways.\nWhen nuclei fuse, the mass of the fused product is less than the mass of the original parts. This lost mass is converted to electromagnetic energy, according to the mass\u2013energy equivalence relationship formula_3. A variety of nuclear fusion reactions take place in the cores of stars, that depend upon their mass and composition.\nThe hydrogen fusion process is temperature-sensitive, so a moderate increase in the core temperature will result in a significant increase in the fusion rate. As a result, the core temperature of main-sequence stars only varies from 4\u00a0million kelvin for a small M-class star to 40\u00a0million kelvin for a massive O-class star.\nIn the Sun, with a 16-million-kelvin core, hydrogen fuses to form helium in the proton\u2013proton chain reaction:\n41H \u2192 22H + 2e+ + 2\u03bde(2 x 0.4 MeV)\n2e+ + 2e\u2212 \u2192 2\u03b3 (2 x 1.0 MeV)\n21H + 22H \u2192 23He + 2\u03b3 (2 x 5.5 MeV)\n23He \u2192 4He + 21H (12.9 MeV)\nThere are a couple other paths, in which 3He and 4He combine to form 7Be, which eventually (with the addition of another proton) yields two 4He, a gain of one.\nAll these reactions result in the overall reaction:\n41H \u2192 4He + 2\u03b3 + 2\u03bde (26.7 MeV)\nwhere \u03b3 is a gamma ray photon, \u03bde is a neutrino, and H and He are isotopes of hydrogen and helium, respectively. The energy released by this reaction is in millions of electron volts. Each individual reaction produces only a tiny amount of energy, but because enormous numbers of these reactions occur constantly, they produce all the energy necessary to sustain the star's radiation output. In comparison, the combustion of two hydrogen gas molecules with one oxygen gas molecule releases only 5.7 eV.\nIn more massive stars, helium is produced in a cycle of reactions catalyzed by carbon called the carbon-nitrogen-oxygen cycle.\nIn evolved stars with cores at 100\u00a0million kelvin and masses between 0.5 and 10\u00a0M\u2609, helium can be transformed into carbon in the triple-alpha process that uses the intermediate element beryllium:\n4He + 4He + 92 keV \u2192 8*Be\n4He + 8*Be + 67 keV \u2192 12*C\n12*C \u2192 12C + \u03b3 + 7.4 MeV\nFor an overall reaction of:\n34He \u2192 12C + \u03b3 + 7.2 MeV\nIn massive stars, heavier elements can be burned in a contracting core through the neon-burning process and oxygen-burning process. The final stage in the stellar nucleosynthesis process is the silicon-burning process that results in the production of the stable isotope iron-56. Any further fusion would be an endothermic process that consumes energy, and so further energy can only be produced through gravitational collapse.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26809", "revid": "1320100991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26809", "title": "StarCraft (video game)", "text": "1998 real-time strategy game\nStarCraft is a real-time strategy video game developed and published by Blizzard Entertainment for Microsoft Windows. The first installment of the video game series of the same name, it was released in 1998. A Classic Mac OS version was released in 1999, and a Nintendo 64 port co-developed with Mass Media and published by Nintendo was released in 2000.\nBlizzard started work on the game shortly after \"\", another real-time strategy game, was released in 1995. The first incarnation debuted at the 1996 Electronic Entertainment Expo, where it was unfavorably compared to \"Warcraft II\". As a result, the project was entirely overhauled before being showcased to the public in early 1997, at which time it received a far more positive response. The game's multiplayer is particularly popular in South Korea, where players and teams participate in , earn sponsorships, and compete in televised tournaments.\nSet in a future timeline during the 25th century AD in a distant part of the Milky Way galaxy known as the Koprulu Sector, the game revolves around three intelligent species fighting for dominance: the Terrans are humans exiled from Earth who are now skilled at adapting to any situation; the Zerg are a race of insectoid aliens in pursuit of genetic perfection and obsessed with assimilating other races; the Protoss are a humanoid species with advanced technology and psionic abilities who are attempting to preserve their civilization and strict philosophy about their way of life from the Zerg.\nMany journalists of the video game industry have praised \"StarCraft\" as one of the most important and greatest video games of all time. The game is also said to have raised the bar for developing real-time strategy (RTS) games. With more than 11 million copies sold worldwide by February 2009, \"StarCraft\" became one of the best-selling games for the personal computer. It has been praised for pioneering the use of unique factions in RTS gameplay and for having a compelling story.\n\"StarCraft\" has had its storyline adapted and expanded through a series of novels published between 2000 and 2016, the expansion pack ', and two officially authorized add-ons, and \"Retribution\". A sequel, ', was released in July 2010, along with two expansion packs and a campaign pack between 2013 and 2016, while of the original and its expansion pack was released in August 2017. The original game, along with the expansion, was released for free in April 2017.\nGameplay.\nBlizzard Entertainment's use of three distinct races in \"StarCraft\" is widely credited with revolutionizing the real-time strategy genre. All units are unique to their respective races, and while rough comparisons can be drawn between certain types of units in the technology tree, every unit performs differently and requires different tactics for a player to succeed.\nThe psionic and technologically adept Protoss have access to powerful units and machinery and advanced technologies such as energy shields and localized warp capabilities, powered by their psionic traits. However, their forces have lengthy and expensive manufacturing processes, encouraging players to follow a strategy of the quality of their units over quantity. The insectoid Zerg possess entirely organic units and structures, which can be produced quickly and at a far cheaper cost to resources, but are accordingly weaker, relying on sheer numbers and speed to overwhelm enemies. The humanoid Terrans provide a middle ground between the other two races, providing units that are versatile and flexible. They have access to a range of more ballistic military technologies and machinery, such as tanks and nuclear weapons.\nAlthough each race is unique in its composition, no race has an innate advantage over the other. Each species is balanced out so that while they have different strengths, powers, and abilities, their overall strength is the same.\n\"StarCraft\" features artificial intelligence that scales in difficulty, although the player cannot change the difficulty level in the single-player campaigns. Each campaign starts with enemy factions running easy AI modes, scaling through the course of the campaign to the hardest AI modes. In the level editor provided with the game, a designer has access to four levels of AI difficulties: \"easy\", \"medium\", \"hard\", and \"insane\", each setting differing in the units and technologies allowed to an AI faction and the extent of the AI's tactical and strategic planning. The single-player campaign consists of thirty missions, split into ten for each race.\nResource management.\nEach race relies on two resources to sustain their game economies and to build their forces: minerals and vespene gas. Minerals are needed for all units and structures, and they are obtained by using a worker unit to harvest the resource directly from mineral nodes scattered around the battlefield. Players require vespene gas to construct advanced units and buildings, and they acquire it by constructing a gas extraction building on top of a geyser and using worker units to extract the gas from it. In addition, players need to regulate the supplies for their forces to ensure that they can construct the number of units they need. Although the nature of the supply differs between the races\u2014Terrans use physical supplies held in depots, Protoss use psionic energy channeled from their homeworld via pylons, and Zerg is regulated by the number of controlling overlord units present\u2014the supply mechanic essentially works in exactly the same way for each race (just with differing impacts on gameplay), allowing players to create new units when there are sufficient resources to sustain them.\nBase construction.\nProtoss and Zerg building construction is limited to specific locations: Protoss buildings need to be linked to a power grid, while almost every Zerg structure must be placed on a carpet of biomass, called \"creep\", that is produced by certain structures. Terran buildings are far less limited, with certain primary base structures possessing the ability to take off and fly slowly to a new location. Terran buildings, however, require the worker unit to continue construction on the building until it is completed. Also, once a Terran building has taken a certain amount of damage, it will catch fire and can eventually burn to the ground without further enemy action if repairs are not performed by a worker unit. The Protoss, by contrast, only require a worker unit to begin the process of transporting a building to the theater of operations via warp, and their buildings' shields (but not their structure) are regenerative. The Zerg worker unit physically transforms into the structure created, which is capable of slowly healing itself.\nMultiplayer.\nMultiplayer on \"StarCraft\" is powered through Blizzard Entertainment's Battle.net Internet service. Through this, a maximum of eight players can compete in a variety of game modes, including simply destroying all other players (which may be competitive, as in Ladder play, or non-ranked, as in melee play), to king of the hill and capture the flag objective-based games. In addition, the game incorporates a variety of specialized scenarios for different types of game, such as simulating a football game, using the Terran hoverbike unit to conduct a bike race, or hosting a Zerg hunting competition. \"StarCraft\" is also one of the few games that includes a spawn installation, which allows for limited multiplayer. It must be installed from a disc, and requires a product key to work just as the full version does. However, one product key can support up to eight spawned installations with access to Battle.net. Limitations of a spawned installation include the inability to play single-player missions, create multiplayer games, or use the campaign editor. Newer releases of the game available through Battle.net or discs that include the Windows Vista label don't support the spawn installation.\nSynopsis.\nSetting.\n\"StarCraft\" takes place in a science fiction universe created by Chris Metzen and James Phinney for Blizzard Entertainment. According to the story presented in the game's manual, the overpopulation of Earth in the early 24th century has caused the international governing body, known as United Powers League (which was later succeeded by United Earth Directorate), to exile certain members of the human race, such as criminals, the cybernetically enhanced, and genetic mutants, to colonize the far reaches of the galaxy. An attempt to colonize a nearby solar system goes wrong, resulting in humanity's arrival in the Koprulu Sector. In the distant Koprulu Sector of the galaxy, the exiles form several governments, but quickly fall into conflict with each other. One government, the Confederacy of Man, eventually emerges as the strongest faction, but its oppressive nature and brutal methods of suppressing dissidents stir up major rebel opposition in the form of a terrorist group called the Sons of Korhal. Just prior to the beginning of the game, in December 2499, an alien race possessing advanced technology and psionic power, the Protoss, makes first contact with humanity by destroying a Confederate colony world without any prior warning. Soon after this, the Terrans discover that a second alien race, the insectoid Zerg, has been stealthily infesting the surface of several of the Terran colonies, and that the Protoss are destroying the planets to prevent the Zerg from spreading. With the Confederacy threatened by two alien races and internal rebellion, it begins to crumble.\nCharacters.\nThe player assumes the role of three nameless characters over the course of the game. In the first act, the player acts as the Confederate magistrate of an outlying colony world of Mar Sara, threatened by both the Zerg and the Protoss, and is forced through events to join the rebel Sons of Korhal under its leader Arcturus Mengsk. Mengsk's campaign is accompanied by Jim Raynor, a morally conscious law enforcement officer from Mar Sara, and Sarah Kerrigan, a psychic assassin and Mengsk's second-in-command. The second episode of the game sees the player as a cerebrate, a commander within the Zerg Swarm. The player is ruled over by the Zerg Overmind \u2013 the manifestation of the collective consciousness of the Swarm and the game's primary antagonist \u2013 and is given advice from other cerebrates of higher rank and status while accomplishing the objectives of the Swarm. In the final part of \"StarCraft\", the player is a newly appointed Executor within the Protoss military reporting to Aldaris, a representative of the Protoss government. Aldaris is at odds with Tassadar \u2013 the former occupant of the player's position \u2013 over his association with Zeratul, a member of a heretical group known as dark templar.\nStory.\nThe story of \"StarCraft\" is presented through its instruction manual, the briefings to each mission, and conversations within the missions themselves, along with the use of cinematic cutscenes at key points. The campaign is split into three episodes, each allowing the player to command one of the game's three races. In the first segment of the game, the player and Jim Raynor are attempting to control the colony of Mar Sara in the wake of the Zerg attacks on other Terran worlds. After the Confederacy arrests Raynor for destroying Confederate property, despite the fact that it had been infested by the Zerg, the player joins Arcturus Mengsk and the Sons of Korhal. Raynor, who is freed by Mengsk's troops, also joins and frequently accompanies the player on missions. Mengsk then begins to use Confederate technology captured on Mar Sara to lure the Zerg to Confederate installations and further his own goals. After forcing Confederate general Edmund Duke to join him, Mengsk sacrifices his own second-in-command, Sarah Kerrigan, to ensure the destruction of the Confederacy by luring the Zerg to the Confederate capital Tarsonis. Raynor is outraged by Mengsk's true aims of obtaining power at any cost and deserts, followed by the player, taking with them a small army of the former colonial militia of Mar Sara. Mengsk reorganizes what remains of the Terran population into the Terran Dominion, crowning himself as emperor.\nThe second campaign reveals that Kerrigan was not killed by the Zerg, but rather is captured and infested in an effort to incorporate her psionic traits into the Zerg gene pool. She emerges with far more psionic powers and physical strength, her DNA completely altered. Meanwhile, the Protoss commander Tassadar discovers that the Zerg's cerebrates cannot be killed by conventional means, but that they can be harmed by the powers wielded by the heretical dark templar. Tassadar allies himself with the dark templar prelate Zeratul, who assassinates Zasz, one of the Zerg's cerebrates in their hive clusters on Char. The cerebrate's death results in its forces running amok through the Zerg hives, but briefly links the minds of Zeratul and the Zerg Overmind, allowing the Overmind to finally learn the location of the Protoss homeworld Aiur, which the Overmind has been seeking for millennia. The main Zerg swarm promptly invades Aiur, while Kerrigan is dispatched to deal with Tassadar, and despite facing heavy Protoss resistance, the Overmind is able to embed itself into the crust of the planet.\nThe final episode of the game sees Aldaris and the Protoss government branding Tassadar a traitor and a heretic for conspiring with the dark templar. The player (later retconned to be Artanis) initially serves Aldaris in defending Aiur from the Zerg invasion, but while on a mission to arrest Tassadar, the player joins him instead. A Protoss civil war erupts, pitting Tassadar, Zeratul, and their allies against the Protoss establishment (known as The Conclave.) The dark templar prove their worth when they use their energies to slay two more of the Zerg cerebrates on Aiur, and the Conclave reconciles with them. Aided by Raynor's forces\u2014who sided with Tassadar back on Char\u2014the Protoss break through the Overmind's weakened defenses and destroy the Overmind's outer shell, but take heavy casualties in the process. Tassadar channels his own psionic energies in combination with those of the dark templar through the hull of his command ship and crashes it into the Overmind, sacrificing himself in order to destroy it.\nDevelopment.\nBlizzard Entertainment began development on \"StarCraft\" in 1995, shortly after the release of highly successful '. Using the \"Tides of Darkness\" game engine as a base, \"StarCraft\" made its debut at E3 1996. The version of the game displayed, assembled by the team's lead programmer Bob Fitch, received a rather weak response from the convention and was criticized by many for being \"\"Warcraft\" in space.\" According to programmer Patrick Wyatt, the E3 1996 build of \"StarCraft\" fared especially poorly in comparison to ', another science fiction real-time strategy game which was being demoed at E3, despite the fact that the demo had been faked by Ion Storm employees; in reality, the demo for \"Dominion\" was actually a pre-rendered video that the employees were merely pretending to play. As a consequence the entire project was overhauled, bringing the focus onto creating three distinct species. Bill Roper, one of the game's producers, stated this would be a major departure from the \"Warcraft\" approach, comparing its two equal sides to those of chess and stating that \"StarCraft\" would allow players to \"develop very unique strategies based on which species is being played, and will require players to think of different strategies to combat the other two species.\" The hand-drawn graphics seen in the E3 version were also replaced with rendered graphics. In early 1997, the new version of \"StarCraft\" was unveiled, receiving a far more positive response.\nHowever, the game was still marred by technical difficulties, so Bob Fitch completely redesigned the \"Warcraft II\" engine within two months to ensure that many of the features desired by the designers, such as the abilities for units to burrow and cloak, could be implemented. Later improvements to the game included pre-rendered sprites and backgrounds, constructed using 3D Studio Max. An isometric in-game view was also adopted, in contrast to \"Warcraft II\"'s auxiliary bird's eye perspective. In addition, the game utilized high quality music, composed by Blizzard's resident composers, and professional voice actors were hired.\nDespite the progress, \"StarCraft\" was slow to emerge. The continual delays inspired a group of \"StarCraft\" fans on the official forums who labeled themselves \"Operation: Can't Wait Any Longer\" to write a series of fictional stories in which the members of Operation CWAL attempted to retrieve the beta version of \"StarCraft\" from Blizzard's headquarters in Irvine, California. To pay homage to their presence on the forums and enthusiasm for the game, Blizzard Entertainment later incorporated the group's name into \"StarCraft\" as a cheat code to speed up the production of units and gave the group thanks in the game's credits. The game was released for Windows on March 31, 1998 and in the United Kingdom on April 9, with the Classic Mac OS version following a year later on March 12, 1999. Development on a Nintendo 64 version, \"StarCraft 64\", began in 1999, converted from PC by Mass Media Interactive Entertainment\u2014a subsidiary of THQ\u2014and published by Nintendo. \"StarCraft 64\" was released in the United States on June 13, 2000, and in Australia on May 25, 2001.\nMusic.\nThe musical score to \"StarCraft\" was composed by Blizzard Entertainment's composers. Glenn Stafford composed the Terran and Protoss in-game themes, while Derek Duke, who was a contracted composer at the time, wrote all the in-game music for the Zerg. The cinematic scores were composed by Stafford and Hayes. Hayes also collaborated with Stafford on one of the Protoss in-game tracks. Tracy W. Bush provided additional support in composing. The musical score of the game was received well by reviewers, who have described it as \"appropriately melodic and dark\" and \"impressive\", with one reviewer noting that some of the music owed much of its inspiration to Jerry Goldsmith's score for the film \"Alien\". The first official game soundtrack, \"StarCraft: Game Music Vol. 1\", was released in 2000, comprising tracks from both \"StarCraft\" and \"\", as well as a sizable portion of remix tracks and music inspired by \"StarCraft\", created by several South Korean disc jockeys. The soundtrack was distributed by Net Vision Entertainment. In September 2008, Blizzard Entertainment announced that a second soundtrack, \"StarCraft Original Soundtrack\", had been released on iTunes. This soundtrack consisted entirely of the original music from \"StarCraft\" and \"Brood War\", both from in-game themes to music used in the cinematic cutscenes.\nExpansions and versions.\nComputer expansions.\nBefore the release of \"StarCraft\", Blizzard Entertainment released a free-to-download game demo entitled \"Loomings\", comprising three missions and a tutorial. The prequel was made available for the full game in October 1999 as a custom map campaign, adding two extra missions and hosting it on Battle.net. In addition, the full release of \"StarCraft\" included a secondary campaign entitled \"Enslavers\". Consisting of five missions played as both the Terrans and the Protoss, \"Enslavers\" is set in the second campaign in \"StarCraft\" and follows the story of a Terran smuggler who manages to take control of a Zerg cerebrate and is pursued by both the Protoss and Terran Dominion. \"Enslavers\" acts as an exemplar single-player campaign for the game's level editor, highlighting how to use the features of the program.\n\"StarCraft\"'s first expansion, ', was released for Windows on July 31, 1998. The expansion was developed by Aztech New Media and authorized by Blizzard Entertainment. Its story focused on a separate Confederate colony alluded to in the manual to \"StarCraft\", following a group of Terran colonists and a Protoss fleet in their fight against the Zerg and a rising local insurgency. \"Insurrection\" was not received well, being criticized by reviewers for lacking the quality of the original game. \"Insurrection\" was followed within a few months by a second expansion, \"Retribution\". Developed by Stardock, published by WizardWorks and authorized by Blizzard Entertainment, \"Retribution\" follows all three races attempting to seize control of a powerful crystal on a Terran Dominion colony. The expansion was not received with critical support, instead being regarded as average but at least challenging. After the release of \"Retribution\", Blizzard Entertainment announced a new official expansion pack that would continue on the story of \"StarCraft\". ' was consequently created, developed jointly by Blizzard Entertainment and Saffire. \"Brood War\" continues the story of \"StarCraft\" from days after its conclusion, and was released for both Windows and Mac to critical praise on December 18, 1998, in the US and in March 1999 in Europe.\nBefore \"Insurrection\", an unauthorized expansion pack, called \"Stellar Forces\", was published by Micro Star but was recalled weeks later when Micro Star settled a lawsuit brought by Blizzard against it. It consisted of 22 single player maps and 32 multi-player maps which are considered to be rather plain.\nNintendo 64 version.\nIn 2000, \"StarCraft 64\" was released in North America for the Nintendo 64, co-developed by Blizzard Entertainment and Mass Media and published by Nintendo. The N64 port features all of the missions from both \"StarCraft\" and the expansion \"Brood War\", as well as some exclusive missions, such as two different tutorials and a new secret mission, \"Resurrection IV\". Blizzard Entertainment had initially considered releasing a home console port onto the PlayStation, but the team ultimately decided to develop and release it for the Nintendo 64 instead. \"Resurrection IV\" is set after the conclusion of \"Brood War\", and follows Jim Raynor embarking on a mission to rescue the \"Brood War\" character Alexei Stukov, a vice admiral from Earth who has been captured by the Zerg. The \"Brood War\" missions required the use of a Nintendo 64 memory Expansion Pak to run. In addition, \"StarCraft 64\" features a split screen cooperative mode, also requiring the expansion pak, allowing two players to control one force in-game. \"StarCraft 64\" lacked the online multiplayer capabilities and speech in mission briefings. In addition, cut scenes were shortened. \"StarCraft 64\" was a runner-up for GameSpot's annual \"Best Game Story\" and \"Best Strategy Game\" awards among console games, which went respectively to \"Summoner\" and \"Ogre Battle 64\".\nRemaster.\nA remastered edition of the game, \"StarCraft: Remastered\", released August 14, 2017, preserves the gameplay of the original while adding support for ultra-high-definition graphics, Blizzard's modern online features, and re-recorded audio (soundtrack and sound effects).\n\"StarCraft: Cartooned\".\nOn June 8, 2019, as part of the grand finals of the third season of the KSL, Blizzard announced a graphics overhaul pack for the game by Carbot Animations, the producers of multiple Blizzard-related parody animations, including their first and longest-running one, the \"StarCrafts\" series. As a graphical overhaul, its effect applies to all game modes and menus in \"StarCraft: Remastered\". It was released on July 10, 2019, as \"StarCraft: Cartooned\" alongside an announcer pack featuring South Korean YouTuber and children's television host Hyejin \"Hey Jini\" Kang.\nCultural impact.\nReception.\n\"StarCraft\" was released internationally on March 31, 1998, and became the best-selling PC game for that year, selling over 1.5\u00a0million copies worldwide. In the United States, it was the best-selling computer game of 1998, with 746,365 units sold. It was the country's 14th best-selling release of the period between 1993 and 1999, selling 916,000 copies. By April 1999, South Korean players had purchased almost 300,000 units of the game, increasing to 1 million units sold in Korea by November 1999. \"StarCraft\"'s worldwide sales reached 4 million units by July 2001; South Korea accounted for 50% of these copies. By May 2007, \"StarCraft\" had sold over 9.5\u00a0million copies across the globe, with 4.5\u00a0million of these being sold in South Korea. Since the initial release of \"StarCraft\", Blizzard Entertainment reported that its Battle.net online multiplayer service grew by 800 percent.\nGenerally, \"StarCraft\" was received positively by critics, with many contemporary reviewers noting that while the game may not have deviated significantly from the status quo of most real-time strategy games, it was one of the best to have applied the formula. In addition, \"StarCraft\"'s pioneering use of three distinct, unique, and balanced races over two equal sides was praised by critics, with \"GameSpot\" commenting that this helped the game to \"avoid the problem that has plagued every other game in the genre\". Many critics also praised the strength of the story accompanying the game, with some reviewers being impressed by how well the story was folded into the gameplay. The game's voice acting in particular was praised; GameSpot later hailed the voice work in the game as one of the ten best in the industry at the time. Equally, the multiplayer aspects of the game were positively received. \"StarCraft\" has received multiple awards, including being named as one of the best games of all time by \"GameSpot\", \"IGN\", and \"Game Informer\". According to Blizzard Entertainment, \"StarCraft\" has won 37 awards and has received a star on the floor of the Metreon as part of the Walk of Game in San Francisco in early 2006.\n\"Next Generation\" reviewed the PC version of the game, rating it five stars out of five, and stated that \"The quality of the play balancing and the elegance of the design mean that \"StarCraft\" sets a new high watermark for all real-time strategy games.\"\nThe reviewer from the online second volume of \"Pyramid\" stated that \"One of the most hotly anticipated computer games of the last two years, Blizzard Entertainment's \"Starcraft\" has had a tremendous amount of hype to live up to. The fact that it \"does\" live up to the high expectations set for it may be the only recommendation it needs.\"\nAlthough at the time \"StarCraft\"'s graphics and audio were praised by critics, later reviews have noted that the graphics do not compare to more modern games. The capacity for the game's artificial intelligence to navigate units to waypoints also faced some heavy criticism, with \"PC Zone\" stating that the inability for developers to make an effective pathfinding system was \"the single most infuriating element of the real-time strategy genre\". In addition, several reviewers expressed concern over some familiarities between the unit structures of each race, as well as over the potential imbalance of players using rushing tactics early in multiplayer games. Blizzard Entertainment has strived to balance rush tactics in later updates. The Nintendo 64 version of the game was not received as positively by reviewers, and was criticized for poor graphics in comparison to the PC version. However, critics did praise the game and Mass Media for using effective controls on the gamepad and maintaining the high quality audio.\nAt the inaugural Interactive Achievement Awards (now known as the D.I.C.E. Awards), \"StarCraft\" won \"Computer Entertainment Title of the Year\", and tied with \"Age of Empires\" for \"PC Strategy Game of the Year\".\n\"Starcraft\" also won the Origins Award for Best Strategy Computer Game of 1998.\nIn 1998, \"PC Gamer\" declared it the 5th-best computer game ever released, and the editors called it \"a strategy game that continues to evolve and surprise many months after its release, and that currently represents the state of the genre's art\".\nWith more than 11 million copies sold worldwide by February 2009, \"StarCraft\" became one of the best-selling games for the personal computer. It has been praised for pioneering the use of unique \"factions\" in RTS gameplay, and for having a compelling story.\nLegacy.\nGameSpot described \"StarCraft\" as \"The defining game of its genre. It is the standard by which all real-time strategy games are judged.\" \"IGN\" stated that \"StarCraft\" \"is hands down one of the best, if not the best, real-time strategy games ever created.\" \"StarCraft\" is frequently included in the industry's best games rankings, for example it ranked 37 in \"Edge\"'s top 100 games of all time. \"StarCraft\" has even been taken into space, as astronaut Daniel T. Barry took a copy of the game with him on the Space Shuttle mission STS-96 in 1999. \"StarCraft\"'s popularity resulted in \"Guinness World Records\" awarding the game four world records, including \"Best Selling PC Strategy Game,\" \"Largest Income in Professional Gaming,\" and \"Largest Audience for a Game Competition\" when 120,000 fans turned out to watch the final of the SKY proleague season 2005 in Busan, South Korea. Researchers have shown that the audience for watching \"StarCraft\" games is diverse and that \"StarCraft\" uses instances of information asymmetry to make the game more entertaining for spectators. In addition, \"StarCraft\" has been the subject of an academic course; the University of California, Berkeley offered a student-run introductory course on theory and strategy in spring 2009.\nAfter its release, \"StarCraft\" rapidly grew in popularity in South Korea. Professional gamers in South Korea are media celebrities, and \"StarCraft\" games are broadcast over three television channels dedicated to the professional gaming scene. Professional gamers in South Korea have gained television contracts, sponsorships, and tournament prizes, allowing one of the most famous players, Lim \"BoxeR\" Yo-hwan, to gain a fan club of over half a million people. One player, Lee Yun-yeol, reported earnings in 2005 of US$.\n\"StarCraft\" was part of the United States Air Force's Air and Space Basic Course, used to teach newly active officers about crisis planning under stress and joint service teamwork. Other efforts to make more 'realistic' current-day battle software led to distractions when simulated hardware didn't align with the real hardware active duty officers knew about. The science fiction setting allowed students to focus on the battle tactics.\nThe annual Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment hosts a competition for AIs playing the game. As of 2015, humans still win.\nIn 2014, an unofficial version for the Pandora handheld and the ARM architecture became available by static recompilation and reverse engineering of the original x86 version.\nThe original game, along with the expansion, was released for free in April 2017.\nIn 2021, The Strong National Museum of Play inducted \"StarCraft\" to its World Video Game Hall of Fame. During the 2022 Russian Invasion of Ukraine, Ukrainian presidential spokesman and Chief of Staff Oleksiy Arestovych described reports of a potential Russian offensive as a \"zerg rush\" of 10,000 volunteers (in reference to Zerg swarm species tactics from the game), and proceeded to explain the meaning of the term.\nMerchandise.\nThe storyline of \"StarCraft\" has been adapted into several novels. The first novel, \"Uprising\", which was written by Blizzard employee Micky Neilson and published in December 2000, acts as a prequel to the events of \"StarCraft\". Other novels\u2014\"Liberty's Crusade\" by Jeff Grubb and Aaron Rosenberg's \"Queen of Blades\"\u2014retell the story of the game from different perspectives. At BlizzCon 2007, \"StarCraft\" creator Chris Metzen stated that he hoped to novelize the entirety of \"StarCraft\" and its expansion \"Brood War\" into a definitive text-based story. Later novels, such as Gabriel Mesta's \"Shadow of the Xel'Naga\" and Christie Golden's \"The Dark Templar Saga\", further expand the storyline, creating the setting for \"StarCraft II\".\nA number of action figures and collectable statues based upon the characters and units in \"StarCraft\" have been produced by ToyCom. A number of model kits, made by Academy Hobby Model Kits, were also produced, displaying 1/30 scale versions of the marine and the hydralisk. In addition, Blizzard Entertainment teamed up with Fantasy Flight Games to create a board game with detailed sculptures of game characters. Blizzard Entertainment also licensed Wizards of the Coast to produce an Alternity based game entitled \"StarCraft Adventures\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26810", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26810", "title": "Skepticism", "text": "Doubtful attitude toward knowledge claims\nSkepticism (US) or scepticism (UK) is a questioning attitude or doubt toward knowledge claims that are seen as mere belief or dogma. For example, if a person is skeptical about claims made by their government about an ongoing war then the person doubts that these claims are accurate. In such cases, skeptics normally recommend not disbelief but suspension of belief, i.e. maintaining a neutral attitude that neither affirms nor denies the claim. This attitude is often motivated by the impression that the available evidence is insufficient to support the claim. Formally, skepticism is a topic of interest in philosophy, particularly epistemology.\nMore informally, skepticism as an expression of questioning or doubt can be applied to any topic, such as politics, religion, or pseudoscience. It is often applied within restricted domains, such as morality (moral skepticism), atheism (skepticism about the existence of God), or the supernatural. Some theorists distinguish \"good\" or moderate skepticism, which seeks strong evidence before accepting a position, from \"bad\" or radical skepticism, which wants to suspend judgment indefinitely.\nPhilosophical skepticism is one important form of skepticism. It rejects knowledge claims that seem certain from the perspective of common sense. Radical forms of philosophical skepticism deny that \"knowledge or rational belief is possible\" and urge us to suspend judgment on many or all controversial matters. More moderate forms claim only that nothing can be known with certainty, or that we can know little or nothing about nonempirical matters, such as whether God exists, whether human beings have free will, or whether there is an afterlife. In ancient philosophy, skepticism was understood as a way of life associated with inner peace.\nSkepticism has been responsible for many important developments in science and philosophy. It has also inspired several contemporary social movements. Religious skepticism advocates for doubt concerning basic religious principles, such as immortality, providence, and revelation. Scientific skepticism advocates for testing beliefs for reliability, by subjecting them to systematic investigation using the scientific method, to discover empirical evidence for them.\nDefinition and semantic field.\n\"Skepticism\", also spelled \"scepticism\" (from the Greek , to search, to think about or look for), refers to a doubting attitude toward knowledge claims. So if a person is skeptical of their government's claims about an ongoing war then the person has doubts that these claims are true. Or being skeptical that one's favorite hockey team will win the championship means that one is uncertain about the strength of their performance. Skepticism about a claim implies that one does not believe the claim to be true. But it does not automatically follow that one should believe that the claim is false either. Instead, skeptics usually recommend a neutral attitude: beliefs about this matter should be suspended. In this regard, skepticism about a claim can be defined as the thesis that \"the only justified attitude with respect to [this claim] is suspension of judgment\". It is often motivated by the impression that one cannot be certain about it. This is especially relevant when there is significant expert disagreement. Skepticism is usually restricted to a claim or a field of inquiry. So religious and moral skeptics have a doubtful attitude about religious and moral doctrines. But some forms of philosophical skepticism, are wider in that they reject any form of knowledge.\nSome definitions, often inspired by ancient philosophy, see skepticism not just as an attitude but as a way of life. This is based on the idea that maintaining the skeptical attitude of doubt toward most concerns in life is superior to living in dogmatic certainty, for example because such a skeptic has more happiness and peace of mind or because it is morally better. In contemporary philosophy, on the other hand, skepticism is often understood neither as an attitude nor as a way of life but as a thesis: the thesis that knowledge does not exist.\nSkepticism is related to various terms. It is sometimes equated with agnosticism and relativism. However, there are slight differences in meaning. Agnosticism is often understood more narrowly as skepticism about religious questions, in particular, about the Christian doctrine. Relativism does not deny the existence of knowledge or truth but holds that they are relative to a person and differ from person to person, for example, because they follow different cognitive norms. The opposite of skepticism is dogmatism, which implies an attitude of certainty in the form of an unquestioning belief. A similar contrast is often drawn in relation to blind faith and credulity.\nTypes.\nVarious types of skepticism have been discussed in the academic literature. Skepticism is usually restricted to knowledge claims on one particular subject, which is why its different forms can be distinguished based on the subject. For example, religious skeptics distrust religious doctrines and moral skeptics raise doubts about accepting various moral requirements and customs. Skepticism can also be applied to knowledge in general. However, this attitude is usually only found in some forms of philosophical skepticism. A closely related classification distinguishes based on the source of knowledge, such as skepticism about perception, memory, or intuition. A further distinction is based on the degree of the skeptical attitude. The strongest forms assert that there is no knowledge at all or that knowledge is impossible. Weaker forms merely state that one can never be absolutely certain.\nSome theorists distinguish between a good or healthy form of moderate skepticism in contrast to a bad or unhealthy form of radical skepticism. On this view, the \"good\" skeptic is a critically minded person who seeks strong evidence before accepting a position. The \"bad\" skeptic, on the other hand, wants to \"suspend judgment indefinitely... even in the face of demonstrable truth\". Another categorization focuses on the motivation for the skeptical attitude. Some skeptics have ideological motives: they want to replace inferior beliefs with better ones. Others have a more practical outlook in that they see problematic beliefs as the cause of harmful customs they wish to stop. Some skeptics have very particular goals in mind, such as bringing down a certain institution associated with the spread of claims they reject.\nPhilosophical skepticism is a prominent form of skepticism and can be contrasted with non-philosophical or ordinary skepticism. Ordinary skepticism involves a doubting attitude toward knowledge claims that are rejected by many. Almost everyone shows some form of ordinary skepticism, for example, by doubting the knowledge claims made by flat earthers or astrologers. Philosophical skepticism, on the other hand, is a much more radical and rare position. It includes the rejection of knowledge claims that seem certain from the perspective of common sense. Some forms of it even deny that one knows that \"I have two hands\" or that \"the sun will come out tomorrow\". It is taken seriously in philosophy nonetheless because it has proven very hard to conclusively refute philosophical skepticism.\nIn various fields.\nSkepticism has been responsible for important developments in various fields, such as science, medicine, and philosophy. In science, the skeptical attitude toward traditional opinions was a key factor in the development of the scientific method. It emphasizes the need to scrutinize knowledge claims by testing them through experimentation and precise measurement. In the field of medicine, skepticism has helped establish more advanced forms of treatment by putting into doubt traditional forms that were based on intuitive appeal rather than empirical evidence. In the history of philosophy, skepticism has often played a productive role not just for skeptics but also for non-skeptical philosophers. This is due to its critical attitude that challenges the epistemological foundations of philosophical theories. This can help to keep speculation in check and may provoke creative responses, transforming the theory in question in order to overcome the problems posed by skepticism. According to Richard H. Popkin, \"the history of philosophy can be seen, in part, as a struggle with skepticism\". This struggle has led many contemporary philosophers to abandon the quest for absolutely certain or indubitable first principles of philosophy, which was still prevalent in many earlier periods. Skepticism has been an important topic throughout the history of philosophy and is still widely discussed today.\nPhilosophy.\nAs a philosophical school or movement, skepticism arose both in ancient Greece and India. In India the Aj\u00f1ana school of philosophy espoused skepticism. It was a major early rival of Buddhism and Jainism, and possibly a major influence on Buddhism. Two of the foremost disciples of the Buddha, Sariputta and Moggall\u0101na, were initially students of the Aj\u00f1ana philosopher Sanjaya Belatthiputta. A strong element of skepticism is found in Early Buddhism, most particularly in the A\u1e6d\u1e6dhakavagga sutra. However, the total effect these philosophies had on each other is difficult to discern. Since skepticism is a philosophical attitude and a style of philosophizing rather than a position, the Aj\u00f1anins may have influenced other skeptical thinkers of India such as Nagarjuna, Jayar\u0101\u015bi Bha\u1e6d\u1e6da, and Shriharsha.\nIn Greece, philosophers as early as Xenophanes (\u00a0BCE) expressed skeptical views, as did Democritus\nand a number of Sophists. Gorgias, for example, reputedly argued that nothing exists, that even if there were something we could not know it, and that even if we could know it we could not communicate it. The Heraclitean philosopher Cratylus refused to discuss anything and would merely wriggle his finger, claiming that communication is impossible since meanings are constantly changing. Socrates also had skeptical tendencies, claiming to know nothing worthwhile.\nThere were two major schools of skepticism in the ancient Greek and Roman world. The first was Pyrrhonism, founded by Pyrrho of Elis (c.). The second was Academic Skepticism, so-called because its two leading defenders, Arcesilaus (c.) who initiated the philosophy, and Carneades (c.), the philosophy's most famous proponent, were heads of Plato's Academy. Pyrrhonism's aims are psychological. It urges suspension of judgment () to achieve mental tranquility (). The Academic Skeptics denied that knowledge is possible (). The Academic Skeptics claimed that some beliefs are more reasonable or probable than others, whereas Pyrrhonian skeptics argue that equally compelling arguments can be given for or against any disputed view.450 Nearly all the writings of the ancient skeptics are now lost. Most of what we know about ancient skepticism is from Sextus Empiricus, a Pyrrhonian skeptic who lived in \u00a0CE. His works contain a lucid summary of stock skeptical arguments.\nAncient skepticism faded out during the late Roman Empire, particularly after Augustine (\u00a0CE) attacked the skeptics in his work \"Against the Academics\" (\u00a0CE). There was little knowledge of, or interest in, ancient skepticism in Christian Europe during the Middle Ages. Interest revived during the Renaissance and Reformation, particularly after the complete writings of Sextus Empiricus were translated into Latin in 1569 and after Martin Luther's skepticism of holy orders. A number of Catholic writers, including Francisco Sanches (c.\u20091550\u20131623), Michel de Montaigne (1533\u20131592), Pierre Gassendi (1592\u20131655), and Marin Mersenne (1588\u20131648) deployed ancient skeptical arguments to defend moderate forms of skepticism and to argue that faith, rather than reason, must be the primary guide to truth. Similar arguments were offered later (perhaps ironically) by the Protestant thinker Pierre Bayle in his influential Historical and Critical Dictionary (1697\u20131702).\nThe growing popularity of skeptical views created an intellectual crisis in seventeenth-century Europe. An influential response was offered by the French philosopher and mathematician Ren\u00e9 Descartes (1596\u20131650). In his classic work, \"Meditations of First Philosophy\" (1641), Descartes sought to refute skepticism, but only after he had formulated the case for skepticism as powerfully as possible. Descartes argued that no matter what radical skeptical possibilities we imagine there are certain truths (e.g., that thinking is occurring, or that I exist) that are absolutely certain. Thus, the ancient skeptics were wrong to claim that knowledge is impossible. Descartes also attempted to refute skeptical doubts about the reliability of our senses, our memory, and other cognitive faculties. To do this, Descartes tried to prove that God exists and that God would not allow us to be systematically deceived about the nature of reality. Many contemporary philosophers question whether this second stage of Descartes's critique of skepticism is successful.210\nIn the eighteenth century a new case for skepticism was offered by the Scottish philosopher David Hume (1711\u20131776). Hume was an empiricist, claiming that all genuine ideas can be traced back to original impressions of sensation or introspective consciousness. Hume argued that on empiricist grounds there are no sound reasons for belief in God, an enduring self or soul, an external world, causal necessity, objective morality, or inductive reasoning. In fact, he argued that \"Philosophy would render us entirely Pyrrhonian, were not Nature too strong for it.\"456 As Hume saw it, the real basis of human belief is not reason, but custom or habit. We are hard-wired by nature to trust, say, our memories or inductive reasoning, and no skeptical arguments, however powerful, can dislodge those beliefs. In this way, Hume embraced what he called a \"mitigated\" skepticism, while rejecting an \"excessive\" Pyrrhonian skepticism that he saw as both impractical and psychologically impossible.\nHume's skepticism provoked a number of important responses. Hume's Scottish contemporary, Thomas Reid (1710\u20131796), challenged Hume's strict empiricism and argued that it is rational to accept \"common-sense\" beliefs such as the basic reliability of our senses, our reason, our memories, and inductive reasoning, even though none of these things can be proved. In Reid's view, such common-sense beliefs are foundational and require no proof in order to be rationally justified.456 Not long after Hume's death, the German philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724\u20131804) argued that human empirical experience has possibility conditions which could not have been realized unless Hume's skeptical conclusions about causal synthetic \"a priori\" judgements were false.\nToday, skepticism continues to be a topic of lively debate among philosophers. British philosopher Julian Baggini posits that reason is perceived as \"an enemy of mystery and ambiguity,\" but, if used properly, can be an effective tool for solving many larger societal issues.\nReligion.\nReligious skepticism generally refers to doubting particular religious beliefs or claims. For example, a religious skeptic might believe that Jesus existed (see historicity of Jesus) while questioning claims that he was the messiah or performed miracles. Historically, religious skepticism can be traced back to Xenophanes, who doubted many religious claims of his time, although he recognized that \"God is one, supreme among gods and men, and not like mortals in body or in mind.\" He maintained that there was one greatest God. God is one eternal being, spherical in form, comprehending all things within himself, is the absolute mind and thought, therefore is intelligent, and moves all things, but bears no resemblance to human nature either in body or mind.\nReligious skepticism is not the same as atheism or agnosticism, though these often do involve skeptical attitudes toward religion and philosophical theology (for example, towards divine omnipotence). Religious people are generally skeptical about claims of other religions, at least when the two denominations conflict concerning some belief. Additionally, they may also be skeptical of the claims made by atheists.\nThe historian Will Durant writes that Plato was \"as skeptical of atheism as of any other dogma\". The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith encourages skepticism that is mainly centered around self-investigation of\ntruth.\nScience.\nA scientific or empirical skeptic is one who questions beliefs on the basis of scientific understanding and empirical evidence.\nScientific skepticism may discard beliefs pertaining to \"purported phenomena\" not subject to reliable observation and thus not systematic or empirically testable. Most scientists, being scientific skeptics, test the reliability of certain kinds of claims by subjecting them to systematic investigation via the scientific method. As a result, a number of ostensibly scientific claims are considered to be \"pseudoscience\" if they are found to improperly apply or to ignore the fundamental aspects of the scientific method.\nAuditing.\nProfessional skepticism is an important concept in auditing. It requires an auditor to have a \"questioning mind\", to make a critical assessment of evidence, and to consider the sufficiency of the evidence.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26811", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26811", "title": "Social Sciences", "text": ""}
{"id": "26812", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26812", "title": "Space Exploration", "text": ""}
{"id": "26817", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26817", "title": "States in Medieval Britain", "text": ""}
{"id": "26818", "revid": "50536615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26818", "title": "Stagflation", "text": "High inflation, low economic growth, and high unemployment\nStagflation is the combination of high inflation, stagnant economic growth, and elevated unemployment. The term \"stagflation\", a portmanteau of \"stagnation\" and \"inflation\", was popularized, and probably coined, by British politician Iain Macleod in the 1960s, during a period of economic distress in the United Kingdom. It gained broader recognition in the 1970s after a series of global economic shocks, particularly the 1973 oil crisis, which disrupted supply chains and led to rising prices and slowing growth. Stagflation challenges traditional economic theories, which suggest that inflation and unemployment are inversely related, as depicted by the Phillips Curve.\nStagflation presents a policy dilemma, as measures to curb inflation\u2014such as tightening monetary policy\u2014can exacerbate unemployment, while policies aimed at reducing unemployment may fuel inflation. In economic theory, there are two main explanations for stagflation: supply shocks, such as a sharp increase in oil prices, and misguided government policies that hinder industrial output while expanding the money supply too rapidly. The stagflation of the 1970s led to a reevaluation of Keynesian economic policies and contributed to the rise of alternative economic theories, including monetarism and supply-side economics.\nEtymology.\nThe term, a portmanteau of \"stagnation\" and \"inflation\", is generally attributed to Iain Macleod, a British Conservative Party politician who became Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1970. Macleod used the word in a 1965 speech to Parliament during a period of simultaneously high inflation and unemployment in the United Kingdom. Warning the House of Commons of the gravity of the situation, he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMacleod used the term again on 7 July 1970, and the media began also to use it, for example in \"The Economist\" on 15 August 1970, and \"Newsweek\" on 19 March 1973. John Maynard Keynes did not use the term, but some of his work refers to the conditions that most would recognise as stagflation.\n1976 Sterling crisis.\nThe United Kingdom experienced an outbreak of inflation in the 1960s and 1970s. As inflation rose, British policy makers failed to recognise the primary role of monetary policy in controlling inflation. They tried to use non-monetary policies and devices to respond to the economic crisis. Policy makers also made \"inaccurate estimates of the degree of excess demand in the economy, [which] contributed significantly to the outbreak of inflation in the United Kingdom in the 1960s and 1970s.\"\nStagflation was not limited to the United Kingdom. Economists have shown that stagflation was prevalent among seven major market economies from 1973 to 1982. After inflation rates began to fall in 1982, economists' focus shifted from the causes of stagflation to the \"determinants of productivity growth and the effects of real wages on the demand for labor\".\nCauses.\nEconomists offer two principal explanations for why stagflation occurs. First, stagflation can result when the economy faces a supply shock, such as a rapid increase in the price of oil. An unfavourable situation like that tends to raise prices at the same time as it slows economic growth by making production more costly and less profitable.\nSecond, the government can cause stagflation if it creates policies that harm industry while growing the money supply too quickly. These two things would probably have to occur together because policies that slow economic growth rarely cause inflation, and policies that cause inflation rarely slow economic growth.\nSupply shock.\nAs soon as the Six-Day War started in 1967 and Israel invaded the Sinai Peninsula down to the Suez Canal, the Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser, who was aligning with the Soviet Union, closed down the Suez Canal for eight years. Oil from the Middle East to Europe had to be rerouted around Africa. Egypt then tried to cross the Suez Canal and take back the Sinai Peninsula in the Yom Kippur War in late 1973. Richard Nixon supported funding Israel with $2.2 billion over the conflict, which triggered an oil embargo in October 1973 when the countries of the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) cut production of oil and placed an embargo on oil exports to the United States and other countries backing Israel.\nExcess demand.\nMoney supply in the early 1970s increased at almost 15% year over year in the United States and the Consumer price index lags behind about one year or two. Britain's monetary policy was also dovish causing excess demand.\nEnd of Bretton Woods system.\nIn the mid 1970s the Bretton Woods system was failing and countries' fixed exchange rate system between currencies started to float, and the gold standard where currencies were pegged to gold was abandoned. The price of gold and oil became very volatile after many years of steadiness.\nOther reasons.\nThere is evidence supporting the second explanation against the supply shock view that the 1970s stagflation was due to OPEC's quadrupling of oil prices in October 1973. Data show that its seeds were sown during the late 1960s and began to be reaped in that decade.\u00a0Between 1968 and 1970 unemployment rose from 3.6% to 4.9% while the CPI inflation rose from 4.7% to 5.6%. Further in the Michigan survey expected inflation rose from 3.8% to 4.9% between 1967 and 1970. The rise in expected inflation strongly supports the view that Expected Augmented Phillips Curve (EAPC) can explain the early, mild stagflation. Although the weakening economy was putting some downward pressure on inflation overall inflation rose in accordance with EAPC, as expected inflation kept rising. The stagflation became more severe in the early 1970s but was suppressed by the price controls and wage freeze imposed by President Nixon starting in August 1971 and through 1972. But when the controls were lifted in mid-1973 the CPI surged to 8.5%. Arguably, if there were no wage-price controls, the mini stagflation documented above would have been clearly evident before the October 1973 OPEC oil price hike.\nAs for the direct impact of dollar depreciation on inflation, data again imply that just as higher inflation shifted up the labor supply curve and made workers demand and get higher money wages, similarly a falling dollar made commodity producers demand higher prices to compensate for the dollar decline. Further, the weakening of the dollar, while exogeneous to oil prices, was itself a delayed response to rising inflation from 1968 onwards. This pattern of an overheated economy, leading to inflation, dollar depreciation, and then to higher oil prices and another bout of stagflation repeated itself in 1979.\nBoth explanations are offered in analyses of the 1970s stagflation in the West. It began with a large rise in oil prices, but then continued as central banks used excessively stimulative monetary policy to counteract the resulting recession, thereby causing a price/wage spiral.\nIncreased requirements on skill (education and experience) on work force, for example because of increased technical complexity, can cause shortage on skilled employees and rising salaries for them, at the same time as uneducated work tasks have in part moved to low salary countries such as in Asia, causing high unemployment.\nPostwar Keynesian and monetarist views.\nEarly Keynesianism and monetarism.\nUp to the 1960s, many Keynesian economists ignored the possibility of stagflation, because history suggested high unemployment correlated with low inflation, and vice versa (the Phillips curve). The idea was that high demand for goods drives up prices and encourages firms to hire more; and high employment raises demand. However, in the 1970s and 1980s, when stagflation occurred, it became clear that the relationship between inflation and employment levels was not necessarily stable: that is, the Phillips relationship could shift. Macroeconomists became more sceptical of Keynesian theories, and Keynesians reconsidered their ideas in search of an explanation for stagflation.\nExplanations for the shift of the Phillips curve were initially provided by the monetarist economist Milton Friedman, and also by Edmund Phelps. Both argued that when workers and firms expect more inflation, the Phillips curve shifts up (meaning that more inflation occurs at any given level of unemployment). In particular, they suggested that if inflation lasted for several years, workers and firms would start to take it into account during wage negotiations, causing workers' wages and firms' costs to rise more quickly, thus further increasing inflation. While this idea was a criticism of early Keynesian theories, it was gradually accepted by most Keynesians, and has been incorporated into New Keynesian economic models.\nNeo-Keynesianism.\nNeo-Keynesian theory distinguished two distinct kinds of inflation: demand-pull (caused by shifts of the aggregate demand curve) and cost-push (caused by shifts of the aggregate supply curve). Stagflation, in this view, is caused by cost-push inflation. Cost-push inflation occurs when some force or condition increases the costs of production. This could be caused by government policies (such as taxes) or from purely external factors such as a shortage of natural resources or an act of war.\nContemporary Keynesian analyses argue that stagflation can be understood by distinguishing factors that affect aggregate demand from those that affect aggregate supply. While monetary and fiscal policy can be used to stabilise the economy in the face of aggregate demand fluctuations, they are not very useful in confronting aggregate supply fluctuations. In particular, an adverse shock to aggregate supply, such as an increase in oil prices, can give rise to stagflation.\nSupply theory.\nFundamentals.\nSupply theories are based on the neo-Keynesian cost-push model and attribute stagflation to large disruptions to the supply side of the supply-demand market equation, such as when there is a sudden scarcity of key commodities, natural resources, or the natural capital needed to produce goods and services. In this view, stagflation is thought to occur when there is an adverse supply shock (for example, a sudden increase in the price of oil or a new tax) that causes a subsequent jump in the \"cost\" of goods and services (often at the wholesale level). In technical terms, this leads to contraction or negative shift in an economy's aggregate supply curve.\nIn the resource scarcity scenario (Zinam 1982), stagflation results when a restricted supply of raw materials inhibits economic growth. That is, when the supply of basic materials (fossil fuels (energy), minerals, agricultural land in production, timber, etc.) decreases and/or cannot rise fast enough to respond to demand. The resource shortage may be real or relative due to factors such as taxes or bad monetary policy influencing the \"cost\" or availability of raw materials. This is consistent with the cost-push inflation factors in neo-Keynesian theory (above). After supply shock occurs, the economy tries to maintain momentum. That is, consumers and businesses begin paying higher prices to maintain their level of demand. The central bank may exacerbate this by increasing the money supply, by lowering interest rates for example, in an effort to combat a recession. The increased money supply props up the demand for goods and services, though demand would normally drop during a recession.\nIn the Keynesian model, higher prices prompt increases in the supply of goods and services. However, during a supply shock (i.e., scarcity, \"bottleneck\" in resources, etc.), supplies do not respond as they normally would to these price pressures. So, inflation jumps and output drops, producing stagflation.\nExplaining the 1970s stagflation.\nFollowing Richard Nixon's imposition of wage and price controls on 15 August 1971, an initial wave of cost-push shocks in commodities were blamed for causing spiraling prices. The second major shock was the 1973 oil crisis, when the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) constrained the worldwide supply of oil. Both events, combined with the overall energy shortage that characterised the 1970s, resulted in actual or relative scarcity of raw materials. The price controls resulted in shortages at the point of purchase, causing, for example, queues of consumers at fuelling stations and increased production costs for industry.\nRecent views.\nThrough the mid-1970s, it was alleged that none of the major macroeconomic models (Keynesian, new classical, and monetarist) was able to explain stagflation.\nLater, an explanation was provided based on the effects of adverse supply shocks on both inflation and output. According to Blanchard (2009), these adverse events were one of two components of stagflation; the other was \"ideas\"\u2014which Robert Lucas, Thomas Sargent, and Robert Barro were cited as expressing as \"wildly incorrect\" and \"fundamentally flawed\" predictions (of Keynesian economics) which, they said, left stagflation to be explained by \"contemporary students of the business cycle\". In this discussion, Blanchard hypothesizes that the recent oil price increases could trigger another period of stagflation, although this has not yet happened (pg. 152).\nNeoclassical views.\nA purely neoclassical view of the macroeconomy rejects the idea that monetary policy can have real effects. Neoclassical macroeconomists argue that real economic quantities, like real output, employment, and unemployment, are determined by real factors only. Nominal factors like changes in the money supply only affect nominal variables like inflation. The neoclassical idea that nominal factors cannot have real effects is often called \"monetary neutrality\" or also the \"classical dichotomy\".\nSince the neoclassical viewpoint says that real phenomena like unemployment are essentially unrelated to nominal phenomena like inflation, a neoclassical economist would offer two separate explanations for \"stagnation\" and \"inflation\". Neoclassical explanations of stagnation (low growth and high unemployment) include inefficient government regulations or high benefits for the unemployed that give people less incentive to look for jobs. Another neoclassical explanation of stagnation is given by real business cycle theory, in which any decrease in labour productivity makes it efficient to work less. The main neoclassical explanation of inflation is very simple: it happens when the monetary authorities increase the money supply too much.\nIn the neoclassical viewpoint, the real factors that determine output and unemployment affect the aggregate supply curve only. The nominal factors that determine inflation affect the aggregate demand curve only. When some adverse changes in real factors are shifting the aggregate supply curve left at the same time that unwise monetary policies are shifting the aggregate demand curve right, the result is stagflation.\nThus the main explanation for stagflation under a classical view of the economy is simply policy errors that affect both inflation and the labour market. Ironically, a very clear argument in favour of the classical explanation of stagflation was provided by Keynes himself. In 1919, John Maynard Keynes described the inflation and economic stagnation gripping Europe in his book \"The Economic Consequences of the Peace\". Keynes wrote:\nLenin is said to have declared that the best way to destroy the Capitalist System was to debauch the currency. By a continuing process of inflation, governments can confiscate, secretly and unobserved, an important part of the wealth of their citizens. By this method they not only confiscate, but they confiscate arbitrarily; and, while the process impoverishes many, it actually enriches some. [...] Lenin was certainly right. There is no subtler, no surer means of overturning the existing basis of society than to debauch the currency. The process engages all the hidden forces of economic law on the side of destruction, and does it in a manner which not one man in a million is able to diagnose.\nKeynes explicitly pointed out the relationship between governments printing money and inflation.\nThe inflationism of the currency systems of Europe has proceeded to extraordinary lengths. The various belligerent Governments, unable, or too timid or too short-sighted to secure from loans or taxes the resources they required, have printed notes for the balance.\nKeynes also pointed out how government price controls discourage production.\nThe presumption of a spurious value for the currency, by the force of law expressed in the regulation of prices, contains in itself, however, the seeds of final economic decay, and soon dries up the sources of ultimate supply. If a man is compelled to exchange the fruits of his labours for paper which, as experience soon teaches him, he cannot use to purchase what he requires at a price comparable to that which he has received for his own products, he will keep his produce for himself, dispose of it to his friends and neighbours as a favour, or relax his efforts in producing it. A system of compelling the exchange of commodities at what is not their real relative value not only relaxes production, but leads finally to the waste and inefficiency of barter.\nKeynes detailed the relationship between German government deficits and inflation.\nIn Germany the total expenditure of the Empire, the Federal States, and the Communes in 1919\u201320 is estimated at 25 milliards of marks, of which not above 10 milliards are covered by previously existing taxation. This is without allowing anything for the payment of the indemnity. In Russia, Poland, Hungary, or Austria such a thing as a budget cannot be seriously considered to exist at all. Thus the menace of inflationism described above is not merely a product of the war, of which peace begins the cure. It is a continuing phenomenon of which the end is not yet in sight.\nZimmermann conclusion.\nWhile most economists believe that changes in money supply can have some real effects in the short run, neoclassical and neo-Keynesian economists tend to agree that there are no long-run effects from changing the money supply. Therefore, even economists who consider themselves neo-Keynesians usually believe that in the long run, money is neutral. In other words, while neoclassical and neo-Keynesian models are often seen as competing points of view, they can also be seen as two descriptions appropriate for different time horizons. Many mainstream textbooks today treat the neo-Keynesian model as a more appropriate description of the economy in the short run, when prices are \"sticky\", and treat the neoclassical model as a more appropriate description of the economy in the long run, when prices have sufficient time to adjust fully.\nTherefore, while mainstream economists today might often attribute short periods of stagflation (not more than a few years) to adverse changes in supply, they would not accept this as an explanation of very prolonged stagflation. More prolonged stagflation would be explained as the effect of inappropriate government policies: excessive regulation of product markets and labour markets leading to long-run stagnation, and excessive growth of the money supply leading to long-run inflation.\nAlternative views.\nAs differential accumulation.\nPolitical economists Jonathan Nitzan and Shimshon Bichler have proposed an explanation of stagflation as part of a theory they call differential accumulation, which says firms seek to beat the average profit and capitalisation rather than maximise. According to this theory, periods of mergers and acquisitions oscillate with periods of stagflation. When mergers and acquisitions are no longer politically feasible (governments clamp down with anti-monopoly rules), stagflation is used as an alternative to have higher relative profit than the competition. With increasing mergers and acquisitions, the power to implement stagflation increases.\nStagflation appears as a societal crisis, such as during the period of the oil crisis in the 70s and in 2007 to 2010. Inflation in stagflation, however, does not affect all firms equally. Dominant firms are able to increase their own prices at a faster rate than competitors. While in the aggregate no one appears to profit, differentially dominant firms improve their positions with higher relative profits and higher relative capitalisation. Stagflation is not due to any actual supply shock, but because of the societal crisis that hints at a supply crisis. It is mostly a 20th and 21st century phenomenon that has been mainly used by the \"weapondollar-petrodollar coalition\" creating or using Middle East crises for the benefit of pecuniary interests.\nDemand-pull stagflation theory.\nDemand-pull stagflation theory explores the idea that stagflation can result exclusively from monetary shocks without any concurrent supply shocks or negative shifts in economic output potential. Demand-pull theory describes a scenario where stagflation can occur following a period of monetary policy implementations that cause inflation. This theory was first proposed in 1999 by Eduardo Loyo of Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government.\nSupply-side theory.\nSupply-side economics emerged as a response to US stagflation in the 1970s. It largely attributed inflation to the ending of the Bretton Woods system in 1971 and the lack of a specific price reference in the subsequent monetary policies (Keynesian and Monetarism). Supply-side economists asserted that the contraction component of stagflation resulted from an inflation-induced rise in real tax rates (see bracket creep).\nAustrian School of economics.\nAdherents to the Austrian School maintain that creation of new money ex nihilo benefits the creators and early recipients of the new money relative to late recipients. Money creation is not wealth creation; it merely allows early money recipients to outbid late recipients for resources, goods, and services. Since the actual producers of wealth are typically late recipients, increases in the money supply weakens wealth formation and undermines the rate of economic growth. Austrian economist Frank Shostak says: \"The increase in the money supply rate of growth coupled with the slowdown in the rate of growth of goods produced is what the increase in the rate of price inflation is all about. (Note that a price is the amount of money paid for a unit of a good.) What we have here is a faster increase in price inflation and a decline in the rate of growth in the production of goods. But this is exactly what stagflation is all about, i.e., an increase in price inflation and a fall in real economic growth. Popular opinion is that stagflation is totally made up. It seems therefore that the phenomenon of stagflation is the normal outcome of loose monetary policy. This is in agreement with Phelps and Friedman (PF). Contrary to PF, however, we maintain that stagflation is not caused by the fact that in the short run people are fooled by the central bank. Stagflation is the natural result of monetary pumping which weakens the pace of economic growth and at the same time raises the rate of increase of the prices of goods and services.\"\nJane Jacobs and the influence of cities on stagflation.\nIn 1984, journalist and activist Jane Jacobs proposed the failure of major macroeconomic theories to explain stagflation was due to their focus on the nation as the salient unit of economic analysis, rather than the city. She proposed that the key to avoiding stagflation was for a nation to focus on the development of \"import-replacing cities\" that would experience economic ups and downs at different times, providing overall national stability and avoiding widespread stagflation. According to Jacobs, import-replacing cities are those with developed economies that balance their own production with domestic imports\u2014so they can respond with flexibility as economic supply and demand cycles change. While lauding her originality, clarity, and consistency, urban planning scholars have criticised Jacobs for not comparing her own ideas to those of major theorists (e.g., Adam Smith, Karl Marx) with the same depth and breadth they developed, as well as a lack of scholarly documentation. Despite these issues, Jacobs' work is notable for having widespread public readership and influence on decision-makers.\nResponses.\nStagflation undermined support for the Keynesian consensus.\nFederal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker very sharply increased interest rates from 1979 to 1983 in what was called a \"disinflationary scenario\". After US prime interest rates had soared into the double-digits, inflation did come down; these interest rates were the highest long-term prime interest rates that had ever existed in modern capital markets. Volcker is often credited with having stopped at least the inflationary side of stagflation, although the American economy dipped into a recession with the unemployment rate peaking at 10.4% in February 1983. Economic recovery began in 1983. Both fiscal stimulus and money supply growth were policy at this time. A five- to six-year jump in unemployment during the Volcker disinflation suggests Volcker may have trusted unemployment to self-correct and return to its natural rate within a reasonable period.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26819", "revid": "31348440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26819", "title": "Soundness", "text": "Term in logic and deductive reasoning\nIn logic and deductive reasoning, an argument is sound if it is both valid in form and has no false premises. Soundness has a related meaning in mathematical logic, wherein a formal system of logic is sound if and only if every well-formed formula that can be proven in the system is logically valid with respect to the logical semantics of the system.\nDefinition.\nIn deductive reasoning, a sound argument is an argument that is valid and all of its premises are true (and as a consequence its conclusion is true as well). An argument is valid if, assuming its premises are true, the conclusion \"must be\" true. An example of a sound argument is the following well-known syllogism:\n All men are mortal. \n Socrates is a man.\n Therefore, Socrates is mortal.\nBecause of the logical necessity of the conclusion, this argument is valid; and because the argument is valid and its premises are true, the argument is sound. \nHowever, an argument can be valid without being sound. For example:\n All birds can fly.\n Penguins are birds.\n Therefore, penguins can fly.\nThis argument is valid as the conclusion \"must be\" true assuming the premises are true. However, the first premise is false. Not all birds can fly (for example, ostriches). For an argument to be sound, the argument must be valid \"and\" its premises must be true.\nSome authors, such as Lemmon, have used the term \"soundness\" as synonymous with what is now meant by \"validity\", which left them with no particular word for what is now called \"soundness\". But nowadays, this division of the terms is very widespread.\nUse in mathematical logic.\nLogical systems.\nIn mathematical logic, a logical system has the soundness property if every formula that can be proved in the system is logically valid with respect to the semantics of the system.\nIn most cases, this comes down to its rules having the property of \"preserving truth\". The converse of soundness is known as completeness. \nA logical system with syntactic entailment formula_1 and semantic entailment formula_2 is sound if for any sequence formula_3 of sentences in its language, if formula_4, then formula_5. In other words, a system is sound when all of its theorems are validities.\nSoundness is among the most fundamental properties of mathematical logic. The soundness property provides the initial reason for counting a logical system as desirable. The completeness property means that every validity (truth) is provable. Together they imply that all and only validities are provable.\nMost proofs of soundness are trivial. For example, in an axiomatic system, proof of soundness amounts to verifying the validity of the axioms and that the rules of inference preserve validity (or the weaker property, truth). If the system allows Hilbert-style deduction, it requires only verifying the validity of the axioms and one rule of inference, namely modus ponens (and sometimes substitution).\nSoundness properties come in two main varieties: weak and strong soundness, of which the former is a restricted form of the latter.\nWeak soundness.\nWeak soundness of a deductive system is the property that any sentence that is provable in that deductive system is also true on all interpretations or structures of the semantic theory for the language upon which that theory is based. In symbols, where \"S\" is the deductive system, \"L\" the language together with its semantic theory, and \"P\" a sentence of \"L\": if \u22a2\"S\"\u00a0\"P\", then also \u22a8\"L\"\u00a0\"P\".\nStrong soundness.\nStrong soundness of a deductive system is the property that any sentence \"P\" of the language upon which the deductive system is based that is derivable from a set \u0393 of sentences of that language is also a logical consequence of that set, in the sense that any model that makes all members of \u0393 true will also make \"P\" true. In symbols, where \u0393 is a set of sentences of \"L\": if \u0393\u00a0\u22a2\"S\"\u00a0\"P\", then also \u0393\u00a0\u22a8\"L\"\u00a0\"P\". Notice that in the statement of strong soundness, when \u0393 is empty, we have the statement of weak soundness.\nArithmetic soundness.\nIf \"T\" is a theory whose objects of discourse can be interpreted as natural numbers, we say \"T\" is \"arithmetically sound\" if all theorems of \"T\" are actually true about the standard mathematical integers. For further information, see \u03c9-consistent theory.\nRelation to completeness.\nThe converse of the soundness property is the semantic completeness property. A deductive system with a semantic theory is strongly complete if every sentence \"P\" that is a semantic consequence of a set of sentences \u0393 can be derived in the deduction system from that set. In symbols: whenever \u0393 \u22a8 \"P\", then also \u0393 \u22a2 \"P\". Completeness of first-order logic was first explicitly established by G\u00f6del, though some of the main results were contained in earlier work of Skolem.\nInformally, a soundness theorem for a deductive system expresses that all provable sentences are true. Completeness states that all true sentences are provable.\nG\u00f6del's first incompleteness theorem shows that for languages sufficient for doing a certain amount of arithmetic, there can be no consistent and effective deductive system that is complete with respect to the intended interpretation of the symbolism of that language. Thus, not all sound deductive systems are complete in this special sense of completeness, in which the class of models (up to isomorphism) is restricted to the intended one. The original completeness proof applies to \"all\" classical models, not some special proper subclass of intended ones.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26820", "revid": "48492641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26820", "title": "Syllabary", "text": "Set of written symbols that represent the syllables or moras which make up spoken words\nIn the linguistic study of written languages, a syllabary is a set of written symbols that represent the syllables or (more frequently) morae which make up words. \nA symbol in a syllabary, called a syllabogram, typically represents an (optional) consonant sound (simple onset) followed by a vowel sound (nucleus)\u2014that is, a CV (consonant+vowel) or V syllable\u2014but other phonographic mappings, such as CVC, CV- tone, and C (normally nasals at the end of syllables), are also found in syllabaries.\nTypes.\nA writing system using a syllabary is \"complete\" when it covers all syllables in the corresponding spoken language without requiring complex orthographic / graphemic rules, like implicit codas (\u27e8C1V\u27e9 \u21d2 /C1VC2/), silent vowels (\u27e8C1V1+C2V2\u27e9 \u21d2 /C1V1C2/) or echo vowels (\u27e8C1V1+C2V1\u27e9 \u21d2 /C1V1C2/). This loosely corresponds to \"shallow\" orthographies in alphabetic writing systems.\n\"True\" syllabograms are those that encompass all parts of a syllable, i.e., initial onset, medial nucleus and final coda, but since onset and coda are optional in at least some languages, there are \"middle\" (nucleus), \"start\" (onset-nucleus), \"end\" (nucleus-coda) and \"full\" (onset-nucleus-coda) true syllabograms. Most syllabaries only feature one or two kinds of syllabograms and form other syllables by graphemic rules.\nSyllabograms, hence syllabaries, are \"pure\", \"analytic\" or \"arbitrary\" if they do not share graphic similarities that correspond to phonic similarities, e.g. the symbol for \"ka\" does not resemble in any predictable way the symbol for \"ki\", nor the symbol for \"a\". Otherwise, they are \"synthetic\", if they vary by onset, rime, nucleus \"or\" coda, or \"systematic\", if they vary by all of them.\nSome scholars, e.g., Daniels, reserve the general term for analytic syllabaries and invent other terms (abugida, abjad) as necessary.\nLanguages using syllabaries.\nLanguages that use syllabic writing include Japanese, Cherokee, Vai, the Yi languages of eastern Asia, the English-based creole language Ndyuka, Xiangnan Tuhua, and the ancient language Mycenaean Greek (Linear B).\nThe Cretan Linear A and its derivative Cypro-Minoan are also believed by some to be syllabic scripts, although as they remain undecoded, this has not been confirmed.\nChinese characters, the cuneiform script used for Sumerian, Akkadian and other languages, and the former Maya script are largely syllabic in nature, although based on logograms. They are therefore sometimes referred to as \"logosyllabic\".\nThe contemporary Japanese language uses two syllabaries together called kana (in addition to the non-syllabic systems kanji and romaji), namely hiragana and katakana, which were developed around 800 CE. Because Japanese uses mainly CV (consonant + vowel) syllables, a syllabary is well suited to write the language. As in many syllabaries, vowel sequences and final consonants are written with separate glyphs, so that both \"atta\" and \"kaita\" are written with three kana: \u3042\u3063\u305f (\"a-t-ta\") and \u304b\u3044\u305f (\"ka-i-ta\"). It is therefore more correctly called a \"moraic\" writing system, with syllables consisting of two moras corresponding to two kana symbols.\nLanguages that use syllabaries today tend to have simple phonotactics, with a predominance of monomoraic (CV) syllables. For example, the modern Yi script is used to write languages that have no diphthongs or syllable codas; unusually among syllabaries, there is a separate glyph for every consonant-vowel-tone combination (CVT) in the language (apart from one tone which is indicated with a diacritic).\nFew syllabaries have glyphs for syllables that are not monomoraic, and those that once did have simplified over time to eliminate that complexity. \nFor example, the Vai syllabary originally had separate glyphs for syllables ending in a coda \"(do\u014b),\" a long vowel \"(soo),\" or a diphthong \"(bai),\" though not enough glyphs to distinguish all CV combinations (some distinctions were ignored). The modern script has been expanded to cover all moras, but at the same time reduced to exclude all other syllables. Bimoraic syllables are now written with two letters, as in Japanese: diphthongs are written with the help of V or \"h\"V glyphs, and the nasal codas will be written with the glyph for \"\u014b\", which can form a syllable of its own in Vai.\nIn Linear B, which was used to transcribe Mycenaean Greek, a language with complex syllables, complex consonant onsets were either written with two glyphs or simplified to one, while codas were generally ignored, e.g., \"ko-no-so\" for \"Kn\u014dsos\", \"pe-ma\" for \"sperma.\"\nThe Cherokee syllabary generally uses dummy vowels for coda consonants, but also has a segmental grapheme for /s/, which can be used both as a coda and in an initial /sC/ consonant cluster.\nDifference from abugidas.\nThe languages of India and Southeast Asia, as well as the Ethiopian Semitic languages, have a type of alphabet called an \"abugida\" or \"alphasyllabary\". In these scripts, unlike in pure syllabaries, syllables starting with the same consonant are largely expressed with graphemes regularly based on common graphical elements. Usually each character representing a syllable consists of several elements which designate the individual sounds of that syllable.\nIn the 19th century these systems were called \"syllabics\", a term which has survived in the name of Canadian Aboriginal syllabics (also an abugida).\nIn a true syllabary there may be graphic similarity between characters that share a common consonant or vowel sound, but it is not systematic or at all regular. For example, the characters for \"ka ke ko\" in Japanese hiragana \u2013 \u304b \u3051 \u3053 \u2013 have no similarity to indicate their common /k/ sound. Compare this with Devanagari script, an abugida, where the characters for \"ka ke ko\" are \u0915 \u0915\u0947 \u0915\u094b respectively.\nComparison to alphabets.\nEnglish, along with many other Indo-European languages like German and Russian, allows for complex syllable structures, making it cumbersome to write English words with a syllabary. A \"pure\" English syllabary would require over 10,000 separate glyphs for each possible syllable (e.g., separate glyphs for \"half\" and \"have\"). However, such pure systems are rare. A workaround to this problem, common to several syllabaries around the world (including English loanwords in Japanese), is to add a paragogic dummy vowel, as if the syllable coda were a second syllable: \"ha-fu\" for \"half\" and \"ha-vu\" for \"have\".\nThe Korean script Hangul has been described as a syllabic alphabet as it combines the features of alphabetic and syllabic writing systems. Korean letters are written in syllabic blocks with the alphabetic letters arranged in two dimensions. For example, Seoul is written as , not .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26821", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26821", "title": "SurrealNumbers", "text": ""}
{"id": "26822", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26822", "title": "Steve Reich", "text": "American composer (born 1936)\nStephen Michael Reich ( ; born October 3, 1936) is an American composer best known as a pioneer of minimal music in the mid to late 1960s. Reich's work is marked by its use of repetitive figures, slow harmonic rhythm, and canons. Reich describes this concept in his essay \"Music as a Gradual Process\" by stating, \"I am interested in perceptible processes. I want to be able to hear the process happening throughout the sounding music.\" For example, his early works experiment with phase shifting, in which one or more repeated phrases plays slower or faster than the others, causing it to go \"out of phase.\" This creates new musical patterns in a perceptible flow. \nHis innovations include using tape loops to create phasing patterns, as on the early compositions \"It's Gonna Rain\" (1965) and \"Come Out\" (1966), and the use of simple, audible processes, as on \"Pendulum Music\" (1968) and \"Four Organs\" (1970). Works like \"Drumming\" (1971) and \"Music for 18 Musicians\" (1976), both considered landmarks of minimalism and important influences on experimental music, rock, and contemporary electronic music, would help entrench minimalism as a movement. Reich's work took on a darker character in the 1980s with the introduction of historical themes as well as themes from his Jewish heritage, notably \"Different Trains\" (1988).\nReich's style of composition has influenced many contemporary composers and groups, especially in the United States and Great Britain. The critic Andrew Clements has suggested that Reich is one of \"a handful of living composers who can legitimately claim to have altered the direction of musical history\".\nEarly life.\nReich was born in New York City to Jewish parents, the Broadway lyricist June Sillman and Leonard Reich. When he was one year old, his parents divorced, and Reich divided his time between New York and California. He is the half-brother of writer Jonathan Carroll. He was given piano lessons as a child and describes growing up with the \"middle-class favorites\", having no exposure to music written before 1750 or after 1900. At the age of 14 he began to study music in earnest, after hearing music from the Baroque period and earlier, as well as music of the 20th century. Reich studied drums with Roland Kohloff in order to play jazz. While attending Cornell University, he minored in music and graduated in 1957 with a B.A. in Philosophy. Reich's B.A. thesis was on Ludwig Wittgenstein; later he would set texts by that philosopher to music in \"Proverb\" (1995) and \"You Are (variations)\" (2006).\nFor a year following graduation, Reich studied composition privately with Hall Overton before he enrolled at Juilliard to work with William Bergsma and Vincent Persichetti (1958\u20131961). Subsequently, he attended Mills College in Oakland, California, where he studied with Luciano Berio and Darius Milhaud (1961\u20131963) and earned a master's degree in composition. At Mills, Reich composed \"Melodica\" for melodica and tape, which appeared in 1986 on the three-LP release \"Music from Mills\".\nReich worked with the San Francisco Tape Music Center along with Pauline Oliveros, Ramon Sender, Morton Subotnick, Phil Lesh and Terry Riley. He was involved with the premiere of Riley's \"In C\" and suggested the use of the eighth note pulse, which is now standard in performance of the piece.\nCareer.\n1960s.\nReich's early forays into composition involved experimentation with twelve-tone composition, but he found the rhythmic aspects of the number twelve more interesting than the pitch aspects. Reich also composed film soundtracks for \"Plastic Haircut\" (1963), \"Oh Dem Watermelons\" (1965), and \"Thick Pucker\" (1965), three films by Robert Nelson. The soundtrack of \"Plastic Haircut\", composed in 1963, was a short tape collage, possibly Reich's first. The \"Watermelons\" soundtrack used two 19th-century minstrel tunes as its basis, and used repeated phrasing together in a large five-part canon. The music for \"Thick Pucker\" arose from street recordings Reich made walking around San Francisco with Nelson, who filmed in black and white 16mm. This film no longer survives. A fourth film from 1965, about 25 minutes long and tentatively entitled \"Thick Pucker II\", was assembled by Nelson from outtakes of that shoot and more of the raw audio Reich had recorded. Nelson was not happy with the resulting film and never showed it.\nReich was influenced by fellow minimalist Terry Riley, whose work \"In C\" combines simple musical patterns, offset in time, to create a slowly shifting, cohesive whole. Reich adopted this approach to compose his first major work, \"It's Gonna Rain\". Composed in 1965, the piece used a fragment of a sermon about the end of the world given by a Black Pentecostal street-preacher known as Brother Walter. Reich built on his early tape work, transferring the last three words of the fragment, \"it's gonna rain!\", to multiple tape loops that gradually move out of phase with one another. \nThe 13-minute \"Come Out\" (1966) uses similarly manipulated sound collage recordings of a single spoken line given by Daniel Hamm, one of the falsely accused Harlem Six, who was severely injured by police. The survivor, who had been beaten, punctured a bruise on his own body to convince police to allow him to receive medical aid for his injury from the police beating. Out of Hamm's spoken line \"I had to, like, open the bruise up and let some of the bruise blood come out to show them,\" Reich rerecorded the fragment \"come out to show them\" on two channels, which are initially played in unison. They quickly slip out of sync; gradually the discrepancy widens and becomes a reverberation. The two voices then split into four, looped continuously, then eight, and continues splitting until the actual words are unintelligible, leaving the listener with only the speech's rhythmic and tonal patterns.\nIn \"Melodica\" (1966), Reich applies the phase looping approach of his previous works to a musical instrument. He started by playing and recording a simple melody on a melodica. He then places the recording on two separate channels, and by slowly moving them out of phase creates an intricate interlocking melody. This piece is very similar to \"Come Out\" in rhythmic structure, and is an example of how one rhythmic process can be realized in different sounds to create two different pieces of music. Reich was inspired to compose this piece from a dream he had on May 22, 1966, and put the piece together in one day. \"Melodica\" was the last piece Reich composed solely for tape, and he considers it his transition from tape music to instrumental music.\nReich's first attempt at translating this phasing technique from recorded tape to live performance was the 1967 \"Piano Phase\", for two pianos. In \"Piano Phase\" the performers repeat a rapid twelve-note melodic figure, initially in unison. As one player keeps tempo with robotic precision, the other speeds up very slightly until the two parts line up again, but one sixteenth note apart. The second player then resumes the previous tempo. This cycle of speeding up and then locking in continues throughout the piece; the cycle comes full circle three times, the second and third cycles using shorter versions of the initial figure. \"Violin Phase\", also written in 1967, is built on these same lines. \"Piano Phase\" and \"Violin Phase\" both premiered in a series of concerts given in New York art galleries.\nA similar, lesser known example of this so-called process music is \"Pendulum Music\" (1968), which consists of the sound of several microphones swinging over the loudspeakers to which they are attached, producing feedback as they do so. \"Pendulum Music\" has never been recorded by Reich himself, but was introduced to rock audiences by Sonic Youth in the late 1990s.\nReich also tried to create the phasing effect in a piece \"that would need no instrument beyond the human body\". He found that the idea of phasing was inappropriate for the simple ways he was experimenting to make sound. Instead, he composed \"Clapping Music\" (1972), in which the players do not phase in and out with each other, but instead one performer keeps one line of a 12-eighth-note-long (12-quaver-long) phrase and the other performer shifts by one eighth note beat every 12 bars, until both performers are back in unison 144 bars later.\nThe 1967 prototype piece \"Slow Motion Sound\" was not performed although Chris Hughes performed it 27 years later as \"Slow Motion Blackbird\" on his Reich-influenced 1994 album \"Shift\". It introduced the idea of slowing down a recorded sound until many times its original length without changing pitch or timbre, which Reich applied to \"Four Organs\" (1970), which deals specifically with augmentation. The piece has maracas playing a fast eighth note pulse, while the four organs stress certain eighth notes using an 11th chord. This work therefore dealt with repetition and subtle rhythmic change. In contrast to Reich's typical cyclical structure, \"Four Organs\" is unique among his work in using a linear structure\u2014the superficially similar \"Phase Patterns\", also for four organs but without maracas, is (as the name suggests) a cyclical phase piece similar to others composed during the period. \"Four Organs\" was performed as part of a Boston Symphony Orchestra program, and was Reich's first composition to be performed in a large traditional setting.\n1970s.\nIn June 1970, Reich travelled to the University of Ghana to study polyrhythmic music for five weeks with the Ewe master drummer Gideon Alorwoyie. From this experience, as well as A. M. Jones's \"Studies in African Music\" about the music of the Ewe people, Reich drew inspiration for his extensive piece \"Drumming\" (1970\u20131971), which he started to compose shortly after his return. Composed for a nine-piece percussion ensemble with female voices and piccolo, \"Drumming\" marked the beginning of a new stage in his career, for around this time he formed his ensemble, Steve Reich and Musicians, and increasingly concentrated on composition and performance with them. Steve Reich and Musicians was the sole ensemble to interpret his works for many years, and they remain a \"living laboratory\" for his music. The ensemble still remains active with many of its original members.\nAfter \"Drumming\", Reich moved on from the \"phase shifting\" technique that he had pioneered, and began writing more elaborate pieces. He started investigating other musical processes such as augmentation (the temporal lengthening of phrases and melodic fragments). In the summers of 1973 and 1974, he studied Balinese gamelan semar pegulingan and gambang (at Seattle and Berkeley). This experience influenced the composition of \"Music for Mallet Instruments, Voices and Organ\" (1973). Another work from this period is \"Six Pianos\" (1973).\nIn 1974, Reich began writing \"Music for 18 Musicians\". This piece involved many new ideas, although it also recalls earlier pieces. It is based on a cycle of eleven chords introduced at the beginning (called \"Pulses\"), followed by a small section of music based on each chord (\"Sections I-XI\"), and finally a return to the original cycle (\"Pulses II\"). This was Reich's first attempt at writing for larger ensembles. The increased number of performers resulted in more scope for psychoacoustic effects, which fascinated Reich, and he noted that he would like to \"explore this idea further\". Reich remarked that this one work contained more harmonic movement in the first five minutes than any other work he had written. Steve Reich and Musicians made the premier recording of this work on ECM Records.\nOne of Reich\u2019s characteristic compositional strategies for his minimalist work is his omission of bass notes to avoid tonal structure. \u201cThe reason lay in his antipathy to the functionality, which Reich thought inevitable, of the bass in determining and spelling out a tonal center and the relationships developed around this\u201d. \"Music for 18 Musicians\u201d maintains his minimalist feel through these \u201cphases\u201d and harmonic shifts. A piece with rich tonal exploration about an hour\u2019s length performance can only provide so much melodic opportunity, so repetitive rhythmic structure also plays a large role in this.\nReich explored these ideas further in his frequently recorded pieces \"Music for a Large Ensemble\" (1978) and \"Octet\" (1979). In these two works, Reich experimented with \"the human breath as the measure of musical duration ... the chords played by the trumpets are written to take one comfortable breath to perform\". Human voices are part of the musical palette in \"Music for a Large Ensemble\" but the wordless vocal parts simply form part of the texture (as they do in \"Drumming\"). With \"Octet\" and his first orchestral piece \"Variations for Winds, Strings and Keyboards\" (also 1979), Reich's music showed the influence of Biblical cantillation, which he had studied in Israel since the summer of 1977. After this, the human voice singing a text would play an increasingly important role in Reich's music.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The technique ... consists of taking pre-existing melodic patterns and stringing them together to form a longer melody in the service of a holy text. If you take away the text, you're left with the idea of putting together small motives to make longer melodies \u2013 a technique I had not encountered before.\nIn 1974 Reich published the book \"Writings About Music\", containing essays on his philosophy, aesthetics, and musical projects written between 1963 and 1974. An updated and much more extensive collection, \"Writings On Music (1965\u20132000)\", was published in 2002.\n1980s.\nReich's work took on a darker character in the 1980s with the introduction of historical themes as well as themes from his Jewish heritage. \"Tehillim\" (1981), Hebrew for \"psalms\", is the first of Reich's works to draw explicitly on his Jewish background. The work is in four parts, and is scored for an ensemble of four women's voices (one high soprano, two lyric sopranos and one alto), piccolo, flute, oboe, English horn, two clarinets, six percussion (playing small tuned tambourines without jingles, clapping, maracas, marimba, vibraphone and crotales), two electronic organs, two violins, viola, cello and double bass, with amplified voices, strings, and winds. A setting of texts from Psalms 19:2\u20135 (19:1\u20134 in Christian translations), 34:13\u201315 (34:12\u201314), 18:26\u201327 (18:25\u201326), and 150:4\u20136, \"Tehillim\" is a departure from Reich's other work in its formal structure; the setting of texts several lines long rather than the fragments used in previous works makes melody a substantive element. Use of formal counterpoint and functional harmony also contrasts with the loosely structured minimalist works written previously. The musicologist Ronit Seter described it as \"one of a very few non-Israeli works where the setting of the Hebrew text feels natural\", reflecting Reich's extensive research into modern Hebrew-Israeli speech, ancient Psalmic prosody and Jewish cantillation traditions.\n\"Different Trains\" (1988), for string quartet and tape, uses recorded speech, as in his earlier works, but this time as a melodic rather than a rhythmic element. In \"Different Trains\", Reich compares and contrasts his childhood memories of his train journeys between New York and California in 1939\u20131941 with the very different trains being used to transport contemporaneous European children to their deaths under Nazi rule. The Kronos Quartet recording of \"Different Trains\" was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Classical Contemporary Composition in 1990. The composition was described by Richard Taruskin as \"the only adequate musical response\u2014one of the few adequate artistic responses in any medium\u2014to the Holocaust\", and he credited the piece with earning Reich a place among the great composers of the 20th century.\n1990s.\nIn 1993, Reich collaborated with his wife, the video artist Beryl Korot, on an opera, \"The Cave\", which explores the roots of Judaism, Christianity and Islam through the words of Israelis, Palestinians, and Americans, echoed musically by the ensemble. The work, for percussion, voices, and strings, is a musical documentary, named for the Cave of Machpelah in Hebron, where a mosque now stands and Abraham is said to have been buried. According to musicologist Ronit Seter, the work \"share[s] the confrontational, yet peaceful message\" conveyed by contemporaneous Israeli composers.\nReich and Korot collaborated on the opera \"Three Tales\", which concerns the \"Hindenburg\" disaster, the testing of nuclear weapons on Bikini Atoll, and other more modern concerns, specifically Dolly the sheep, cloning, and the technological singularity.\nReich used sampling techniques for pieces like \"Three Tales\" and \"City Life\" from 1994. Reich returned to composing purely instrumental works for the concert hall, starting with \"Triple Quartet\" in 1998 written for the Kronos Quartet that can either be performed by string quartet and tape, three string quartets or 36-piece string orchestra. According to Reich, the piece is influenced by Bart\u00f3k's and Alfred Schnittke's string quartets, and Michael Gordon's \"Yo Shakespeare\".\n2000s.\nThe instrumental series for the concert hall continued with \"Dance Patterns\" (2002), \"Cello Counterpoint\" (2003), and multiple works centered around variations: \"You Are (Variations)\" (2004), \"Variations for Vibes, Pianos, and Strings\" (2005), and the \"Daniel Variations\" (2006). \"You Are\" looks back to the vocal writing of \"Tehillim\" and \"The Desert Music\" while the \"Daniel Variations\", which Reich called \"much darker, not at all what I'm known for\", are partly inspired by the death of Daniel Pearl.\nIn 2002 Reich was invited by Walter Fink to the annual Komponistenportr\u00e4t of the Rheingau Musik Festival, as the 12th composer featured.\nIn December 2010 Nonesuch Records and Indaba Music held a community remix contest in which over 250 submissions were received, and Steve Reich and Christian Carey judged the finals. Reich spoke in a related BBC interview that once he composed a piece he would not alter it again himself; \"When it's done, it's done,\" he said. On the other hand, he acknowledged that remixes have an old tradition e.g. famous religious music pieces where melodies were further developed into new songs.\n2010s.\nReich premiered a piece, \"WTC 9/11\", written for String Quartet and Tape (a similar instrumentation to that of \"Different Trains\") in March 2011. This was a response to the September 11 attacks and used recordings from emergency services and from family members who were in New York during the attacks. It was premiered by the Kronos Quartet, at Duke University, North Carolina, US.\nOn March 5, 2013, the London Sinfonietta, conducted by Brad Lubman, at the Royal Festival Hall in London gave the world premiere of \"Radio Rewrite\", Reich's work inspired by the band Radiohead. The programme also included \"Double Sextet\", \"Clapping Music\", featuring Reich himself alongside percussionist Colin Currie, \"Electric Counterpoint\", with electric guitar by Mats Bergstr\u00f6m as well as two of Reich's ensemble pieces.\n\"Music for Ensemble and Orchestra\" was premiered on November 4, 2018 by the Los Angeles Philharmonic under Susanna M\u00e4lkki at Walt Disney Concert Hall, marking Reich's return to writing for orchestra after an interval of more than thirty years.\nReich has lived with his wife Beryl Korot in a home in upstate New York since 2006.\nAwards.\nIn 2005, Reich was awarded the Edward MacDowell Medal.\nReich was awarded with the Praemium Imperiale Award in Music in October 2006.\nOn January 25, 2007, Reich was named 2007 recipient of the Polar Music Prize with jazz saxophonist Sonny Rollins.\nOn April 20, 2009, Reich was awarded the 2009 Pulitzer Prize for Music, recognizing \"Double Sextet\", first performed in Richmond March 26, 2008. The citation called it \"a major work that displays an ability to channel an initial burst of energy into a large-scale musical event, built with masterful control and consistently intriguing to the ear\".\nIn May 2011 Steve Reich received an honorary doctorate from the New England Conservatory of Music.\nIn 2012, Steve Reich received the Gold Medal in Music by the American Academy of Arts and Letters.\nIn 2013 Reich received the US$400,000 BBVA Foundation Frontiers of Knowledge Award in contemporary music for bringing a new conception of music, based on the use of realist elements from the realm of daily life and others drawn from the traditional music of Africa and Asia.\nIn September 2014, Reich was awarded the \"Leone d'Oro\" (Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement in Music) from the Venice Biennale.\nIn March 2016, Reich was awarded an Honorary Doctorate by the Royal College of Music in London.\nLegacy.\nThe American composer and critic Kyle Gann has said that Reich \"may\u00a0... be considered, by general acclamation, America's greatest living composer\". Writing in \"The Guardian\", music critic Andrew Clements has suggested that Reich is one of \"a handful of living composers who can legitimately claim to have altered the direction of musical history\". \nReich's style of composition has influenced many other composers and musical groups, including John Adams, Michael Nyman, Aphex Twin, Bj\u00f6rk, Sonic Youth, American Football, Stereolab, King Crimson, Autechre, Matmos, Michael Hedges, Brian Eno, the Residents, Underworld, the composers associated with the Bang on a Can festival (including David Lang, Michael Gordon, and Julia Wolfe), Sufjan Stevens, Matthew Healy of the 1975, Tortoise, The Mercury Program, JG Thirlwell, and Godspeed You! Black Emperor (which titled an unreleased song \"Steve Reich\").\nJohn Adams commented, \"He didn't reinvent the wheel so much as he showed us a new way to ride.\" He has also influenced visual artists such as Bruce Nauman, and many notable choreographers have made dances to his music, Eliot Feld, Ji\u0159\u00ed Kyli\u00e1n, Douglas Lee and Jerome Robbins among others; he has expressed particular admiration of Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker's work set to his pieces.\nIn featuring a sample of Reich's \"Electric Counterpoint\" (1987) in the 1990 track \"Little Fluffy Clouds\" the British ambient techno act the Orb exposed a new generation of listeners to his music. In 1999 the album \"Reich Remixed\" featured remixes of a number of Reich's works by various electronic dance-music producers, such as DJ Spooky, Kurtis Mantronik, Ken Ishii, and Coldcut among others.\nReich's \"Cello Counterpoint\" (2003) was the inspiration for a series of commissions for solo cello with pre-recorded cellos made by Ashley Bathgate in 2017 including new works by Emily Cooley and Alex Weiser.\nReich often cites P\u00e9rotin, J. S. Bach, Debussy, Bart\u00f3k, and Stravinsky as composers whom he admires and who greatly influenced him when he was young. Jazz is a major part of the formation of Reich's musical style, and two of the earliest influences on his work were vocalists Ella Fitzgerald and Alfred Deller, whose emphasis on the artistic capabilities of the voice alone with little vibrato or other alteration was an inspiration to his earliest works. John Coltrane's style, which Reich has described as \"playing a lot of notes to very few harmonies\", also had an impact; of particular interest was the album \"Africa/Brass\", which \"was basically a half-an-hour in E\". Reich's influence from jazz includes its roots, also, from the West African music he studied in his readings and visit to Ghana. Other important influences are Kenny Clarke and Miles Davis, and visual artist friends such as Sol LeWitt and Richard Serra. Reich has also stated that he admires the music of the band Radiohead, which led to his composition \"Radio Rewrite\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26823", "revid": "51015218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26823", "title": "Simon &amp; Garfunkel", "text": "American folk music duo\nSimon &amp; Garfunkel were an American folk rock duo comprising the singer-songwriter Paul Simon and the singer Art Garfunkel. They were one of the best-selling musical acts of the 1960s. Their most famous recordings include three U.S. number-one singles\u2014\"The Sound of Silence\" and the two Record of the Year Grammy winners \"Mrs. Robinson\" and \"Bridge over Troubled Water\"\u2014as well as \"Homeward Bound\", \"I Am a Rock\", \"Scarborough Fair/Canticle\", \"A Hazy Shade of Winter\", \"America\", \"The Boxer\" and \"Cecilia\".\nSimon and Garfunkel met in elementary school in Queens, New York City, in 1953, where they learned to harmonize and Simon began writing songs. As teenagers, under the name Tom &amp; Jerry, they had minor success with \"Hey Schoolgirl\" (1957), a song imitating their idols, the Everly Brothers. In 1963, they regrouped and were signed to Columbia Records as Simon &amp; Garfunkel. Their debut album, \"Wednesday Morning, 3 A.M.\" (1964), sold poorly; Simon returned to a solo career, this time in England, while Garfunkel resumed his studies at Columbia University. In 1965, a remixed version of \"The Sound of Silence\", became a US AM radio hit, reaching number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. They released their second album, \"Sounds of Silence\", in 1966, and toured colleges nationwide. They assumed more creative control on their third album, \"Parsley, Sage, Rosemary and Thyme\", released in 1966. Their music featured prominently in Mike Nichols's 1967 film \"The Graduate\", and in 1968 the soundtrack album and the duo's fourth album, \"Bookends,\" featuring the hit version of \"Mrs. Robinson\", alternated at number one on the \"Billboard\" Top 200.\nSimon and Garfunkel had a troubled relationship, leading to artistic disagreements and their breakup in 1970. Their final studio album, \"Bridge over Troubled Water\", released that January, became one of the world's best-selling albums. Following their split, Simon had a successful solo career, releasing albums including the acclaimed \"Graceland\" (1986). Garfunkel released successful singles such as \"All I Know\" (1973) and \"I Only Have Eyes for You\" (1975) and \"Bright Eyes\" (Britain's top single of 1979), and pursued acting, with leading roles in the Mike Nichols films \"Catch-22\" (1970) and \"Carnal Knowledge\" (1971) and in Nicolas Roeg's \"Bad Timing\" (1980). The duo have reunited several times; their 1981 concert in Central Park may have attracted more than 500,000 people, one of the largest concert attendances in history.\nSimon &amp; Garfunkel won seven Grammy Awards\u2014plus four Grammy Hall of Fame Awards\u2014and in 1990 were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Richie Unterberger described them as \"the most successful folk-rock duo of the 1960s\" and one of the most popular artists from the decade. They are among the best-selling music artists, having sold more than 100 million records. They were ranked 40th on \"Rolling Stone's\" 2010 list of the Greatest Artists of All Time and third on its list of the greatest duos.\nHistory.\n1953\u20131956: Early years.\nPaul Simon and Art Garfunkel grew up in the 1940s and 1950s in the predominantly Jewish neighborhood of Kew Gardens Hills in Queens, New York, three blocks away from one another. They attended the same schools: Public School 164 in Kew Gardens Hills, Parsons Junior High School, and Forest Hills High School. They were both fascinated by music; both listened to the radio and were taken with rock and roll as it emerged, particularly the Everly Brothers. Simon first noticed Garfunkel when Garfunkel was singing in a fourth-grade talent show, which Simon thought was a good way to attract girls. They became friends in 1953, when they appeared in a sixth grade adaptation of \"Alice in Wonderland\". They formed a streetcorner doo-wop group, the Peptones, with three friends, and learned to harmonize. They began performing as a duo at school dances.\nSimon and Garfunkel later attended Forest Hills High School, where in 1956 they wrote their first song, \"The Girl for Me\"; Simon's father sent a handwritten copy to the Library of Congress to register a copyright. While trying to remember the lyrics to the Everly Brothers song \"Hey Doll Baby\", they wrote \"Hey, Schoolgirl\", which they recorded for $25 at Sanders Recording Studio in Manhattan. While recording they were overheard by promoter Sid Prosen, who signed them to his independent label Big Records after speaking to their parents. They were both 15.\n1957\u20131964: Tom &amp; Jerry and early recordings.\nUnder Big Records, Simon and Garfunkel assumed the name Tom &amp; Jerry; Garfunkel named himself Tom Graph, a reference to his interest in mathematics, and Simon Jerry Landis, after the surname of a girl he had dated. Their first single, \"Hey, Schoolgirl\", was released with the B-side \"Dancin' Wild\" in 1957. Prosen, using the payola system, bribed DJ Alan Freed $200 to play the single on his radio show, where it became a nightly staple. \"Hey, Schoolgirl\" attracted regular rotation on nationwide AM pop stations, leading it to sell more than 100,000 copies and to land on \"Billboard\"'s charts at number 49 and number 45 in Canada. Prosen promoted the group heavily, getting them a headlining spot on Dick Clark's \"American Bandstand\" alongside Jerry Lee Lewis. Simon and Garfunkel shared approximately $4,000 from the song\u2014earning two percent each from royalties, the rest staying with Prosen. They released two more singles on Big Records (\"Our Song\" and \"That's My Story\") neither of them successful.\nAfter graduating from Forest Hills High School in 1958, the pair continued their education should a music career not unfold. Simon studied English at Queens College, City University of New York, and Garfunkel studied architecture before switching to art history at Columbia College, Columbia University. While still with Big Records as a duo, Simon released a solo single, \"True or False\", under the name \"True Taylor\". This upset Garfunkel, who regarded it as a betrayal; the emotional tension from the incident occasionally surfaced throughout their relationship.\nSimon and Garfunkel continued recording as solo artists: Garfunkel composed and recorded \"Private World\" for Octavia Records, and\u2014under the name Artie Garr\u2014\"Beat Love\" for Warwick Records; Simon recorded with the Mystics and Tico and the Triumphs, and wrote and recorded under the names Jerry Landis and Paul Kane. Simon also wrote and performed demos for other artists, working for a while with Carole King and Gerry Goffin.\nAfter graduating in 1963, Simon joined Garfunkel, who was still at Columbia University, to perform again as a duo, this time with a shared interest in folk music. Simon enrolled part-time in Brooklyn Law School. By late 1963, billing themselves as Kane &amp; Garr, they performed at Gerde's Folk City, a Greenwich Village club that hosted Monday night open mic performances. They performed three new songs\u2014\"Sparrow\", \"He Was My Brother\", and \"The Sound of Silence\"\u2014and attracted the attention of Columbia Records staffer Tom Wilson, a prominent A&amp;R man and producer (who would later become a key architect of Bob Dylan's transition from folk to rock). As a \"star producer\" for the label, he wanted to record \"He Was My Brother\" with a new British act, the Pilgrims. Simon convinced Wilson to let him and Garfunkel audition in the studio, where they performed \"The Sound of Silence\". At Wilson's urging, Columbia signed them.\nSimon &amp; Garfunkel's debut studio album, \"Wednesday Morning, 3 A.M.\", produced by Wilson, was recorded over three sessions in March 1964 and released in October. It contains five songs by Simon, three traditional folk songs, and four originals. Simon was adamant that they would no longer use stage names. Columbia set up a promotional showcase at Folk City on March 31, 1964, the duo's first public concert as Simon &amp; Garfunkel.\n1964\u20131965: Simon in England; Garfunkel in college.\n\"Wednesday Morning, 3 A.M.\" sold only 3,000 copies on release. Simon moved to England, where he toured small folk clubs and befriended folk artists such as Bert Jansch, Martin Carthy, Al Stewart, and Sandy Denny. He also met Kathy Chitty, who became the object of his affection and is the Kathy in \"Kathy's Song\" and \"America\".\nA small music publishing company, Lorna Music, licensed \"Carlos Dominguez\", a single Simon had recorded two years prior as Paul Kane, for a new recording by Val Doonican that sold well. Simon visited Lorna to thank them, and the meeting resulted in a publishing and recording contract. He signed to the Oriole label and released \"He Was My Brother\" as a single. Simon invited Garfunkel to stay for the summer of 1964.\nNear the end of the season, Garfunkel returned to Columbia for class. Simon also returned to the US, and resumed his studies at Brooklyn Law School for one semester, partially at his parents' insistence. He returned to England in January 1965, now certain that music was his calling. In the meantime, his landlady, Judith Piepe, had compiled a tape from his work at Lorna and sent it to the BBC in hopes they would play it. The demos aired on the \"Five to Ten\" morning show, and were instantly successful. Oriole had folded into CBS by that point, and hoped to record a new Simon album.\nSimon recorded his first solo album, \"The Paul Simon Songbook,\" in June 1965, featuring future Simon &amp; Garfunkel staples including \"I Am a Rock\" and \"April Come She Will\". CBS flew Wilson over to produce the record, and he stayed at Simon's flat. The album was released in August; although sales were poor, Simon felt content with his future in England. Garfunkel graduated in 1965, returning to Columbia University to pursue a master's degree in mathematics.\n1965\u20131966: Mainstream breakthrough and success.\nIn the United States, Dick Summer, a late-night DJ at WBZ in Boston, played \"The Sound of Silence\"; it became popular with a college audience. It was picked up the next day along the East Coast of the United States. When Wilson heard about this new wave of interest, he took inspiration from the success of the folk-rock hybrid that he had created with Dylan in \"Like a Rolling Stone\" and crafted a rock remix of \"Sound of Silence\" using studio musicians. The remix was issued in September 1965, and it eventually reached the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. Wilson did not inform the duo of his plan, and Simon was \"horrified\" when he first heard it.\nBy January 1966, \"The Sound of Silence\" had topped the Hot 100, selling more than one million copies. Simon reunited with Garfunkel in New York, leaving Chitty and his friends in England behind. CBS demanded a new album to be called \"Sounds of Silence\" to ride the wave of the hit. Recorded in three weeks and consisting of rerecorded songs from \"The Paul Simon Songbook\" plus four new tracks, \"Sounds of Silence\" was rush-released in mid-January 1966, peaking at number 21 \"Billboard\" Top LPs chart. A week later, \"Homeward Bound\" was released as a single, entering the USA top ten, followed by \"I Am a Rock\" peaking at number three. The duo supported the recordings with a nationwide tour of the US including a performance during the first Spring Weekend of the University of Massachusetts Boston where the duo was the headline act. CBS continued its promotion by re-releasing \"Wednesday Morning, 3 A.M.\", which charted at number 30. Despite the success, the duo was derided by some critics as a manufactured imitation of folk music.\nSince they considered \"The Sounds of Silence\" a \"rush job\" to capitalize on their sudden success, Simon &amp; Garfunkel spent more time crafting the follow-up. For the first time, Simon insisted on total control in aspects of recording. Work began in 1966 and took nine months. Garfunkel considered the recording of \"Scarborough Fair\" to be the point at which they stepped into the role of producer, as they were constantly beside engineer Roy Halee mixing. \"Parsley, Sage, Rosemary and Thyme\" was issued in October 1966, following the release of several singles and sold-out college campus shows. The duo resumed their college circuit tour eleven days later, crafting an image that was described as \"alienated\", \"weird\", and \"poetic\". Manager Mort Lewis also was responsible for this public perception, as he withheld them from television appearances unless they were allowed to play an uninterrupted set or choose the setlist. Simon, then 26, felt he had \"made it\" into an upper echelon of rock and roll while retaining artistic integrity; according to his biographer Marc Eliot, this made him \"spiritually closer to Bob Dylan than to, say, Bobby Darin\". The duo chose William Morris as their booking agency after a recommendation from Wally Amos, also a friend of Wilson's.\nDuring the sessions for \"Parsley\", Simon and Garfunkel recorded \"A Hazy Shade of Winter\"; it was released as a single, peaking at number 13 on the national charts. \"At the Zoo\", recorded in early 1967 for a single release, charted at number 16. Simon began work for their next album around this time, telling \"High Fidelity\" he was no longer interested in singles. He developed writer's block, which prevented the duo from releasing an album in 1967. Many other successful artists at the time were expected to release two or three albums each year, and the lack of productivity worried Columbia executives. Amid concerns for Simon's apparent idleness, Columbia Records chairman Clive Davis arranged for up-and-coming producer John Simon to kick-start the recording. Simon was distrustful of label executives; on one occasion, he and Garfunkel recorded a meeting with Davis, who was giving a \"fatherly talk\" on speeding up production, to laugh at it later. The duo's rare television appearances at this time saw them performing on network broadcasts as \"The Ed Sullivan Show\", \"The Mike Douglas Show\", and \"The Andy Williams Show\" in 1966, and twice on \"The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour\" in 1967.\nMeanwhile, director Mike Nichols, at that time filming \"The Graduate\", had become fascinated with Simon &amp; Garfunkel's records, listening to them extensively before and after filming. He met Davis to ask for permission to license Simon &amp; Garfunkel music for his film. Davis viewed it as a perfect fit and envisioned a best-selling soundtrack album. Simon was not as receptive and was cautious of \"selling out\". After meeting Nichols and being impressed by his wit and the script, he agreed to write new songs for the film. Leonard Hirshan, a powerful agent at William Morris, negotiated a deal that paid Simon $25,000 to submit three songs to Nichols and producer Lawrence Turman. When Nichols was not impressed by Simon's songs \"Punky's Dilemma\" and \"Overs\", Simon and Garfunkel offered another, incomplete song, which became \"Mrs. Robinson\"; Nichols loved it.\n1967\u20131968: Studio time and low profile.\nSimon &amp; Garfunkel's fourth studio album, \"Bookends\", was recorded in fits and starts from late 1966 to early 1968. Although the album had long been planned, work did not begin in earnest until late 1967. The duo were signed under an older contract that specified the label pay for sessions, and Simon &amp; Garfunkel took advantage of this, hiring viola and brass players and percussionists. The record's brevity reflects its concise and perfectionist production; the team spent more than 50 hours recording \"Punky's Dilemma\", for example, and rerecorded vocal parts, sometimes note by note, until they were satisfied. Garfunkel's songs and voice took a lead role on some of the songs, and the harmonies for which the duo was known gradually disappeared. For Simon, \"Bookends\" represented the end of the collaboration and became an early indicator of his intentions to go solo.\nPrior to release, the band helped put together and performed at the Monterey Pop Festival, which signaled the beginning of the Summer of Love on the West Coast. \"Fakin' It\" was issued as a single that summer and found only modest success on AM radio; the duo were much more focused on the rising FM format, which played album tracks and treated their music with respect. In January 1968, the duo appeared on a \"Kraft Music Hall\" special, \"Three for Tonight\", performing ten songs, largely taken from their previous album. \"Bookends\" was released by Columbia Records in April 1968, 24 hours before the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. which spurred nationwide outrage and riots. The album debuted on the \"Billboard\" Top LPs in the issue dated April 27, 1968, climbing to number one and staying at that position for seven non-consecutive weeks; it remained on the chart as a whole for 66 weeks. \"Bookends\" received such heavy orders weeks in advance of its release that Columbia was able to apply for award certification before copies left the warehouse, a fact it touted in magazine ads. The album became the duo's best-selling to date, helped by the attention for the \"Graduate\" soundtrack ten weeks earlier, creating an initial combined sales figure of more than five million units.\nDavis had predicted this, and suggested raising the list price of \"Bookends\" by one dollar to $5.79, above the then standard retail price, to compensate for a large poster included in vinyl copies. Simon scoffed and viewed it as charging a premium on \"what was sure to be that year's best-selling Columbia album\". According to biographer Marc Eliot, Davis was \"offended by what he perceived as their lack of gratitude for what he believed was his role in turning them into superstars\". Rather than implement Davis' plan, Simon &amp; Garfunkel signed a contract extension with Columbia that guaranteed them a higher royalty rate. At the 1969 Grammy Awards, the lead single \"Mrs. Robinson\" became the first rock and roll song to receive Record of the Year, and also won Best Contemporary Pop Performance by a Duo or Group.\n1969\u20131970: Growing apart and final album.\n\"Bookends\", alongside the \"Graduate\" soundtrack, made Simon &amp; Garfunkel the biggest rock duo in the world. Simon was approached by producers to write music for films or license songs; he turned down Franco Zeffirelli, who was preparing to film \"Brother Sun, Sister Moon\", and John Schlesinger, who was preparing to film \"Midnight Cowboy\". In addition to Hollywood proposals, Simon declined a request by producers from the Broadway show \"Jimmy Shine\" (starring Simon's friend Dustin Hoffman, who also starred in \"Midnight Cowboy\"). He collaborated briefly with Leonard Bernstein on a sacred mass before withdrawing from the project due to \"finding it perhaps too far afield from his comfort zone\".\nMike Nichols, director of \"The Graduate\", was impressed by the duo's performance styles and asked them both to play parts in his next film, \"Catch-22\". Garfunkel was cast as Captain Nately, and Simon as Dunbar. However, the screenwriter, Buck Henry, felt the film was already crowded with characters, and wrote Simon's part out. Garfunkel left to begin filming in Mexico in January 1969 (this is the subject of the song \"The Only Living Boy in New York\"). Simon remained behind and prepared for them to record their next album after filming ended, but the film's production lasted longer than expected, forcing Garfunkel to return to the studio intermittently. The resulting frictions exacerbated existing tensions in the duo's relationship; Simon wrote in his memoir: \"I think if Artie had become a big movie star he would have left. Instead of just being the guy who sang Paul Simon songs, he could be Art Garfunkel, a big star all by himself \u2026 This made me think about how I could still be the guy who wrote songs and sing them. I didn't need Artie.\"\nFollowing the end of filming in October, the first performance of what was planned to be the last Simon &amp; Garfunkel tour took place in Ames, Iowa. The US leg ended in the sold-out Carnegie Hall on November 27. Meanwhile, the duo, working with director Charles Grodin, produced an hourlong CBS special, \"Songs of America\", a mixture of scenes featuring notable political events and leaders concerning the US, such as the Vietnam War, Martin Luther King Jr., John F. Kennedy's funeral procession, Cesar Chavez and the Poor People's March. It was broadcast only once, due to tension at the network regarding its content. The BBC said that \"one million viewers responded by turning the dial and watching the figure skating on NBC instead.\"\n\"Bridge over Troubled Water\", Simon &amp; Garfunkel's final studio album, was released in January 1970 and charted in more than 11 countries, topping the charts in 10, including the \"Billboard\" Top LP's chart in the US and the UK Albums Chart. It was the best-selling album in 1970, 1971 and 1972 and was at that time the best-selling album of all time. It was also CBS Records' best-selling album before the release of Michael Jackson's \"Thriller\" in 1982. The album topped the \"Billboard\" charts for 10 weeks and stayed in the charts for 85 weeks. In the United Kingdom, the album topped the charts for 35 weeks, and spent 285 weeks in the top 100, from 1970 to 1975. It has since sold more than 25 million copies worldwide. \"Bridge over Troubled Water\", the lead single, reached number one in five countries and became the duo's biggest seller. The song has been covered by more than 50 artists, including Elvis Presley, Johnny Cash, Aretha Franklin, Jim Nabors, Charlotte Church, Maynard Ferguson, Willie Nelson, Roy Orbison, Michael W. Smith, Josh Groban, and The Mormon Tabernacle Choir. \"Cecilia\", the follow-up, reached number four in the US, and \"El Condor Pasa\" hit number 18. A brief British tour followed the album release, and the duo's last concert as Simon &amp; Garfunkel took place at Forest Hills Stadium. In 1971, the album won six awards at the 13th Annual Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year.\n1971\u20131990: Breakup, rifts, and reunions.\nThe recording of \"Bridge over Troubled Water\" was difficult, and Simon and Garfunkel's relationship had deteriorated. \"At that point, I just wanted out\", Simon later said.\nIn 1972, Simon told \"Rolling Stone\" magazine:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;During the making of \"Bridge over Troubled Water\" there were a lot of times when it just wasn't fun to work together. It was very hard work and it was complex, and both of us thought \u2013 I think Artie said that he felt that he didn't want to record \u2013 and I know I said I felt that if I had to go through these kind of personality abrasions, I didn't want to continue to do it. Then when the album was finished Artie was going to [act in the film] \"Carnal Knowledge\" and I went to do an album by myself. We didn't say that's the end. We didn't know if it was the end or not. But it became apparent by the time the movie was out and by the time my album was out that it was over.\nAt the urging of his wife, Peggy Harper, Simon called Davis to confirm the duo's breakup. For the next few years, they spoke only two or three times a year.\nIn the 1970s, the duo reunited several times. Their first reunion was Together for McGovern, a benefit concert for presidential candidate George McGovern at New York's Madison Square Garden in June 1972. In 1975, they reconciled when they visited a recording session with John Lennon and Harry Nilsson. For the rest of the year, they attempted to make the reunion work, but their collaboration only yielded one song, \"My Little Town\", that was featured on Simon's \"Still Crazy After All These Years\" and Garfunkel's \"Breakaway\", both released in 1975. That year, Garfunkel joined Simon for a medley of three songs on \"Saturday Night Live,\" guest-hosted by Simon. In 1977, Garfunkel joined Simon for a brief performance of their songs on \"The Paul Simon Special\", and later that year they recorded a cover of Sam Cooke's \"(What a) Wonderful World\" with James Taylor. Old tensions appeared to dissipate upon Garfunkel's return to New York in 1978, when the duo began interacting more often. On May 1, 1978, Simon joined Garfunkel for a concert held at Carnegie Hall to benefit the hearing disabled.\nBy 1980, the duo's solo careers were not doing well. To help boost morale for New Yorkers during a serious economic decline in the city, concert promoter Ron Delsener suggested a free concert in Central Park. Delsener contacted Simon with the idea of a Simon &amp; Garfunkel reunion, and once Garfunkel had agreed, plans were made. The concert, held on September 19, 1981, attracted more than 500,000 people, at that time the largest ever concert attendance. Warner Bros. Records released a live album of the show, \"The Concert in Central Park\", which went double platinum in the US. A 90-minute recording of the concert was sold to Home Box Office (HBO) for more than $1\u00a0million. The concert created a renewed interest in Simon &amp; Garfunkel's work. They had several \"heart-to-heart talks\", attempting to put their disagreements behind them. The duo undertook a world tour beginning in May 1982, but their relationship grew contentious; for the majority of the tour, they did not speak to one another.\nWarner Bros. pushed for the duo to extend the tour and release a new studio album. Simon had new material ready, and, according to Simon, \"Artie made a persuasive case that he could make it into a natural duo record.\" They quarreled again as Garfunkel refused to learn the songs in the studio and would not give up his longstanding cannabis and cigarette habits, despite Simon's requests. Instead, the material became Simon's 1983 album \"Hearts and Bones\". A spokesperson said: \"Paul simply felt the material he wrote is so close to his own life that it had to be his own record. Art was hoping to be on the album, but I'm sure there will be other projects that they will work on together.\" Another rift opened when the lengthy recording of Simon's 1986 album \"Graceland\" prevented Garfunkel from working with engineer Roy Halee on his Christmas album \"The Animals' Christmas\" (1985). In 1986, Simon said he and Garfunkel remained friends and got on well, \"like when we were 10 years old\", when they were not working together.\n1990\u20132010: Awards and final tour.\nIn 1990, Simon and Garfunkel were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Garfunkel thanked Simon, calling him \"the person who most enriched my life by putting those songs through me\"; Simon responded, \"Arthur and I agree about almost nothing. But it's true, I have enriched his life quite a bit.\" After performing three songs, the duo left without speaking. In August 1991, Simon staged his own concert in Central Park, released as a live album, \"Paul Simon's Concert in the Park,\" a few months later. He declined an offer from Garfunkel to perform with him at the park.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe are indescribable. You'll never capture it. It's an ingrown, deep friendship. Yes, there is deep love in there. But there's also shit.\n\u2013 Garfunkel describing his decades-long relationship with Simon\nBy 1993, the relationship had thawed, and Simon invited Garfunkel on an international tour. Following a sold-out 21-date run at the Paramount Theater in New York and an appearance at that year's Bridge School Benefit in California, they toured the Far East. They became acrimonious again for the rest of the decade. Simon thanked Garfunkel at his 2001 induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a solo artist: \"I regret the ending of our friendship. I hope that some day before we die we will make peace with each other,\" adding after a pause, \"No rush.\"\nIn 2003, Simon and Garfunkel received a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 45th Annual Grammy Awards, for which the promoters convinced them to open with a performance of \"The Sound of Silence\". The performance was satisfying for both, and they planned a full-scale reunion tour. The Old Friends tour began in October 2003 and played to sold-out audiences across the United States for 40 dates until mid-December, earning an estimated $123\u00a0million. A second US leg commenced in June 2004, consisting of 20 cities. Following a 12-city run in Europe in 2004, they ended their nine-month tour with a free concert along Via dei Fori Imperiali, in front of the Colosseum in Rome, on July 31, 2004. It attracted 600,000 fans, more than their Concert in Central Park. In 2005, Simon and Garfunkel performed three songs for a Hurricane Katrina benefit concert in Madison Square Garden, including a performance with singer Aaron Neville.\nIn February 2009, Simon and Garfunkel reunited for three songs during Simon's two-night engagement at New York's Beacon Theatre. This led to a reunion tour of Asia and Australia in June and July 2009. On October 29, 2009, they performed five songs at the 25th Anniversary Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Concert at Madison Square Garden. In January 2010, Garfunkel developed vocal problems following damage to his vocal cords as the result of an incident in which he had briefly choked on a piece of lobster. Their headlining set several months later at the 2010 New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival was difficult for Garfunkel. \"I was terrible, and crazy nervous. I leaned on Paul Simon and the affection of the crowd,\" he told \"Rolling Stone\" several years later. Garfunkel was diagnosed with vocal cord paresis, and the remaining tour dates were canceled. They reunited two months later to perform \"Mrs. Robinson\" at an American Film Institute Life Achievement Award tribute to director Mike Nichols, in what \"Rolling Stone\" suggested might have been their last performance together. Garfunkel's manager, John Scher, informed Simon's camp that Garfunkel would be ready within a year, which did not happen, damaging relations between the two. Simon continued to publicly wish Garfunkel better health and praised his \"angelic\" voice. Garfunkel regained his vocal strength over the course of the next four years, performing shows in a Harlem theater and to underground audiences.\nIn 2014, Garfunkel told \"Rolling Stone\" that he believed he and Simon would tour again, but said: \"I know that audiences all over the world like Simon and Garfunkel. I'm with them. But I don't think Paul Simon's with them.\" In a 2015 interview with Nigel Farndale for \"The Daily Telegraph\", Garfunkel said: \"How can you walk away from this lucky place on top of the world, Paul? What's going on with you, you idiot? How could you let that go, jerk?\" In 2016, Simon denied that a reunion was possible as he did not enjoy performing under their fractious relationship. In November 2024, Garfunkel said he had been a \"fool\" and that he and Simon had reconciled as friends. In April 2025, Garfunkel was asked about a potential reunion and said \"we may give it a try and see where it leads\".\nMusical style.\nOver the course of their career, Simon &amp; Garfunkel's music gradually moved from a basic folk rock sound to incorporate more experimental elements for the time, including Latin and gospel music. According to \"Rolling Stone\", their music struck a chord among lonely, alienated young adults near the end of the 1960s. According to \"Pitchfork\", though Simon &amp; Garfunkel were a highly regarded folk act \"distinguished by their intuitive harmonies and Paul Simon's articulate songwriting\", they were more conservative than the folk music revivalists of Greenwich Village. By the late 1960s, they had become the \"folk establishment ... primarily unthreatening and accessible, which forty years later makes them an ideal gateway act to the weirder, harsher, more complex folkies of the 60s counterculture\". Their later albums explored more ambitious production techniques and incorporated elements of gospel, rock, R&amp;B, and classical, revealing a \"voracious musical vocabulary\".\nCritical reception and legacy.\nSimon &amp; Garfunkel received criticism at the height of their success. In 1968, \"Rolling Stone\" critic Arthur Schmidt described their music as \"questionable\u00a0... it exudes a sense of process, and it is slick, and nothing too much happens.\" \"New York Times\" critic Robert Shelton said that the duo had \"a kind of Mickey Mouse, timid, contrived\" approach. According to Richie Unterberger of AllMusic, their clean sound and muted lyricism \"cost them some hipness points during the psychedelic era ... the pair inhabited the more polished end of the folk-rock spectrum and was sometimes criticized for a certain collegiate sterility.\" He noted that some critics regard Simon's later solo work as superior to Simon &amp; Garfunkel.\nIn 2003, \"Rolling Stone\"'s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list included \"Bridge over Troubled Water\" at number 51, \"Parsley, Sage, Rosemary and Thyme\" at number 201, \"Bookends\" at number 233, and \"Greatest Hits\" at number 293. And in 2004, on their 500 Greatest Songs of All Time list, \"Rolling Stone\" included \"Bridge over Troubled Water\" at number 47, \"The Boxer\" at number 105, and \"The Sound of Silence\" at number 156.\nAwards.\nThe Grammy Awards are held annually by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Simon &amp; Garfunkel have won 9 total competitive awards, 4 Hall of Fame awards, and a Lifetime Achievement Award.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26824", "revid": "50282848", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26824", "title": "State Street Corporation", "text": "Global financial services company\nState Street Corporation is an American multinational financial services and bank holding company headquartered at One Congress Street in Boston. It is the second-oldest continuously operating U.S. bank, tracing its roots to Union Bank, chartered in 1792. As of the third quarter of 2025, State Street is one of the world's largest asset managers and custodians, with approximately US$5.4 trillion in assets under management and US$51.7 trillion under custody and administration.\nState Street operates globally through three main divisions: Global Services (custody and fund administration), Global Advisors (asset management), and Global Markets (trading and research). It is considered a systemically important bank by the Financial Stability Board and ranks among the \"Big Three\" index fund managers alongside BlackRock and Vanguard.\nThe company is ranked 198th on the \"Fortune\" 500 as of 2025. The company is on the list of the banks that are too big to fail published by the Financial Stability Board. It is rated by Visual Capitalist as the third U.S. bank by uninsured deposits, with 91.2% of deposits being uninsured.\nCurrent operations.\nInvestment servicing: State Street Global Services.\nState Street Bank and Trust Company, also known as State Street Global Services, is the securities services division of State Street that provides asset owners and managers with securities services (e.g. custody, corporate actions), fund accounting (pricing and valuation), and administration (financial reporting, tax, compliance, and legal) services. Global Services handles assets from many classes, including stocks, derivatives, exchange-traded funds, fixed income assets, private equity, and real estate. Global Services also provides outsourcing for operations activities and handles US$10.2 trillion of middle-office assets.\nInvestment management: State Street Investment Management.\nState Street Investment Management is the investment management division of State Street that provides asset management, research, and advisory services to corporations, mutual funds, insurance companies, and other institutional investors. Global Advisors develops both passive management and active management strategies using both quantitative and fundamental approaches.\n1993 SPDR innovation.\nIn 1993, the company created the SPDR S&amp;P 500 Trust ETF, the first exchange-traded fund (ETF), and is now one of the largest ETF providers worldwide. Trading on SPDR began January 29, 1993.\nState Street Global Markets.\nGlobal Markets is State Street's securities business that offers research, trading, and securities lending services for foreign exchange, equities, fixed income, and derivatives. To avoid a conflict of interest, the company does not run proprietary trading books. Global Markets maintains trading desks in Boston, Hong Kong, London, Singapore, Sydney, Toronto, Tokyo and S\u00e3o Paulo.\nHistory.\nThe company traces its roots to Union Bank, which received a charter in 1792 from Massachusetts Governor John Hancock. It was the third bank to be chartered in Boston and its office was at the corner of State and Exchange Streets. In 1865, Union Bank received a national charter and became the National Union Bank of Boston. The bank later built a headquarters at Washington and State streets. The company is named after State Street in Boston, which was known as the \"Great Street to the Sea\" in the 18th century as Boston became a flourishing maritime capital.\nState Street Deposit &amp; Trust Co opened in July 1891. The name was shortened to State Street Trust Company in 1897. It became the custodian of the first U.S. mutual fund in 1924, the Massachusetts Investors Trust (now MFS Investment Management).\n20th century.\nState Street and National Union merged in October 1925. The merged bank took the State Street name, but National Union was the nominal survivor, and it operated under National Union's charter, thus giving the current entity its rank among the oldest banks in the United States.\nThe company merged with Second National Bank in 1955 and with the Rockland-Atlas National Bank in 1961.\nIn 1966, the company completed construction of the State Street Bank Building, a new headquarters building, the first high-rise office tower in downtown Boston.\nIn 1972, the company opened its first international office in Munich.\nIn 1973, as a 50/50 joint venture with DST Systems, the company formed Boston Financial Data Services, a provider of shareholder record-keeping, intermediary and investor services, and regulatory compliance. More than 100 top staff from IBM were hired by State Street as it set about implementing IBM mainframe computer systems.\nIn 1975, William Edgerly became president and chief executive officer of the bank and shifted the company's strategy from commercial banking to investments and securities processing.\nDuring the 1980s and 1990s, the company opened offices in Montreal, Toronto, Dublin, London, Paris, Dubai, Sydney, Wellington, Hong Kong, and Tokyo.\nBy 1992, most of State Street's revenue came from fees for holding securities, settling trades, keeping records, and performing accounting. In 1994, the company formed State Street Global Advisors, a global asset management business.\nIn 1995, State Street acquired Investors Fiduciary Trust of Kansas City for $162 million from DST Systems and Kemper Financial Services. In 1996, Bank of New York acquired the unit investment trust servicing business of Investors Fiduciary Trust Co., Kansas City, Mo.\nIn 1997, State Street setup its office in Singapore.\nIn 1999, State Street sold its retail and commercial banking businesses to Citizens Financial Group.\n21st century.\nIn 1990, State Street Bank Luxembourg was founded, and as of 2018[ [update]] is the largest player in the country's fund industry by assets.\nIn 2003, the company acquired the securities services division of Deutsche Bank for $1.5 billion. The company also sold its corporate trust business to U.S. Bancorp for $725 million. Also in 2003, State Street sold its private asset management business to U.S. Trust.\nIn July 2007, the company acquired Investors Bank &amp; Trust for $4.5 billion.\nIn October 2008, the United States Department of the Treasury invested $2 billion in the company as part of the Troubled Asset Relief Program and in July 2009, the company became the first major financial firm to repay the Treasury.\nIn 2010, the company acquired Mourant International Finance Administration. It also acquired the securities services group of Intesa Sanpaolo for $1.87 billion. In December 2010, the company announced that it would be retrenching 5% of its workforce and effectively reducing the hourly wages of remaining employees by 10% via increased standard work hours.\nIn November 2011, the company was named as amongst the world's 29 systemic banks.\nIn 2012, the company acquired Goldman Sachs Administration Services, a hedge fund administrator, for $550 million.\nIn November 2014, the company sold SSARIS Advisors, its hedge fund unit, to senior management.\nIn 2016, State Street launched a program called Beacon, focused on cutting costs and improving reporting technology. Their main focus was to shrink their US workforce in order to bolster profits in excess of $2.5 billion (2018 figures). Also in 2016, the company acquired the asset management business of General Electric.\nIn 2017, the company announced that Jay Hooley, the chief executive officer of the company, would retire, to be succeeded by Ronald P. O\u2019Hanley, then vice chairman, president and CEO of State Street Global Advisors.\nIn 2018, State Street completed its acquisition of Charles River Development, a Burlington, Massachusetts provider of investment management software. The deal closed October 1, 2018, at a cost of approximately $2.6 billion that will be financed by the suspension of share repurchases and the issuing of common and preferred equity. News of the acquisition led to a drop in State Street shares of nearly 10% with share prices remaining flat since the purchase.\nIn January 2019, State Street announced that it planned to lay off 1,500 employees, increasing the number to 2,300 in July. During that period, the company shifted their workforce from the United States to countries like China, India and Poland and operated under a hiring freeze. The increased overseas hiring resulted in a net gain of employment of over 3,000.\nIn September 2021, State Street agreed to buy Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Co.'s investor-services business for $3.5 billion in cash. Following continued scrutiny in receiving regulatory approvals, the deal was mutually agreed to be dropped in November 2022.\nIn February 2025, State Street agreed to acquire Mizuho Financial Group's global custody and related business outside of Japan. This covered approximately US $580 billion in assets under custody and US $24 billion under administration. The transaction is expected to close in late 2025.\nControversies.\nCurrency trade fraud.\nIn 2009, California alleged on behalf of its pension funds CalPERS and CalSTRS that State Street had committed fraud on currency trades handled by the custodian bank.\nNon-disclosure of short position.\nOn February 28, 2012, State Street Global Advisors entered into a consent order with the Massachusetts Securities Division. The Division was investigating the firm's role as the investment manager of a $1.65 billion (USD) hybrid collateralized debt obligation. The investigation resulted in a fine of $5 million (USD) for the non-disclosure of certain initial investors taking a short position on portions of the CDO.\nShareholder complaints.\nDuring the May 2012 annual shareholders meeting, chairman and chief executive Jay Hooley was shouted down on numerous occasions by protesters in relation to the outsourcing and other grievances.\nUndisclosed commissions.\nOn January 18, 2017, State Street agreed to pay $64.6 million to resolve U.S. investigations into what prosecutors said was a scheme to defraud six clients through secret commissions on billions of dollars of trades.\n\"Fearless Girl\" statue.\nIn March 2017, State Street Global Advisors commissioned a statue called \"Fearless Girl\" by Kristen Visbal and placed it temporarily in the Financial District, Manhattan, in front of the Wall Street icon \"Charging Bull\". The statue is an advertisement for an index fund which comprises gender diverse companies that have a higher percentage of women among their senior leadership. While some have seen it as an encouragement of women in business, some women criticized the statue as \"corporate feminism\" that violated their own feminist principles. In October 2017, the company paid $5 million to settle a lawsuit charging that it had paid certain female and black executives less than their male and white peers.\nClimate change.\nState Street announced in January 2020 that State Street Global Advisors will vote against directors of companies in major stock indices that do not meet targets for environmental, social, and governance changes. According to Morningstar Proxy Data, State Street, \"supported a majority of the climate-related disclosure requests that shareholders placed on the ballot,\" during the 2020 proxy season.\nInvestments in China.\nIn February 2025, a group of 17 U.S. state attorneys general criticized State Street for making improper or inadequate disclosures about investments in China.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26825", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26825", "title": "Spanish language", "text": "Romance language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nSpanish () or Castilian () is a Romance language of the Indo-European language family that evolved from the Vulgar Latin spoken on the Iberian Peninsula of Europe. It originated in the Kingdom of Castile, a historical kingdom in north-central Spain. Today, it is a global language with 519 million native speakers, mainly in the Americas and Spain, and about 636 million speakers total, including second-language speakers. Spanish is the official language of 20 countries, as well as one of the six official languages of the United Nations. Spanish is the world's second-most spoken native language after Mandarin Chinese; the world's fourth-most spoken language overall after English, Mandarin Chinese, and Hindustani (Hindi-Urdu); and the world's most widely spoken Romance language. The country with the largest population of native speakers is Mexico.\nSpanish is part of the Ibero-Romance language group, in which the language is also known as \"Castilian\" (). The group evolved from several dialects of Vulgar Latin in Iberia after the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century. The oldest Latin texts with traces of Spanish come from mid-northern Iberia in the 9th century, and the first systematic written use of the language happened in Toledo, a prominent city of the Kingdom of Castile, in the 13th century. Spanish colonialism in the early modern period spurred the introduction of the language to overseas locations, most notably to the Americas.\nAs a Romance language, Spanish is a descendant of Latin. Around 75% of modern Spanish vocabulary is Latin in origin, including Latin borrowings from Ancient Greek. Alongside English and French, it is also one of the most taught foreign languages throughout the world. Spanish is well represented in the humanities and social sciences. Spanish is also the third most used language on the internet by number of users after English and Chinese and the second most used language by number of websites after English.\nSpanish is used as an official language by many international organizations, including the United Nations, European Union, Organization of American States, Union of South American Nations, Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, African Union, and others.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nName of the language and etymology.\nName of the language.\nIn Spain and some other parts of the Spanish-speaking world, Spanish is called not only but also (Castilian), the language from the Kingdom of Castile, contrasting it with other languages spoken in Spain such as Galician, Basque, Asturian, Catalan/Valencian, Aragonese, Occitan and other minor languages.\nThe Spanish Constitution of 1978 uses the term to define the official language of the whole of Spain, in contrast to (lit.\u2009'the other Spanish languages'). Article III reads as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCastilian is the official Spanish language of the State.\u00a0... The other Spanish languages shall also be official in their respective Autonomous Communities...\nThe Royal Spanish Academy (), on the other hand, currently uses the term in its publications. However, from 1713 to 1923, it called the language .\nThe (a language guide published by the Royal Spanish Academy) states that, although the Royal Spanish Academy prefers to use the term in its publications when referring to the Spanish language, both terms\u2014 and \u2014are regarded as synonymous and equally valid.\nEtymology.\nThe term is related to Castile ( or archaically ), the kingdom where the language was originally spoken. The name \"Castile\", in turn, is usually assumed to be derived from ('castle').\nIn the Middle Ages, the language spoken in Castile was generically referred to as and later also as . Later in the period, it gained geographical specification as (, ), , and ultimately simply as (noun).\nDifferent etymologies have been suggested for the term (Spanish). According to the Royal Spanish Academy, derives from the Occitan word and that, in turn, derives from the Vulgar Latin * ('of Hispania'). Hispania was the Roman name for the entire Iberian Peninsula.\nThere are other hypotheses apart from the one suggested by the Royal Spanish Academy. Spanish philologist Ram\u00f3n Men\u00e9ndez Pidal suggested that the classic or took the suffix from Vulgar Latin, as happened with other words such as (Breton) or (Saxon).\nHistory.\nLike the other Romance languages, the Spanish language evolved from Vulgar Latin, which was brought to the Iberian Peninsula by the Romans during the Second Punic War, beginning in 210 BC. Several pre-Roman languages (also called Paleohispanic languages)\u2014some distantly related to Latin as Indo-European languages, and some that are not related at all\u2014were previously spoken in the Iberian Peninsula. These languages included Proto-Basque, Iberian, Lusitanian, Celtiberian and Gallaecian.\nThe first documents to show traces of what is today regarded as the precursor of modern Spanish are from the 9th century. Throughout the Middle Ages and into the modern era, the most important influences on the Spanish lexicon came from neighboring Romance languages\u2014Mozarabic (Andalusi Romance), Navarro-Aragonese, Leonese, Catalan/Valencian, Portuguese, Galician, Occitan, and later, French and Italian. Spanish also borrowed a considerable number of words from Andalusi Arabic, and a few from Basque. In addition, many more words were borrowed from Latin through the influence of written language and the liturgical language of the Church. The loanwords were taken from both Classical Latin and Renaissance Latin, the form of Latin in use at that time.\nAccording to the theories of Ram\u00f3n Men\u00e9ndez Pidal, local sociolects of Vulgar Latin evolved into Spanish, in the north of Iberia, in an area centered in the city of Burgos, and this dialect was later brought to the city of Toledo, where the written standard of Spanish was first developed, in the 13th century. In this formative stage, Spanish developed a strongly differing variant from its close cousin, Leonese, and, according to some authors, was distinguished by a heavy Basque influence (see Iberian Romance languages). This distinctive dialect spread to southern Spain with the advance of the , and meanwhile gathered a sizable lexical influence from the Arabic of Al-Andalus, much of it indirectly, through the Romance Mozarabic dialects (some 4,000 Arabic-derived words, make up around 8% of the language today). The written standard for this new language was developed in the cities of Toledo, in the 13th to 16th centuries, and Madrid, from the 1570s.\nThe development of the Spanish sound system from that of Vulgar Latin exhibits most of the changes that are typical of Western Romance languages, including lenition of intervocalic consonants (thus Latin &gt; Spanish ). The diphthongization of Latin stressed short and \u2014which occurred in open syllables in French and Italian, but not at all in Catalan or Portuguese\u2014is found in both open and closed syllables in Spanish, as shown in the following table:\nSpanish is marked by palatalization of the Latin double consonants (geminates) and (thus Latin\n &gt; Spanish , and Latin &gt; Spanish\nThe consonant written or in Latin and pronounced in Classical Latin had probably \"fortified\" to a bilabial fricative in Vulgar Latin. In early Spanish (but not in Catalan or Portuguese) it merged with the consonant written \"b\" (a bilabial with plosive and fricative allophones). In modern Spanish, there is no difference between the pronunciation of orthographic and .\nTypical of Spanish (as also of neighboring Gascon extending as far north as the Gironde estuary, and found in a small area of Calabria), attributed by some scholars to a Basque substratum was the mutation of Latin initial into whenever it was followed by a vowel that did not diphthongize. The , still preserved in spelling, is now silent in most varieties of the language, although in some Andalusian and Caribbean dialects, it is still aspirated in some words. Because of borrowings from Latin and neighboring Romance languages, there are many -/- doublets in modern Spanish: and (both Spanish for \"Ferdinand\"), and (both Spanish for \"smith\"), and (both Spanish for \"iron\"), and and (both words pertaining to depth in Spanish, though means \"bottom\", while means \"deep\"); additionally, (\"to make\") is cognate to the root word of (\"to satisfy\"), and (\"made\") is similarly cognate to the root word of (\"satisfied\").\nCompare the examples in the following table:\nSome consonant clusters of Latin also produced characteristically different results in these languages, as shown in the examples in the following table:\nIn the 15th and 16th centuries, Spanish underwent a dramatic change in the pronunciation of its sibilant consonants, known in Spanish as the , which resulted in the distinctive velar pronunciation of the letter \u27e8j\u27e9 and\u2014in a large part of Spain\u2014the characteristic interdental (\"th-sound\") for the letter \u27e8z\u27e9 (and for \u27e8c\u27e9 before \u27e8e\u27e9 or \u27e8i\u27e9). See History of Spanish (Modern development of the Old Spanish sibilants) for details.\nThe , written in Salamanca in 1492 by Elio Antonio de Nebrija, was the first grammar written for a modern European language. According to a popular anecdote, when Nebrija presented it to Queen Isabella I, she asked him what was the use of such a work, and he answered that language is the instrument of empire. In his introduction to the grammar, dated 18 August 1492, Nebrija wrote that \"... language was always the companion of empire.\"\nFrom the 16th century onwards, the language was taken to the Spanish-discovered America and the Spanish East Indies via Spanish colonization of America. Miguel de Cervantes, author of \"Don Quixote\", is such a well-known reference in the world that Spanish is often called (\"the language of Cervantes\").\nIn the 20th century, Spanish was introduced to Equatorial Guinea and the Western Sahara, and to areas of the United States that had not been part of the Spanish Empire, such as Spanish Harlem in New York City. For details on borrowed words and other external influences upon Spanish, see Influences on the Spanish language.\nGeographical distribution.\nSpanish is the primary language in 20 countries worldwide. As of 2025, it is estimated that about 519 million people speak Spanish as a native language, making it the second most spoken language by number of native speakers. An additional 117 million speak Spanish as a second or foreign language, making it the fourth most spoken language in the world overall after English, Mandarin Chinese, and Hindi with a total number of 636 million speakers. Spanish is also the third most used language on the Internet, after English and Chinese.\nEurope.\nSpanish is the official language of Spain. Upon the emergence of the Castilian Crown as the dominant power in the Iberian Peninsula by the end of the Middle Ages, the Romance vernacular associated with this polity became increasingly used in instances of prestige and influence, and the distinction between \"Castilian\" and \"Spanish\" started to become blurred. Hard policies imposing the language's hegemony in an intensely centralising Spanish state were established from the 18th century onward.\nOther European territories in which it is also widely spoken include Gibraltar and Andorra.\nSpanish is also spoken by immigrant communities in other European countries, such as the United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Germany. Spanish is an official language of the European Union.\nAmericas.\nHispanic America.\nToday, the majority of the Spanish speakers live in Hispanic America. Nationally, Spanish is the official language\u2014either \"de facto\" or \"de jure\"\u2014of Argentina, Bolivia (co-official with 36 indigenous languages), Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico (co-official with 63 indigenous languages), Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay (co-official with Guaran\u00ed), Peru (co-official with Quechua, Aymara, and \"the other indigenous languages\"), Puerto Rico (co-official with English), Uruguay, and Venezuela.\nUnited States.\nSpanish language has a long history in the territory of the current-day United States dating back to the 16th century. In the wake of the 1848 Guadalupe Hidalgo Treaty, hundreds of thousands of Spanish speakers became a minoritized community in the United States. The 20th century saw further massive growth of Spanish speakers in areas where they had been hitherto scarce.\nAccording to the 2020 census, over 60 million people of the U.S. population were of Hispanic or Hispanic American by origin. In turn, 41.8 million people in the United States aged five or older speak Spanish at home, or about 13% of the population. Spanish predominates in the unincorporated territory of Puerto Rico, where it is also an official language along with English.\nSpanish is by far the most common second language in the country, with over 50 million total speakers if non-native or second-language speakers are included. While English is the de facto national language of the country, Spanish is often used in public services and notices at the federal and state levels. Spanish is also used in administration in the state of New Mexico. The language has a strong influence in major metropolitan areas such as those of Los Angeles, San Diego, Miami, San Antonio, New York, San Francisco, Dallas, Tucson and Phoenix of the Arizona Sun Corridor, as well as more recently, Chicago, Las Vegas, Boston, Denver, Houston, Indianapolis, Oklahoma City, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Salt Lake City, Atlanta, Nashville, Orlando, Tampa, Raleigh and Baltimore-Washington, D.C. due to 20th- and 21st-century immigration.\nRest of the Americas.\nAlthough Spanish has no official recognition in the former British colony of Belize (known until 1973 as British Honduras) where English is the sole official language, according to the 2022 census, 54% of the total population are able to speak the language.\nDue to its proximity to Spanish-speaking countries and small existing native Spanish speaking minority, Trinidad and Tobago has implemented Spanish language teaching into its education system. The Trinidadian and Tobagonian government launched the \"Spanish as a First Foreign Language\" (SAFFL) initiative in March 2005.\nSpanish has historically had a significant presence on the Dutch Caribbean islands of Aruba, Bonaire and Cura\u00e7ao (ABC Islands) throughout the centuries and in present times. The majority of the populations of each island (especially Aruba) speak Spanish at varying although often high degrees of fluency. The local language Papiamentu (or Papiamento in Aruba) is heavily influenced by Venezuelan Spanish.\nIn addition to sharing most of its borders with Spanish-speaking countries, the creation of Mercosur in the early 1990s induced a favorable situation for the promotion of Spanish language teaching in Brazil. In 2005, the National Congress of Brazil approved a bill, signed into law by the President, making it mandatory for schools to offer Spanish as an alternative foreign language course in both public and private secondary schools in Brazil. In September 2016 this law was revoked by Michel Temer after the impeachment of Dilma Rousseff. In many border towns and villages along Paraguay and Uruguay, a mixed language known as Portu\u00f1ol is spoken.\nAfrica.\nSub-Saharan Africa.\nEquatorial Guinea is the only Spanish-speaking country located entirely in Africa, with the language introduced during the Spanish colonial period. Enshrined in the constitution as an official language (alongside French and Portuguese), Spanish features prominently in the Equatoguinean education system and is the primary language used in government and business. Spanish is spoken as a native language by a small minority in Equatorial Guinea, primarily in larger cities. The Instituto Cervantes estimates that 87.7% of the population is fluent in Spanish. The proportion of proficient Spanish speakers in Equatorial Guinea exceeds the proportion of proficient speakers in other West and Central African nations of their respective colonial languages.\nSpanish is spoken by very small communities in Angola due to Cuban influence from the Cold War and in South Sudan among South Sudanese natives that relocated to Cuba during the Sudanese wars and returned for their country's independence.\nNorth Africa and Macaronesia.\nSpanish is also spoken in the integral territories of Spain in Africa, namely the cities of Ceuta and Melilla and the Canary Islands, located in the Atlantic Ocean some off the northwest of the African mainland. The Spanish spoken in the Canary Islands traces its origins back to the Castilian conquest in the 15th century, and, in addition to a resemblance to Western Andalusian speech patterns, it also features strong influence from the Spanish varieties spoken in the Americas, which in turn have also been influenced historically by Canarian Spanish. The Spanish spoken in North Africa by native bilingual speakers of Arabic or Berber who also speak Spanish as a second language features characteristics involving the variability of the vowel system.\nWhile far from its heyday during the Spanish protectorate in Morocco, the Spanish language has some presence in northern Morocco, stemming for example from the availability of certain Spanish-language media. According to a 2012 survey by Morocco's Royal Institute for Strategic Studies (IRES), penetration of Spanish in Morocco reaches 4.6% of the population. Many northern Moroccans have rudimentary knowledge of Spanish, with Spanish being particularly significant in areas adjacent to Ceuta and Melilla. Spanish also has a presence in the education system of the country (through either selected education centers implementing Spain's education system, primarily located in the North, or the availability of Spanish as foreign language subject in secondary education).\nIn Western Sahara, formerly Spanish Sahara, a primarily Hassaniya Arabic-speaking territory, Spanish was officially spoken as the language of the colonial administration during the late 19th and 20th centuries. Today, Spanish is present in the partially-recognized Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic as its secondary official language, and in the Sahrawi refugee camps in Tindouf (Algeria), where the Spanish language is still taught as a second language, largely by Cuban educators.\nSpanish is also an official language of the African Union.\nAsia.\nSpanish was an official language of the Philippines from the beginning of Spanish administration in 1565 to a constitutional change in 1973. During Spanish colonization, it was the language of government, trade, and education, and was spoken as a first language by Spaniards and educated Filipinos (\"Ilustrados\"). Despite a public education system set up by the colonial government, by the end of Spanish rule in 1898, only about 10% of the population had knowledge of Spanish, mostly those of Spanish descent or elite standing.\nSpanish continued to be official and used in Philippine literature and press during the early years of American administration after the Spanish\u2013American War but was eventually replaced by English as the primary language of administration and education by the 1920s. Nevertheless, despite a significant decrease in influence and speakers, Spanish remained an official language of the Philippines upon independence in 1946, alongside English and Filipino, a standardized version of Tagalog.\nSpanish was briefly removed from official status in 1973 but reimplemented under the administration of Ferdinand Marcos two months later. It remained an official language until the ratification of the present constitution in 1987, in which it was re-designated as a voluntary and optional auxiliary language. Additionally, the constitution, in its Article XIV, stipulates that the government shall provide the people of the Philippines with a Spanish-language translation of the country's constitution. In recent years changing attitudes among non-Spanish speaking Filipinos have helped spur a revival of the language, and starting in 2009 Spanish was reintroduced as part of the basic education curriculum in a number of public high schools, becoming the largest foreign language program offered by the public school system, with over 7,000 students studying the language in the 2021\u20132022 school year alone. The local business process outsourcing industry has also helped boost the language's economic prospects. Today, while the actual number of proficient Spanish speakers is around 400,000, or under 0.5% of the population, a new generation of Spanish speakers in the Philippines has likewise emerged, though speaker estimates vary widely.\nAside from standard Spanish, a Spanish-based creole language called Chavacano developed in the southern Philippines. However, it is not mutually intelligible with Spanish. The number of Chavacano-speakers was estimated at 1.2 million in 1996. The local languages of the Philippines also retain significant Spanish influence, with many words derived from Mexican Spanish, owing to the administration of the islands by Spain through New Spain until 1821, until direct governance from Madrid afterwards to 1898.\nOceania.\nSpanish is the official and most spoken language on Easter Island, which is geographically part of Polynesia in Oceania and politically part of Chile. However, Easter Island's traditional language is Rapa Nui, an Eastern Polynesian language.\nAs a legacy of comprising the former Spanish East Indies, Spanish loan words are present in the local languages of Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, Marshall Islands and Micronesia.\nIn addition, in Australia and New Zealand, there are native Spanish communities, resulting from emigration from Spanish-speaking countries (mainly from the Southern Cone).\nSpanish speakers by country.\n20 countries and one United States territory speak Spanish officially, and the language has a significant unofficial presence in the rest of the United States along with Andorra, Belize and the territory of Gibraltar.\nGrammar.\nMost of the grammatical and typological features of Spanish are shared with the other Romance languages. Spanish is a fusional language. The noun and adjective systems exhibit two genders and two numbers. In addition, articles and some pronouns and determiners have a neuter gender in their singular form. There are about fifty conjugated forms per verb, with 3 tenses: past, present, future; 2 aspects for past: perfective, imperfective; 4 moods: indicative, subjunctive, conditional, imperative; 3 persons: first, second, third; 2 numbers: singular, plural; 3 verboid forms: infinitive, gerund, and past participle. The indicative mood is the unmarked one, while the subjunctive mood expresses uncertainty or indetermination, and is commonly paired with the conditional, which is a mood used to express \"would\" (as in, \"I would eat if I had food\"); the imperative is a mood to express a command, commonly a one word phrase \u2013 \"\u00a1Di!\" (\"Talk!\").\nVerbs express T\u2013V distinction by using different persons for formal and informal addresses. (For a detailed overview of verbs, see Spanish verbs and Spanish irregular verbs.)\nSpanish syntax is considered right-branching, meaning that subordinate or modifying constituents tend to be placed after head words. The language uses prepositions (rather than postpositions or inflection of nouns for case), and usually\u2014though not always\u2014places adjectives after nouns, as do most other Romance languages.\nSpanish is classified as a subject\u2013verb\u2013object language; however, as in most Romance languages, constituent order is highly variable and governed mainly by topicalization and focus. It is a \"pro-drop\", or \"null-subject\" language\u2014that is, it allows the deletion of subject pronouns when they are pragmatically unnecessary. Spanish is described as a \"verb-framed\" language, meaning that the \"direction\" of motion is expressed in the verb while the \"mode\" of locomotion is expressed adverbially (e.g. \"subir corriendo\" or \"salir volando\"; the respective English equivalents of these examples\u2014'to run up' and 'to fly out'\u2014show that English is, by contrast, \"satellite-framed\", with mode of locomotion expressed in the verb and direction in an adverbial modifier).\nPhonology.\nThe Spanish phonological system evolved from that of Vulgar Latin. Its development exhibits some traits in common with other Western Romance languages, others with the neighboring Hispanic varieties\u2014especially Leonese and Aragonese\u2014as well as other features unique to Spanish. Spanish is alone among its immediate neighbors in having undergone frequent aspiration and eventual loss of the Latin initial sound (e.g. Cast. vs. Leon. and Arag. ). The Latin initial consonant sequences , , and in Spanish typically merge as (originally pronounced ), while in Aragonese they are preserved in most dialects, and in Leonese they present a variety of outcomes, including , , and . Where Latin had before a vowel (e.g. ) or the ending , (e.g. ), Old Spanish produced , that in Modern Spanish became the velar fricative (, ), whereas neighboring languages have the palatal lateral (e.g. Portuguese , ; Catalan , ).\nSegmental phonology.\nThe Spanish phonemic inventory consists of five vowel phonemes (, , , , ) and 17 to 19 consonant phonemes (the exact number depending on the dialect). The main allophonic variation among vowels is the reduction of the high vowels and to glides\u2014 and respectively\u2014when unstressed and adjacent to another vowel. Some instances of the mid vowels and , determined lexically, alternate with the diphthongs and respectively when stressed, in a process that is better described as morphophonemic rather than phonological, as it is not predictable from phonology alone.\nThe Spanish consonant system is characterized by (1) three nasal phonemes, and one or two (depending on the dialect) lateral phoneme(s), which in syllable-final position lose their contrast and are subject to assimilation to a following consonant; (2) three voiceless stops and the affricate ; (3) three or four (depending on the dialect) voiceless fricatives; (4) a set of voiced obstruents\u2014, , , and sometimes \u2014which alternate between approximant and plosive allophones depending on the environment; and (5) a phonemic distinction between the \"tapped\" and \"trilled\" \"r\"-sounds (single \u27e8r\u27e9 and double \u27e8rr\u27e9 in orthography).\nIn the following table of consonant phonemes, is marked with an asterisk (*) to indicate that it is preserved only in some dialects. In most dialects it has been merged with in the merger called . Similarly, is also marked with an asterisk to indicate that most dialects do not distinguish it from (see ), although this is not a true merger but an outcome of different evolution of sibilants in southern Spain.\nThe phoneme is in parentheses () to indicate that it appears only in loanwords. Each of the voiced obstruent phonemes , , , and appears to the right of a \"pair\" of voiceless phonemes, to indicate that, while the \"voiceless\" phonemes maintain a phonemic contrast between plosive (or affricate) and fricative, the \"voiced\" ones alternate allophonically (i.e. without phonemic contrast) between plosive and approximant pronunciations.\nProsody.\nSpanish is classified by its rhythm as a syllable-timed language: each syllable has approximately the same duration regardless of stress.\nSpanish intonation varies significantly according to dialect but generally conforms to a pattern of falling tone for declarative sentences and wh-questions (who, what, why, etc.) and rising tone for yes/no questions. There are no syntactic markers to distinguish between questions and statements and thus, the recognition of declarative or interrogative depends entirely on intonation.\nStress most often occurs on any of the last three syllables of a word, with some rare exceptions at the fourth-to-last or earlier syllables. Stress tends to occur as follows:\nIn addition to the many exceptions to these tendencies, there are numerous minimal pairs that contrast solely on stress such as ('sheet') and ('savannah'); ('boundary'), ('he/she limits') and ('I limited'); ('liquid'), ('I sell off') and ('he/she sold off').\nThe orthographic system unambiguously reflects where the stress occurs: in the absence of an accent mark, the stress falls on the last syllable unless the last letter is \u27e8n\u27e9, \u27e8s\u27e9, or a vowel, in which cases the stress falls on the next-to-last (penultimate) syllable. Exceptions to those rules are indicated by an acute accent mark over the vowel of the stressed syllable. (See Spanish orthography.)\nSpeaker population.\nSpanish is the official, or national language in 18 countries and one territory in the Americas, Spain, and Equatorial Guinea. With a population of over 410 million, Hispanophone America accounts for the vast majority of Spanish speakers, of which Mexico is the most populous Spanish-speaking country. In the European Union, Spanish is the mother tongue of 8% of the population, with an additional 7% speaking it as a second language. Additionally, Spanish is the second most spoken language in the United States and is by far the most popular foreign language among students. In 2015, it was estimated that over 50 million Americans spoke Spanish, about 41 million of whom were native speakers. With continued immigration and increased use of the language domestically in public spheres and media, the number of Spanish speakers in the United States is expected to continue growing over the forthcoming decades.\nDialectal variation.\nWhile being mutually intelligible, there are important variations (phonological, grammatical, and lexical) in the spoken Spanish of the various regions of Spain and throughout the Spanish-speaking areas of the Americas.\nThe national variety with the most speakers is Mexican Spanish. It is spoken by more than twenty percent of the world's Spanish speakers (more than 112\u00a0million of the total of more than 500\u00a0million, according to the table above). One of its main features is the reduction or loss of unstressed vowels, mainly when they are in contact with the sound /s/.\nIn Spain, northern dialects are popularly thought of as closer to the standard, although positive attitudes toward southern dialects have increased significantly in the last 50 years. The speech from the educated classes of Madrid is the standard variety for use on radio and television in Spain and it is indicated by many as the one that has most influenced the written standard for Spanish. Central (European) Spanish speech patterns have been noted to be in the process of merging with more innovative southern varieties (including Eastern Andalusian and Murcian), as an emerging interdialectal levelled \"koine\" buffered between the Madrid's traditional national standard and the Seville speech trends.\nPhonology.\nThe four main phonological divisions are based respectively on (1) the phoneme , (2) the debuccalization of syllable-final , (3) the sound of the spelled \u27e8s\u27e9, (4) and the phoneme .\nMorphology.\nThe main morphological variations between dialects of Spanish involve differing uses of pronouns, especially those of the second person and, to a lesser extent, the object pronouns of the third person.\nVoseo.\nVirtually all dialects of Spanish make the distinction between a formal and a familiar register in the second-person singular and thus have two different pronouns meaning \"you\": in the formal and either or in the familiar (and each of these three pronouns has its associated verb forms), with the choice of or varying from one dialect to another. The use of and its verb forms is called . In a few dialects, all three pronouns are used, with , , and denoting respectively formality, familiarity, and intimacy.\nIn , is the subject form (, \"you say\") and the form for the object of a preposition (, \"I am going with you\"), while the direct and indirect object forms, and the possessives, are the same as those associated with : (\"You know your friends respect you\").\nThe verb forms of the general are the same as those used with except in the present tense (indicative and imperative) verbs. The forms for generally can be derived from those of (the traditional second-person familiar \"plural\") by deleting the glide , or , where it appears in the ending: &gt; ; &gt; , () &gt; (), () &gt; ().\nIn Central American , the and forms differ in the present subjunctive as well:\nIn Chilean , almost all forms are distinct from the corresponding standard -forms.\nThe use of the pronoun with the verb forms of () is called \"pronominal \". Conversely, the use of the verb forms of with the pronoun ( or ) is called \"verbal \". In Chile, for example, verbal is much more common than the actual use of the pronoun , which is usually reserved for highly informal situations.\nDistribution in Spanish-speaking regions of the Americas.\nAlthough is not used in Spain, it occurs in many Spanish-speaking regions of the Americas as the primary spoken form of the second-person singular familiar pronoun, with wide differences in social consideration. Generally, it can be said that there are zones of exclusive use of (the use of ) in the following areas: almost all of Mexico, the West Indies, Panama, most of Colombia, Peru, Venezuela and coastal Ecuador.\n as a cultured form alternates with as a popular or rural form in Bolivia, in the north and south of Peru, in Andean Ecuador, in small zones of the Venezuelan Andes (and most notably in the Venezuelan state of Zulia), and in a large part of Colombia. Some researchers maintain that can be heard in some parts of eastern Cuba, and others assert that it is absent from the island.\n exists as the second-person usage with an intermediate degree of formality alongside the more familiar in Chile, in the Venezuelan state of Zulia, on the Caribbean coast of Colombia, in the Azuero Peninsula in Panama, in the Mexican state of Chiapas, and in parts of Guatemala.\nAreas of generalized include Argentina, Nicaragua, eastern Bolivia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Costa Rica, Paraguay, Uruguay and the Colombian departments of Antioquia, Caldas, Risaralda, Quindio and Valle del Cauca.\nUstedes.\n functions as formal and informal second-person plural in all of Hispanic America, the Canary Islands, and parts of Andalusia. It agrees with verbs in the 3rd person plural. Most of Spain maintains the formal/familiar distinction with and respectively. The use of with the second person plural is sometimes heard in Andalusia, but it is non-standard.\nUsted.\n is the usual second-person singular pronoun in a formal context, but it is used jointly with the third-person singular voice of the verb. It is used to convey respect toward someone who is a generation older or is of higher authority (\"you, sir\"/\"you, ma'am\"). It is also used in a \"familiar\" context by many speakers in Colombia and Costa Rica and in parts of Ecuador and Panama, to the exclusion of or . This usage is sometimes called \"ustedeo\" in Spanish.\nIn Central America, especially in Honduras, is often used as a formal pronoun to convey respect between the members of a romantic couple. is also used that way between parents and children in the Andean regions of Ecuador, Colombia and Venezuela.\nThird-person object pronouns.\nMost speakers use (and the prefers) the pronouns and for direct objects (masculine and feminine respectively, regardless of animacy, meaning \"him\", \"her\", or \"it\"), and for indirect objects (regardless of gender or animacy, meaning \"to him\", \"to her\", or \"to it\"). The usage is sometimes called \"etymological\", as these direct and indirect object pronouns are a continuation, respectively, of the accusative and dative pronouns of Latin, the ancestor language of Spanish.\nA number of dialects (more common in Spain than in the Americas) use additional rules for the pronouns, such as animacy, or count noun vs. mass noun, rather than just direct vs. indirect object. The ways of using the pronouns in such varieties are called \", \", or \"\", according to which respective pronoun, , , or , covers more than just the etymological usage ( as a direct object, or or as an indirect object).\nVocabulary.\nSome words can be significantly different in different Hispanophone countries. Most Spanish speakers can recognize other Spanish forms even in places where they are not commonly used, but Spaniards generally do not recognize specifically American usages. For example, Spanish , and (respectively, 'butter', 'avocado', 'apricot') correspond to (word used for lard in Peninsular Spanish), , and , respectively, in Argentina, Chile (except ), Paraguay, Peru (except and ), and Uruguay. In the healthcare context, an assessment of the Spanish translation of the QWB-SA identified some regional vocabulary choices and US-specific concepts, which cannot be successfully implemented in Spain without adaptation.\nVocabulary.\nSpanish vocabulary has been influenced by several languages. As in other European languages, Classical Greek words (Hellenisms) are abundant in the terminologies of several fields, including art, science, politics, nature, etc. Its vocabulary has also been influenced by Arabic, having developed during the Al-Andalus era in the Iberian Peninsula, with around 8% of its vocabulary having Arabic lexical roots. It may have also been influenced by Basque, Iberian, Celtiberian, Visigothic, and other neighboring Ibero-Romance languages. Additionally, it has absorbed vocabulary from other languages, particularly other Romance languages such as French, Mozarabic, Portuguese, Galician, Catalan, Occitan, and Sardinian, as well as from Quechua, Nahuatl, and other indigenous languages of the Americas. In the 18th century, words taken from French referring above all to fashion, cooking and bureaucracy were added to the Spanish lexicon. In the 19th century, new loanwords were incorporated, especially from English and German, but also from Italian in areas related to music, particularly opera and cooking. In the 20th century, the pressure of English in the fields of technology, computing, science and sports was greatly accentuated.\nIn general, Hispanic America is more susceptible to loanwords from English or Anglicisms. For example: mouse (computer mouse) is used in Hispanic America, in Spain \"rat\u00f3n\" is used. This happens largely due to closer contact with the United States. For its part, Spain is known by the use of Gallicisms or words taken from neighboring France (such as the Gallicism \"ordenador\" in European Spanish, in contrast to the Anglicism \"computador\" or \"computadora\" in American Spanish).\nRelation to other languages.\nSpanish is closely related to the other West Iberian Romance languages, including Asturian, Aragonese, Galician, Ladino, Leonese, Mirandese and Portuguese. It is somewhat less similar, to varying degrees, from other members of the Romance language family.\nIt is generally acknowledged that Portuguese and Spanish speakers can communicate in written form, with varying degrees of mutual intelligibility. Mutual intelligibility of the \"written\" Spanish and Portuguese languages is high, lexically and grammatically. \"Ethnologue\" gives estimates of the lexical similarity between related languages in terms of precise percentages. For Spanish and Portuguese, that figure is 89%, although phonologically the two languages are quite dissimilar. Italian on the other hand, is phonologically similar to Spanish, while sharing lower lexical and grammatical similarity of 82%. Mutual intelligibility between Spanish and French or between Spanish and Romanian is lower still, given lexical similarity ratings of 75% and 71% respectively. Comprehension of Spanish by French speakers who have not studied the language is much lower, at an estimated 45%. In general, thanks to the common features of the writing systems of the Romance languages, interlingual comprehension of the written word is greater than that of oral communication.\nThe following table compares the forms of some common words in several Romance languages:\n1. In Romance etymology, Latin terms are given in the Accusative since most forms derive from this case.\n2. As in \"us very selves\", an emphatic expression.\n3. Also in early modern Portuguese (e.g. \"The Lusiads\"), and in Galician.\n4. Alternatively in French.\n5. in many Southern Italian dialects and languages.\n6. Medieval Catalan (e.g. \"Llibre dels fets\").\n7. Modified with the learned suffix \"-ci\u00f3n\".\n8. Depending on the written norm used (see Reintegrationism).\n9. From Basque \"esku\", \"hand\" + \"erdi\", \"half, incomplete\". This negative meaning also applies for Latin \"sinistra(m)\" (\"dark, unfortunate\").\n10. Romanian \"ca\u0219\" (from Latin c\u0101sevs) means a type of cheese. The universal term for cheese in Romanian is \"br\u00e2nz\u0103\" (from unknown etymology).\nJudaeo-Spanish.\nJudaeo-Spanish, also known as Ladino, is a variety of Spanish which preserves many features of medieval Spanish and some old Portuguese and is spoken by descendants of the Sephardi Jews who were expelled from Spain in the 15th century. While in Portugal the conversion of Jews occurred earlier and the assimilation of New Christians was overwhelming, in Spain the Jews kept their language and identity. The relationship of Ladino and Spanish is therefore comparable with that of the Yiddish language to German. Ladino speakers today are almost exclusively Sephardi Jews, with family roots in Turkey, Greece, or the Balkans, and living mostly in Israel, Turkey, and the United States, with a few communities in Hispanic America. Judaeo-Spanish lacks the Native American vocabulary which was acquired by standard Spanish during the Spanish colonial period, and it retains many archaic features which have since been lost in standard Spanish. It contains, however, other vocabulary which is not found in standard Spanish, including vocabulary from Hebrew, French, Greek and Turkish, and other languages spoken where the Sephardim settled.\nJudaeo-Spanish is in serious danger of extinction because many native speakers today are elderly as well as elderly \"olim\" (immigrants to Israel) who have not transmitted the language to their children or grandchildren. However, it is experiencing a minor revival among Sephardi communities, especially in music. In Hispanic American communities, the danger of extinction is also due to assimilation by modern Spanish.\nA related dialect is Haketia, the Judaeo-Spanish of northern Morocco. This too, tended to assimilate with modern Spanish, during the Spanish occupation of the region.\nWriting system.\nSpanish is written in the Latin script, with the addition of the character \u27e8\u00f1\u27e9 (, representing the phoneme , a letter distinct from \u27e8n\u27e9, although typographically composed of an \u27e8n\u27e9 with a tilde). Formerly the digraphs \u27e8ch\u27e9 (, representing the phoneme ) and \u27e8ll\u27e9 (, representing the phoneme or ), were also considered single letters. However, the digraph \u27e8rr\u27e9 (, 'strong r', , 'double r', or simply ), which also represents a distinct phoneme , was not similarly regarded as a single letter. Since 1994 \u27e8ch\u27e9 and \u27e8ll\u27e9 have been treated as letter pairs for collation purposes, though they remained a part of the alphabet until 2010. Words with \u27e8ch\u27e9 are now alphabetically sorted between those with \u27e8cg\u27e9 and \u27e8ci\u27e9, instead of following \u27e8cz\u27e9 as they used to. The situation is similar for \u27e8ll\u27e9.\nThus, the Spanish alphabet has the following 27 letters:\nSince 2010, none of the digraphs () are considered letters by the Royal Spanish Academy.\nThe letters and are used only in words and names coming from foreign languages (, etc.).\nWith the exclusion of a very small number of regional terms such as (see Toponymy of Mexico), pronunciation can be entirely determined from spelling. Under the orthographic conventions, a typical Spanish word is stressed on the syllable before the last if it ends with a vowel (not including \u27e8y\u27e9) or with a vowel followed by \u27e8n\u27e9 or an \u27e8s\u27e9; it is stressed on the last syllable otherwise. Exceptions to this rule are indicated by placing an acute accent on the stressed vowel.\nThe acute accent is used, in addition, to distinguish between certain homophones, especially when one of them is a stressed word and the other one is a clitic: compare ('the', masculine singular definite article) with ('he' or 'it'), or ('you', object pronoun) with ('tea'), (preposition 'of') versus ('give' [formal imperative/third-person present subjunctive]), and (reflexive pronoun) versus ('I know' or imperative 'be').\nThe interrogative pronouns (, , , , etc.) also receive accents in direct or indirect questions, and some demonstratives (, , , etc.) can be accented when used as pronouns. Accent marks used to be omitted on capital letters (a widespread practice in the days of typewriters and the early days of computers when only lowercase vowels were available with accents), although the advises against this and the orthographic conventions taught at schools enforce the use of the accent.\nWhen is written between and a front vowel or , it indicates a \"hard g\" pronunciation. A diaeresis indicates that it is not silent as it normally would be (e.g., , 'stork', is pronounced ; if it were written *, it would be pronounced *).\nInterrogative and exclamatory clauses are introduced with inverted question and exclamation marks ( and , respectively) and closed by the usual question and exclamation marks.\nOrganizations.\nRoyal Spanish Academy.\nThe Royal Spanish Academy (), founded in 1713, together with the 21 other national ones (see Association of Spanish Language Academies), exercises a standardizing influence through its publication of dictionaries and widely respected grammar and style guides.\nBecause of influence and for other sociohistorical reasons, a standardized form of the language (Standard Spanish) is widely acknowledged for use in literature, academic contexts and the media.\nAssociation of Spanish Language Academies.\nThe Association of Spanish Language Academies (, or ) is the entity which regulates the Spanish language. It was created in Mexico in 1951 and represents the union of all the separate academies in the Spanish-speaking world. It comprises the academies of 23 countries, ordered by date of academy foundation: Spain (1713), Colombia (1871), Ecuador (1874), Mexico (1875), El Salvador (1876), Venezuela (1883), Chile (1885), Peru (1887), Guatemala (1887), Costa Rica (1923), Philippines (1924), Panama (1926), Cuba (1926),\nParaguay (1927), Dominican Republic (1927), Bolivia (1927), Nicaragua (1928), Argentina (1931), Uruguay (1943), Honduras (1949), Puerto Rico (1955), United States (1973) and Equatorial Guinea (2016).\nCervantes Institute.\nThe ('Cervantes Institute') is a worldwide nonprofit organization created by the Spanish government in 1991. This organization has branches in 45 countries, with 88 centers devoted to the Spanish and Hispanic American cultures and Spanish language. The goals of the Institute are to promote universally the education, the study, and the use of Spanish as a second language, to support methods and activities that help the process of Spanish-language education, and to contribute to the advancement of the Spanish and Hispanic American cultures in non-Spanish-speaking countries. The institute's 2015 report \"El espa\u00f1ol, una lengua viva\" (Spanish, a living language) estimated that there were 559\u00a0million Spanish speakers worldwide. Its latest annual report \"El espa\u00f1ol en el mundo 2018\" (Spanish in the world 2018) counts 577\u00a0million Spanish speakers worldwide. Among the sources cited in the report is the U.S. Census Bureau, which estimates that the U.S. will have 138\u00a0million Spanish speakers by 2050, making it the biggest Spanish-speaking nation on earth, with Spanish the mother tongue of almost a third of its citizens.\nOfficial use by international organizations.\nSpanish is one of the official languages of the United Nations, the European Union, the World Trade Organization, the Organization of American States, the Organization of Ibero-American States, the African Union, the Union of South American Nations, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, the Latin Union, the Caricom, the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Inter-American Development Bank, and numerous other international organizations.\nSample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Spanish:\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in English:\n\"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26826", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26826", "title": "Sodium", "text": "element with atomic number 11 (Na)\nSodium is a chemical element; it has symbol\u00a0Na (from Neo-Latin ) and atomic number\u00a011. It is a soft, silvery-white, highly reactive metal. Sodium is an alkali metal, being in group 1 of the periodic table. Its only stable isotope is 23Na. The free metal does not occur in nature and must be prepared from compounds. Sodium is the sixth most abundant element in the Earth's crust and exists in numerous minerals such as feldspars, sodalite, and halite (NaCl). Many salts of sodium are highly water-soluble: sodium ions have been leached by the action of water from the Earth's minerals over eons, and thus sodium and chlorine are the most common dissolved elements by weight in the oceans.\nSodium was first isolated by Humphry Davy in 1807 by the electrolysis of sodium hydroxide. Among many other useful sodium compounds, sodium hydroxide (lye) is used in soap manufacture, and sodium chloride (edible salt) is a de-icing agent and a nutrient for animals including humans.\nSodium is an essential element for all animals and some plants. Sodium ions are the major cation in the extracellular fluid (ECF) and as such are the major contributor to the ECF osmotic pressure. Animal cells actively pump sodium ions out of the cells by means of the sodium\u2013potassium pump, an enzyme complex embedded in the cell membrane, in order to maintain a roughly ten-times higher concentration of sodium ions outside the cell than inside. In nerve cells, the sudden flow of sodium ions into the cell through voltage-gated sodium channels enables transmission of a nerve impulse in a process called the action potential.\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical.\nSodium at standard temperature and pressure is a soft silvery metal that combines with oxygen in the air, forming sodium oxides. Bulk sodium is usually stored in oil or an inert gas. Sodium metal can be easily cut with a knife. It is a good conductor of electricity and heat.\nThe melting (98\u00a0\u00b0C) and boiling (883\u00a0\u00b0C) points of sodium are lower than those of lithium but higher than those of the heavier alkali metals potassium, rubidium, and caesium, following periodic trends down the group. These properties change dramatically at elevated pressures: at 1.5\u00a0Mbar, the color changes from silvery metallic to black; at 1.9\u00a0Mbar the material becomes transparent with a red color; and at 3 Mbar, sodium is a clear and transparent solid. All of these high-pressure allotropes are insulators and electrides.\nIn a flame test, sodium and its compounds glow yellow because the excited 3s electrons of sodium emit a photon when they fall from 3p to 3s; the wavelength of this photon corresponds to the D line at about 589.3\u00a0nm. Spin-orbit interactions involving the electron in the 3p orbital split the D line into two, at 589.0 and 589.6\u00a0nm; hyperfine structures involving both orbitals cause many more lines.\nIsotopes.\nTwenty isotopes of sodium are known, but only 23Na is stable. 23Na is created in the carbon-burning process in stars by fusing two carbon atoms together; this requires temperatures above 600 megakelvins and a star of at least three solar masses. Two radioactive, cosmogenic isotopes are the byproduct of cosmic ray spallation: 22Na has a half-life of 2.6 years and 24Na, a half-life of 15 hours; all other isotopes have a half-life of less than one minute.\nTwo nuclear isomers have been discovered, the longer-lived one being 24mNa with a half-life of around 20.2 milliseconds. Acute neutron radiation, as from a nuclear criticality accident, converts some of the stable 23Na in human blood to 24Na; the neutron radiation dosage of a victim can be calculated by measuring the concentration of 24Na relative to 23Na.\nChemistry.\nSodium atoms have 11 electrons, one more than the stable configuration of the noble gas neon. The first and second ionization energies are 495.8\u00a0kJ/mol and 4562\u00a0kJ/mol, respectively. As a result, sodium usually forms ionic compounds involving the Na+ cation.\nMetallic sodium.\nMetallic sodium is generally less reactive than potassium and more reactive than lithium. Sodium metal is highly reducing, with the standard reduction potential for the Na+/Na couple being \u22122.71 volts, though potassium and lithium have even more negative potentials.\nSalts and oxides.\nSodium compounds are of immense commercial importance, being particularly central to industries producing glass, paper, soap, and textiles. The most important sodium compounds are table salt (NaCl), soda ash (Na2CO3), baking soda (NaHCO3), caustic soda (NaOH), sodium nitrate (NaNO3), di- and tri-sodium phosphates, sodium thiosulfate (Na2S2O3\u00b75H2O), and borax (Na2B4O7\u00b710H2O). In compounds, sodium is usually ionically bonded to water and anions and is viewed as a hard Lewis acid.\nMost soaps are sodium salts of fatty acids. Sodium soaps have a higher melting temperature (and seem \"harder\") than potassium soaps.\nLike all the alkali metals, sodium reacts exothermically with water. The reaction produces caustic soda (sodium hydroxide) and flammable hydrogen gas. When burned in air, it forms primarily sodium peroxide with some sodium oxide.\nAqueous solutions.\nSodium tends to form water-soluble compounds, such as halides, sulfates, nitrates, carboxylates and carbonates. The main aqueous species are the aquo complexes [Na(H2O)\"n\"]+, where \"n\" = 4\u20138; with \"n\" = 6 indicated from X-ray diffraction data and computer simulations.\nDirect precipitation of sodium salts from aqueous solutions is rare because sodium salts typically have a high affinity for water. An exception is sodium bismuthate (NaBiO3), which is insoluble in cold water and decomposes in hot water. Because of the high solubility of its compounds, sodium salts are usually isolated as solids by evaporation or by precipitation with an organic antisolvent, such as ethanol; for example, only 0.35\u00a0g/L of sodium chloride will dissolve in ethanol. A crown ether such as 15-crown-5 may be used as a phase-transfer catalyst.\nSodium content of samples is determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometry or by potentiometry using ion-selective electrodes.\nElectrides and sodides.\nLike the other alkali metals, sodium dissolves in ammonia and some amines to give deeply colored solutions; evaporation of these solutions leaves a shiny film of metallic sodium. The solutions contain the coordination complex [Na(NH3)6]+, with the positive charge counterbalanced by electrons as anions; cryptands permit the isolation of these complexes as crystalline solids. Sodium forms complexes with crown ethers, cryptands and other ligands.\nFor example, 15-crown-5 has a high affinity for sodium because the cavity size of 15-crown-5 is 1.7\u20132.2\u00a0\u00c5, which is enough to fit the sodium ion (1.9\u00a0\u00c5). Cryptands, like crown ethers and other ionophores, also have a high affinity for the sodium ion; derivatives of the alkalide Na\u2212 are obtainable by the addition of cryptands to solutions of sodium in ammonia via disproportionation.\nOrganosodium compounds.\nMany organosodium compounds have been prepared. Because of the high polarity of the C-Na bonds, they behave like sources of carbanions (salts with organic anions). Some well-known derivatives include sodium cyclopentadienide (NaC5H5) and trityl sodium ((C6H5)3CNa). Sodium naphthalene, Na+[C10H8\u2022]\u2212, a strong reducing agent, forms upon mixing Na and naphthalene in ethereal solutions.\nIntermetallic compounds.\nSodium forms alloys with many metals, such as potassium, calcium, lead, and the group 11 and 12 elements. Sodium and potassium form KNa2 and NaK. NaK is 40\u201390% potassium and it is liquid at ambient temperature. It is an excellent thermal and electrical conductor. Sodium-calcium alloys are by-products of the electrolytic production of sodium from a binary salt mixture of NaCl-CaCl2 and ternary mixture NaCl\u2013CaCl2-BaCl2. Calcium is only partially miscible with sodium, and the 1\u20132% of it dissolved in the sodium obtained from said mixtures can be precipitated by cooling to 120\u00a0\u00b0C and filtering.\nIn a liquid state, sodium is completely miscible with lead. There are several methods to make sodium-lead alloys. One is to melt them together and another is to deposit sodium electrolytically on molten lead cathodes. NaPb3, NaPb, Na9Pb4, Na5Pb2, and Na15Pb4 are some of the known sodium-lead alloys. Sodium also forms alloys with gold (NaAu2) and silver (NaAg2). Group 12 metals (zinc, cadmium and mercury) are known to make alloys with sodium. NaZn13 and NaCd2 are alloys of zinc and cadmium. Sodium and mercury form NaHg, NaHg4, NaHg2, Na3Hg2, and Na3Hg.\nHistory.\nBecause of its importance in human health, salt has long been an important commodity. In medieval Europe, a compound of sodium with the Latin name of \"sodanum\" was used as a headache remedy. The name sodium is thought to originate from the Arabic \"suda\", meaning headache, as the headache-alleviating properties of sodium carbonate or soda were well known in early times.\nAlthough sodium, sometimes called \"soda\", had long been recognized in compounds, the metal itself was not isolated until 1807 by Sir Humphry Davy through the electrolysis of sodium hydroxide. In 1809, the German physicist and chemist Ludwig Wilhelm Gilbert proposed the names \"Natronium\" for Humphry Davy's \"sodium\" and \"Kalium\" for Davy's \"potassium\".\nThe chemical abbreviation for sodium was first published in 1814 by J\u00f6ns Jakob Berzelius in his system of atomic symbols, and is an abbreviation of the element's Neo-Latin name \"natrium\", which refers to the Egyptian \"natron\", a natural mineral salt mainly consisting of hydrated sodium carbonate. Natron historically had several important industrial and household uses, later eclipsed by other sodium compounds.\nSodium imparts an intense yellow color to flames. As early as 1860, Kirchhoff and Bunsen noted the high sensitivity of a sodium flame test, and stated in Annalen der Physik und Chemie:\nIn a corner of our 60\u00a0m3 room farthest away from the apparatus, we exploded 3\u00a0mg of sodium chlorate with milk sugar while observing the nonluminous flame before the slit. After a while, it glowed a bright yellow and showed a strong sodium line that disappeared only after 10 minutes. From the weight of the sodium salt and the volume of air in the room, we easily calculate that one part by weight of air could not contain more than 1/20 millionth weight of sodium.\nOccurrence.\nThe Earth's crust contains 2.27% sodium, making it the sixth most abundant element on Earth and the fourth most abundant metal, behind aluminium, iron, calcium, and magnesium and ahead of potassium.Sodium's estimated oceanic abundance is 10.8\u00a0grams per liter. Because of its high reactivity, it is never found as a pure element. It is found in many minerals, some very soluble, such as halite and natron, others much less soluble, such as amphibole and zeolite. The insolubility of certain sodium minerals such as cryolite and feldspar arises from their polymeric anions, which in the case of feldspar is a polysilicate. In the universe, sodium is the 15th most abundant element with a 20,000 parts-per-billion abundance, making sodium 0.002% of the total atoms in the universe.\nAstronomical observations.\nAtomic sodium has a very strong spectral line in the yellow-orange part of the spectrum (the same line as is used in sodium-vapor street lights). This appears as an absorption line in many types of stars, including the Sun. The line was first studied in 1814 by Joseph von Fraunhofer during his investigation of the lines in the solar spectrum, now known as the Fraunhofer lines. Fraunhofer named it the \"D\"\u00a0line, although it is now known to actually be a group of closely spaced lines split by a fine and hyperfine structure.\nThe strength of the D\u00a0line allows its detection in many other astronomical environments. In stars, it is seen in any whose surfaces are cool enough for sodium to exist in atomic form (rather than ionized). This corresponds to stars of roughly F-type and cooler. Many other stars appear to have a sodium absorption line, but this is actually caused by gas in the foreground interstellar medium. The two can be distinguished via high-resolution spectroscopy, because interstellar lines are much narrower than those broadened by stellar rotation.\nSodium has also been detected in numerous Solar System environments, including the exospheres of Mercury and the Moon, and numerous other bodies. Some comets have a sodium tail, which was first detected in observations of Comet Hale\u2013Bopp in 1997. Sodium has even been detected in the atmospheres of some extrasolar planets via transit spectroscopy.\nCommercial production.\nEmployed in rather specialized applications, about 100,000 tonnes of metallic sodium are produced annually. Metallic sodium was first produced commercially in the late nineteenth century by carbothermal reduction of sodium carbonate at 1100\u00a0\u00b0C, as the first step of the Deville process for the production of aluminium:\nNa2CO3 + 2 C \u2192 2 Na + 3 CO\nThe high demand for aluminium created the need for the production of sodium. The introduction of the Hall\u2013H\u00e9roult process for the production of aluminium by electrolysing a molten salt bath ended the need for large quantities of sodium. A related process based on the reduction of sodium hydroxide was developed in 1886.\nSodium is now produced commercially through the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride (common salt), based on a process patented in 1924. This is done in a Downs cell in which the NaCl is mixed with calcium chloride to lower the melting point below 700\u00a0\u00b0C. As calcium is less electropositive than sodium, no calcium will be deposited at the cathode. This method is less expensive than the previous Castner process (the electrolysis of sodium hydroxide).\nIf sodium of high purity is required, it can be distilled once or several times.\nThe market for sodium is volatile due to the difficulty in its storage and shipping; it must be stored under a dry inert gas atmosphere or anhydrous mineral oil to prevent the formation of a surface layer of sodium oxide or sodium superoxide.\nUses.\nThough metallic sodium has some important uses, the major applications for sodium use compounds; millions of tons of sodium chloride, hydroxide, and carbonate are produced annually. Sodium chloride is extensively used for anti-icing and de-icing and as a preservative; examples of the uses of sodium bicarbonate include baking, as a raising agent, and sodablasting. Along with potassium, many important medicines have sodium added to improve their bioavailability; though potassium is the better ion in most cases, sodium is chosen for its lower price and atomic weight. Sodium hydride is used as a base for various reactions (such as the aldol reaction) in organic chemistry.\nMetallic sodium is used mainly for the production of sodium borohydride, sodium azide, indigo, and triphenylphosphine. A once-common use was the making of tetraethyllead and titanium metal; because of the move away from TEL and new titanium production methods, the production of sodium declined after 1970. Sodium is also used as an alloying metal, an anti-scaling agent, and as a reducing agent for metals when other materials are ineffective.\nNote the free element is not used as a scaling agent, ions in the water are exchanged for sodium ions. Sodium plasma (\"vapor\") lamps are often used for street lighting in cities, shedding light that ranges from yellow-orange to peach as the pressure increases. By itself or with potassium, sodium is a desiccant; it gives an intense blue coloration with benzophenone when the desiccate is dry.\nIn organic synthesis, sodium is used in various reactions such as the Birch reduction, and the sodium fusion test is conducted to qualitatively analyse compounds. Sodium reacts with alcohols and gives alkoxides, and when sodium is dissolved in ammonia solution, it can be used to reduce alkynes to trans-alkenes. Lasers emitting light at the sodium D line are used to create artificial laser guide stars that assist in the adaptive optics for land-based visible-light telescopes.\nHeat transfer.\nLiquid sodium is used as a heat transfer fluid in sodium-cooled fast reactors because it has the high thermal conductivity and low neutron absorption cross section required to achieve a high neutron flux in the reactor. The high boiling point of sodium allows the reactor to operate at ambient (normal) pressure, but drawbacks include its opacity, which hinders visual maintenance, and its strongly reducing properties. Sodium will explode in contact with water, although it will only burn gently in air.\nRadioactive sodium-24 may be produced by neutron bombardment during operation, posing a slight radiation hazard; the radioactivity stops within a few days after removal from the reactor. If a reactor needs to be shut down frequently, sodium\u2013potassium alloy (NaK) is used. Because NaK is a liquid at room temperature, the coolant does not solidify in the pipes. The pyrophoricity of the NaK means extra precautions must be taken to prevent and detect leaks.\nAnother heat transfer application of sodium is in poppet valves in high-performance internal combustion engines; the valve stems are partially filled with sodium and work as a heat pipe to cool the valves.\nBiological role.\nBiological role in humans.\nIn humans, sodium is an essential mineral that regulates blood volume, blood pressure, osmotic equilibrium and pH. The minimum physiological requirement for sodium is estimated to range from about 120 milligrams per day in newborns to 500 milligrams per day over the age of 10.\nDiet.\nSodium chloride, also known as 'edible salt' or 'table salt' (chemical formula ), is the principal source of sodium () in the diet and is used as seasoning and preservative in such commodities as pickled preserves and jerky. For Americans, most sodium chloride comes from processed foods. Other sources of sodium are its natural occurrence in food and such food additives as monosodium glutamate (MSG), sodium nitrite, sodium saccharin, baking soda (sodium bicarbonate), and sodium benzoate.\nThe U.S. Institute of Medicine set its tolerable upper intake level for sodium at 2.3\u00a0grams per day, but the average person in the United States consumes 3.4\u00a0grams per day. The American Heart Association recommends no more than 1.5\u00a0g of sodium per day.\nThe committee to Review the Dietary Reference Intakes for Sodium and Potassium, which is part of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, has determined that there isn't enough evidence from research studies to establish Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) and Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) values for sodium. As a result, the committee has established Adequate Intake (AI) levels instead, as follows. The sodium AI for infants of 0\u20136 months is established at 110\u00a0mg/day, 7\u201312 months: 370\u00a0mg/day; for children 1\u20133 years: 800\u00a0mg/day, 4\u20138 years: 1,000\u00a0mg/day; for adolescents: 9\u201313 years \u2013 1,200\u00a0mg/day, 14\u201318 years 1,500\u00a0mg/day; for adults regardless of their age or sex: 1,500\u00a0mg/day.\nSodium chloride () contains approximately 39.34% of its total mass as elemental sodium (). This means that of sodium chloride contains approximately of elemental sodium. For example, to find out how much sodium chloride contains 1500\u00a0mg of elemental sodium (the value of 1500\u00a0mg sodium is the adequate intake (AI) for an adult), we can use the proportion:\n393.4 mg Na : 1000 mg NaCl = 1500 mg Na : x mg NaCl\nSolving for \"x\" gives us the amount of sodium chloride that contains 1500\u00a0mg of elemental sodium\nx = (1500 mg Na \u00d7 1000 mg NaCl) / 393.4 mg Na = 3812.91 mg\nThis mean that 3812.91\u00a0mg of sodium chloride contain 1500\u00a0mg of elemental sodium.\nHigh sodium consumption.\nHigh sodium consumption is unhealthy, and can lead to alteration in the mechanical performance of the heart. High sodium consumption is also associated with chronic kidney disease, high blood pressure, cardiovascular diseases, and stroke.\nHigh blood pressure.\nThere is a strong correlation between higher sodium intake and higher blood pressure. Studies have found that lowering sodium intake by 2\u00a0g per day tends to lower systolic blood pressure by about two to four mm\u00a0Hg. It has been estimated that such a decrease in sodium intake would lead to 9\u201317% fewer cases of hypertension.\nHypertension causes 7.6 million premature deaths worldwide each year. Since edible salt contains about 39.3% sodium\u2014the rest being chlorine and trace chemicals; thus, 2.3\u00a0g sodium is about 5.9\u00a0g, or 5.3\u00a0ml, of salt\u2014about one US teaspoon.\nOne scientific review found that people with or without hypertension who excreted less than 3 grams of sodium per day in their urine (and therefore were taking in less than 3\u00a0g/d) had a \"higher\" risk of death, stroke, or heart attack than those excreting 4 to 5 grams per day. Levels of 7\u00a0g per day or more in people with hypertension were associated with higher mortality and cardiovascular events, but this was not found to be true for people without hypertension. The US FDA states that adults with hypertension and prehypertension should reduce daily sodium intake to 1.5\u00a0g.\nPhysiology.\nThe renin\u2013angiotensin system regulates the amount of fluid and sodium concentration in the body. Reduction of blood pressure and sodium concentration in the kidney result in the production of renin, which in turn produces aldosterone and angiotensin, which stimulates the reabsorption of sodium back into the bloodstream. When the concentration of sodium increases, the production of renin decreases, and the sodium concentration returns to normal. The sodium ion (Na+) is an important electrolyte in neuron function, and in osmoregulation between cells and the extracellular fluid. This is accomplished in all animals by Na+/K+-ATPase, an active transporter pumping ions against the gradient, and sodium/potassium channels. The difference in extracellular and intracellular ion concentration, maintained by the sodium-potassium pump, produce electrical signals in the form of action potentials that supports cardiac muscle contraction and promote long-distance communication between neurons. Sodium is the most prevalent metallic ion in extracellular fluid.\nIn humans, unusually low or high sodium levels in the blood is recognized in medicine as hyponatremia and hypernatremia. These conditions may be caused by genetic factors, ageing, or prolonged vomiting or diarrhea.\nBiological role in plants.\nIn C4 plants, sodium is a micronutrient that aids metabolism, specifically in regeneration of phosphoenolpyruvate and synthesis of chlorophyll. In others, it substitutes for potassium in several roles, such as maintaining turgor pressure and aiding in the opening and closing of stomata. Excess sodium in the soil can limit the uptake of water by decreasing the water potential, which may result in plant wilting; excess concentrations in the cytoplasm can lead to enzyme inhibition, which in turn causes necrosis and chlorosis.\nIn response, some plants have developed mechanisms to limit sodium uptake in the roots, to store it in cell vacuoles, and restrict salt transport from roots to leaves. Excess sodium may also be stored in old plant tissue, limiting the damage to new growth. Halophytes have adapted to be able to flourish in sodium rich environments.\nSafety and precautions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nSodium forms flammable hydrogen and caustic sodium hydroxide on contact with water; ingestion and contact with moisture on skin, eyes or mucous membranes can cause severe burns. Sodium spontaneously explodes in the presence of water due to the formation of hydrogen (highly explosive) and sodium hydroxide (which dissolves in the water, liberating more surface). However, sodium exposed to air and ignited or reaching autoignition (reported to occur when a molten pool of sodium reaches about ) displays a relatively mild fire.\nIn the case of massive (non-molten) pieces of sodium, the reaction with oxygen eventually becomes slow due to formation of a protective layer. Fire extinguishers based on water accelerate sodium fires. Those based on carbon dioxide and bromochlorodifluoromethane should not be used on sodium fire. Metal fires are Class D, but not all Class D extinguishers are effective when used to extinguish sodium fires. An effective extinguishing agent for sodium fires is Met-L-X. Other effective agents include Lith-X, which has graphite powder and an organophosphate flame retardant, and dry sand.\nSodium fires are prevented in nuclear reactors by isolating sodium from oxygen with surrounding pipes containing inert gas. Pool-type sodium fires are prevented using diverse design measures called catch pan systems. They collect leaking sodium into a leak-recovery tank where it is isolated from oxygen.\nLiquid sodium fires are more dangerous to handle than solid sodium fires, particularly if there is insufficient experience with the safe handling of molten sodium. In a technical report for the United States Fire Administration, R. J. Gordon writes (emphasis in original)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Molten sodium is extremely dangerous because it is much more reactive than a solid mass. In the liquid form, every sodium atom is free and mobile to instantaneously combine with any available oxygen atom or other oxidizer, and any gaseous by-product will be created as a rapidly expanding gas bubble within the molten mass. Even a minute amount of water can create this type of reaction. Any amount of water introduced into a pool of molten sodium is likely to cause a violent explosion inside the liquid mass, releasing the hydrogen as a rapidly expanding gas and causing the molten sodium to erupt from the container.\nWhen molten sodium is involved in a fire, the combustion occurs at the surface of the liquid. An inert gas, such as nitrogen or argon, can be used to form an inert layer over the pool of burning liquid sodium, but the gas must be applied very gently and contained over the surface. Except for soda ash, most of the powdered agents that are used to extinguish small fires in solid pieces or shallow pools will sink to the bottom of a molten mass of burning sodium \u2013 the sodium will float to the top and continue to burn. If the burning sodium is in a container, it may be feasible to extinguish the fire by placing a lid on the container to exclude oxygen.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26828", "revid": "40427189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26828", "title": "Suriname", "text": "Country in South America\nSuriname, officially the Republic of Suriname, is a country in northern South America, also considered as part of the Caribbean and the West Indies. Situated slightly north of the equator, over 90% of its territory is covered by rainforest, the highest proportion of forest cover in the world. Suriname is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the north, French Guiana to the east, Guyana to the west, and Brazil to the south. It is the smallest country in South America by both population and territory, with around inhabitants in 2021 in an area of approximately . The capital and largest city is Paramaribo, which is home to roughly half the population.\nSuriname was inhabited as early as the fourth millennium BC by various indigenous peoples, including the Arawaks, Caribs, and Wayana. Europeans arrived and contested the area in the 16th century, with the Dutch controlling much of the country's current territory by the late 17th century. Under Dutch rule, Suriname was a lucrative plantation colony focused mostly on sugar; its economy was driven by African slave labour until the abolition of slavery in 1863. Approximately 300,000 enslaved Africans were taken to Suriname during the transatlantic slave trade, from the mid-1600s to the early 1800s. After 1863, indentured servants were recruited mostly from British India and the Dutch East Indies. In 1954, Suriname became a constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. On 25 November 1975, it became independent following negotiations with the Dutch government. Suriname continues to maintain close diplomatic, economic, and cultural ties with the Netherlands.\nSurinamese culture and society strongly reflect the legacy of Dutch colonial rule. It is the only independent state outside Europe where Dutch is the official and prevailing language of government, business, media, and education; an estimated 60% of the population speaks Dutch as a native language. Sranan Tongo, an English-based creole language, is a widely used \"lingua franca\". Most Surinamese are descendants of slaves brought from Africa by Europeans, and indentured labourers brought from Asia by the Dutch. Suriname is highly diverse, with no ethnic group forming a majority; proportionally, its Muslim and Hindu populations are some of the largest in the Americas. Most people live along the northern coast, centred on Paramaribo, making Suriname one of the least densely populated countries on Earth.\nIt is a developing country with a high level of human development; its economy is heavily dependent on its abundant natural resources, namely bauxite, gold, petroleum, and agricultural products. Suriname is a member of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the United Nations, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the Organization of American States.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Suriname\" may derive from an indigenous people called \"Surinen\", who inhabited the area at the time of European contact. The suffix -ame, common in Surinamese river and place names (see also the Coppename River), may come from \"aima\" or \"eima\", meaning river or creek mouth, in Lokono, an Arawak language spoken in the country.\nThe earliest European sources give variants of \"Suriname\" as the name of the river on which colonies were eventually founded. Lawrence Kemys wrote in his \"Relation of the Second Voyage to Guiana\" of passing a river called \"\"Shurinama\" as he travelled along the coast. In 1598, a fleet of three Dutch ships visiting the Wild Coast mention passing the river \"Surinamo\". In 1617, a Dutch notary spelled the name of the river on which a Dutch trading post had existed three years earlier as \"Surrenant\"\".\nBritish settlers, who in 1630 founded the first European colony at Marshall's Creek along the Suriname River, spelled the name \"Surinam\"; this would long remain the standard spelling in English. The Dutch navigator David Pietersz. de Vries wrote of travelling up the \"Sername\" river in 1634 until he encountered the English colony there; the terminal vowel remained in future Dutch spellings and pronunciations. The river was called \"Soronama\" in a 1640 Spanish manuscript entitled \"General Description of All His Majesty's Dominions in America\". In 1653, instructions given to a British fleet sailing to meet Lord Willoughby in Barbados, which at the time was the seat of English colonial government in the region, again spelled the name of the colony \"Surinam\". A 1663 royal charter said the region around the river was \"called Serrinam also Surrinam\".\nAs a result of the \"Surrinam\" spelling, 19th-century British sources offered the folk etymology \"Surryham\", saying it was the name given to the Suriname River by Lord Willoughby in the 1660s in honour of the Duke of Norfolk and Earl of Surrey when an English colony was established under a grant from King Charles II. This folk etymology can be found repeated in later English-language sources.\nWhen the territory was taken over by the Dutch, it became part of a group of colonies known as Dutch Guiana. The official spelling of the country's English name was changed from \"Surinam\" to \"Suriname\" in January 1978, but \"Surinam\" can still be found in English, such as Surinam Airways and the Surinam toad. The older English name is reflected in the English pronunciation, . In Dutch, the official language of Suriname, the pronunciation is , with a schwa terminal vowel and the main stress on the third syllable.\nHistory.\nPre-colonial.\nIndigenous settlement of Suriname dates back to 3,000 BC. The largest tribes were the Arawak, a nomadic coastal tribe that lived from hunting and fishing. They were the first inhabitants in the area. The Carib also settled in the area and conquered the Arawak by using their superior sailing ships. They settled in Galibi (\"Kupali Yum\u00ef\", meaning \"tree of the forefathers\") at the mouth of the Marowijne River. While the larger Arawak and Carib tribes lived along the coast and savanna, smaller groups of indigenous people lived in the inland rainforest, such as the Akurio, Tri\u00f3, Warao, and Wayana.\nColonial period.\nBeginning in the 16th century, French, Spanish and English explorers visited the area. A century later, Dutch and English settlers established plantation colonies along the many rivers in the fertile Guiana plains. The earliest documented colony in Guiana was an English settlement named Marshall's Creek along the Suriname River. After that, there was another short-lived English colony called Surinam that lasted from 1650 to 1667.\nFrom the early 17th century, Jews began to settle there after the expulsion from Spain and Portugal. They were granted freedom of religion in 1665 and the right to have their own courts and civil guard. They continued to enjoy autonomy after the colony was handed over to the Netherlands. Over half the sugarcane plantations in Suriname were owned by Jews. In 1825, these special rights were rescinded.\nDisputes arose between the Dutch and the English for control of this territory. In 1667, during negotiations leading to the Treaty of Breda after the Second Anglo-Dutch War, the Dutch decided to keep the nascent plantation colony of Surinam they had gained from the English. In return the English kept New Amsterdam, the main city of the former colony of New Netherland in North America on the mid-Atlantic coast. The British renamed it New York, after the Duke of York who would later become King James\u00a0II of England.\nIn 1683, the Society of Suriname was founded by the city of Amsterdam, the Van Aerssen van Sommelsdijck family, and the Dutch West India Company. The society was chartered to manage and defend the colony. The planters of the colony relied heavily on African slaves to cultivate, harvest and process the commodity crops of coffee, cocoa, sugar cane and cotton plantations along the rivers. Approximately 300,000 enslaved Africans were taken to Suriname during the transatlantic slave trade, from the mid-1600s to the early 1800s. The treatment of slaves was notoriously brutal even by the standards of the time\u2014historian C. R. Boxer wrote that \"man's inhumanity to man just about reached its limits in Surinam\"\u2014and many slaves escaped plantations. In November 1795, the Society was nationalized by the Batavian Republic and from then on the Batavian Republic and its legal successors (the Kingdom of Holland and the Kingdom of the Netherlands) governed the territory as a national colony \u2013 barring two periods of British occupation, between 1799 and 1802, and between 1804 and 1816.\nWith the help of the native South Americans living in the adjoining rain forests, runaway African slaves established a new and unique culture in the interior that was highly successful in its own right. They were known collectively in English as Maroons, in French as \"N\u00e8g'Marrons\" (literally meaning \"brown negroes\", that is \"pale-skinned negroes\"), and in Dutch as \"Marrons\". The Maroons gradually developed several independent tribes through a process of ethnogenesis, as they were from different African ethnicities. These tribes include the Saramaka, Paramaka, Ndyuka or Aukan, Kwinti, Aluku or Boni, and Matawai.\nThe Maroons often raided plantations to recruit new members from the enslaved and capture women, as well as to acquire weapons, food, and supplies. They sometimes killed the Dutch planters and their families in the raids. European colonists built defences, which were significant enough that they were shown on 18th-century maps.\nThe Dutch colonists also mounted armed campaigns against the Maroons, who generally escaped through the rainforest, which they knew much better than the colonists did. To end hostilities, in the 18th century, the European colonial authorities signed several peace treaties with different tribes. They granted the Maroons sovereign status and trade rights in their inland territories.\nAbolition of slavery.\nFrom 1861 to 1863, with the American Civil War underway, and enslaved people escaping to Northern territory controlled by the Union, United States President Abraham Lincoln and his administration looked abroad for places to relocate people who were freed from enslavement and who wanted to leave the United States. It opened negotiations with the Dutch government regarding African American emigration to and colonization of the Dutch colony of Suriname. Nothing came of the idea, which was dropped after 1864.\nThe Netherlands abolished slavery in Suriname in 1863, under a gradual process that required slaves to work on plantations for 10 transition years for minimal pay, which was considered as partial compensation for their masters. After that transition period expired in 1873, most freedmen largely abandoned the plantations where they had worked for several generations in favour of the capital city, Paramaribo. Some of them were able to purchase the plantations they worked on, especially in the district of Para and Coronie. Their descendants still live on those grounds today. Several plantation owners did not pay their former enslaved workers the pay they owed them for the ten years following 1863. They paid the workers with the property rights of the ground of the plantation in order to escape their debt to the workers. 1 July 1863 is called Ketikoti.\nAs a plantation colony, Suriname had an economy dependent on labour-intensive commodity crops. To make up for a shortage of labour, the Dutch recruited and transported contract or indentured labourers from the Dutch East Indies (modern Indonesia) and India (the latter through an arrangement with the British, who then ruled the area). In addition, during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, small numbers of labourers, mostly men, were recruited from China and the Middle East.\nAlthough Suriname's population remains relatively small, because of this complex colonisation and exploitation, it is one of the most ethnically and culturally diverse countries in the world.\nDecolonization.\nDuring World War II, on 23 November 1941, under an agreement with the Netherlands government-in-exile, the United States sent 2,000 soldiers to Suriname to protect the bauxite mines to support the Allies' war effort. In 1942, the Dutch government-in-exile began to review the relations between the Netherlands and its colonies in terms of the post-war period.\nIn 1954, Suriname became one of the constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, along with the Netherlands Antilles and the Netherlands. In this construction, the Netherlands retained control of its defense and foreign affairs. In 1974, the local government, led by the National Party of Suriname (NPS) (whose membership was largely Creole, meaning ethnically African or mixed African-European), started negotiations with the Dutch government leading towards full independence; in contrast to Indonesia's earlier war for independence from the Netherlands, the path toward Suriname's independence had been an initiative of the then left-wing Dutch government. Independence was granted on 25 November 1975. A large part of Suriname's economy for the first decade following independence was fueled by foreign aid provided by the Dutch government.\nIndependence.\nThe first president of the country was Johan Ferrier, the former governor, with Henck Arron (the then leader of the NPS) as prime minister. In the years leading up to independence, nearly one-third of the population of Suriname emigrated to the Netherlands, amidst concern that the new country would fare worse under independence than it had as a constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Surinamese politics did degenerate into ethnic polarisation and corruption soon after independence, with the NPS using Dutch aid money for partisan purposes. Its leaders were accused of fraud in the 1977 elections, in which Arron won a further term, and the discontent was such that a large portion of the population fled to the Netherlands, joining the already significant Surinamese community there.\n1980 military coup.\nOn 25 February 1980, a military coup overthrew Arron's government. It was initiated by a group of 16 sergeants, led by D\u00e9si Bouterse. Opponents of the military regime attempted counter-coups in April 1980, August 1980, 15 March 1981, and again on 12 March 1982. The first counter attempt was led by Fred Ormskerk, the second by Marxist-Leninists, the third by Wilfred Hawker, and the fourth by Surendre Rambocus.\nHawker escaped from prison during the fourth counter-coup attempt, but he was captured and summarily executed. Between 2\u00a0am and 5\u00a0am on 7 December 1982, the military, under Bouterse's leadership, rounded up 13 prominent citizens who had criticized the military dictatorship and held them at Fort Zeelandia in Paramaribo. The dictatorship had all these men executed over the next three days, along with Rambocus and Jiwansingh Sheombar (who was also involved in the fourth counter-coup attempt).\nCivil war, elections, and constitution.\nThe brutal civil war between the Suriname army and Maroons loyal to rebel leader Ronnie Brunswijk, begun in 1986, continued and its effects further weakened Bouterse's position during the 1990s. Due to the civil war, more than 10,000 Surinamese, mostly Maroons, fled to French Guiana in the late 1980s.\nNational elections were held in 1987. The National Assembly adopted a new constitution that allowed Bouterse to remain in charge of the army. Dissatisfied with the government, Bouterse summarily dismissed the ministers in 1990, by telephone. This event became popularly known as the \"Telephone Coup\". His power began to wane after the 1991 elections.\nAt the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, Suriname became the smallest independent South American state to win its first ever Olympic medal as Anthony Nesty won gold in the 100-metre butterfly.\nThe first half of 1999 was marked by non-violent national protests against poor general economic and social conditions. By mid-year, the Netherlands tried Bouterse \"in absentia\" on drug-smuggling charges. He was convicted and sentenced to prison but remained in Suriname.\n21st century.\nIn 2002, the inner historic city in Suriname's capital, Paramaribo, was inscribed on the list as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, for its outstanding collection of Dutch colonial architecture.\nOn 19 July 2010, Bouterse returned to power when he was elected as the president of Suriname. Before his election in 2010, he, along with 24 others, had been charged with the murders of 15 prominent dissidents in the December murders. However, in 2012, two months before the verdict in the trial, the National Assembly extended its amnesty law and provided Bouterse and the others with amnesty of these charges. He was reelected on 14 July 2015. However, Bouterse was convicted by a Surinamese court on 29 November 2019 and given a 20-year sentence for his role in the 1982 killings.\nAfter winning the 2020 elections, Chan Santokhi was the sole nomination for president of Suriname. On 13 July, Santokhi was elected president by acclamation in an uncontested election. He was inaugurated on 16 July in a ceremony without public attendance due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn February 2023, there were heavy protests against rising living costs in the capital Paramaribo. Protesters accused the government of President Chan Santokhi of corruption. They stormed the National Assembly, demanding the government to resign. However, the government condemned the protests. In December 2024, Desi Bouterse, Suriname\u2019s fugitive former president, died.\nOn 6 July 2025, Jennifer Geerlings-Simons of the National Democratic Party (NDP) was elected as Suriname's first woman president by the parliament.\nGeography.\nSuriname is the smallest independent country in South America. Situated on the Guiana Shield, it lies mostly between latitudes 1\u00b0 and 6\u00b0N, and longitudes 54\u00b0 and 58\u00b0W. The country can be divided into two main geographic regions. The northern, lowland coastal area (roughly above the line Albina-Paranam-Wageningen) has been cultivated, and most of the population lives here. The southern part consists of tropical rainforest and sparsely inhabited savanna along the border with Brazil, covering about 80% of Suriname's land surface.\nThe two main mountain ranges are the Bakhuys Mountains and the Van Asch Van Wijck Mountains. Julianatop is the highest mountain in the country at above sea level. Other mountains include Tafelberg at , Mount Kasikasima at , Goliathberg at and Voltzberg at .\nSuriname contains six terrestrial ecoregions: Guayanan Highlands moist forests, Guianan moist forests, Paramaribo swamp forests, Tepuis, Guianan savanna, and Guianan mangroves. Its forest cover is 90.2%, the highest of any nation in the world. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 9.39/10, ranking it fifth globally out of 172 countries.\nBorders.\nSuriname is situated between French Guiana to the east and Guyana to the west. The southern border is shared with Brazil and the northern border is the Atlantic coast. The southernmost borders with French Guiana and Guyana are disputed by these countries along the Marowijne and Corantijn rivers, respectively, while a part of the disputed maritime boundary with Guyana was arbitrated by the Permanent Court of Arbitration convened under the rules set out in of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on 20 September 2007.\nClimate.\nLying two to five degrees north of the equator, Suriname has a very hot and wet tropical climate, and temperatures do not vary much throughout the year. Average relative humidity is between 80% and 90%. Its average temperature ranges from . Due to the high humidity, actual temperatures are distorted and may therefore feel up to hotter than the recorded temperature.\nThe year has two wet seasons, from April to August and from November to February. It also has two dry seasons, from August to November and February to April.\nClimate change in Suriname is leading to warmer temperatures and more extreme weather events. As a relatively poor country, its contributions to global climate change have been limited. Because of the large forest cover, the country has been running a carbon negative economy since 2014.\nBiodiversity and conservation.\nDue to the variety of habitats and temperatures, biodiversity in Suriname is considered high. In October 2013, 16 international scientists researching the ecosystems during a three-week expedition in Suriname's Upper Palumeu River Watershed catalogued 1,378 species and found 60\u2014including six frogs, one snake, and 11 fish\u2014that may be previously unknown species. According to the environmental non-profit Conservation International, which funded the expedition, Suriname's ample supply of fresh water is vital to the biodiversity and healthy ecosystems of the region.\nSnakewood (\"Brosimum guianense\"), a tree, is native to this tropical region of the Americas. Customs in Suriname report that snakewood is often illegally exported to French Guiana, thought to be for the crafts industry.\nOn 21 March 2013, Suriname's REDD+ Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP 2013) was approved by the member countries of the Participants Committee of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF).\nAs in other parts of Central and South America, indigenous communities have increased their activism to protect their lands and preserve habitat. In March 2015, the \"Trio and Wayana communities presented a declaration of cooperation to the National Assembly of Suriname that announces an indigenous conservation corridor spanning 72,000 square kilometers (27,799 square miles) of southern Suriname. The declaration, led by these indigenous communities and with the support of Conservation International (CI) and World Wildlife Fund (WWF) Guianas, comprises almost half of the total area of Suriname. This area includes large forests and is considered \"essential for the country's climate resilience, freshwater security, and green development strategy.\"\nThe Central Suriname Nature Reserve has been designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site for its unspoiled forests and biodiversity. There are many national parks in the country, including Galibi National Reserve along the coast; Brownsberg Nature Park and Eilerts de Haan Nature Park in central Suriname; and the Sipaliwani Nature Reserve on the Brazilian border. In all, 16% of the country's land area is national parks and lakes, according to the UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre.\nSuriname's extensive tree cover is vital to the country's efforts to mitigate climate change and maintain carbon negativity.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe Republic of Suriname is a representative democratic republic with an installed presidential parliamentary system in place, based on the Constitution of 1987. The legislative branch of government consists of a 51-member unicameral National Assembly, simultaneously and popularly elected for a five-year term.\nIn the elections held on Tuesday 25 May 2010, the \"Megacombinatie\" won 23 of the National Assembly seats, followed by \"Nationale Front\" with 20 seats. A much smaller number, important for coalition-building, went to the \"A-combinatie\" and to the \"Volksalliantie.\" The parties held negotiations to form coalitions. Elections were held on 25 May 2015, and the National Assembly again elected D\u00e9si Bouterse as president.\nThe president of Suriname is elected for a five-year term by a two-thirds majority of the National Assembly. If at least two-thirds of the National Assembly cannot agree to vote for one presidential candidate, a People's Assembly is formed from all National Assembly delegates and regional and municipal representatives who were elected by popular vote in the most recent national election. The president may be elected by a majority of the People's Assembly called for the special election.\nAs head of government, the president appoints a sixteen-minister cabinet. A vice president is normally elected for a five-year term at the same time as the president, by a simple majority in the National Assembly or People's Assembly. There is no constitutional provision for removal or replacement of the president, except in the case of resignation.\nThe judiciary is headed by the High Court of Justice of Suriname (Supreme Court). This court supervises the magistrate courts. Members are appointed for life by the president in consultation with the National Assembly, the State Advisory Council, and the National Order of Private Attorneys.\nForeign relations.\nDue to Suriname's Dutch colonial history, Suriname had a long-standing special relationship with the Netherlands.\nIn 1999, D\u00e9si Bouterse was convicted and sentenced \"in absentia\" in the Netherlands to 11 years of imprisonment for drug trafficking. He was the main suspect in the court case concerning the December murders, the 1982 assassination of opponents of military rule in Fort Zeelandia, Paramaribo. He served as president between 2010 and 2020. These two cases still strain relations between the Netherlands and Suriname.\nThe Dutch government stated during that time that it would maintain limited contact with the president.\nBouterse was elected as president of Suriname in 2010. The Netherlands in July 2014 dropped Suriname as a member of its development program.\nSince 1991, the United States has maintained positive relations with Suriname. The two countries work together through the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative (CBSI) and the U.S. President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR). Suriname also receives military funding from the U.S. Department of Defense.\nSuriname has been a member of The Forum of Small States (FOSS) since the group's founding in 1992.\nEuropean Union relations and cooperation with Suriname are carried out both on a bilateral and a regional basis. There are ongoing EU-Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) and EU-CARIFORUM dialogues. Suriname is party to the Cotonou Agreement, the partnership agreement among the members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States and the European Union.\nOn 17 February 2005, the leaders of Barbados and Suriname signed the \"Agreement for the deepening of bilateral cooperation between the Government of Barbados and the Government of the Republic of Suriname.\" On 23\u201324 April 2009, both nations formed a Joint Commission in Paramaribo, Suriname, to improve relations and to expand into various areas of cooperation. They held a second meeting toward this goal on 3\u20134 March 2011, in Dover, Barbados. Their representatives reviewed issues of agriculture, trade, investment, as well as international transport.\nIn the late 2000s, Suriname intensified development cooperation with other developing countries. China's South-South cooperation with Suriname has included a number of large-scale infrastructure projects, including port rehabilitation and road construction. Brazil signed agreements to cooperate with Suriname in education, health, agriculture, and energy production.\nMilitary.\nThe Armed Forces of Suriname have three branches: the Army, the Air Force, and the Navy. The president of the Republic is the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces (\"Opperbevelhebber van de Strijdkrachten\"). The president is assisted by the minister of defence. Beneath the president and minister of defence is the commander of the armed forces (\"Bevelhebber van de Strijdkrachten\"). The military branches and regional military commands report to the commander.\nAfter the creation of the Statute of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Royal Netherlands Army was entrusted with the defense of Suriname, while the defense of the Netherlands Antilles was the responsibility of the Royal Netherlands Navy. The army set up a separate \"Troepenmacht in Suriname\" (Forces in Suriname, TRIS). Upon independence in 1975, this force was turned into the \"Surinaamse Krijgsmacht\" (SKM):, Surinamese Armed Forces. After the 1980 overthrow of the government, the SKM was rebranded as the \"Nationaal Leger\" (NL), National Army.\nIn 1965, the Dutch and Americans used Suriname's Coronie site for multiple Nike Apache sounding rocket launches.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe country is divided into ten administrative districts, each headed by a district commissioner appointed by the president, who also has the power of dismissal. Suriname is further subdivided into 62 resorts (ressorten).\nEconomy.\nSuriname's democracy gained some strength after the turbulent 1990s, and its economy became more diversified and less dependent on Dutch financial assistance. Bauxite (aluminium ore) mining used to be a strong revenue source, since before the independence of the country up to 2015. Because Alcoa stopped all bauxite operations, the bauxite era in Suriname also ended.\nThe discovery, exploration and exploitation of oil and gold in modern times contributes substantially to Suriname's economic independence. Agriculture, especially rice and bananas, remains a strong component of the economy, and ecotourism is providing new economic opportunities. More than 93% of Suriname's landmass consists of unspoiled rainforest. With the establishment of the Central Suriname Nature Reserve in 1998, Suriname signaled its commitment to the conservation of this precious resource. The Central Suriname Nature Reserve became a World Heritage Site in 2000.\nThe economy of Suriname was dominated by the bauxite industry, which accounted for more than 15% of GDP and 70% of export earnings up to 2015. Currently gold exports make up 60\u201380% of all exports earnings. In 2021 the gold industry accounted for 8.5% of the GDP. The share of large-scale mining in total gold production is 58% compared to 42% of small-scale mining. With an export value of US$1.83 billion in 2023, the gold sector makes an important contribution to the economy. The gold production of Suriname in 2015 is 30 tonnes.\nThe exploration and exploitation of oil adds substantially to the economy of Suriname at about 10% of the GDP. The national oil company, STAATSOLIE, is the motor behind Suriname's oil industry. Their core business is oil extraction and refining. In 2022 they made a revenue of US$840 million. In that year their contribution to the state treasury was US$320 million. In 2023 they made a revenue of US$722 million. The drop in revenue was because of the lower price for oil per barrel that year. Their contribution to the Surinamese state treasury was US$335 million.\nOther main export products include rice, bananas, and shrimp. Suriname has recently started exploiting some of its sizeable oil and gold reserves. About a quarter of the people work in the agricultural sector. The Surinamese economy is very dependent on commerce, its main trade partners being, Switzerland, China, the Netherlands, the United States, Canada, and Caribbean countries, mainly Trinidad and Tobago and the islands of the former Netherlands Antilles.\nAfter assuming power in the fall of 1996, the Wijdenbosch government ended the structural adjustment program of the previous government, claiming it was unfair to the poorer elements of society. Tax revenues fell as old taxes lapsed and the government failed to implement new tax alternatives. By the end of 1997, the allocation of new Dutch development funds was frozen as Surinamese Government relations with the Netherlands deteriorated. Economic growth slowed in 1998, with decline in the mining, construction, and utility sectors. Rampant government expenditures, poor tax collection, a bloated civil service, and reduced foreign aid in 1999 contributed to the fiscal deficit, estimated at 11% of GDP. The government sought to cover this deficit through monetary expansion, which led to a dramatic increase in inflation. It takes longer on average to register a new business in Suriname than virtually any other country in the world (694 days or about 99 weeks).\nTourism.\nMost tourists visit Suriname for the biodiversity of the Amazonian rain forests in the south of the country, which are noted for their flora and fauna. The Central Suriname Nature Reserve is the biggest and one of the most popular reserves, along with the Brownsberg Nature Park which overlooks the Brokopondo Reservoir, one of the largest human-made lakes in the world. In 2008, the Berg en Dal Eco &amp; Cultural Resort opened in Brokopondo. Tonka Island in the reservoir is home to a rustic eco-tourism project run by the Saramaccaner Maroons. Pangi wraps and bowls made of calabashes are the two main products manufactured for tourists. The Maroons have learned that colorful and ornate pangis are popular with tourists. https://] Other popular decorative souvenirs are hand-carved purple-hardwood made into bowls, plates, canes, wooden boxes, and wall decors.\nThere are also many waterfalls throughout the country. Raleighvallen, or Raleigh Falls, is a nature reserve on the Coppename River, rich in bird life. Also are the Blanche Marie Falls on the Nickerie River and the Wonotobo Falls. Tafelberg Mountain in the centre of the country is surrounded by its own reserve \u2013 the Tafelberg Nature Reserve \u2013 around the source of the Saramacca River, as is the Voltzberg Nature Reserve further north on the Coppename River at Raleighvallen. In the interior are many Maroon and Amerindian villages, many of which have their own reserves that are generally open to visitors.\nSuriname is one of the few countries in the world where at least one of each biome that the state possesses has been declared a wildlife reserve. Around 30% of the total land area of Suriname is protected by law as reserves.\nOther attractions include plantations such as Laarwijk, which is situated along the Suriname River. This plantation can be reached only by boat via Domburg, in the north central Wanica District of Suriname.\nCrime rates continue to rise in Paramaribo and armed robberies are not uncommon. According to the current U.S. Department of State Travel Advisory at the date of the 2025 report's publication, Suriname has been assessed as Level 1: exercise normal precautions.\nLandmarks.\nThe Jules Wijdenbosch Bridge is a bridge over the river Suriname between Paramaribo and Meerzorg in the Commewijne district. The bridge was built during the tenure of President Jules Albert Wijdenbosch (1996\u20132000) and was completed in 2000. The bridge is high, and long. It connects Paramaribo with Commewijne, a connection which previously could only be made by ferry. The purpose of the bridge was to facilitate and promote the development of the eastern part of Suriname. The bridge consists of two lanes (one lane each way).\nThe construction of the Sts. Peter and Paul Cathedral started on 13 January 1883. Before it became a cathedral it was a theatre. The theatre was built in 1809 and burned down in 1820.\nSuriname is one of the few countries in the world where a synagogue is located next to a mosque.\nThe two buildings are located next to each other in the centre of Paramaribo and have been known to share a parking facility during their respective religious rites, should they happen to coincide with one another.\nA relatively new landmark is the Hindu Arya Diwaker temple in the Johan Adolf Pengelstraat in Wanica, Paramaribo, which was inaugurated in 2001. A special characteristic of the temple is that it does not have images of the Hindu divinities, as they are forbidden in the Arya Samaj, the Hindu movement to which the people who built the temple belong. Instead, the building is covered by many texts derived from the Vedas and other Hindu scriptures. The architecture makes the temple a tourist attraction.\nTransportation.\nRoad.\nSuriname, along with neighboring Guyana, is one of only two countries on the mainland South American continent that drive on the left, although many vehicles are left-hand-drive as well as right-hand-drive. One explanation for this practice is that at the time of its colonization of Suriname, the Netherlands itself used left-hand traffic, also introducing the practice in the Dutch East Indies, now Indonesia. Another is that Suriname was first colonized by the British, and for practical reasons, this was not changed when it came under Dutch administration. Although the Netherlands converted to driving to the right at the end of the 18th century, Suriname did not.\nAs of 2003, Suriname had 4303\u00a0km (2674 miles) of roads, of which 1119\u00a0km (695 miles) are paved.\nAir.\nThe country has 55 mostly small airports, of which only six are paved. \nThe only international airport that supports large jet aircraft is Johan Adolf Pengel International Airport.\nAirlines with departures from Suriname: \nAirlines with arrivals in Suriname:\nOther national companies with an air operator certification:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\nIn 2022, Suriname had a population of roughly 624,900 according to estimates by the United Nations. This compares to 541,638 inhabitants from the 2012 census. The Surinamese populace is characterized by high levels of diversity, wherein no particular demographic group constitutes a majority. This is a legacy of centuries of Dutch rule, which entailed successive periods of forced, contracted, or voluntary migration by various nationalities and ethnic groups from around the world.\nLargest cities.\nThe national capital, Paramaribo, is by far the dominant urban area, accounting for nearly half of Suriname's population and most of its urban residents. Indeed, its population is greater than the next nine largest cities combined. Most municipalities are located within the capital's metropolitan area, or along the densely populated coastline; about 90% of the population lives in Paramaribo or on the coast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEthnicity.\nThe largest ethnic group are Asian Surinamese (about 43%), with the largest subgroup being Indo-Surinamese, locally referred to as \"Hindustanis\", who form over a quarter of the population (27.4%). The vast majority are descendants of 19th-century indentured workers from Northern India and Southern Nepal, hailing mostly from areas in the Hindi Belt of modern Bihar, Jharkhand and Eastern Uttar Pradesh, and also the Bengal region than consists of modern West Bengal and Bangladesh. If counted as one ethnic group, the Afro-Surinamese are the second largest community, at around 37.4%; however, they are usually divided into two cultural/ethnic groups: the Creoles and the Maroons. Surinamese Maroons, whose ancestors are mostly runaway slaves that fled to the interior, comprise 21.7% of the population. They are divided into six tribes: Ndyuka (Aucans), Saramaccans, Paramaccans, Kwinti, Aluku (Boni) and Matawai. Surinamese Creoles, mixed people descending from African slaves and Europeans (mostly Dutch), form 15.7% of the population. Javanese make up 14% of the population, and like the East Indians, descend largely from workers contracted from the island of Java in the former Dutch East Indies (modern Indonesia). 13.4% of the population identifies as being of mixed ethnic heritage. Chinese, originating from 19th-century indentured workers and some recent migration, make up 7.3% of the population.\nOther groups include Lebanese, primarily Maronites, and Jews of Sephardic and Ashkenazi origin, whose centre of population was Jodensavanne. Various indigenous peoples make up 3.7% of the population, with the main groups being the Akurio, Arawak, Kalina (Caribs), Tiriy\u00f3 and Wayana. They live mainly in the districts of Paramaribo, Wanica, Para, Marowijne and Sipaliwini. A small but influential number of Europeans remain in the country, comprising about 1% of the population. They are descended mostly from Dutch 19th-century immigrant farmers, known as \"Boeroes\" (derived from \"boer\", the Dutch word for \"farmer\"), and to a lesser degree other European groups, such as Portuguese. Many Boeroes left after independence in 1975.\nMore recently Suriname has seen a new wave of immigrants, namely Brazilians, Haitians and Chinese (many of them laborers mining for gold). Most do not have legal status.\nEmigration.\nThe option to choose between Surinamese or Dutch citizenship in the years leading up to Suriname's independence in 1975 led to a mass migration to the Netherlands. This migration continued in the period immediately after independence and during military rule in the 1980s and for largely economic reasons extended throughout the 1990s. The Surinamese community in the Netherlands numbered 350,300 as of 2013[ [update]] (including children and grandchildren of Suriname migrants born in the Netherlands), compared to approximately 566,000 Surinamese in Suriname itself.\nAccording to the International Organization for Migration, around 272,600 people from Suriname lived in other countries in the late 2010s, in particular in the Netherlands (c.\u2009192,000), France (c. 25,000, most of them in French Guiana), the United States (c. 15,000), Guyana (c. 5,000), Aruba (c. 1,500), and Canada (c. 1,000).\nLanguages.\nSuriname has roughly 14 local languages, but Dutch (\"Nederlands\") is the sole official language and is the language used in education, government, business, and the media. Over 60% of the population are native speakers of Dutch and around 20%\u201330% speak it as a second language. In 2004, Suriname became an associate member of the Dutch Language Union.\nSuriname is one of three Dutch-speaking sovereign countries in the world (the others being the Netherlands and Belgium). It is also the only area in the Americas where Dutch is spoken by a majority of the population (as territories in the Dutch Caribbean all have other majority languages). Finally, Suriname and English-speaking Guyana are the only countries in South America along with the English-speaking British dependent territory of the Falkland Islands where a Romance language does not predominate.\nIn Paramaribo, Dutch is the main home language in two-thirds of the households. The recognition of \"Surinaams-Nederlands\" (\"Surinamese Dutch\") as a national dialect equal to \"Nederlands-Nederlands\" (\"Dutch Dutch\") and \"Vlaams-Nederlands\" (\"Flemish Dutch\") was expressed in 2009 by the publication of the \"Woordenboek Surinaams Nederlands\" (\"Surinamese\u2013Dutch Dictionary\"). It is the most commonly spoken language in urban areas. The local languages are only more predominant than Dutch in the interior of Suriname (namely parts of Sipaliwini and Brokopondo).\nSranan Tongo, a local English-based creole language, is the most widely used vernacular language in daily life and business among the Surinamese. Together with Dutch, it is considered to be one of the two principal languages of Surinamese diglossia. Both are further influenced by other spoken languages which are spoken primarily within ethnic communities. Sranan Tongo is often used interchangeably with Dutch depending on the formality of the setting; Dutch is seen as a prestige dialect and Sranan Tongo the common vernacular.\nSarnami Hindustani, an Indo-Aryan koin\u00e9 language and the Surinamese variety of Caribbean Hindustani, is the third-most used language. It is primarily spoken by the descendants of Indian indentured labourers from the former British Raj.\nThe six Maroon languages of Suriname are also considered English-based creole languages, and include Saramaccan, Aukan, Aluku, Paramaccan, Matawai and Kwinti. Aluku, Paramaccan, and Kwinti are so mutually intelligible with Aukan that they can be considered dialects of the Aukan language. The same can be said about Matawai, which is mutually intelligible with Saramaccan.\nSurinamese-Javanese is used by the residents of Suriname who are descendants of the Javanese indentured laborers once sent from the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia).\nAmerindian languages include Akurio, Arawak-Lokono, Carib-Kari'nja, Sikiana-Kashuyana, Tiro-Tiriy\u00f3, Waiwai, Warao, and Wayana.\nHakka is spoken by the descendants of the Chinese indentured labourers. Cantonese and Mandarin are spoken by the recent wave of Chinese immigrants.\nEnglish, Guyanese English Creole, Portuguese, Spanish, French, and French Guianese Creole are spoken at areas near the country's borders where there are many migrants from neighboring countries speaking their respective languages.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSuriname's religious makeup is heterogeneous and reflective of the country's multicultural character. According to Pew research from 2012, Christians are the largest religious community, at slightly over half the population (51.6%), followed by Hindus (19.8%) and Muslims (15.2%); other religious minorities include adherents of various folk traditions (5.3%), Buddhists (&lt;1%), Jews (&lt;1%), practitioners of other faiths (1.8%), and unaffiliated (5.4%).\nAccording to the 2020 census, 52.3% of Surinamese were Christians; 26.7% were Protestants (11.18% Pentecostal, 11.16% Moravian, 0.7% Reformed (including Remonstrants), and 4.4% other Protestant denominations), while 21.6% were Catholics. Hindus are the second largest religious group in Suriname, comprising nearly one-fifth of the population (18.8% in 2020), the third largest proportion of any country in the Western Hemisphere, after Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago, both of which also have large proportions of Indians. Likewise, almost all practitioners of Hinduism are found among the Indo-Surinamese population. Muslims constitute 14.3% of the population, the highest proportion of Muslims in the Americas. They are largely of Javanese or Indian descent. Folk religions are practiced by 5.6% of the population and include Winti, an Afro-American religion practiced mostly by those of Maroon ancestry, Javanism (0.8%), a syncretic faith found among some Javanese Surinamese, and various indigenous folk traditions that are often incorporated into one of the larger religions (usually Christianity). In the 2020 census, 6.2% of the population declared they had \"no religion\", while a further 1.9% adhere to \"other religions\".\nHealth.\nThe Global Burden of Disease Study provides an on-line data source for analyzing updated estimates of health for 359 diseases and injuries and 84 risk factors from 1990 to 2017 in most of the world's countries. Comparing Suriname with other Caribbean nations show that in 2017 the age-standardized death rate for all causes was 793 (males 969, females 641) per 100,000, far below the 1219 of Haiti, somewhat below the 944 of Guyana but considerably above the 424 of Bermuda. In 1990, the death rate was 960 per 100,000. Life expectancy in 2017 was 72 years (males 69, females 75). The death rate for children &lt; 5 years was 581 per 100,000 compared to 1308 in Haiti and 102 in Bermuda. In 1990 and 2017, the leading causes of age-standardized death rates were cardiovascular disease, cancer, and diabetes/chronic kidney disease.\nEducation.\nEducation in Suriname is compulsory until the age of 12, and the nation had a net primary enrollment rate of 94% in 2004. Literacy is very common, particularly among men. The main university in the country is the Anton de Kom University of Suriname.\nFrom elementary school to high school there are 13 grades. The elementary school has six grades, middle school four grades, and high school three grades. Students take a test at the end of elementary school to determine whether they will go to the MULO (secondary modern school) or a middle school of lower standards like LBO.\nCulture.\nOwing to the country's multicultural heritage, Suriname celebrates a variety of distinct ethnic and religious festivals.\nNational holidays.\nThere are several Hindu and Islamic national holidays like Diwali, Phagwa, and Eid-ul-adha. These holidays do not have fixed dates on the Gregorian calendar, as they are based on the Hindu and Islamic calendars, respectively. As of 2020, Eid-ul-adha is a national holiday, and equal to a Sunday.\nThere are several holidays which are unique to Suriname. These include the Prawas Din (Indian), Javanese, and Chinese arrival days. They celebrate the arrival of the first ships with their respective immigrants.\nNew Year's Eve.\nNew Year's Eve in Suriname is called \"Oud jaar\", \"Owru Yari\", or \"old year\". Firecrackers called \"pagaras\" with long ribbons attached are detonated at midnight.\nMedia.\nTraditionally, \"De Ware Tijd\" was the major newspaper of the country, but since the '90s \"Times of Suriname, De West\" and \"Dagblad Suriname\" have also been well-read newspapers. All publish primarily in Dutch.\nSuriname has twenty-four radio stations, most of them also broadcast through the Internet. There are twelve television sources:\nABC (Ch. 4\u20131, 2), RBN (Ch. 5\u20131, 2), Rasonic TV (Ch. 7), STVS (Ch. 8\u20131, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6), Apintie (Ch. 10\u20131), ATV (Ch. 12\u20131, 2, 3, 4), Radika (Ch. 14), SCCN (Ch. 17\u20131, 2, 3), Pipel TV (Ch. 18\u20131, 2), Trishul (Ch. 20\u20131, 2, 3, 4), Garuda (Ch. 23\u20131, 2, 3), Sangeetmala (Ch. 26), Ch. 30, Ch. 31, Ch.32, Ch.38, SCTV (Ch. 45). Also listened to is mArt, a broadcaster from Amsterdam founded by people from Suriname. Kondreman is one of the popular cartoons in Suriname.\nThere are also three major news sites: Starnieuws, Suriname Herald, and GFC Nieuws.\nIn 2022, Suriname ranked 52nd in the worldwide Press Freedom Index by the organization Reporters Without Borders, a strong drop in the ranking compared to the 2018\u20132021 period (about location 20).\nSports.\nThe major sports in Suriname are football, basketball, and volleyball. The Suriname Olympic Committee is the national governing body for sports in Suriname. The major mind sports are chess, draughts, bridge and troefcall.\nMany Suriname-born football players and Dutch-born football players of Surinamese descent have turned out to play for the Dutch national team, including Gerald Vanenburg, Ruud Gullit, Frank Rijkaard, Edgar Davids, Clarence Seedorf, Patrick Kluivert, Aron Winter, Ryan Babel, Georginio Wijnaldum, Virgil van Dijk, and Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink, Donyell Malen, Xavi Simons, Ryan Gravenberch, and Denzel Dumfries. In 1999, Humphrey Mijnals, who played for both Suriname and the Netherlands, was elected Surinamese footballer of the century. Another famous player is Andr\u00e9 Kamperveen, who captained Suriname in the 1940s and was the first Surinamese to play professionally in the Netherlands.\nIn 2021 Suriname participated in their first CONCACAF Gold Cup where they played against Costa Rica, Jamaica and Guadeloupe in Group C. Suriname lost its first two matches against Jamaica and Costa Rica, but ended third in the group following a 2\u20131 win against Guadeloupe.\nSwimmer Anthony Nesty is the only Olympic medalist for Suriname. He won gold in the 100-meter butterfly at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul and he won bronze in the same discipline at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona. Originally from Trinidad and Tobago, he now lives in Gainesville, Florida, and is the head coach of the University of Florida swim team.\nThe most famous international track &amp; field athlete from Suriname is Letitia Vriesde, who won a silver medal at the 1995 World Championships behind Ana Quirot in the 800 metres, the first medal won by a South American female athlete in World Championship competition. In addition, she also won a bronze medal at the 2001 World Championships and won several medals in the 800 and 1500 metres at the Pan-American Games and Central American and Caribbean Games. Tommy Asinga also received acclaim for winning a bronze medal in the 800 metres at the 1991 Pan American Games.\nCricket is popular in Suriname to some extent, influenced by its popularity in the Netherlands and in neighbouring Guyana. The Surinaamse Cricket Bond is an associate member of the International Cricket Council (ICC). Suriname and Argentina were the only ICC associate members in South America when ICC had a three tiered membership, although Guyana is represented on the West Indies Cricket Board, a full member. The national cricket team was ranked 47th in the world and sixth in the ICC Americas region as of June 2014, and competes in the World Cricket League (WCL) and ICC Americas Championship. Iris Jharap, born in Paramaribo, played women's One Day International matches for the Dutch national side, the only Surinamese to do so.\nIn the sport of badminton, another popular sport in Suriname especially with the youth, the local heroes are Virgil Soeroredjo, Mitchel Wongsodikromo, S\u00f6ren Opti and also Crystal Leefmans. All winning medals for Suriname at the Carebaco Caribbean Championships, the Central American and Caribbean Games (CACSO Games) and also at the South American Games, better known as the ODESUR Games. Virgil Soeroredjo also participated for Suriname at the 2012 London Summer Olympics, only the second badminton player, after Oscar Brandon, for Suriname to achieve this. National Champion S\u00f6ren Opti became the third Surinamese badminton player to participate at the Summer Olympics in 2016.\nMultiple time K-1 kickboxing world champions Ernesto Hoost and Remy Bonjasky were born in Suriname or are of Surinamese descent. Other kickboxing world champions include Gilbert Ballantine, Rayen Simson, Melvin Manhoef, Tyrone Spong, Andy Ristie, Jairzinho Rozenstruik, Regian Eersel, and Donovan Wisse.\nSuriname also has a national korfball team, with korfball being a Dutch sport. Vinkensport is also practised.\nIn 2016, the Sports Hall of Fame Suriname was established in the building of the Suriname Olympic Committee and is dedicated to the achievements of the Surinamese sporters.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "26829", "revid": "1893804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26829", "title": "Category of sets", "text": "Category whose objects are sets and whose morphisms are functions\nIn the mathematical field of category theory, the category of sets, denoted by Set, is the category whose objects are sets. The arrows or morphisms between sets \"A\" and \"B\" are the functions from \"A\" to \"B\", and the composition of morphisms is the composition of functions.\nMany other categories (such as the category of groups, with group homomorphisms as arrows) add structure to the objects of the category of sets or restrict the arrows to functions of a particular kind (or both).\nProperties of the category of sets.\nThe axioms of a category are satisfied by Set because composition of functions is associative, and because every set \"X\" has an identity function id\"X\" : \"X\" \u2192 \"X\" which serves as identity element for function composition.\nThe epimorphisms in Set are the surjective maps, the monomorphisms are the injective maps, and the isomorphisms are the bijective maps.\nThe empty set serves as the initial object in Set with empty functions as morphisms. Every singleton is a terminal object, with the functions mapping all elements of the source sets to the single target element as morphisms. There are thus no zero objects in Set. \nThe category Set is complete and co-complete. The product in this category is given by the cartesian product of sets. The coproduct is given by the disjoint union: given sets \"A\"\"i\" where \"i\" ranges over some index set \"I\", we construct the coproduct as the union of \"A\"\"i\"\u00d7{\"i\"} (the cartesian product with \"i\" serves to ensure that all the components stay disjoint).\nSet is the prototype of a concrete category; other categories are concrete if they are \"built on\" Set in some well-defined way.\nEvery two-element set serves as a subobject classifier in Set. The power object of a set \"A\" is given by its power set, and the exponential object of the sets \"A\" and \"B\" is given by the set of all functions from \"A\" to \"B\". Set is thus a topos (and in particular cartesian closed and exact in the sense of Barr).\nSet is not abelian, additive nor preadditive.\nEvery non-empty set is an injective object in Set. Every set is a projective object in Set (assuming the axiom of choice).\nThe finitely presentable objects in Set are the finite sets. Since every set is a direct limit of its finite subsets, the category Set is a locally finitely presentable category.\nIf \"C\" is an arbitrary category, the contravariant functors from \"C\" to Set are often an important object of study. If \"A\" is an object of \"C\", then the functor from \"C\" to Set that sends \"X\" to Hom\"C\"(\"X\",\"A\") (the set of morphisms in \"C\" from \"X\" to \"A\") is an example of such a functor. If \"C\" is a small category (i.e. the collection of its objects forms a set), then the contravariant functors from \"C\" to Set, together with natural transformations as morphisms, form a new category, a functor category known as the category of presheaves on \"C\".\nFoundations for the category of sets.\nIn Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory the collection of all sets is not a set; this follows from the axiom of foundation. One refers to collections that are not sets as proper classes. One cannot handle proper classes as one handles sets; in particular, one cannot write that those proper classes belong to a collection (either a set or a proper class). This is a problem because it means that the category of sets cannot be formalized straightforwardly in this setting. Categories like Set whose collection of objects forms a proper class are known as large categories, to distinguish them from the small categories whose objects form a set. \nOne way to resolve the problem is to work in a system that gives formal status to proper classes, such as NBG set theory. In this setting, categories formed from sets are said to be \"small\" and those (like Set) that are formed from proper classes are said to be \"large\".\nAnother solution is to assume the existence of Grothendieck universes. Roughly speaking, a Grothendieck universe is a set which is itself a model of ZF(C) (for instance if a set belongs to a universe, its elements and its powerset will belong to the universe). The existence of Grothendieck universes (other than the empty set and the set formula_1 of all hereditarily finite sets) is not implied by the usual ZF axioms; it is an additional, independent axiom, roughly equivalent to the existence of strongly inaccessible cardinals. Assuming this extra axiom, one can limit the objects of Set to the elements of a particular universe. (There is no \"set of all sets\" within the model, but one can still reason about the class \"U\" of all inner sets, i.e., elements of \"U\".)\nIn one variation of this scheme, the class of sets is the union of the entire tower of Grothendieck universes. (This is necessarily a proper class, but each Grothendieck universe is a set because it is an element of some larger Grothendieck universe.) However, one does not work directly with the \"category of all sets\". Instead, theorems are expressed in terms of the category Set\"U\" whose objects are the elements of a sufficiently large Grothendieck universe \"U\", and are then shown not to depend on the particular choice of \"U\". As a foundation for category theory, this approach is well matched to a system like Tarski\u2013Grothendieck set theory in which one cannot reason directly about proper classes; its principal disadvantage is that a theorem can be true of all Set\"U\" but not of Set.\nVarious other solutions, and variations on the above, have been proposed.\nThe same issues arise with other concrete categories, such as the category of groups or the category of topological spaces.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26830", "revid": "13079754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26830", "title": "Slovakia", "text": "Country in Central Europe\nSlovakia, officially the Slovak Republic, is a landlocked country in Central Europe. It is bordered by Poland to the north, Ukraine to the east, Hungary to the south, Austria to the west, and the Czech Republic to the northwest. Slovakia's mostly mountainous territory spans about , hosting a population exceeding 5.4 million. The capital and largest city is Bratislava, while the second largest city is Ko\u0161ice.\nThe Slavs arrived in the territory of the present-day Slovakia in the 5th and 6th centuries. From the late 6th century, parts of modern Slovakia were incorporated into the Avar Khaghanate. In the 7th century, the Slavs played a significant role in the creation of Samo's Empire. When the Avar Khaghanate dissolved in the 9th century, the Slavs established the Principality of Nitra before it was annexed by the Principality of Moravia, which later became Great Moravia. When Great Moravia fell in the 10th century, the territory was integrated into the Principality of Hungary at the end of the 9th century, which later became the Kingdom of Hungary in 1000. In 1241 and 1242, after the Mongol invasion of Europe, much of the territory was destroyed, but was recovered largely thanks to Hungarian king B\u00e9la IV. During the 16th and 17th centuries, southern portions of present-day Slovakia were incorporated into provinces of the Ottoman Empire. The Ottoman-controlled areas were ceded to the Habsburgs by the turn of the 18th century. The Hungarian declaration of independence in 1848 was followed in the same year by the Slovak Uprising through the establishment of the Slovak National Council. While the uprising did not achieve its aim, it played an important role in cementing a Slovak national identity. The Hungarian wars of independence eventually resulted in a compromise that established the Austro-Hungarian Empire.\nDuring World War I, the Czechoslovak National Council successfully fought for independence amidst the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and the state of Czechoslovakia was proclaimed in 1918. The borders were set by the Treaty of Saint Germain in 1919 and by the Treaty of Trianon in 1920 Czechoslovakia incorporated the territory of present-day Slovakia which was entirely part of the Kingdom of Hungary. In the lead up to World War II, local fascist parties gradually came to power in the Slovak lands, and the first Slovak Republic was established in 1939 as a one-party clerical fascist client state under the control of Nazi Germany. In 1940, the country joined the Axis when its leaders signed the Tripartite Pact. Czechoslovakia was re-established after the country's liberation at the end of the war in 1945. Following the Soviet-backed coup of 1948, Czechoslovakia became a communist state within the Eastern Bloc, a satellite state of the Soviet Union behind the Iron Curtain and member of the Warsaw Pact. Attempts to liberalise communism culminated in the Prague Spring, which was suppressed by the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968. In 1989, the Velvet Revolution peacefully ended Communist rule in Czechoslovakia. Slovakia became an independent democratic state on 1 January 1993 after the peaceful dissolution of Czechoslovakia, sometimes referred to as the Velvet Divorce.\nSlovakia is a developed country with an advanced high-income economy. The country maintains a combination of a market economy with a comprehensive social security system, providing citizens with universal health care, free education, one of the lowest retirement age in Europe and one of the longest paid parental leaves in the OECD. Slovakia is a member of the European Union, the eurozone, the Schengen Area, the United Nations, NATO, CERN, the OECD, the WTO, the Council of Europe, the Visegr\u00e1d Group, and the OSCE. Slovakia is also home to eight UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The world's largest per-capita car producer, Slovakia manufactured a total of 1.08 million cars in 2023, representing 44% of its total industrial output.\nEtymology.\nSlovakia's name means the \"Land of the Slavs\" ( in Slovak stemming from the older form ). As such, it is a cognate of the words Slovenia and Slavonia. In medieval Latin, German, and even some Slavic sources, the same name has often been used for Slovaks, Slovenes, Slavonians, and Slavs in general. According to one of the theories, a new form of national name formed for the ancestors of the Slovaks between the 13th and 14th century, possibly due to foreign influence; the Czech word (in medieval sources from 1291 onward). This form slowly replaced the name for the male members of the community, but the female name (), reference to the lands inhabited () and the name of the language () all remained the same, with their base in the older form (compare to Slovenian counterparts). Most foreign translations tend to stem from this newer form (\"Slovakia\" in English, in German, in French, etc.).\nIn medieval Latin sources, terms: , , or (and more variants, from as early as 1029) have been used. In German sources, names for the Slovak lands were or (early 15th century), with the forms \"Slovakia\" and starting to appear in the 16th century. The present Slovak form is first attested in the year 1675.\nHistory.\nThe oldest surviving human artefacts from Slovakia are found near Nov\u00e9 Mesto nad V\u00e1hom and are dated at 270,000\u00a0BCE, in the Early Paleolithic era. These ancient tools, made by the Clactonian technique, bear witness to the ancient habitation of Slovakia.\nOther stone tools from the Middle Paleolithic era (200,000\u201380,000\u00a0BCE) come from the Pr\u00e9v\u00f4t (Prepo\u0161tsk\u00e1) cave in Bojnice and from other nearby sites. The most important discovery from that era is a Neanderthal cranium (c. 200,000 BCE), discovered near G\u00e1novce, a village in northern Slovakia.\nArchaeologists have found prehistoric human skeletons in the region, as well as numerous objects and vestiges of the Gravettian culture, principally in the river valleys of Nitra, Hron, Ipe\u013e, V\u00e1h and as far as the city of \u017dilina, and near the foot of the Vihorlat, Inovec, and Tribe\u010d mountains, as well as in the Myjava Mountains. The most well-known finds include the oldest female statue made of mammoth bone (22,800\u00a0BCE), the famous Venus of Moravany. The statue was found in the 1940s in Moravany nad V\u00e1hom near Pie\u0161\u0165any. Numerous necklaces made of shells from Cypraca thermophile gastropods of the Tertiary period have come from the sites of Z\u00e1kovsk\u00e1, Podkovice, Hubina, and Rado\u0161ina. These findings provide the most ancient evidence of commercial exchanges carried out between the Mediterranean and Central Europe.\nBronze Age.\nDuring the Bronze Age, the geographical territory of modern-day Slovakia went through three stages of development, stretching from 2000 to 800\u00a0BCE. Major cultural, economic, and political development can be attributed to the significant growth in production of copper, especially in central Slovakia (for example in \u0160pania Dolina) and northwest Slovakia. Copper became a stable source of prosperity for the local population.\nAfter the disappearance of the \u010cakany and Velatice cultures, the Lusatian people expanded building of strong and complex fortifications, with the large permanent buildings and administrative centres. Excavations of Lusatian hill forts document the substantial development of trade and agriculture at that period. The richness and diversity of tombs increased considerably. The inhabitants of the area manufactured arms, shields, jewellery, dishes, and statues.\nIron Age.\nHallstatt Period.\nThe arrival of tribes from Thrace disrupted the people of the Kalenderberg culture, who lived in the hamlets located on the plain (Sere\u010f) and in the hill forts like Molp\u00edr, near Smolenice, in the Little Carpathians. During Hallstatt times, monumental burial mounds were erected in western Slovakia, with princely equipment consisting of richly decorated vessels, ornaments and decorations. The burial rites consisted entirely of cremation. Common people were buried in flat urnfield cemeteries.\nA special role was given to weaving and the production of textiles. The local power of the \"Princes\" of the Hallstatt period disappeared in Slovakia during the century before the middle of first millennium BCE, after strife between the Scytho-Thracian people and locals, resulting in abandonment of the old hill-forts. Relatively depopulated areas soon caught the interest of emerging Celtic tribes, who advanced from the south towards the north, following the Slovak rivers, peacefully integrating into the remnants of the local population.\nLa T\u00e8ne Period.\nFrom around 500\u00a0BCE, the territory of modern-day Slovakia was settled by Celts, who built powerful \"oppida\" on the sites of modern-day Bratislava and Dev\u00edn. Biatecs, silver coins with inscriptions in the Latin alphabet, represent the first known use of writing in Slovakia. At the northern regions, remnants of the local population of Lusatian origin, together with Celtic and later Dacian influence, gave rise to the unique P\u00fachov culture, with advanced crafts and iron-working, many hill-forts and fortified settlements of central type with the coinage of the \"Velkobysterecky\" type (no inscriptions, with a horse on one side and a head on the other). This culture is often connected with the Celtic tribe mentioned in Roman sources as Cotini.\nRoman Period.\nFrom 2\u00a0CE, the expanding Roman Empire established and maintained a series of outposts around and just south of the Danube, the largest of which were known as Carnuntum (whose remains are on the main road halfway between Vienna and Bratislava) and Brigetio (present-day Sz\u0151ny at the Slovak-Hungarian border). Such Roman border settlements were built on the present area of Rusovce, currently a suburb of Bratislava. The military fort was surrounded by a civilian vicus and several farms of the villa rustica type. The name of this settlement was Gerulata. The military fort had an auxiliary cavalry unit, approximately 300 horses strong, modelled after the Cananefates. The remains of Roman buildings have also survived in Stupava, Dev\u00edn Castle, Bratislava Castle Hill, and the Bratislava-D\u00fabravka suburb.\nNear the northernmost line of the Roman hinterlands, the Limes Romanus, there existed the winter camp of Laugaricio (modern-day Tren\u010d\u00edn) where the Auxiliary of Legion\u00a0II fought and prevailed in a decisive battle over the Germanic Quadi tribe in 179\u00a0CE during the Marcomannic Wars. The Kingdom of Vannius, a kingdom founded by the Germanic Suebi tribes of Quadi and Marcomanni, as well as several small Germanic and Celtic tribes, including the Osi and Cotini, existed in western and central Slovakia from 8\u20136\u00a0BCE to 179\u00a0CE.\nGreat invasions from the fourth to seventh centuries.\nIn the second and third centuries CE, the Huns began to leave the Central Asian steppes. They crossed the Danube in 377\u00a0CE and occupied Pannonia, which they used for 75\u00a0years as their base for launching looting-raids into Western Europe. However, Attila's death in 453 brought about the disappearance of the Hunnic empire. In 568, a Turko-Mongol tribal confederacy, the Avars, conducted its invasion into the Middle Danube region. The Avars occupied the lowlands of the Pannonian Plain and established an empire dominating the Carpathian Basin.\nIn 623, the Slavic population living in the western parts of Pannonia seceded from their empire after a revolution led by Samo, a Frankish merchant. After 626, the Avar power started a gradual decline but its reign lasted to 804.\nAvars.\nIn 568, the Avars, under Khagan Bayan I established an empire in the Carpathian Basin that lasted for 250 years.\nSlavic states.\nThe Slavic tribes settled in the territory of present-day Slovakia in the fifth century. Western Slovakia was the centre of Samo's empire in the seventh century. A Slavic state known as the Principality of Nitra arose in the eighth century and its ruler Pribina had the first known Christian church of the territory of present-day Slovakia consecrated by 828. Together with neighbouring Moravia, the principality formed the core of the Great Moravian Empire from 833. The high point of this Slavonic empire came with the arrival of Saints Cyril and Methodius in 863, during the reign of Duke Rastislav, and the territorial expansion under King Sv\u00e4topluk I.\nGreat Moravia (830\u2013before 907).\nGreat Moravia arose around 830 when Mojm\u00edr I unified the Slavic tribes settled north of the Danube and extended the Moravian supremacy over them. When Mojm\u00edr I endeavoured to secede from the supremacy of the king of East Francia in 846, King Louis the German deposed him and assisted Mojm\u00edr's nephew Rastislav (846\u2013870) in acquiring the throne. The new monarch pursued an independent policy: after stopping a Frankish attack in 855, he also sought to weaken the influence of Frankish priests preaching in his realm. Duke Rastislav asked the Byzantine Emperor Michael III to send teachers who would interpret Christianity in the Slavic vernacular.\nIn 862, Prince Rastislav of Moravia rebelled against the Franks, and after hiring Hungarian troops, won his independence; this was the first time that Hungarians expeditionary troops entered the Carpathian Basin.\nOn Rastislav's request, two brothers, Byzantine officials and missionaries Saints Cyril and Methodius came in 863. Cyril developed the first Slavic alphabet and translated the Gospel into the Old Church Slavonic language. Rastislav was also preoccupied with the security and administration of his state. Numerous fortified castles built throughout the country are dated to his reign and some of them (e.g.,\u00a0\"Dowina\", sometimes identified with Dev\u00edn Castle) are also mentioned in connection with Rastislav by Frankish chronicles.\nDuring Rastislav's reign, the Principality of Nitra was given to his nephew Sv\u00e4topluk as an appanage. The rebellious prince allied himself with the Franks and overthrew his uncle in 870. Similarly to his predecessor, Sv\u00e4topluk I (871\u2013894) assumed the title of the king (\"rex\"). During his reign, the Great Moravian Empire reached its greatest territorial extent, when not only present-day Moravia and Slovakia but also present-day northern and central Hungary, Lower Austria, Bohemia, Silesia, Lusatia, southern Poland and northern Serbia belonged to the empire, but the exact borders of his domains are still disputed by modern authors. Svatopluk also withstood attacks of the Magyar tribes and the Bulgarian Empire, although sometimes it was he who hired the Magyars when waging war against East Francia.\nIn 880, Pope John\u00a0VIII set up an independent ecclesiastical province in Great Moravia with Archbishop Methodius as its head. He also named the German cleric Wiching the Bishop of Nitra.\nAfter the death of Prince Svatopluk in 894, his sons Mojm\u00edr\u00a0II (894\u2013906?) and Svatopluk\u00a0II succeeded him as the Prince of Great Moravia and the Prince of Nitra respectively. However, they started to quarrel for domination of the whole empire. Weakened by an internal conflict as well as by constant warfare with Eastern Francia, Great Moravia lost most of its peripheral territories.\nIt is not known what happened with both Mojm\u00edr\u00a0II and Svatopluk\u00a0II because they are not mentioned in written sources after 906. In three battles (4\u20135\u00a0July and 9\u00a0August 907) near Bratislava, the Magyars routed Bavarian armies. Some historians put this year as the date of the break-up of the Great Moravian Empire, due to the Hungarian conquest; other historians take the date a little bit earlier (to 902).\nGreat Moravia left behind a lasting legacy in Central and Eastern Europe. The Glagolitic script and its successor Cyrillic were disseminated to other Slavic countries, charting a new path in their sociocultural development.\nGrand Principality of Hungary (895\u20131000).\nFoundation of the Hungarian state is connected to the Hungarian conquerors, who arrived from the Pontic steppes as a confederation of seven tribes. The Hungarians arrived in the frame of a strong centralized steppe-empire under the leadership of Grand Prince \u00c1lmos and his son \u00c1rp\u00e1d, they became founders of the \u00c1rp\u00e1d dynasty, the Hungarian ruling dynasty and the Hungarian state. The \u00c1rp\u00e1d dynasty claimed to be a direct descendant of the great Hun leader Attila. The Hungarians took possession of the Carpathian Basin in a pre-planned manner, with a long move-in between 862 and 895. Their armies' advance may have been promoted by continuous wars among the countries of the region whose rulers still hired them occasionally to intervene in their struggles.\nJust a few decades after the collapse of the Avar Khaganate in 822, once again a steppe empire, the Hungarian Grand Principality united the Carpathian Basin under its rule. Only the East Frankish Empire had such military power that it could intervent in the formation of the new order. His leadership also wanted to eliminate the new steppe state because the East Frankish Empire lost Pannonia and its Christian Avar taxpayers, and his territory was hit by increasing attacks by the Hungarians, especially Bavaria, which was then the eastern province of the Eastern Frankish Kingdom. In 907, three East Francian armies led by Luitpold, Margrave of Bavaria, which entered the Hungarian territory in order to expel the Hungarians from the Carpathian Basin, is annihilated by the Hungarian army at the Battle of Pressburg. Luitpold, Margrave of Bavaria, Dietmar I, Archbishop of Salzburg, Prince Sieghard, 19 counts, 2 bishops, and 3 abbots are killed in the battle, together with the majority of the soldiers. The Hungarians secured the lands they gained during the Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin, and prevented a future German invasion, the Germans did not launch an imperial scale campaign against Hungary for 123 years until 1030.\nThe Kingdom of Hungary, the Habsburg Monarchy and the Ottoman Empire (1000\u20131918).\nIn 972, the ruling prince G\u00e9za of the \u00c1rp\u00e1d dynasty officially started to integrate Grand Principality of Hungary into Christian Western Europe. His son Saint Stephen I became the first King of Hungary after defeating his pagan uncle Kopp\u00e1ny. Under Stephen, Hungary was recognised as a Catholic Apostolic Kingdom. Applying to Pope Sylvester II, Stephen received the insignia of royalty (including probably a part of the Holy Crown of Hungary) from the papacy.\nIn the years 1001\u20131002 and 1018\u20131029, Slovakia was part of the Kingdom of Poland, having been conquered by Boleslaus I the Brave. After the territory of Slovakia was returned to Hungary, a semi-autonomous polity continued to exist (or was created in 1048 by king Andrew I) called Duchy of Nitra. Comprising roughly the territory of Principality of Nitra and Bihar principality, they formed what was called a \"tercia pars regni\", third of a kingdom.\nThis polity existed up until 1108/1110, after which it was not restored. After this, up until the collapse of Austria-Hungary in 1918, the territory of Slovakia was an integral part of the Hungarian state. The ethnic composition of Slovakia became more diverse with the arrival of the Carpathian Germans in the 13th century and the Jews in the 14th century.\nA significant decline in the population resulted from the invasion of the Mongols in 1241 and the subsequent famine. After the invasion, much of the territory was destroyed, but was recovered largely thanks to Hungarian king B\u00e9la IV. However, in medieval times the area of Slovakia was characterised by German and Jewish immigration, burgeoning towns, construction of numerous stone castles, and the cultivation of the arts. The arrival of German element sometimes proved a problem for the autochthonous Slovaks (and even Hungarians in the broader Hungary), since they often quickly gained most power in medieval towns, only to later refuse to share it. Breaking of old customs by Germans often resulted in national quarrels. One of which had to be sorted out by the king Louis I. with the proclamation Privilegium pro Slavis (Privilege for Slovaks) in the year 1381. According to this privilege, Slovaks and Germans were to occupy each half of the seats in the city council of \u017dilina and the mayor should be elected each year, alternating between those nationalities. This would not be the last such case.\nIn 1465, King Matthias Corvinus founded the Hungarian Kingdom's third university, in Pressburg (Bratislava), but it was closed in 1490 after his death. Hussites also settled in the region after the Hussite Wars.\nOwing to the Ottoman Empire's expansion into Hungarian territory, Bratislava was designated the new capital of Hungary in 1536, ahead of the fall of the old Hungarian capital of Buda in 1541. It became part of the Austrian Habsburg monarchy, marking the beginning of a new era. The territory comprising modern Slovakia, then known as Upper Hungary, became the place of settlement for nearly two-thirds of the Magyar nobility fleeing the Turks and became far more linguistically and culturally Hungarian than it was before. Partly thanks to old Hussite families and Slovaks studying under Martin Luther, the region then experienced a growth in Protestantism. For a short period in the 17th century, most Slovaks were Lutherans. They defied the Catholic Habsburgs and sought protection from neighbouring Transylvania, a rival continuation of the Magyar state that practised religious tolerance and normally had Ottoman backing. Upper Hungary, modern Slovakia, became the site of frequent wars between Catholics in the west territory and Protestants in the east, as well as against Turks; the frontier was on a constant state of military alert and heavily fortified by castles and citadels often manned by Catholic German and Slovak troops on the Habsburg side. By 1648, Slovakia was not spared the Counter-Reformation, which brought the majority of its population from Lutheranism back to Roman Catholicism. In 1655, the printing press at the Trnava university produced the Jesuit Benedikt Sz\u00f6ll\u0151si's Cantus Catholici, a Catholic hymnal in Slovak that reaffirmed links to the earlier works of Cyril and Methodius.\nThe Ottoman wars, the rivalry between Austria and Transylvania, and the frequent insurrections against the Habsburg monarchy inflicted a great deal of devastation, especially in the rural areas. In the Austro-Turkish War (1663\u20131664) a Turkish army led by the Grand Vizier decimated Slovakia. In 1682, the Principality of Upper Hungary, a short-lived Ottoman vassal state, was established in the territory of modern Slovakia. Prior to this, regions on its southern rim were already encompassed in the Egri, Budin and Uyvar eyalets. Th\u00f6k\u00f6ly's kuruc rebels from the Principality of Upper Hungary fought alongside the Turks against the Austrians and Poles at the Battle of Vienna of 1683 led by John III Sobieski. As the Turks withdrew from Hungary in the late 17th century, the importance of the territory composing modern Slovakia decreased, although Pressburg retained its status as the capital of Hungary until 1848 when it was transferred back to Buda.\nDuring the revolution of 1848\u201349, the Slovaks started uprising, supporting the Austrian Emperor, hoping for independence from the Hungarian part of the Dual Monarchy and greater autonomy within the empire. They failed to achieve their aim, but the conflict resulted in Slovak rights for language in certain administrative and educational areas.\nThereafter, relations between the nationalities deteriorated (see Magyarisation), culminating in the secession of Slovakia from Hungary after World War I.\nCzechoslovak independence (1918\u20131939).\nOn 18 October 1918, Tom\u00e1\u0161 Garrigue Masaryk, Milan Rastislav \u0160tef\u00e1nik and Edvard Bene\u0161 declared in Washington, D.C. the independence for the territories of Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, Upper Hungary and Carpathian Ruthenia from the Austro-Hungarian Empire and proclaimed a common state, Czechoslovakia.\nDuring the chaos following the break-up of Austria-Hungary, Czechoslovakia was formed with numerous Czechs, Germans, Slovaks, Hungarians and Ruthenians. The borders were set by the Treaty of Saint Germain in 1919 and Treaty of Trianon in 1920. By the treaties following the World War I, Czechoslovakia emerged as a sovereign European state.\nDuring the Interwar period, democratic Czechoslovakia was allied with France, and also with Romania and Yugoslavia (Little Entente); however, the Locarno Treaties of 1925 left East European security open. Both Czechs and Slovaks enjoyed a period of relative prosperity. There was progress in not only the development of the country's economy but also culture and educational opportunities. Yet the Great Depression caused a sharp economic downturn, followed by political disruption and insecurity in Europe.\nIn the 1930s, Czechoslovakia came under continuous pressure from the revanchist governments of Germany, Hungary and Poland who used the aggrieved minorities in the country as a useful vehicle. Revision of the borders was called for, as Czechs constituted only 43% of the population. Eventually, this pressure led to the Munich Agreement of September 1938, which allowed the majority ethnic Germans in the Sudetenland, borderlands of Czechoslovakia, to join with Germany. The remaining minorities stepped up their pressures for autonomy and the State became federalised, with Diets in Slovakia and Ruthenia. The remainder of Czechoslovakia was renamed Czecho-Slovakia and promised a greater degree of Slovak political autonomy. This, however, failed to materialise. Parts of southern and eastern Slovakia were also reclaimed by Hungary at the First Vienna Award of November 1938.\nFascist regime during World War II (1939\u20131945).\nAfter the Munich Agreement and its Vienna Award, Nazi Germany threatened to annex part of Slovakia and allow the remaining regions to be partitioned by Hungary or Poland unless independence was declared. Thus, Slovakia seceded from Czecho-Slovakia in March 1939 and allied itself, as demanded by Germany, with Hitler's coalition. Secession had created the first Slovak state in history.\nA one-party clerical fascist Slovak Republic governed by the far-right Hlinka's Slovak People's Party was led by President Jozef Tiso and Prime Minister Vojtech Tuka. The (First) Slovak Republic is primarily known for its collaboration with Nazi Germany, which included sending troops to the invasion of Poland in September 1939 and the Soviet Union in 1941. On 24\u00a0November 1940, Slovakia joined the Axis when its leaders signed the Tripartite Pact. The country was strongly influenced by Germany and gradually became a puppet regime in many respects.\nMeanwhile, the Czechoslovak government-in-exile sought to reverse the Munich Agreement and the subsequent German occupation of Czechoslovakia and to return the Republic to its 1937 boundaries. The government operated from London and it was ultimately considered, by those countries that recognised it, the legitimate government for Czechoslovakia throughout the Second World War.\nThe local Jewish population was heavily persecuted. As part of the Holocaust in Slovakia, 75,000 Jews out of 80,000 who remained on Slovak territory after Hungary had seized southern regions were deported and taken to German death camps. Thousands of Jews, Gypsies and other politically undesirable people remained in Slovak forced labour camps in Sere\u010f, Vyhne, and Nov\u00e1ky. Tiso, through the granting of presidential exceptions, allowed between 1,000 and 4,000 people crucial to the war economy to avoid deportations.\nUnder Tiso's government and Hungarian occupation, the vast majority of Slovakia's pre-war Jewish population (between 75,000 and 105,000 individuals including those who perished from the occupied territory) were murdered. The Slovak state paid Germany 500 RM per every deported Jew for \"retraining and accommodation\" (a similar but smaller payment of 30 RM was paid by Croatia).\nAfter it became clear that the Soviet Red Army was going to push the Nazis out of eastern and central Europe, an anti-Nazi resistance movement launched. Internal opposition to the fascist government's policies culminated in the Slovak National Uprising, near the end of summer 1944. A bloody German occupation and a guerilla war followed. Germans and their local collaborators completely destroyed 93 villages and massacred thousands of civilians, often hundreds at a time. Although the uprising was eventually suppressed, partisan resistance continued. The territory of Slovakia was liberated by Soviet and Romanian forces by the end of April 1945.\nFrom Fascism to Communism (1945\u20131948).\nAs a result of the Yalta Conference in February 1945, Czechoslovakia came under the influence of the Soviet Union.\nAfter World War\u00a0II, Czechoslovakia was reconstituted and Jozef Tiso was executed in 1947 for collaboration with the Nazis. More than 80,000 Hungarians and 32,000 Germans were forced to leave Slovakia, in a series of population transfers initiated by the Allies at the Potsdam Conference. Out of about 130,000 Carpathian Germans in Slovakia in 1938, by 1947 only some 20,000 remained.\nIn February 1948, the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, with Soviet backing, assumed undisputed control over the government of Czechoslovakia through a coup d'\u00e9tat and Czechoslovakia came under direct occupation of the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact. It became a puppet state of the Soviet Union, but it was never part of the Soviet Union and remained independent to a certain degree.\nCommunist party rule in Czechoslovakia (1948\u20131989).\nBorders with the West were protected by the Iron Curtain. About 600 people, men, women, and children, were killed on the Czechoslovak border with Austria and West Germany between 1948 and 1989. 8,240 people went to forced labour camps in 1948\u20131953.\nOn 11 July 1960, the Constitution of Czechoslovakia was promulgated, changing the name of the country from the \"Czechoslovak Republic\" to the \"Czechoslovak Socialist Republic\".\nIn 1968, following the Prague Spring, the country was invaded by the Warsaw Pact forces (People's Republic of Bulgaria, People's Republic of Hungary, People's Republic of Poland, and Soviet Union, with the exception of Socialist Republic of Romania and People's Socialist Republic of Albania), ending a period of liberalisation under the leadership of Alexander Dub\u010dek. 137 Czechoslovak civilians were killed and 500 seriously wounded during the invasion.\nIn 1969, Czechoslovakia became a federation of the Czech Socialist Republic and the Slovak Socialist Republic within the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.\nCzechoslovakia was allied with communist regimes worldwide. As one of the first countries in the world acknowledged Kim Il-sung's Democratic People's Republic of Korea. After the beginning of the Korean War, Czechoslovakia protested against measures taken by the Security Council. Czechoslovak communist leaders considered the intervention against North Korean aggression illegal. During summer 1950, many resolutions against \"American imperialism\" were sent to the United Nations from Czechoslovakia. During the Korean War in 1952, Czechoslovakia sent a military hospital with two hospital teams consisting of 58 people to North Korea.\nWhen Fidel Castro took power after the Cuban Revolution in 1959, Czechoslovakia opened an embassy in Cuba and developed mutual relations. In August 1968, Castro denounced the Prague Spring as led by a \"fascist reactionary rabble\" and praised the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia. During the Vietnam War, Czechoslovakia sent significant aid to North Vietnam. The Czechoslovak government created committees which sought to not only promote and establish peace, but also to promote victory for Viet Cong and Vietnam People's Army forces. Czech-made equipment and military aid would increase significantly following the Prague Spring. Czechoslovakia continued to send tens of thousands of Czech-made rifles as well as mortar and artillery throughout the war.\nFrom Communism to Democracy (1989\u20131992).\nThe end of Communist rule in Czechoslovakia in 1989, during the peaceful Velvet Revolution, was followed once again by the country's dissolution, this time into two successor states. Czechoslovak Socialist Republic renamed as Czech and Slovak Federative Republic, the word \"socialist\" was dropped in the names of the two republics within the federation, the Slovak Socialist Republic renamed as Slovak Republic.\nOn 17\u00a0July 1992, Slovakia, led by Prime Minister Vladim\u00edr Me\u010diar, declared itself a sovereign state, meaning that its laws took precedence over those of the federal government. Throughout the autumn of 1992, Vladim\u00edr Me\u010diar and Czech Prime Minister V\u00e1clav Klaus negotiated the details for disbanding the federation. In November, the federal parliament voted to dissolve the country officially on 31\u00a0December 1992.\nSlovak independence (since 1993).\n1990s.\nThe Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic went their separate ways on 1\u00a0January 1993, an event sometimes called the Velvet Divorce, after 74 years of joint existence disrupted only by World War II. Slovakia has, nevertheless, remained a close partner with the Czech Republic; the two countries are close European allies and both co-operate with Hungary and Poland in the Visegr\u00e1d Group. The first President of the Slovak Republic became Michal Kov\u00e1\u010d, elected by the National Council of Slovakia in February 1993. Slovakia became a member of the United Nations on 19\u00a0January 1993, on 31\u00a0March 1993 ratified the UNESCO World Heritage Convention, making its historical sites eligible for inclusion on the UNESCO list and on 15\u00a0April 1993 joined GATT (current World Trade Organization).\nAfter the fall of communism and the dissolution of Czechoslovakia, the country was unprepared for organised crime. Crime rates in Slovakia soared in the 1990s, the first post-communist gangsters emerged and mafia became the major problem in the country. Most of the law enforcement officers, prosecutors, and judges had no experience of investigating, trying, or sentencing criminals. Many officials lacked even basic knowledge of the leading criminal operators in their communities. Between 1994\u20131998, during the government of Prime Minister Vladim\u00edr Me\u010diar, organised crime became well established and it penetrated the highest political positions. One of the major crime events was kidnapping of Slovak president's son Michal Kov\u00e1\u010d Jr. in 1995, organised by Slovak intelligence service and the government of Vladim\u00edr Me\u010diar. Processes of privatization in Slovakia began, often criticized for lack of transparency and corruption. Hundreds of state assets came into private hands to only a selected group of businessmen. In the 1990s, Slovakia had central Europe's worst-performing economy, marked by high unemployment rates and inflation with least democratic government. Madeleine Albright, the U.S. secretary of state, referred to it as \"a black hole in the heart of Europe\". This time period in Slovakia is also known as \"Wild 90s\" (\"Divok\u00e9 90.roky\"). Since March 1998, the country was 14 months without a head of state, when the National Council of Slovakia multiple times failed to elect the new president, which led to the introduction of a direct presidential election in 1999.\nAfter the 1998 parliamentary election, Mikul\u00e1\u0161 Dzurinda went on to replace Vladim\u00edr Me\u010diar as Prime Minister, and during two successive governments between 1998\u20132006, relaunched the transformation processes that had stalled under Me\u010diar. The country embarked on a reformist course that saw the introduction of a flat tax, liberalisation of the labour market, deregulation of business, and partial privatization of social security. Government of Mikul\u00e1\u0161 Dzurinda led Slovakia into OECD, NATO and the European Union. In 1999, the second President of Slovakia became Rudolf Schuster, first directly-elected president.\n2000s.\nSlovakia became a member of OECD on 14\u00a0December 2000, NATO on 29\u00a0March 2004 and of the European Union on 1\u00a0May 2004. The country used to be dubbed the \"Tatra Tiger\" in the 2000s as achieved, on average, roughly 6% per capita GDP growth each year from 2000 to 2008. Ivan Ga\u0161parovi\u010d became the third president of Slovakia in 2004 and in 2009 became the first and the only Slovak re-elected president.\nIn 2006, Robert Fico became Prime Minister, during his first government, Slovakia joined the Schengen area on 21\u00a0December 2007, allowing visa free travel and on 1\u00a0January 2009 adopted the Euro as its national currency at 30.1260 korunas to the euro. The Slovak economy was involved in a major slowdown during the 2008 financial crisis, experiencing the deepest recession in history. At the beginning of 2009, Slovakia faced energy crisis and declared a state of emergency, after Russia cut gas supplies to Europe via Ukrainian pipelines as part of a price dispute with Ukraine.\n2010s.\nBetween 2010\u20132012, Slovak government was led by first female Prime Minister Iveta Radi\u010dov\u00e1. Her government lasted only two years, Radi\u010dov\u00e1 combined the vote on the strengthening of the European Financial Stability Facility \u2013 a key anti-crisis mechanism in the eurozone \u2013 with a vote of confidence for her cabinet. Slovak parliament rejected the EFSF, which led to the collapse of the government.\nIn 2012, Robert Fico became second time Prime Minister when his political party Direction \u2013 Social Democracy won election and collected 83 of 150 seats in National Council, becoming the first single party to win a clear majority in the Slovak parliament since the fall of communism. In 2014, Andrej Kiska became the fourth President of Slovakia. For the first time was elected as President entrepreneur and first-time politician. International crisis impacted Slovak politics and quickly started dominating the country's political life and media coverage, such as Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation in neighbouring Ukraine in 2014 or European migrant crisis in 2015.\nAfter the parliamentary election in 2016, Robert Fico became third time Prime Minister, making him longest-serving prime minister in Slovak history, if the years are counted cumulatively. Third term of Fico's government was characterised by social and political turmoil. On February 21, 2018, young Slovak investigative journalist J\u00e1n Kuciak and his fianc\u00e9e, were killed in their home in Ve\u013ek\u00e1 Ma\u010da. Thousands of people protested in streets across Slovakia for independent investigation of journalist's murder and a 'trustworthy' government in largest demonstrations in the country since the Velvet Revolution. Due to protests, Robert Fico resigned, and the government continued under a new Prime Minister Peter Pellegrini. In 2019, Zuzana \u010caputov\u00e1 became the fifth President of Slovakia, first female president.\n2020s.\nAfter the parliamentary election in 2020, Igor Matovi\u010d became the new Prime Minister of Slovakia. Matovi\u010d and his government, with little to no previous government experience, was dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic and COVID-19 recession, during which more than 21,000 people died in Slovakia between 2020\u20132023, the worst death toll in the country since the end of World War II. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Slovak economy faced the worst economic crisis since the 2008 financial crisis and fell into recession.\nAt the beginning of 2021, Matovi\u010d signed an agreement to acquire 2 million doses of Russia's Sputnik V COVID-19 vaccine, which has not been cleared by European Union regulators. Matovi\u010d orchestrated the deal despite disagreement among his coalition partners, which led to a government crisis and his resignation. The government continued under a new Prime Minister Eduard Heger. Heger and his government faced many challenges, such as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, Russian invasion in neighbouring Ukraine, Ukrainian refugee crisis, Global energy crisis and Inflation surge. After a strong economic recovery in 2021, growth slowed down markedly in 2022 and 2023 as a result of the consequences of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, notably the subsequent EU sanctions on Russia and Global energy crisis. Slovakia became one of Ukraine's largest donors of military aid during Heger's government in 2022 and 2023. Government crisis in Slovakia continued with various disputes in the coalition. At the end of 2022, Heger's government collapsed, after a lost no-confidence vote in parliament. In 2023, in the interim before the next election, President Zuzana \u010caputov\u00e1 appointed the first technocrat government in Slovak history and \u013dudov\u00edt \u00d3dor became the new Prime Minister for only six months, the third Prime Minister of Slovakia in three years.\nAfter the parliamentary election in 2023, Robert Fico became for the fourth time Prime Minister. The new government halted military aid to Ukraine, while still providing humanitarian aid and electricity supplies. On May 15, 2024, Prime Minister Robert Fico was shot several times and wounded in an assassination attempt. The suspect stated during interrogation that he acted primarily because of the Fico government's opposition to military assistance to Ukraine. In 2024, Peter Pellegrini became the sixth President of Slovakia. Pellegrini is the first Slovak politician to have held all three highest constitutional posts (President, Prime Minister and Speaker of Parliament) in the country. Fourth term of Fico's government is characterized by political instability with fragile coalition, worsening relations with European Union, diplomatic disputes with the closest ally Czech Republic and growing Russian influence. Pro-Russia policies of Slovak government, questioning Slovakia's future in the European Union and NATO, criticism of Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and Fico's good relationship with Russian President Vladimir Putin, led to widespread demonstrations across the country. Slovakia fell significantly in the media freedom ranking and corruption ranking. Crisis of democratic society was followed by economic decline, underlined by downgrade rating from credit rating agency Moody's and later Standard &amp; Poor's. In 2025, the government amended constitution to recognize only two genders (male and female), sparking human rights concerns.\nGeography.\nSlovakia lies between latitudes 47\u00b0 and 50\u00b0 N, and longitudes 16\u00b0 and 23\u00b0 E. The Slovak landscape is noted primarily for its mountainous nature, with the Carpathian Mountains extending across most of the northern half of the country. Among these mountain ranges are the high peaks of the Fatra-Tatra Area (including Tatra Mountains, Greater Fatra and Lesser Fatra), Slovak Ore Mountains, Slovak Central Mountains or Beskids. The largest lowland is the fertile Danubian Lowland in the southwest, followed by the Eastern Slovak Lowland in the southeast. Forests cover 41% of Slovak land surface.\nTatra mountains.\nThe Tatra Mountains, with 29 peaks higher than AMSL, are the highest mountain range in the Carpathian Mountains. The Tatras occupy an area of , of which the greater part lies in Slovakia. They are divided into several parts.\nTo the north, close to the Polish border, are the High Tatras which are a popular hiking and skiing destination and home to many scenic lakes and valleys as well as the highest point in Slovakia, the Gerlachovsk\u00fd \u0161t\u00edt at and the country's highly symbolic mountain Kriv\u00e1\u0148. To the west are the Western Tatras with their highest peak of Bystr\u00e1 at and to the east are the Belianske Tatras, smallest by area.\nSeparated from the Tatras proper by the valley of the V\u00e1h river are the Low Tatras, with their highest peak of \u010eumbier at .\nThe Tatra mountain range is represented as one of the three hills on the coat of arms of Slovakia.\nNational parks.\nThere are nine national parks in Slovakia, covering 6.5% of the Slovak land surface. These parks are: Tatra National Park, Low Tatras National Park, Ve\u013ek\u00e1 Fatra National Park, Slovak Karst National Park, Poloniny National Park, Mal\u00e1 Fatra National Park, Mur\u00e1nska planina National Park, Slovak Paradise National Park and Pieniny National Park.\nCaves.\nSlovakia has hundreds of caves and caverns under its mountains, of which 30 are open to the public. Most of the caves have stalagmites rising from the ground and stalactites hanging from above.\nThere are currently five Slovak caves under UNESCO's World Heritage Site status: Dob\u0161in\u00e1 Ice Cave, Domica, Gombasek Cave, Jasovsk\u00e1 Cave and Ochtinsk\u00e1 Aragonite Cave. Other caves open to the public include Belianska Cave, Dem\u00e4novsk\u00e1 Cave of Liberty, Dem\u00e4novsk\u00e1 Ice Cave or Bystrianska Cave.\nRivers.\nMost of the rivers arise in the Slovak mountains. Some only pass through Slovakia, while others make a natural border with surrounding countries (more than ). For example, the Dunajec () to the north, the Danube () to the south or the Morava () to the West. The total length of the rivers on Slovak territory is .\nThe longest river in Slovakia is the V\u00e1h (), the shortest is the \u010cierna voda. Other important and large rivers are the Myjava, the Nitra (), the Orava, the Hron (), the Horn\u00e1d (), the Slan\u00e1 (), the Ipe\u013e (, forming the border with Hungary), the Bodrog, the Laborec, the Latorica and the Ondava.\nThe biggest volume of discharge in Slovak rivers is during spring, when the snow melts from the mountains. The only exception is the Danube, whose discharge is the greatest during summer when the snow melts in the Alps. The Danube is the largest river that flows through Slovakia.\nClimate.\nThe Slovak climate lies between the temperate and continental climate zones with relatively warm summers and cold, cloudy and humid winters. Temperature extremes are between although temperatures below are rare. The weather differs from the mountainous north to the plains in the south.\nThe warmest region is Bratislava and Southern Slovakia where the temperatures may reach in summer, occasionally to in Hurbanovo. During night, the temperatures drop to . The daily temperatures in winter average in the range of to . During night it may be freezing, but usually not below .\nIn Slovakia, there are four seasons, each season (spring, summer, autumn and winter) lasts three months. The dry continental air brings in the summer heat and winter frosts. In contrast, oceanic air brings rainfalls and reduces summer temperatures. In the lowlands and valleys, there is often fog, especially in winter.\nSpring starts with 21 March and is characterised by colder weather with an average daily temperature of in the first weeks and about in May and in June. In Slovakia, the weather and climate in the spring are very unstable.\nSummer starts on 22 June and is usually characterised by hot weather with daily temperatures exceeding . July is the warmest month with temperatures up to about , especially in regions of southern Slovakia. Showers or thunderstorms may occur because of the summer monsoon called Medardova kvapka (Medard drop \u2013 40 days of rain). Summer in Northern Slovakia is usually mild with temperatures around (less in the mountains).\nAutumn in Slovakia starts on 23 September and is mostly characterised by wet weather and wind, although the first weeks can be very warm and sunny. The average temperature in September is around , in November to . Late September and early October is a dry and sunny time of year (so-called Indian summer).\nWinter starts on 21 December with temperatures around . In December and January, it is usually snowing, these are the coldest months of the year. At lower altitudes, snow does not stay the whole winter, it changes into the thaw and frost. Winters are colder in the mountains, where the snow usually lasts until March or April and the night temperatures fall to and colder.\nBiodiversity.\nSlovakia signed the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity on 19\u00a0May 1993, and became a party to the convention on 25\u00a0August 1994. It has subsequently produced a National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, which was received by the convention on 2\u00a0November 1998.\nThe biodiversity of Slovakia comprises animals (such as annelids, arthropods, molluscs, nematodes and vertebrates), fungi (Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, Chytridiomycota, Glomeromycota and Zygomycota), micro-organisms (including Mycetozoa), and plants. The geographical position of Slovakia determines the richness of the diversity of fauna and flora. More than 11,000 plant species have been described throughout its territory, nearly 29,000 animal species and over 1,000 species of protozoa. Endemic biodiversity is also common.\nSlovakia is located in the biome of temperate broadleaf and mixed forests and terrestrial ecoregions of Pannonian mixed forests and Carpathian montane conifer forests. As the altitude changes, the vegetation associations and animal communities are forming height levels (oak, beech, spruce, scrub pine, alpine meadows and subsoil). Forests cover 44% of the territory of Slovakia. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.34/10, ranking it 129th globally out of 172 countries. In terms of forest stands, 60% are broadleaf trees and 40% are coniferous trees. The occurrence of animal species is strongly connected to the appropriate types of plant associations and biotopes.\nOver 4,000 species of fungi have been recorded from Slovakia. Of these, nearly 1,500 are lichen-forming species. Some of these fungi are undoubtedly endemic, but not enough is known to say how many. Of the lichen-forming species, about 40% have been classified as threatened in some way. About 7% are apparently extinct, 9% endangered, 17% vulnerable, and 7% rare. The conservation status of non-lichen-forming fungi in Slovakia is not well documented, but there is a red list for its larger fungi.\nWater.\nThe entire population of Slovakia has access to a safe-drinking water source. The country has one of the best quality tap water in the world, it is the second country in Europe (after Austria) with the largest reserves of drinking water. Groundwater is the drinking water source of the highest quality protected by Constitution of Slovakia. Since 2014, it is banned the export of drinking and mineral waters in pipelines and water tanks. The ban excludes bottled water and water for personal use. Both, groundwater (82.2%) as well as surface water (17.8%) are exploited as drinking water sources. \u017ditn\u00fd ostrov is the biggest natural groundwater source in Slovakia and as well in Central Europe.\nAbout 1300 mineral sources are registered, providing curative water and high quality mineral water for drinking. There are 21 thermal spa towns built on these mineral springs. The most visited are Pie\u0161\u0165any, Tren\u010dianske Teplice, Bardejov and Dudince.\nGovernment and politics.\nSlovakia is a parliamentary democratic republic with a multi-party system. The last parliamentary elections were held on 30\u00a0September 2023 and two rounds of presidential elections took place on 23\u00a0March and 6\u00a0April 2024.\nThe Slovak head of state and the formal head of the executive is the president (currently Peter Pellegrini), though with very limited powers. The president is elected by direct, popular vote under the two-round system for a five-year term. Most executive power lies with the head of government, the prime minister (currently Robert Fico), who is usually the leader of the winning party and who needs to form a majority coalition in the parliament. The prime minister is appointed by the president. The remainder of the cabinet is appointed by the president on the recommendation of the prime minister.\nSlovakia's highest legislative body is the 150-seat unicameral National Council of the Slovak Republic (\"N\u00e1rodn\u00e1 rada Slovenskej republiky\"). Delegates are elected for a four-year term on the basis of proportional representation.\nSlovakia's highest judicial body is the Constitutional Court of Slovakia (\"\u00dastavn\u00fd s\u00fad\"), which rules on constitutional issues. The 13\u00a0members of this court are appointed by the president from a slate of candidates nominated by parliament.\nThe Constitution of the Slovak Republic was ratified 1\u00a0September 1992, and became effective 1\u00a0January 1993. It was amended in September 1998 to allow direct election of the president and again in February 2001 due to EU admission requirements. The civil law system is based on Austro-Hungarian codes. The legal code was modified to comply with the obligations of Organisation on Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and to expunge the Marxist\u2013Leninist legal theory. Slovakia accepts the compulsory International Court of Justice jurisdiction with reservations.\nForeign relations.\nThe Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs () is responsible for maintaining the Slovak Republic's external relations and the management of its international diplomatic missions. The ministry's director is Juraj Blan\u00e1r. The ministry oversees Slovakia's affairs with foreign entities, including bilateral relations with individual nations and its representation in international organisations.\nSlovakia joined the European Union and NATO in 2004, the Schengen Area in 2007 and the eurozone in 2009.\nSlovakia is a member of the United Nations (since 1993) and participates in its specialised agencies. The country was, on 10\u00a0October 2005, elected to a two-year term on the UN Security Council from 2006 to 2007. It is also a member of the Council of Europe (CoE), the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the World Trade Organisation (WTO), the World Health Organization (WHO), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Union for the Mediterranean (UfM), the International Criminal Police Organisation (INTERPOL), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN), the Bucharest Nine (B9) and part of the Visegr\u00e1d Group (V4: Slovakia, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Poland).\nIn 2025, Slovak citizens had visa-free or visa-on-arrival access to 185 countries and territories, putting the Slovak passport at the 6th rank of travel freedom (tied with Hungary, Malta, New Zealand, Poland and Slovenia) on the Henley Passport Index.\nSlovakia maintains diplomatic relations with 134 countries, primarily through its Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Slovakia maintained 90 missions abroad, including 64 embassies, seven missions to multilateral organisations, nine consulates-general, one consular office, one Slovak Economic and Cultural Office and eight Slovak Institutes. Bratislava hosts 41 foreign embassies and 22 consulates.\nLargest trading partners are countries of the European Union. In 2024, more than 80% of Slovak exports went to the European Union, and more than 65% of Slovak imports came from other European Union member states.\nSlovakia and the United States retain strong diplomatic ties and cooperate in the military and law enforcement areas. U.S. Department of Defence programmes has contributed significantly to Slovak military reforms. The two countries have a long history tracing back to the American Revolutionary War, when a Slovak Major, J\u00e1n Ladislav Polereck\u00fd, fought alongside George Washington in Yorktowne to win the colonies' independence. \nPresident Woodrow Wilson and the United States played a major role in the establishment of the original Czechoslovak state on 28\u00a0October 1918. Around one million Americans have their roots in Slovakia, and many retain strong cultural and familial ties to the Slovak Republic. American steel producer U. S. Steel is the largest employer in Eastern Slovakia in Ko\u0161ice with 12,000 employees.\nMilitary.\nThe president is formally the commander-in-chief of the Slovak armed forces.\nSlovakia joined NATO in March 2004. From 2006, the army transformed into a fully professional organisation and compulsory military service was abolished. Slovak armed forces numbered 19,500 uniformed personnel and 4,208 civilians in 2022.\nAs of 2025, Slovakia has 240 military personnel deployed in Cyprus for UNFICYP United Nations led peace support operations, 50 troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina for EUFOR Althea and 135 troops deployed in Latvia for NATO Enhanced Forward Presence.\nThe Slovak Ground Forces are made up of two active mechanised infantry brigades. The Air and Air Defence Forces comprise one wing of fighters, one wing of utility helicopters, and one SAM brigade. Training and support forces comprise a National Support Element (Multifunctional Battalion, Transport Battalion, Repair Battalion), a garrison force of the capital city Bratislava, as well as a training battalion, and various logistics, communication, and information bases. Miscellaneous forces under the direct command of the General Staff include the 5th Special Forces Regiment.\nHuman rights.\nHuman rights in Slovakia are guaranteed by the Constitution of Slovakia from the year 1992 and by multiple international laws signed in Slovakia between 1948 and 2006. Slovakia performs favourably in measurements of civil liberties, press freedom, internet freedom, democratic governance, and peacefulness.\nThe US State Department in 2021 reported:\nThe government generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however, there were problems in some areas. Significant human rights issues included credible reports of: corruption; violence and threats of violence against Roma and members of other ethnic and racial minorities; and violence and threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex persons.\nAccording to the European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC), Romani people in Slovakia \"endure racism in the job market, housing and education fields and are often subjected to forced evictions, vigilante intimidation, disproportionate levels of police brutality and more subtle forms of discrimination.\"\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Slovakia performs in the mid-range on overall democratic measures, with particular strengths in political equality and judicial independence.\nAdministrative divisions.\nSlovakia is divided into 8 \"kraje\" (singular\u2014\"kraj\", usually translated as \"region\"), each of which is named after its principal city. Regions have enjoyed a certain degree of autonomy since 2002. Their self-governing bodies are referred to as Self-governing (or autonomous) Regions (sg. \"samospr\u00e1vny kraj\", pl. \"samospr\u00e1vne kraje\") or Upper-Tier Territorial Units (sg. \"vy\u0161\u0161\u00ed \u00fazemn\u00fd celok\", pl. \"vy\u0161\u0161ie \u00fazemn\u00e9 celky\", abbr. V\u00daC).\nThe \"kraje\" are subdivided into \"okresy\" (sg. \"okres\", usually translated as districts). Slovakia currently has 79\u00a0districts.\nThe \"okresy\" are further divided into (sg. , usually translated as \"municipality\"). There are currently 2,890 municipalities.\nIn terms of economics and unemployment rate, the western regions are richer than eastern regions. Bratislava is the 19th-richest region of the European Union by GDP (PPP) per capita; GDP at purchasing power parity is about three times higher than in other Slovak regions.\nEconomy.\nSlovakia has a high-income developed economy. In 2025, with a population of only 5 million, it ranked as the 46th richest country with a per capita gross domestic product based on purchasing power parity of $44,081, and the 60th largest economy in the World with a GDP of $147,031 billion. Its GDP per capita equalling 74% of the average of the European Union in 2023. Major privatisations are completed, the banking sector is almost completely in private hands, and foreign investment has risen.\nIn 2024, more than 80% of Slovak exports went to the European Union, and more than 65% of Slovak imports came from other European Union member states. Main export partners are Germany (23% of total exports), Czech Republic (12.4%), Poland (8.3%) and Austria (5.7%).\nThe country has difficulties addressing regional imbalances in wealth and employment. GDP per capita ranges from 188% of EU average in Bratislava to 54% in Eastern Slovakia. Bratislava is the 19th-richest region of the European Union by GDP (PPP) per capita. Although regional income inequality is high, 90% of citizens own their homes.\nThe country used to be dubbed the \"Tatra Tiger\" in the 2000s as it successfully transformed from a centrally planned economy to a market-driven economy and achieved, on average, roughly 6% per capita GDP growth each year from 2000 to 2008.\nUnemployment, peaking at 19% at the end of 1999, decreased to 4.9% in 2019, lowest recorded rate in Slovak history. Unemployment rate was 5.3% as per June 2025.\nThe ratio of government debt to GDP in Slovakia reached 60.5% in 2024.\nA high dependence on global supply chains and energy imports makes the Slovak economy vulnerable to external shocks. As a consequence, the economy was hit hard by the global COVID-19 pandemic crisis (\u22123.3% decline in 2020), despite sizeable economic policy support. And after a strong recovery in 2021 (+4.8% growth), growth slowed down markedly in 2022 (+1.9%) and 2023 (+1.6%) as a result of the consequences of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, notably the subsequent EU sanctions on Russia and soaring energy prices.\nThe Slovak government encourages foreign investment since it is one of the driving forces of the economy. Slovakia is an attractive country for foreign investors mainly because of its low wages, low tax rates, well educated labour force, favourable geographic location in the heart of Central Europe, strong political stability and good international relations reinforced by the country's accession to the European Union. Some regions, mostly at the east of Slovakia have failed to attract major investment, which has aggravated regional disparities in many economic and social areas.\nSlovakia adopted the euro currency on 1 January 2009 as the 16th member of the eurozone. The euro in Slovakia was approved by the European commission on 7\u00a0May 2008. The Slovak koruna was revalued on 28\u00a0May 2008 to 30.126 for 1\u00a0euro, which was also the exchange rate for the euro.\nSlovakia ranks 45th out of 190 economies in terms of ease of doing business, according to the 2020 World Bank Doing Business Report and 59th out of the 67 countries and territories in terms of competitive economy, according to the 2024 World Competitiveness Yearbook Report.\nIndustry.\nAlthough Slovakia's GDP comes mainly from the tertiary (services) sector, the industrial sector also plays an important role within its economy. The main industry sectors are car manufacturing and electrical engineering. Since 2007, Slovakia has been the world's largest producer of cars per capita, with a total of 1,080,000 cars manufactured in the country in 2023 alone. 275,000 people are employed directly and indirectly\nby the automotive industry. There are currently four automobile assembly plants, with a fifth under construction: Volkswagen's in Bratislava (models: Volkswagen Up, Volkswagen Touareg, Audi Q7, Audi Q8, Porsche Cayenne, Lamborghini Urus), PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn's in Trnava (models: Peugeot 208, Citro\u00ebn C3 Picasso), Kia Motors' \u017dilina Plant (models: Kia Cee'd, Kia Sportage, Kia Venga) and Jaguar Land Rover's in Nitra (model: Land Rover Defender, Land Rover Discovery). Volvo will make electric cars at a new plant at the east of Slovakia, construction began in 2023 in Ko\u0161ice, with series production starting in 2027. Hyundai Mobis in \u017dilina is the largest suppliers for the automotive industry in Slovakia.\nThe electronics manufacturing industry also thrives. Foxconn has a factory at Nitra for LCD TV manufacturing, Samsung at Galanta for computer monitors and television sets manufacturing. Steel producer U. S. Steel in Ko\u0161ice is the largest employer in the east of Slovakia with 12,000 employees.\nESET is an IT security company from Bratislava with more than 1,000 employees worldwide at present. Their branch offices are in the United States, Ireland, United Kingdom, Argentina, the Czech Republic, Singapore and Poland. In recent years, service and high-tech-oriented businesses have prospered in Bratislava. Many global companies, including IBM, Dell, Lenovo, AT&amp;T, SAP, and Accenture, have built outsourcing and service centres here. Reasons for the influx of multi-national corporations include proximity to Western Europe, skilled labour force and the high density of universities and research facilities. Other large companies and employers with headquarters in Bratislava include Amazon, Slovak Telekom, Orange Slovensko, Slovensk\u00e1 sporite\u013e\u0148a, Tatra banka, Doprastav, Hewlett-Packard Slovakia, Henkel Slovensko, Slovensk\u00fd plyn\u00e1rensk\u00fd priemysel, Microsoft Slovakia, Mondelez Slovakia, Whirlpool Slovakia and Zurich Insurance Group Slovakia.\nBratislava's geographical position in Central Europe has long made Bratislava a crossroads for international trade traffic. Various ancient trade routes, such as the Amber Road and the Danube waterway, have crossed territory of present-day Bratislava. Today, Bratislava is a road, railway, waterway and airway hub.\nEnergy.\nSlovakia is self-sufficient in electricity production following the launch of the third unit of the Mochovce nuclear power plant in 2023.\nIn 2020, Slovakia produced a total of 29,322 GWh of electricity. Nuclear energy accounted for 54% (15 400 GWh) of total electricity production, followed by 16% by hydro power energy, 16% natural gas, 8% coal, biofuel 3% and 3% by solar energy,\nThe two nuclear power-plants in Slovakia are in Jaslovsk\u00e9 Bohunice and Mochovce. Jaslovsk\u00e9 Bohunice containing two operating reactors. Mochovce containing three operating reactors, unit Mochovce-3 came on-line in January 2023 and unit Mochovce-4 will be completed at the end of 2025. The additional reactors in Mochovce returned Slovakia to being a net exporter of electricity.\nIn 2024, Slovak government approved a plan to build another new nuclear reactor in Jaslovsk\u00e9 Bohunice.\nSlovensk\u00fd plyn\u00e1rensk\u00fd priemysel (\"Slovak Gas Industry\") is the biggest natural gas seller in Slovakia. In 2024, domestic gas production covers roughly 2% of Slovak consumption. An average of around 65 million m\u00b3 of natural gas is produced, while 4,2 billion m\u00b3 of natural gas is imported. As of 2025, most of gas imports to Slovakia is from Russia via TurkStream pipeline. TurkStream connects Russia and Turkey, with gas flowing through the Balkans and Hungary before reaching Slovakia.\nThe oil production in Slovakia is even lower than the gas production. In 2021 it reached a volume of 4,500 tons per year with a total oil consumption of around 6 million tons per year. Among European Union countries, Slovakia is the most dependent on Russian oil and petroleum products. In 2020, Russia was the origin country for 78 percent of the country's total oil imports. Slovnaft, with 4,000 employees, is the largest oil refining company in Slovakia, located in Bratislava. The company refines 5.5 to 6 million tonnes of crude oil per annum and produces a broad range of motor fuels, fuel oils and petrochemical products.\nTransportation.\nThere are four main motorway D1 to D4 and eight expressways R1 to R8. Many of them are still under construction.\nThe major motorway in Slovakia is D1, the motorway connects major cities across Slovakia from west to east, from Bratislava to Trnava, Nitra, Tren\u010d\u00edn, \u017dilina and beyond. As of 2025, some sections of D1 are still under construction. The D2 motorway connects it to Prague, Brno and Budapest in the north\u2013south direction. A large part of D4\u00a0motorway (an outer bypass), which ease the pressure on Bratislava's highway system, opened in 2021. The A6\u00a0motorway to Vienna connects Slovakia directly to the Austrian motorway system and was opened on 19\u00a0November 2007.\nSlovakia has three international airports. Bratislava Airport is the main and largest international airport. It is located 9\u00a0km northeast of the city centre. It serves civil and governmental, scheduled and unscheduled domestic and international flights. The current runways support the landing of all common types of aircraft currently used. The airport has enjoyed rapidly growing passenger traffic in recent years; it served 279,028\u00a0passengers in 2000 and 2,292,712 in 2018. Ko\u0161ice International Airport is an airport serving Ko\u0161ice. It is the second-largest international airport in Slovakia. The Poprad\u2013Tatry Airport is the third busiest airport, the airport is located 5\u00a0km west-northwest of Poprad. It is an airport with one of the highest elevations in Central Europe, at 718 m, which is 150 m higher than Innsbruck Airport in Austria.\nRailways of the Slovak Republic (\"\u017deleznice Slovenskej Republiky\") provides railway transport services on national and international lines.\nThe Port of Bratislava is one of the two international river ports in Slovakia. The port connects Bratislava to international boat traffic, especially the interconnection from the North Sea to the Black Sea via the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal.\nAdditionally, tourist boats operate from Bratislava's passenger port, including routes to Dev\u00edn, Vienna and elsewhere. The Port of Kom\u00e1rno is the second largest port in Slovakia with an area of over 20 hectares and is located approximately 100\u00a0km east of Bratislava. It lies at the confluence of two rivers \u2013 the Danube and V\u00e1h.\nTourism.\nTourism is one of the main sectors of the Slovakia's economy, although still underserved. It is based on domestic tourism, as most of the tourists are the Slovak nationals and residents travelling for leisure within the country. Slovakia features natural landscapes, mountains, caves, medieval castles and towns, folk architecture, spas and ski resorts. More than 5,4 million tourists visited Slovakia in 2017. The most attractive destinations are the capital of Bratislava and the High Tatras. Most visitors come from the Czech Republic (about 26%), Poland (15%) and Germany (11%).\nSlovakia contains many castles, most of which are in ruins. The best known castles include Bojnice Castle (often used as a filming location), Spi\u0161 Castle, (on the UNESCO list), Orava Castle, Bratislava Castle, and the ruins of Dev\u00edn Castle. \u010cachtice Castle was once the home of the world's most prolific female serial killer, the 'Bloody Lady', Elizabeth B\u00e1thory.\nSlovakia's position in Europe and the country's past (part of the Kingdom of Hungary, the Habsburg monarchy and Czechoslovakia) made many cities and towns similar to the cities in the Czech Republic (such as Prague), Austria (such as Salzburg) or Hungary (such as Budapest). A historical centre with at least one square has been preserved in many towns. Large historical centres can be found in Bratislava, Tren\u010d\u00edn, Ko\u0161ice, Bansk\u00e1 \u0160tiavnica, Levo\u010da, and Trnava. Historical centres have been going through a restoration in recent years.\nHistorical churches can be found in virtually every village and town in Slovakia. Most of them are built in the Baroque style, but there are also many examples of Romanesque and Gothic architecture, for example Bansk\u00e1 Bystrica, Bardejov and Spi\u0161sk\u00e1 Kapitula. The Basilica of St. James in Levo\u010da with the tallest wood-carved altar in the world and the Church of the Holy Spirit in \u017dehra with medieval frescos are UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The St. Martin's Concathedral in Bratislava served as the coronation church for the Kingdom of Hungary. The oldest sacral buildings in Slovakia stem from the Great Moravian period in the ninth century.\nVery precious structures are the complete wooden churches of northern and northern-eastern Slovakia. Most were built from the 15th century onwards by Catholics, Lutherans and members of eastern-rite churches.\nThere are many castles located throughout the country. Among the tourists, some of the most popular are Bojnice Castle, Spi\u0161 Castle, Star\u00e1 \u013dubov\u0148a Castle, Kr\u00e1sna H\u00f4rka Castle, Orava Castle (where many scenes of Nosferatu were filmed), Tren\u010d\u00edn Castle, and Bratislava Castle, and also castles in ruins, such as Beckov Castle, Dev\u00edn Castle, \u0160ari\u0161 Castle, Pova\u017eie Castle, and Stre\u010dno Castle (where Dragonheart was filmed).\nSlovakia is also known for its numerous spas. Pie\u0161\u0165any is the biggest and busiest spa town in the country, attracting many visitors from the Gulf countries, mostly the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Kuwait, and Bahrain. Bardejov, Tren\u010dianske Teplice, Tur\u010dianske Teplice, and Rajeck\u00e9 Teplice are other major spa towns. Some well-known minor spa towns and villages are \u0160t\u00f3s, \u010c\u00ed\u017e, Dudince, Kov\u00e1\u010dov\u00e1, Nimnica, Smrd\u00e1ky, L\u00fa\u010dky, and Vy\u0161n\u00e9 Ru\u017ebachy, among others.\nTypical souvenirs from Slovakia are dolls dressed in folk costumes, ceramic objects, crystal glass, carved wooden figures, \u010drp\u00e1ks (wooden pitchers), fujaras (a folk instrument on the UNESCO list) and vala\u0161kas (a decorated folk hatchet) and above all products made from corn husks and wire, notably human figures. Souvenirs can be bought in the shops run by the state organisation \u00da\u013dUV (\"\u00dastredie \u013eudovej umeleckej v\u00fdroby\"\u2014Centre of Folk Art Production).\nScience.\nThe Slovak Academy of Sciences has been the most important scientific and research institution in the country since 1953. Slovaks have made notable scientific and technical contributions during history. In 1999, astronaut Ivan Bella, became the first and only Slovak citizen to fly in space.\nObserver status to European Space Agency (ESA) was granted in 2010, when Slovakia signed the General Agreement on Cooperation in which information about ongoing education programmes was shared and Slovakia was invited to various negotiations of the ESA. In 2015, Slovakia signed the European Cooperating State Agreement based on which Slovakia committed to the finance entrance programme named PECS (Plan for the European Cooperating States) which serves as preparation for full membership. Slovak research and development organisations can apply for funding of projects regarding space technologies advancement. Slovakia became European Space Agency associate member state in 2022. In 2024, the country signed the Artemis Accords with NASA.\nSlovakia was ranked 47th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe population is over 5.4 million and consists mostly of Slovaks. The average population density is 110 inhabitants per km2. According to the 2021 census, the majority of the inhabitants of Slovakia are Slovaks (83.8%). Hungarians are the largest ethnic minority (7.8%). Other ethnic groups include Roma (1.2%), Czechs (0.5%), Rusyns (0.4%) and others (1.9) or unspecified (5.4%).\nIn 2024, the median age of the Slovak population was 42.8 years.\nThe largest waves of Slovak emigration occurred in the 19th and early 20th centuries. In the 1990 US\u00a0census, 1.8\u00a0million people self-identified as having Slovak ancestry.\nIn the 2024 Global Hunger Index, Slovakia is one of 22 countries with a GHI score of less than 5.\nLanguages.\nThe official language is Slovak, a member of the Slavic language family. Hungarian is widely spoken in the southern regions, and Rusyn is used in some parts of the Northeast. Minority languages hold co-official status in the municipalities in which the size of the minority population meets the legal threshold of 15% in two consecutive censuses.\nSlovakia is ranked among the top EU countries regarding the knowledge of foreign languages. In 2007, 68% of the population aged from 25 to 64 years claimed to speak two or more foreign languages, finishing second highest in the European Union. The best known foreign language in Slovakia is Czech. Eurostat report also shows that 98.3% of Slovak students in the upper secondary education take on two foreign languages, ranking highly over the average 60.1% in the European Union. According to a Eurobarometer survey from 2012, 26% of the population have knowledge of English at a conversational level, followed by German (22%) and Russian (17%).\nThe deaf community uses the Slovak Sign Language.\nReligion.\nThe Slovak constitution guarantees freedom of religion. In 2021, 55.8% of population identified themselves as Catholics (Latin Church), 5.3% as Lutherans, 1.6% as Calvinists, 4% as Greek Catholics, 0.9% as Orthodox, 23.8% identified themselves as atheists or non-religious, and 6.5% did not answer the question about their belief. In 2004, about one third of the church members regularly attended church services. The Slovak Greek Catholic Church is an Eastern rite sui iuris Catholic Church. Before World War\u00a0II, an estimated 90,000 Jews lived in Slovakia (1.6% of the population), but most were murdered during the Holocaust. After further reductions due to postwar emigration and assimilation, only about 2,300 Jews remain today (0.04% of the population).\nThere are 18 state-registered religions in Slovakia, of which 16 are Christian, one is Jewish, and one is the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. In 2016, a two-thirds majority of the Slovak parliament passed a new bill that would obstruct Islam and other religious organisations from becoming state-recognised religions by doubling the minimum followers threshold from 25,000 to 50,000; however, Slovakia's then-president Andrej Kiska vetoed the bill. In 2010, there were an estimated 5,000 Muslims in Slovakia representing less than 0.1% of the country's population. Slovakia is the only member state of the European Union to not have any mosques.\nEducation.\nEducation in Slovakia is compulsory from age 6 to 16. Primary school in Slovakia lasts for nine years, which is divided into two parts, the first stage (age 6\u201310) and the second stage (age 10\u201315), which is finished by taking nationwide testing called \"Monitor\" (in Slovak language and math).\nFor most students, secondary education (high school) lasts four years, from ages 15 to 19. This is the typical length for students who complete the full nine years of primary school and then enroll in a secondary school. High school is finished by school-leaving exam called \"Maturita\", or \"Maturitn\u00e1 sk\u00fa\u0161ka\". The Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the OECD, currently ranks Slovak secondary education the 30th in the world (placing it just below the United States and just above Spain).\nAfter finishing high school, students can go to university. Slovakia has a wide range of universities. The biggest university is Comenius University, established in 1919. Although it is not the first university ever established on Slovak territory, it is the oldest university that is still running. Most universities in Slovakia are public funded, where anyone can apply. Every citizen has a right to free education in public schools. The country has also several privately funded universities. Anyone can apply to any number of universities.\nCulture.\nFolk tradition.\nFolk tradition has rooted strongly in Slovakia and is reflected in literature, music, dance and architecture. The prime example is the Slovak national anthem, \"Nad Tatrou sa bl\u00fdska\", which is based on a melody from the \"Kopala studienku\" folk song.\nThe manifestation of Slovak folklore culture is the \"V\u00fdchodn\u00e1\" Folklore Festival. It is the oldest and largest nationwide festival with international participation, which takes place in V\u00fdchodn\u00e1 annually. Slovakia is usually represented by many groups but mainly by S\u013dUK (\"Slovensk\u00fd \u013eudov\u00fd umeleck\u00fd kolekt\u00edv\u2014Slovak folk art collective\"). S\u013dUK is the largest Slovak folk art group, trying to preserve the folklore tradition.\nAn example of wooden folk architecture in Slovakia can be seen in the well-preserved village of Vlkol\u00ednec which has been the UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1993. The Pre\u0161ov Region preserves the world's most remarkable folk wooden churches. Most of them are protected by Slovak law as cultural heritage, but some of them are on the UNESCO list too, in Bodru\u017eal, Hervartov, Ladomirov\u00e1 and Rusk\u00e1 Bystr\u00e1.\nThe best known Slovak hero, found in many folk mythologies, is Juraj J\u00e1no\u0161\u00edk (1688\u20131713) (the Slovak equivalent of Robin Hood). The legend says he was taking from the rich and giving to the poor. J\u00e1no\u0161\u00edk's life was depicted in a list of literary works and many movies throughout the 20th century. One of the most popular is a film \"J\u00e1no\u0161\u00edk\" directed by Martin Fri\u010d in 1935. He is commemorated mainly in Terchov\u00e1, his family's place of living.\nArt.\nVisual art in Slovakia is represented through painting, drawing, printmaking, illustration, arts and crafts, sculpture, photography or conceptual art. The Slovak National Gallery founded in 1948, is the biggest network of galleries in Slovakia. Two displays in Bratislava are situated in Esterh\u00e1zy Palace (\"Esterh\u00e1zyho pal\u00e1c\") and the Water Barracks (\"Vodn\u00e9 kas\u00e1rne\"), adjacent one to another. They are located on the Danube riverfront in the Old Town.\nThe Bratislava City Gallery, founded in 1961 is the second biggest Slovak gallery of its kind. It stores about 35,000 pieces of Slovak international art and offers permanent displays in P\u00e1lffy Palace and Mirbach Palace, located in the Old Town. Danubiana Art Museum, one of the youngest art museums in Europe, is situated near \u010cunovo waterworks (part of Gab\u010d\u00edkovo Waterworks). Other major galleries include: Andy Warhol Museum of Modern Art (Warhol's parents were from Mikov\u00e1), East Slovak Gallery, Ernest Zmet\u00e1k Art Gallery, Zvolen Castle.\nLiterature.\nChristian topics include poem Proglas as a foreword to the four Gospels, partial translations of the Bible into Old Church Slavonic, \"Zakon sudnyj ljudem\".\nMedieval literature, in the period from the 11th to the 15th centuries, was written in Latin, Czech and Slovakised Czech. Lyric (prayers, songs and formulas) was still controlled by the Church, while epic was concentrated on legends. Authors from this period include Johannes de Thurocz, author of the Chronica Hungarorum and Maurus, both of them Hungarians. The worldly literature also emerged and chronicles were written in this period.\nTwo leading persons codified Slovak. The first was Anton Bernol\u00e1k, whose concept was based on the western Slovak dialect in 1787. It was the codification of the first-ever literary language of Slovaks. The second was \u013dudov\u00edt \u0160t\u00far, whose formation of the Slovak took principles from the central Slovak dialect in 1843.\nSlovakia is also known for its polyhistors, of whom include Pavol Jozef \u0160af\u00e1rik, Matej Bel, J\u00e1n Koll\u00e1r, and its political revolutionaries and reformists, such Milan Rastislav \u0160tef\u00e1nik and Alexander Dub\u010dek.\nCuisine.\nTraditional Slovak cuisine is based mainly on pork, poultry (chicken is the most widely eaten, followed by duck, goose, and turkey), flour, potatoes, cabbage, and milk products. It is relatively closely related to Hungarian, Czech, Polish and Austrian cuisine. On the east it is also influenced by Ukrainian, including Lemko and Rusyn. In comparison with other European countries, \"game meat\" is more accessible in Slovakia due to vast resources of forest and because hunting is relatively popular. Boar, rabbit, and venison are generally available throughout the year. Lamb and goat are eaten but are not widely popular.\nThe traditional Slovak meals are , bryndzov\u00e9 pirohy and other meals with potato dough and bryndza. Bryndza is a salty cheese made of sheep milk, characterised by a strong taste and aroma. Bryndzov\u00e9 halu\u0161ky especially is considered a national dish, and is very commonly found on the menu of traditional Slovak restaurants.\nA typical soup is a sauerkraut soup (\"kapustnica\"). A blood sausage called \"krvavnica\", made from any parts of a butchered pig, is also a specific Slovak meal.\nWine is enjoyed throughout Slovakia. Slovak wine comes predominantly from the southern areas along the Danube and its tributaries; the northern half of the country is too cold and mountainous to grow grapevines. Traditionally, white wine was more popular than red or ros\u00e9 (except in some regions), and sweet wine more popular than dry; however, in recent years tastes seem to be changing. Beer (mainly of the pilsener style, though dark lagers are also consumed) is also popular.\nSport.\nSporting activities are practised widely in Slovakia, many of them on a professional level. Ice hockey and football have traditionally been regarded as the most popular sports in Slovakia, though tennis, handball, basketball, volleyball, whitewater slalom, cycling, alpine skiing, biathlon and athletics are also popular.\nOne of the most popular team sports in Slovakia is ice hockey. Slovakia became a member of the IIHF on 2\u00a0February 1993. Since then, the team has won four medals in Ice Hockey World Championships, consisting of one gold, two silver and a bronze. The most recent success was a silver medal at the 2012 IIHF World Championship in Helsinki. The Slovak national hockey team made eight appearances in the Olympic games, finishing fourth in the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver and third with bronze medal at the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing. The country has 8,280 registered players and is ranked seventh in the IIHF World Ranking at present. The Slovak hockey teams HC Slovan Bratislava and HC Lev Poprad participated in the Kontinental Hockey League.\nSlovakia hosted the 2011 IIHF World Championship, where Finland won the gold medal and 2019 IIHF World Championship, where Finland also won the gold medal. Both competitions took place in Bratislava and Ko\u0161ice.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Slovakia, with over 400,000 registered players. Since 1993, the Slovak national football team has qualified for the FIFA World Cup once, in 2010. They progressed to the last 16, where they were defeated by the Netherlands. The most notable result was the 3\u20132 victory over Italy. In 2016, the Slovak national football team qualified for the UEFA Euro 2016 tournament, under head coach J\u00e1n Koz\u00e1k. This helped the team reach its best-ever position of 14th in the FIFA World Rankings.\nIn club competitions, only three teams have qualified for the UEFA Champions League Group Stage, namely MFK Ko\u0161ice in 1997\u201398, FC Artmedia Bratislava in 2005\u201306 season, and M\u0160K \u017dilina in 2010\u201311. FC Artmedia Bratislava has been the most successful team, finishing third at the Group Stage of the UEFA Cup, therefore qualifying for the knockout stage. They remain the only Slovak club that has won a match at the group stage.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGovernment\nTourism and living information\nGeneral information"}
{"id": "26832", "revid": "47784746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26832", "title": "Stramenopile", "text": "Clade of eukaryotes\nThe stramenopiles, also called heterokonts, are protists distinguished by the presence of stiff tripartite external hairs. In most species, the hairs are attached to flagella, in some they are attached to other areas of the cellular surface, and in some they have been secondarily lost (in which case relatedness to stramenopile ancestors is evident from other shared cytological features or from genetic similarity). Stramenopiles represent one of the three major clades in the SAR supergroup, along with Alveolata and Rhizaria.\nStramenopiles are eukaryotes; most are single-celled, but some are multicellular including some large seaweeds, the brown algae. The group includes a variety of algal protists, heterotrophic flagellates, opalines and closely related proteromonad flagellates (all endobionts in other organisms); the actinophryid Heliozoa, and oomycetes. The tripartite hairs characteristic of the group have been lost in some of the included taxa \u2013 for example in most diatoms.\nMany stramenopiles are unicellular flagellates, and most others produce flagellated cells at some point in their lifecycles, for instance as gametes or zoospores. Most flagellated heterokonts have two flagella; the anterior flagellum has one or two rows of stiff hairs or mastigonemes, and the posterior flagellum is without such embellishments, being smooth, usually shorter, or in a few cases not projecting from the cell.\nThe term 'heterokont' is used both as an adjective, indicating that a cell has two dissimilar flagella, and as the name of a taxon. The groups included in that taxon have however varied widely, creating the 'heterokont problem', now resolved by the definition of the stramenopiles.\nNomenclature.\nThe term 'stramenopile' was introduced by D. J. Patterson in 1989, defining a group that overlapped with the ambiguously defined heterokonts. The name \"stramenopile\" has been discussed by J. C. David. Patterson's term was formalized as a taxonomic name, Stramenopiles, in 2005 by the International Society of Protistologists. It has since been the most widely accepted name for this group of organisms. Several alternative names have been proposed since Patterson's publication, such as Straminipila, Straminopiles, and Stramenopila, which is the valid name under the PhyloCode.\nThe heterokont problem.\nThe term 'heterokont' is used as both an adjective \u2013 indicating that a cell has two dissimilar flagella \u2013 and as the name of a taxon. The taxon 'Heterokontae' was introduced in 1899 by Alexander Luther for algae that are now considered the Xanthophyceae. But the same term was used for other groupings of algae. For example, in 1956, Copeland used it to include the xanthophytes (using the name Vaucheriacea), a group that included what became known as the chrysophytes, the silicoflagellates, and the hyphochytrids. Copeland also included the unrelated collar flagellates (as the choanoflagellates) in which he placed the bicosoecids. He also included the not-closely related haptophytes. The consequence of associating multiple concepts to the taxon 'heterokont' is that the meaning of 'heterokont' can only be made clear by making reference to its usage: Heterokontae sensu Luther 1899; Heterokontae sensu Copeland 1956, etc. This contextual clarification is rare, such that when the taxon name is used, it is unclear how it should be understood. The term 'heterokont' has lost its usefulness in critical discussions about the identity, nature, character and relatedness of the group. The term 'stramenopile' sought to identify a clade (monophyletic and holophyletic lineage) using the approach developed by transformed cladists of pointing to a defining innovative characteristic or apomorphy.\nOver time, the scope of application has changed, especially when in the 1970s ultrastructural studies revealed greater diversity among the algae with chromoplasts (chlorophylls a and c) than had previously been recognized. At the same time, a protistological perspective was replacing the 19th century one based on the division of unicellular eukaryotes into animals and plants. One consequence was that an array of heterotrophic organisms, many not previously considered as 'heterokonts', were seen as related to the 'core heterokonts' (those having anterior flagella with stiff hairs). Newly recognized relatives included the parasitic opalines, proteromonads, and actinophryid Heliozoa. They joined other heterotrophic protists, such as bicosoecids, labyrinthulids, and oomycete fungi, that were included by some as heterokonts and excluded by others. Rather than continue to use a name whose meaning had changed over time and was hence ambiguous, the name 'stramenopile' was introduced to refer to the clade of protists that had tripartite stiff (usually flagellar) hairs and all their descendants. Molecular studies confirm that the genes that code for the proteins of these hairs are exclusive to stramenopiles.\nCharacteristics.\nThe presumed apomorphy of tripartite flagellar hairs in stramenopiles is well characterized. The basal part of the hair is flexible and inserts into the cell membrane; the second part is dominated by a long stiff tube (the 'straw' or 'stramen'); and finally the tube is tipped by many delicate hairs called mastigonemes. The proteins that code for the mastigonemes appear to be exclusive to the stramenopile clade, and are present even in taxa (such as diatoms) that no longer have such hairs.\nMost stramenopiles have two flagella near the apex. They are usually supported by four microtubule roots in a distinctive pattern. There is a transitional helix inside the flagellum where the beating axoneme with its distinctive geometric pattern of nine peripheral couplets around two central microtubules changes into the nine-triplet structure of the basal body.\nPlastids.\nMany stramenopiles have plastids which enable them to photosynthesise, using light to make their own food. Those plastids are coloured off-green, orange, golden or brown because of the presence of chlorophyll a, chlorophyll c, and fucoxanthin. This form of plastid is called a stramenochrome or chromoplast. The most significant autotrophic stramenopiles are the brown algae (wracks and many other seaweeds), and the diatoms. The latter are among the most significant primary producers in marine and freshwater ecosystems. Most molecular analyses suggest that the most basal stramenopiles lacked plastids and were accordingly colourless heterotrophs, feeding on other organisms. This implies that the stramenopiles arose as heterotrophs, diversified, and then some of them acquired chromoplasts. Some lineages (such as the axodine lineage that included the chromophytic pedinellids, colourless ciliophryids, and colourless actinophryid heliozoa) have secondarily reverted to heterotrophy.\nEcology.\nSome stramenopiles are significant as autotrophs and as heterotrophs in natural ecosystems; others are parasitic. \n\"Blastocystis\" is a gastrointestinal parasite of humans; \nopalines and proteromonads live in the intestines of cold-blooded vertebrates and have been described as parasitic;\noomycetes include some significant plant pathogens such as the cause of potato blight, \"Phytophthora infestans\". \nDiatoms are major contributors to global carbon cycles because they are the most important autotrophs in most marine habitats. \nThe brown algae, including familiar seaweeds like wrack and kelp, are major autotrophs of the intertidal and subtidal marine habitats. \nSome of the bacterivorous stramenopiles, such as \"Cafeteria\", are common and widespread consumers of bacteria, and thus play a major role in recycling carbon and nutrients within microbial food webs.\nEvolution.\nExternal.\nStramenopiles are most closely related to alveolates and Rhizaria, all of which have tubular mitochondrial cristae and collectively form the SAR supergroup, whose name is formed from their initials. The ancestor of the SAR supergroup appears to have captured a unicellular photosynthetic red alga, and many stramenopiles, as well as members of other SAR groups such as the Rhizaria, still have plastids which retain the double membrane of the red alga and a double membrane surrounding it, for a total of four membranes. In addition, species of Telonemia, the sister group to SAR, exhibit heterokont flagella with tripartite mastigonemes, implying a more ancient origin of stramenopile characteristics.\nInternal.\nThe following cladogram summarizes the evolutionary relationships between stramenopiles. The phylogenetic relationships of Bigyra vary greatly from one analysis to the next: it has been recovered as either monophyletic or paraphyletic. When paraphyletic, the branching order of the bigyran groups also varies: in some studies, Sagenista is the most basal-branching clade, while in others Opalozoa is the most basal. Nonetheless, Platysulcea is consistently recovered as the sister clade to all other stramenopiles. In addition, a flagellate species discovered in 2023, \"Kaonashia insperata\", remains in an uncertain phylogenetic position, but more closely related to Gyrista than to other clades.\nClassification.\nThe classification of the stramenopiles according to Adl \"et al.\" (2019), with additions from newer research:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
